NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PHARMACEUTICAL EMBODIED TECHNICAL PROGRESS,
LONGEVITY, AND QUALITY OF LIFE:
DRUGS AS “EQUIPMENT FOR YOUR HEALTH”
Frank R. Lichtenberg
Suchin Virabhak
Working Paper 9351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9351
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

November 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Frank R. Lichtenberg and Suchin Virabhak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress, longevity, and quality of life:
drugs as “equipment for your health”
Frank R. Lichtenberg and Suchin Virabhak
NBER Working Paper No. 9351
November 2002
JEL No. I12, L65, O3
ABSTRACT

Several econometric studies have concluded that technical progress embodied in equipment
is a major source of manufacturing productivity growth. Other research has suggested that, over the long run,
growth in the U.S. economy’s “health output” has been at least as large as the growth in non-health goods and
services. One important input in the production of health—pharmaceuticals—is even more R&D- intensive
than equipment.
In this paper we test the pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress hypothesis—the hypothesis that
newer drugs increase the length and quality of life—and estimate the rate of progress. To do this, we estimate
health production functions, in which the dependent variables are various indicators of post-treatment health
status (such as survival, perceived health status, and presence of physical or cognitive limitations), and the
regressors include drug vintage (the year in which the FDA first approved a drug’s active ingredient(s)) and
indicators of pre-treatment health status. We estimate these relationships using extremely
disaggregated—prescription- level—cross-sectional data derived primarily from the 1997 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey.
We find that people who used newer drugs had better post-treatment health than people using older
drugs for the same condition, controlling for pre-treatment health, age, sex, race, marital status, education,
income, and insurance coverage: they were more likely to survive, their perceived health status was higher, and
they experienced fewer activity, social, and physical limitations. The estimated cost of the increase in vintage
required to keep a person alive is lower than some estimates of the value of remaining alive for one month. One
estimate of the cost of preventing an activity limitation is $1745, and the annual rate of technical progress with
respect to activity limitations is 8.4%. People consuming newer drugs tend to experience greater increases (or
smaller declines) in physical ability than people consuming older drugs.
Most of the health measures indicate that the effect of drug vintage on health is higher for people with
low initial health than it is for people with high initial health. Therefore in contrast to equipment-embodied
technical progress, which tends to increase economic inequality, pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress
has a tendency to reduce inequality as well as promote economic growth, broadly defined.
Frank R. Lichtenberg
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
726 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu

Suchin Virabhak
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
sv102@columbia.edu

3
In his seminal 1956 paper, Robert Solow showed that, for sustained economic
growth to occur, technological progress is necessary:
Technical progress

Economic growth

In that paper, Solow assumed that technical progress was exogenous: it descends upon
the economy like “manna from heaven,” automatically and regardless of whatever else is
going on in the economy (Jones (1998, 32-3)).
More recent theoretical (“endogenous growth”) models (Romer (1990)) relaxed
this assumption: they have hypothesized that “technical progress is driven by research
and development” ((Jones (1998, 89-90)):
R&D

Technical progress

Economic growth

Empirical evidence (e.g. Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984), Lichtenberg and Siegel
(199?)) is consistent with the hypothesis that firms and industries that perform more
R&D exhibit higher productivity growth.
Solow and other economists have recognized since the late 1950s that there are
two kinds of technical progress: disembodied and embodied.

R&D

Technical progress
• disembodied
• embodied

Economic growth

Suppose that agent i in the economy (e.g. a firm or government agency) engages in
research and development. If technical progress is disembodied, another agent (j) can
benefit from agent i’s R&D whether or not he purchases agent i’s products. But if
technical progress is embodied, agent j benefits from agent i’s R&D only if he purchases
agent i’s products. Solow conjectured that most technical progress was embodied. In
one paper (Solow (1962, p. 76)), he assumed that “all technological progress needs to be
‘embodied’ in newly produced capital goods before there can be any effect on output.”
A number of econometric studies have investigated the hypothesis that capital
equipment employed by U.S. manufacturing firms embodies technological change, i.e.

4
that “each successive vintage of investment is more productive than the last.” Equipment
is expected to embody significant technical progress due to the relatively high R&Dintensity of equipment manufacturers. According to the National Science Foundation,
the R&D- intensity of machinery and equipment manufacturing is about 50% higher than
the R&D- intensity of manufacturing in general, and 78% higher than the R&D intensity
of all industries.
One method that has been used to test the equipment-embodied technical change
hypothesis is to estimate manufacturing production functions, including (mean) vintage
of equipment as well as quantities of capital and labor. Bahk and Gort (1993) argued that
“we can take due account of the effect of vintage by measuring the average vintage of the
stock” (p. 565). Similarly, Sakellaris and Wilson (2000) stated that “a standard
production function estimation (in logs) provides an estimate of embodied technical
change by dividing the coefficient on average age [of equipment] by the coefficient on
capital stock” (capital’s share in total cost).
These studies have concluded that technical progress embodied in equipment is a
major source of manufacturing productivity growth. Hulten (1992) found that as much as
20 percent (and perhaps more) of the BLS total- factor-productivity change (in
manufacturing) can be directly associated with embodiment—the higher productivity of
new capital than old capital. For equipment used in U.S. manufacturing, best-practice
technology may be as much as 23 percent above the average level of technical efficiency.
Bahk and Gort (1993) concluded that “Industrywide learning appears to be uniquely
related to embodied technical change of physical capital. Once due account is taken of
the latter variable, residual industrywide learning [disembodied technical change]
disappears as a significant explanatory variable” (p. 579). And Sakellaris and Wilson
(2000) estimate that “each vintage is about 12 percent more productive than the previous
year’s vintage (in the preferred specification)”, and that equipment-embodied technical
change accounted for about two thirds of U.S. manufacturing productivity growth
between 1972 and 1996.
Although equipment-embodied technical progress has contributed to U.S.
economic growth, it has probably had an undesirable side effect: increasing economic

5
inequality. 1 Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987) presented evidence that reductions in the
mean age of equipment reduce the relative demand for, and wages of, less-educated
workers. Support for the “skill-biased technical change” hypothesis has been provided
by numerous other studies.
Although virtually all previous empirical studies of embodied technical progress
have focused on equipme nt used in manufacturing, embodied technical progress may also
be an important source of economic growth in another sector of the economy: health care.
Recent research has suggested that, over the long run, growth in the U.S. economy’s
“health output” ha s been at least as large as the growth in non-health goods and services. 2

R&D

Technical progress
• disembodied
• embodied

Economic growth
• conventional
• health

Between 1900 and 1997, life expectancy at birth increased from 49.2 years to 76.5 years
Anderson (1999)). Nordhaus (2002) estimated that, “to a first approximation, the
economic value of increases in longevity over the twentieth century is about as large as
the value of measured growth in non-health goods and services”. Moreover, there is
evidence that the quality as well as the length of life of life have increased. According to
a new study, which looked at a sample of 19,000 Americans age 65 and older, the
chances that elderly Americans will be devastated by chronic disabilities like stroke and
dementia have declined sharply. The number of older people who become severely
disabled has been declining gradually for more than a decade, but the decline became
much sharper at the end of the 1990's. 3
1

According to a recent article, “For 30 years the gap between the richest Americans and everyone else has
been growing so much that the level of inequality is higher than in any other industrialized nation….many
economists [have] come to see inequality as a basic feature of the new high-tech economic scene.”
(“Grounded by an income gap,” New York Times, Dec. 15, 2001.)
2
Evidently, officials at the United Nations feel that per capita GDP growth is an incomplete measure of
economic growth, broadly defined: they publish the “human development index,” which is an (unweighted)
average of three indexes: a life expectancy index, an education index, and an index of per capita GDP.
3
Scientists at the National Institute on Aging, which sponsored the study, said the decline probably resulted
from a variety of factors, including more widespread knowledge of the benefits of diet and exercise, fewer
people smoking, new drugs for heart problems and other illnesses, and advances in eye surgery. Advances
in prescription drugs and medical technology have also contributed to the decline. “Decrease in Chronic
Illness Bodes Well for Medicare Costs,” New York Times, May 8, 2001

6
Thus health output appears to be increasing at least as fast as conventional output.
Moreover, one important input in the production of health—pharmaceuticals—is even
more R&D-intensive than equipment. According to the NSF, the R&D intensity of drugs
and medicines manufacturing is 74% higher than the R&D intensity of machinery and
equipment manufacturing (Figure 1). Therefore, it is quite plausible that there is also a
high rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress.
The objective of this paper is to test the pharmaceutical-embodied technical
progress hypothesis—the hypothesis that newer drugs increase the length and quality of
life—and to estimate the rate of progress. In one respect, the approach we take is similar
to that used in previous studies of manufacturing: we estimate production functions that
include vintage. But our methodology differs in a number of ways. We estimate health
production functions, in which the dependent variables are various indicators of health
status, such as presence of physical or cognitive limitations. We estimate these
relationships using extremely disaggregated—prescription- level—cross-sectional data
derived primarily from the 1997 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. And we define
vintage as the year in which the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) first approved a
drug’s active ingredient(s).
Theoretical Framework
The simplest model one might estimate to determine the effect of drug vintage on
post-treatment health is
HPOST = b0 + b1 V + b2 Z + u

(1)

where:
HPOST is a measure of a person’s post-treatment health status
V is the vintage (FDA approval year) of the drug(s) consumed by the person
during a period
Z are other potential determinants of HPOST that may be correlated with V (e.g.
medical condition, age, sex, and education)
u is a disturbance

7
For several reasons, however, the consistency and efficiency of estimates of this
effect may be improved by extending eq. (1) to include pre-treatment health status:
HPOST = b0 + b1 V + b2 Z + b3 HPRE + u

(2)

where:
HPRE is a measure of a person’s pre-treatment health status, i.e. her status at the
beginning of the period
We will estimate both models. Estimation of eq. (2) will reveal the effect of vintage on
post-treatment health status, conditional on pre-treatment health status.4 The first reason
to control for HPRE is that many of the health indicators that we will ana lyze are fairly
subjective: they are responses to questions such as “do you have difficulty walking?,” or
“do you suffer from cognitive limitations?”. There may be significant differences in the
way people whose “true” health is the same respond to such questions. But as long as
these differences remain the same in the pre- and post-treatment health surveys, they
won’t affect our estimates.
The second reason is that HPOST may depend on the vintage of drugs consumed in
previous periods as well as the period of observation. Suppose that HPOST = f(V, V-1 , V2 ,…).

If the coefficients on V decay geometrically with respect to time, one may express

HPOST as a linear function of current V and its own lagged value (HPRE ). Under these
assumptions, b1 may be interpreted as the short-run effect of V on health, and (b1 / (1 –
b3 )) may be interpreted as the long-run effect.
The third reason to control for HPRE is that assignment of drugs to individuals is
not random. Moreover, a simple but plausible theory of how drugs are assigned to
people, which we sketch below, suggests that V may be (negatively) correlated with
HPRE . If this is the case, estimates of eq. (1) will yield estimates of the effect of drug
vintage on post-treatment health that are biased downward 5 .

4

If age affects the rate of depreciation of health as well as the level of health (e.g., health declines more
rapidly among the elderly), then age should reduce HPOST, conditional on HPRE .
5
Another concern is the issue of access to drugs. Should this be restricted, we would expect people with
access to newer drugs to have better outcomes, hence rendering the estimates from our proposed model to
be potentially misleading. Although it remains unobserved, studies have shown wide variation in health
care usage exists among apparently comparable populations living in neighboring communities. For details
on small area analysis, refer for instance to Wennberg, John E. et al (1980).

8
Suppose that a person’s (post-treatment) utility function is:
U = U(HPOST , Y – pV V)

(3)

where:
Y is the person’s gross income (assumed to be exogenous)
pV (p V > 0) is the “price of vintage”, i.e. the difference in price between a drug of
vintage t+1 and a drug of vintage t. 6 Hence (Y – p V V) is the person’s “residual
income”, i.e. income net of expenditure on drug vintage.
Further suppose that the (post-treatment) health production function is of the form
HPOST = HPOST (V, HPRE )

(4)

where:
HPRE is a measure of a person’s pre-treatment health status (also assumed to be
exogenous).
Assume that the partial derivatives of HPOST with respect to both V and HPRE are positive:
increases in pre-treatment health and in drug vintage both increase post-treatment health.
Eq. (1) can be regarded as a linear version of eq. (4), in which HPRE is included in
the disturbance.
Substituting (4) into (3),
U = U(HPOST (V, HPRE ), Y – pV V)

(5)

Using newer drugs (increasing V) affects utility in two opposite ways: it increases U by
increasing HPOST , but reduces utility by reducing residual income (Y – pV V). A utilitymaximizing consumer chooses V to balance these two effects.
We now make one further assumption about the health production function (4): a
“negative interaction” between V and HPRE ((∂2 HPOST / ∂ V ∂ HPRE ) < 0), i.e. we assume
that the marginal productivity of increasing V is higher for people with poor initial health
(low HPRE ). (Figure 2) As a rule, increases in the quantity and quality of medical care
are probably more valuable to people in poor initial health than they are to people in

6

We will present evidence about p V below.

9
excellent initial health. We will present empirical evidence that provides strong support
for this negative interaction.
Since people with low education and income are more likely to be in poor initial
health than people with high education and income, pharmaceutical-embodied technical
progress may be biased towards the less-educated. 7 If so, it tends to reduce inequality as
it contributes to economic growth. 8
These assumptions imply that (for given Y), equilibrium V is inversely related to
HPRE : individuals in poor initial health will tend to use newer drugs than people in
excellent initial health. This is why b1 from equation (1) may underestimate the effect of
V on HPOST . Suppose that the true post-treatment health production function is a linear
version of eq. (4):
HPOST = β0 + β1 V + β 2 Z + β 3 HPRE + u

(6)

Then plim(b1 ) = β1 + β 3 βPRE.V, where β PRE.V is the slope coefficient from the simple
“auxiliary” regression of HPRE on V. Since we hypothesize that β 3 > 0 and βPRE.V < 0,
plim(b1 ) < β 1 .
Fortunately, we have data on HPRE as well as on HPOST and V, so we can estimate
eq. (5), i.e. we can control for pre-treatment health. In fact, we can extend and generalize
the model as follows:
HPOST = β0 + β1 V + β 2 Z + β 3 HPRE + β4 (V * HPRE ) + u

(7)

According to the “negative interaction” hypothesis discussed above, inclusion of the
interaction term (V * HPRE ) is appropriate.
We have argued that controlling for initial health status affords a better
representation of the health production function than one without. However, the health
7

Provided that the less-educated have access to new drugs. Lleras -Muney and Lichtenberg (2002) find that
less-educated people use older drugs than more-educated people, but the difference in mean age of drugs is
very small. The Medicaid program has been the main source of access to new (and old) drugs by lesseducated people for the last 30 years.
8
Inequality in household income increased during the period 1970-95: the share of U.S. aggregate income
received by the top 20% of households increased from 43.3% in 1970 to 48.7% in 1995; the share received
by the top 5% increased from 16.6% to 21.0%. In contrast, inequality in longevity declined: t he coefficient
of variation of mean age at death declined by about 7%, from 26.6 to 24.7. (Infant deaths are excluded
from these calculations.) In general, the outward shift of the age-at-death distribution was larger at the left
(at young ages) than it was at the right.

10
production function in equation (7) still fails to account for health shocks that may occur
during the interim between the initial health and post-treatment health ‘snapshots’.
Although health shock events are unobservable, we have reason to believe that including
treatment responses could help capture their impact. In other words, by incorporating
health utilization measures such as the quantity of prescription drugs, physician visits,
and inpatient discharges into our regression, we could, to some extent, account for
adverse health shocks9 . With this interpretation, we would expect a negative relationship
between health utilization and post treatment health status – a person who encounters
adverse health shocks would receive more treatment. Under this specification, the health
production function in equation (4) takes the form:

HPOST = HPOST (V, HPRE, Health Shocks)

(4’)

Further, using health utilization as a proxy for shocks and assuming a linear
production function, we modify equation (6) to give:
HPOST = β0 + β1 V + β2 Z + β3 HPRE
+ β4 Prescription + β 5 Physician + β 6 Hospital + u

(8)

where:
Prescription refers to the number of prescriptions
Physician is the number of physician visits
Hospital is the number of inpatient admissions
β4 , β5 , and β6 are postulated to be negative

The model specified in equation (8) poses an additional estimation concern for the
drug vintage coefficient. If the quality of drugs affects health status, then it must certainly
affect the extent to which a person utilizes other health treatments. This implies that (for
any given post-treatment health status), equilibrium V is inversely related to each health
utilization variable: individuals who use newer drugs would also tend to need
9

Notice that our proposed health utilization variables represent quantitative rather than qualitative health
‘consumption’ (unlike our drug vintage coefficient), which should therefore effectively measure the degree
of adverse health events.

11
quantitatively less treatment in the form of drugs, physician visits and/or inpatient care 10 .
For ease of exposition, let’s assume a composite variable denoting health utilization,
UTIL, with respective slope coefficient, β UTIL . If V and UTIL are negatively related, we
expect b1 from equation (1) may ‘overestimate’ the effect of V on HPOST 11 : plim(b1 ) = β 1
+ β UTIL β UTIL.V, where β UTIL.V is the slope coefficient from the “auxiliary” regression of
UTIL on V. The first term, β 1 can be interpreted as the direct effect of V on HPOST , while
the expression, β UTIL β UTIL.V measures the indirect impact of V on HPOST via UTIL. Since
we hypothesize that β UTIL < 0 and β UTIL.V < 0, plim(b1 ) > β 1 . In short, a priori, we
anticipate a lower drug vintage coefficient when we include health utilization. However,
this does not necessarily imply that the overall impact of V on HPOST is overestimated
when utilization is excluded. Adjusting for utilization simply decomposes drug vintage
into its direct and indirect effects.
Data
In order to estimate eq. (6), and determine the effect of drug vintage on posttreatment health, conditional on pre-treatment health and a large number of covariates,
we will use data from the household component of the 1997 Medical Expenditure Panel
Survey (MEPS). The household component collected data on a sample of families
and individuals, drawn from a nationally representative subsample of households, which
permits generalization to the entire civilian noninstitutionalized population of the United
States. The objective was to produce annual estimates for a variety of measures of health
status, health insurance coverage, health care use and expenditures, and sources of
payment for health services. The panel design of the survey, which features several
rounds of interviewing, makes it possible to determine how changes in respondents'
health status, income, employment, eligibility for public and private insurance coverage,
use of services, and payment for care are related.
The 1997 MEPS household component collected data on 34,551 people. Each
person was interviewed a number of times, and data on the person’s use of medical
10

There is empirical support for this claim. Using 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, Lichtenberg
(2001) finds evidence that the replacement of older by newer drugs results in reductions in mortality,
morbidity, and total medical expenditure.
11
For simplicity, we ignore the interaction between V and Hpre that was previously discussed.

12
services throughout the year (including data on each of their 234,532 prescribed
medicines) were collected. 12
To measure pre-treatment health status (HPRE ) and covariates (Z), we use data
collected at the end of round 3 for Panel 1 and round 1 for Panel 2. To measure posttreatment health status (HPOST ), we use data collected at the end of round 5 for Panel 1
and round 3 for Panel 2. To measure drug vintage V (and other drug attributes, i.e.
medical condition and price), we use data on all of the prescribed medicine events that
occurred during rounds 4 and 5 for Panel 1 and rounds 2 and 3 for Panel 2. The time- line
of health interviews and prescribed medicine events is depicted in Figure 3.

Health status measures. Responses to the following questions about health status were
obtained at both interviews:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

12

Perceived health status (excellent, very good, good, fair, poor)
Any limitation work/housework/school? (yes, no)
Any social limitations? (yes, no)
Any cognitive limitations? (yes, no)
Any limitation in physical functioning? (yes, no)
Difficulty lifting 10 pounds? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty walking up 10 steps? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do, completely unable to walk)
Difficulty walking 3 blocks? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty walking a mile? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty standing 20 minutes? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty bending/stooping? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty reaching overhead? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)
Difficulty using fingers to grasp? (no difficulty, some difficulty, a lot of difficulty,
unable to do)

Average number of rx’s per person (including people with zero rx’s): 6.8. Average number of rx’s per
person (excluding people with zero rx’s): 11.4. 41% of people had zero rx’s.

13
We recoded all of our health measures to take the value 0 for the worst health outcome
(“zero health output”) and the value 1 for the best health outcome (“maximum health
output”). Using the perceived health status measure and a mortality indicator (whether
the person was alive at the time of the second interview), we constructed a composite
quality-of- life indicator: (1=excellent health, 0.8=very good health, 0.6=good health,
0.4=fair health, 0.2=poor health, 0=dead). For the difficulty measures, we compute the
average across all eight indicators and name the composite, ‘mean level of difficulty’ 13, 14 .
Drug information. For each prescription obtained between the two interviews, we
extracted the following information from the 1997 MEPS Prescribed Medicine Events
file (HC-016A): the National Drug Code (NDC), the 3-digit ICD9 diagnosis for which
the drug was prescribed, and expenditure (by all payers) for the prescription. We used
the “denorm” table in Multum’s Lexicon to identify the active ingredients contained in
each NDC product. In September 2000 there were 1830 active ingredients listed in
Multum’s Lexicon. The FDA approved 92 new molecular entities during 1998-2000, so
there would have been about 1738 active ingredients in 1997. However only 789 of these
ingredients were contained in products represented in the 1997 MEPS Prescribed
Medicine Events file. To determine the vintages (FDA approval dates) of these
ingredients, we used two unpublished files obtained from the FDA. The first is a list of
all of the 821 new molecular entities (NMEs) approved during the period 1950-1993.
The second is a list of all new drug applications (NDAs) approved during the period
1939-1998. (The first FDA drug approval occurred in 1939.) This list includes both new
molecular entities approved and other NDAs approved (new formulations, new
manufacturers, etc.). Although the two lists are broadly consistent, there are some
discrepancies. Figure 4 shows the number of new molecular entities approved per year,

13

The other health status variables available from the MEPS dataset do not permit us to compute
‘reasonable’ (composite) continuous health status. We employ this strategy exclusively for our ‘mean level
of difficulty’ measure. See Wells (1996) for a discussion of the construction of health status variables
using survey results.
14
During the interviews, the list of 7questions pertaining to detailed physical activities were asked only to
respondents who indicated having limitations in physical functioning. We recoded all respondents with no
physical limitation as having ‘no difficulty’ in the set of all detailed physical activities.

14
as computed from both lists. 15 We consider the first list to be more reliable for the 19501993 period, since the FDA constructed it for the specific purpose of identifying NMEs
approved during the period. We use the second list only to provide data on NMEs
approved during 1939-1949 and 1994-1997. We matched Multum active ingredient
names to ingredient names contained in FDA new molecular entity approvals.
Only 60 percent (470 / 789) of the ingredients reported in the 1997 MEPS data
appeared in the list of NMEs approved during 1939-1997. Ingredients with known FDA
approval dates accounted for 69 percent (167,667 / 241,314) of MEPS prescriptions. 16
Table 1 lists the top 20 active ingredients, ranked by number of prescriptions, in the 1997
MEPS. The top 20 ingredients (2.5 percent of MEPS ingredients) accounted for almost
30 percent of all MEPS prescriptions. Four of the top ten, and five of the top twenty,
ingredients did not appear in the list of NMEs approved during 1939-1997; their vintages
are unknown but presumably precede 1939. The average cost of a prescription of
unknown vintage is $21.88, and the average cost of a prescription of known (1939-1997)
vintage is $41.10. Forty-nine percent of prescriptions for drugs of unknown vintage are
generic, compared to 36 percent of prescriptions for drugs of known vintage.
There are several ways of handling the problem of censoring of the vintage
distribution of drugs. One way is to simply exclude prescriptions for drugs of unknown
vintage. This would not affect the consistency of our estimates, provided that the rate of
pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress was the same after 1939 as it was before
1939. It would, however, reduce the precision (efficiency) of our estimates, for two
reasons. First, it would reduce the size of the sample by almost a third. Second, and
probably more importantly, it would substantially reduce the range (and variance) of
vintage. The greater this range, the greater the precision of the estimate of β 1 (= δHPOST /
δV).17

15

We also merged the two lists, by new drug approval number, and calculated the difference in approval
years recorded in the two lists. The mean and median differences were both approximately zero, and 98%
of the differences were between –2 and +2 years, but there were 5 cases in which the absolute difference
exceeded 10 years.
16
These figures treat a prescription for a combination drug—a drug with multiple ingredients—as a
prescription for each ingredient. For example, a prescription for a drug containing the two ingredients
benzalkonium chloride and tyloxapol is treated as two prescriptions, one for each ingredient.
17
If you seek to identify the effect of X on Y, you want X to vary a lot.

15
An alternative approach is to include prescriptions for drugs of unknown vintage
in the sample, but replace V by a dummy variable whose value depends on the
ingredient’s location in the vintage distribution. Suppose we divide drugs into two
groups: “new drugs” (drugs whose vintage is nonmissing and greater than a certain value
(e.g., 1970)), and “old drugs” (other drugs, including those of unknown vintage). Let VN
represent the mean vintage of new drugs and Vo the mean vintage of old drugs. (We
discuss below how the latter may be computed.) Now define a dummy variable equal to
VN if the drug is a new drug and equal to Vo if the drug is an old drug. If we replace V by
this dummy variable in eq. (7), its coefficient is an estimate of the “average annual”
effect of vintage on health. 18 This model can also be estimated on the sample excluding
prescriptions with missing vintages.
A third approach is to include prescriptions for drugs of unknown vintage in the
sample, and impute an average vintage value (e.g., V = 1900) when vintage is unknown.
Imputation enables estimation of our original model (eq. (6)), but since the appropriate
value to impute is unknown, we should perform sensitivity analysis by trying alternative
values. We report estimates based on two different imputed values, 1900 and 1920.
To summarize, we will estimate five different versions of the model:
Missing- vintage rx’s

Missing- vintage rx’s included

excluded
linear vintage

assume missing V = 1900
assume missing V = 1920

vintage dummy

Covariates. All of the models we estimate include one prescription- level covariate—the
diagnosis for which the drug was consumed—and the following person-level covariates:
18

Wald (1940) was apparently the first to propose using this kind of dummy variable as an instrument for a
regressor subject to measurement error. Censoring of vintages may not be the only source of vintage
measurement error. One reason is that there is probably considerable variation in the lag between the time
of drug discovery and the time of FDA approval; the former may be a more appropriate measure of vintage,
but is unobserved. A second is that some drugs (“standard review” drugs) may be very similar to
previously approved (“priority review”) drugs; perhaps the “effective vintage” of standard-review drugs is
the vintage of the preceding priority-review drugs to which they are similar.

16
age, sex, race, education, income, marital status, and indicators of insurance coverage
(Medicare, Medicaid, and private insurance). All variables except income are included as
classification variables, e.g. there is a separate dummy variable for each diagnosis (over
600 diagnoses) and each year of age and education.
Unit of analysis. The unit of analysis is a prescription19 , so the model captures the effect
of a change in the vintage of a single prescription on the consumer’s post-treatment
health. (To calculate the health effect of changing the average vintage of all of a
person’s prescriptions, one would multiply by the number of her prescriptions.)
Each observation contains the vintage of the drug20 , the diagnosis for which the
drug was prescribed, the pre- and post-treatment health status of the person cons uming
the drug, and person-level covariates. Hence, the model is of the form:
HPOST,i = β0 + β 1 Vij + β2 Z i + β 3 HPRE,i + β4 (Vij * HPRE,i)
+ diagnosis effects + uij

(7)

where Vij denotes the jth prescription consumed by person i.
Estimation issues. Due to the categorical nature of the HPOST measures listed above,
ideally one would estimate model (7) using an (ordered) probit or similar procedure.
Unfortunately, due to the large number of (“nuisance”) parameters in the model (600+
diagnosis effects, 100 age effects, 20 education effects, etc.), the probit estimation
procedure often failed to converge. Second, our unit of observation is at the prescription
level, allowing individuals with more than one prescription event to have multiple entries.
We correct for the correlation across such observations by reporting estimates of eq. (7)
19

Hence, if person A had 10 prescriptions and person B had 5, person A would contribute twice as many
observations to the sample. Unweighted estimation at the prescription level is similar to weighted
estimation at the person level, where the weight is the person’s number of prescriptions. Since diagnosis
can vary across prescriptions for a given individual, it is easier to control for diagnosis at the prescription
level than it is at the person level.
20
In principle, it would be desirable to decompose approvals not only according to active ingredients, but
to different combinations and dosages as well, as these may affect the efficacy of drugs to some degree.
However, this is difficult to implement in practice. Moreover, FDA data indicate that new ingredients are
more likely to be significant innovations than new formulations or combinations of existing ingredients.
Our data reveal that 42% of the new molecular entities (NMEs ) approved during 1990-2001 were “priorityreview approvals” i.e. considered by the FDA to represent “significant improvement compared to marketed
products, in the treatment, diagnosis, or prevention of a disease”. On the other hand, only 14% of non-NME
NDAs (including new formulations or combinations) approved were priority-review approvals.

17
using a random effects model that accounts for clustered standard errors 21 . For binary
dependent variables, this is known as the “linear probability model,” which has certain
limitations. We hope to supersede these limitations in the future.
Suppose that HPOST,i equals 1 if person i has no limitation in physical functioning
post-treatment, and otherwise equals zero. Within the linear probability model
framework, β 1 is the (short-run) effect of a one-year increase in vintage on the probability
of no limitation in physical functioning. 22 An estimate of β 1 allows us to calculate both
(1) the increase in drug cost necessary to achieve a given improvement in post-treatment
health, and (2) the rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress.
Let Prx represent the price of a prescription. Then dPrx / dV is the derivative of
prescription price with respect to vintage—the slope of the vintage-price profile. β 1 =
dHPOST / dV is the derivative of post-treatment health with respect to vintage—the slope
of the vintage-health profile. Hence (dPrx / dV) / β 1 = dPrx / dHPOST is the cost of the
increase in vintage necessary to achieve a given improvement in post-treatment health.
For example, if dPrx / dV = $1.50 (prescription cost increases at the rate of $1.50 per year
of vintage) and β 1 = .00018, then dPrx / dHPOST = $1.50 / .00018 = $8433. The increase in
vintage required to achieve a .01 increase in the probability of no limitation in physical
functioning would increase prescription cost by $84.33. 23
The percentage change in the probability of no limitation from a one-year
increase in vintage is β 1 / mean (HPOST ). For example, if β 1 = .00018 and mean (HPOST ) =
.671, the percentage change in probability from a one-year increase in vintage is .00018 /

21

In addition, we attempted the alternative of weighting each observation by the inverse of the number of
prescriptions received by that individual – the estimates generally showed a lower standard error, and
remained significant.
22
Assuming for simplicity that there is no interaction effect (i.e. that β4 = 0). The long-run effect is -β1 /
(1-β3 ).
23
This approach can also be used to estimate the cost of the increase in vintage necessary to achieve a oneyear increase in life exp ectancy. Suppose that HPOST is equal to 1 if the person was alive at the date of the
second interview, and equal to zero if the person had died. Then β1 is the effect of vintage on the
probability of survival. Let LE(t) represent a person’s remaining life expectancy at year t, and S(t,t+1)
represent the probability of survival from age t to age t+1. Then LE(t) ≈ S(t, t+1) * [1 + LE(t+1)], and
dLE / dV ≈ [1 + LE(t+1)] * (dS / dV) = [1 + LE(t+1)] * β1 . Hence, we can obtain an approximate estimate
of the effect of a one-year increase in vintage on life expectancy by multiplying β1 by mean remaining life
expectancy of drug consumers. Since their mean age is 53, their mean remaining life expectancy is about
25 years. The cost of the increase in vintage necessary to achieve a one-year increase in life expectancy is
therefore (dPrx / dV) / (25 * β1 ).

18
.671, or .00027. Previous authors have argued that the annual rate of embodied technical
progress should be measured as the percentage change in output from a one-year increase
in the vintage of an input divided by the input’s share in total cost of production. In our
model, each prescription is regarded as a distinct input. The mean (across prescriptions)
ratio of the cost of the prescription to total medical expenditure is 0.54%. 24 Hence in this
example (using this indicator of health), the rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical
progress is .00027 / .0054 = 5.0% per year. 25
Estimates like these, while computed from cross-sectional micro data, have
aggregate time-series implications. Mean vintage of drugs consumed tends to increase
over time, e.g. drugs consumed in 1997 are of later vintage than drugs consumed in 1977.
(In a steady state, the mean vintage of drugs would increase at the rate of one year per
year.) The National Institute of Aging-sponsored study cited above found that “the
number of older people who become severely disabled has been declining gradually for
more than a decade, but the decline became much sharper at the end of the 1990's.” 26
As Figure 4 indicates, there was a large increase in the mid-1990s in the number of new
drugs approved. This increase, which was primarily due to enactment of the Prescription
Drug User Fee Act, may help to explain the acceleration in the decline in disability at the
end of the 1990s.

Descriptive statistics. Summary statistics are presented in Table 2. These are presented
at both the person level and the prescription level. The prescription- level statistics can be
thought of as weighted person- level statistics, where the weight is the person’s number of
prescriptions. People in poor health tend to consume more prescriptions than people in
24

This ignores the value of the time people devote to their own health care. As Folland et al (2001, p. 121)
note, “The consumer does not merely purchase health passively from the market. Instead, the consumer
produces it, spending time on health-improving efforts in addition to purchasing medical inputs.”
Accounting for the value of time would reduce the ratio of the cost of the prescription to total health care
cost, and increase the estimated rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress.
25
The estimated rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress is invariant with respect to the scale,
but not the location, of the HPOST measure. Suppose that Y* = c1 Y, where c1 is a scale parameter (constant).
Then if b is the slope of the regression of Y on X, and b* is the slope of the regression of Y* on X,
b* / mean (Y*) = (c1 b) / (c1 mean(Y)) = b / mean(Y). But if instead Y* = c0 + c1 Y, where c0 is a location
parameter (constant), b* / mean (Y*) = (c1 b) / (c0 + c1 mean(Y)) ≠ b / mean(Y). We code all of our HPOST
measures to take the value 0 for the worst health outcome (“zero health output”) and the value 1 for the best
health outcome (“maximum health output”).
26
“Decrease in Chronic Illness Bodes Well for Medicare Costs,” New York Times, May 8, 2001.

19
excellent health, so prescription-level mean health is lower than person- level mean
health. For example, 8% of individuals reported limitations in physical functioning in the
initial interview, but 32% of prescriptions were consumed by individuals who reported
limitations in physical functioning in the initial interview. Similarly, 0.26% of the
individuals had died by the date of the second interview, but 0.80% of prescriptions were
consumed by individuals who had died by the date of the second interview. 27
Results
Table 3 presents estimates of β 1 from equation HPOST,i = β 0 + β1 Vij + β2 Z i +
diagnosis effects + uij (excluding pre-treatment health), based on alternative samples
(excluding vs. including observations with unknown vintages) and alternative measures
of vintage (continuous vs. discrete). It also presents (in the first row) estimates of the
effect of vintage on the price of a prescription in 1997.
The first column reports estimates based on the subset of observations where
vintage is known, and where the vintage measure is continuous. The Rx price coefficient
of 1.25 indicates that a one- year increase in vintage increases the price of a prescription
by $1.25 (3.2%), on average. Looking down the first column, only one of the vintage
coefficients—on “absence of social limitations”--is significant at the 5 percent level.
Estimates reported in the second column are also based on the subset of
observations where vintage is known, but the vintage measure is discrete: if the vintage is
less than or equal to 1970, it is replaced by the mean vintage of 1939-1970 drugs
(1957.7), and if the vintage is greater than 1970, it is replaced by the mean vintage of
1971-1997 drugs (1984.6). A number of the coefficients on this discrete measure of
vintage—the coefficients from ALIVE, perceived health status, the quality of life index,
absence of limitations on work/housework/school, absence of social limitations, and
mean level of difficulty regressions--are positive and highly statistically significant. This
is consistent with the view that vintage is subject to measurement error, which tends to
bias the vintage coefficient towards zero, and this bias can be attenuated by grouping
prescriptions according to measured vintage.
27

Because poor health and mortality are relatively uncommon at the person level, the fact that sicker people
consume more drugs is likely to increase the power of statistical tests performed at the prescription level,
where these outcomes are less uncommon.

20
Estimates reported in the third column are based on the full sample of
prescriptions; in this column the vintage of prescriptions of unknown (pre-1939) vintage
is assumed to be 1900. As in the first column, vintage is measured as a continuous
variable. Notice first that the Rx-price coefficient is much smaller in column 3 than it is
in the first two columns. That is because the Rx-price/vintage frontier is quite
nonlinear—it is much steeper for vintages greater than 1970 than it is for older
vintages—and the sample on which column 3 estimates are based include more old drugs.
This estimate implies that, when all drugs are considered (and the value 1900 is imputed
for missing vintages), a one- year increase in vintage increased the price of a 1997
prescription by $0.35 (about 1%), on average.
The vintage coefficients in seven of the nine health indicator regressions in
column 3 are positive and highly significant, suggesting that people who use newer drugs
had better post-treatment health than people using older drugs for the same condition,
controlling for age, sex, race, marital status, education, income, and insurance coverage.
Although the effect of vintage on health is generally insignificant when a continuous
vintage measure is used and the sample is restricted to drugs with known (post-1939)
vintages (column 1), the effect of vintage on health is generally significant when either a
discrete vintage measure is used (column 2) or the sample is not restricted to drugs with
known vintages (column 3).
Estimates reported in the fourth column are also based on the full sample of
prescriptions and a continuous vintage measure; in this column the vintage of
prescriptions of unknown (pre-1939) vintage is assumed to be 1920, rather than 1900. In
general, this increases the point estimates of the vintage coefficients: the rate of health
improvement with respect to vintage appears to be larger, since the old drugs are assumed
to be less old. But the coefficients don’t change by an enormous amount, and they
remain highly significant, suggesting that our results won’t be too sensitive to the choice
of imputed value for missing vintages. 28 Since the t-statistics in column 3 are generally
larger than those in column 4, henceforth we will impute 1900 to missing vintages.

28

Since the Rx-price coefficient is also higher in column 4 than it is in column 3, estimates of dPrx / dHPOST
= (dPr x / dV) / β1 from the two columns will be quite similar.

21
The fifth and last column of Table 3 presents estimates based on the full sample
of prescriptions; in this column the vintage of prescriptions of unknown (pre-1939)
vintage is assumed to be 1900, but a discrete measure of vintage is used. If the vintage is
less than or equal to 1970, it is replaced by the mean vintage of pre-1970 drugs
(estimated to be 1930.3), and if the vintage is greater than 1970, it is replaced by the
mean vintage of 1971-1997 drugs (1984.6). Once again, many of the vintage coefficients
are positive and highly statistically significant. For several health indicators, this
specification fits the data better than the previous four specifications (judging by the tstatistic on the vintage coefficient). In light of this, this is the specification (discrete
vintage, all observations, set missing vintage = 1900) that we will use in the remainder of
this paper.
The estimates reported in Table 3 do not control for pre-treatment health status.
In Table 4 we report estimated effects of vintage on health that do control for pretreatment health status, i.e. we report estimates from the “dynamic” equation HPOST,i = β 0
+ β1 Vij + β 2 Z i + β3 HPRE ,i + diagnosis effects + uij. Column 2 of Table 4 reports
estimates of the short-run effect of vintage on health, β 1 , and column 3 reports estimates
of the long-run effect, (β 1 / (1 - β3 )). For purposes of comparison, we also report in
column 1 estimates of β 1 from the “static” model (excluding pre-treatment health); these
estimates are also reported in column 5 of Table 3. We also report, for each estimate, the
cost of the increase in vintage required to achieve a unit increase in post-treatment health
(dPrx / d H), and the implied rate of embodied technical progress.
The first set of estimates is coefficients from ALIVE regressions. Recall that
ALIVE = 1 if the person was alive at the time of the second interview, and = 0 if the
person had died. (In the ALIVE and QUALITY of LIFE regressions, initial health status
is measured as pre-treatment PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS. In all other regressions,
initial health status is measured as the lagged (pre-treatment) dependent variable.) Drug
vintage has a positive and highly significant coefficient in both the static and dynamic
models: people consuming newer drugs during the period were more likely to be alive at
the end of the period, whether or not we control for perceived health status at the
beginning of the period. The static model implies that the cost of the increase in vintage
required to keep the person alive is $8214. The short-run and long-run estimates from the

22
dynamic model are both about the same as this. This cost seems to be quite low, in
comparison with other researchers’ estimates of the economic value of a life- year.
Murphy and Topel (forthcoming 2002) estimate that the average value of a life-year is
$150,000. Hence our estimate of the cost of preventing a death is lower than Murphy and
Topel’s estimate of the value of remaining alive for one month. Prevention of a person’s
death during the sample period presumably increases her longevity by far more than a
month. 29 The estimated rate of technical change is about 1.2%.
Next we consider the health indicator PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS
(conditional on survival). This variable ranges from 0, for a person in “poor” health (the
lowest state), to 1 for a person in “excellent” health (the highest state). Once again,
vintage has a positive and highly significant effect on PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS
in both the static and dynamic models. The static model implies that the cost of the
increase in vintage required to increase a person’s health from poor to excellent is $3663.
The short-run estimate from the dynamic model is higher ($5114), but the long-run effect
is lower ($2273). The fact that the long-run estimate is lower than the static estimate is
consistent with the view that people in poor initial health tend to consume newer drugs,
so that failure to control for initial health biases the estimates of the effect of vintage on
health towards zero, and estimates of the cost of the increase in vintage required to
achieve better health away from zero. The rate of embodied technical progress implied
by the long-run effect is quite high: 9.3%.
The QUALITY OF LIFE index, estimates of which are presented next in Table 4,
is based on both of the previous indicators, and is measured for all persons in the sample,
not just survivors. It is equal to zero if the person had died, 0.2 if the person was alive
and in poor health, 0.4 if the person was alive and in fair health,..., and 1.0 if the person
was alive and in excellent health. The estimates based on this index are fairly similar to
the estimates based on PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS, although the cost of health
improvement implied by the long-run estimate is somewhat higher ($2711 vs. $2273),
and the rate of embodied technical progress lower (6.4% vs. 9.3%).

29

In the future, we hope to estimate the increase in life expectancy associated with the vintage-induced
increase in survival probability.

23
The next two indicators--ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION
WORK/HOUSEWORK/SCHOOL and ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS—also
provide strong support for the pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress hypothesis.
People were less likely to experience activity or social limitations if they had consumed
newer drugs, conditional on their previous limitations (and the other covariates). The
long-run estimate indicates that the cost of preventing an activity limitation is $1745, and
the annual rate of technical progress with respect to activity limitations is 8.4%.
The next two indicators--PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS and
ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS—do not show any signs of embodied
technical progress: neither the static nor the dynamic estimates of the vintage coefficients
are significantly different from zero. With respect to the last indicator--ABSENCE OF
LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING—the vintage effect is significant in the
static model, but not in the dynamic one (i.e., controlling for initial physical limitations).
But in addition to this broad (binary) indicator of physical limitations, MEPS provides
data on respondents’ ability to perform seven specific physical activities (lifting 10
pounds, walking 3 blocks, etc.). 30 As mentioned earlier, we use this information to
compute a composite measure called MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY. As shown in
Table 4, people who consume newer drugs tend to have lower levels of mean difficulty.
The long-run estimate indicates that the cost of preventing physical difficulty is $2479,
and the annual rate of technical progress with respect to physical difficulty is 4.8% 31 .
The estimates we have presented so far measure, we believe, the average effect of
drug vintage on health. In our theoretical discussion we postulated that in reality, this
effect may be heterogeneous: the effect of drug vintage on health is greater for people in
initially poor health. To test this hypothesis, we estimated eq. (7), which includes both
main and interaction vintage and pre-treatment health effects: HPOST,i = β0 + β1 Vij + β2 Z i

30

These variables indicate the degree, as well as the absence or presence, of physical limitation.
In fact, we also estimated models of respondents’ ability to perform each of the seven activities
separately (not reported). Almost all of the detailed physical activities variables strongly support the
existence of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress. People consuming newer drugs tend to
experience greater increases (or smaller declines) in physical ability than peop le consuming older drugs.
The average rate of embodied technical progress across all seven activities is about 4%. Since detailed
physical limitation indicators (and their mean) provide evidence of embodied technical change while a
crude measure does not, it is quite possible that if detailed cognitive limitation indicators were available,
they (and their mean) would have provided evidence of embodied technical change.
31

24
+ β3 HPRE,i + β4 (Vij * HPRE,i) + diagnosis effects + uij. In this model, the partial derivative
of HPOST,i with respect to vintage is ∂ HPRE,i / ∂ Vij = (β 1 + β4 HPRE,i). Suppose that HPRE,i
= 1 if person i is in excellent initial health and HPRE,i = 0 if person i is in poor initial
health. Then ∂ HPRE,i / ∂ Vij = (β 1 + β4 ) for the person in excellent initial health and ∂
HPRE,i / ∂ Vij = β 1 for the person in poor initial health. We hypothesize that β 4 is negative
and significantly different from zero.
Estimates of models of broad health indicators including interactions between
drug vintage and initial health are presented in Table 5. The first column presents
estimates of the drug vintage effect for people with the lowest initial health (HPRE = 0);
the second column presents estimates of the drug vintage effect for people with the
highest initial health (HPRE = 1); and the third column presents estimates of the difference
between these two effects. In general, the estimates are consistent with the “negative
interaction” hypothesis. In the case of seven of the nine indicators (ALIVE,
PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS, QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX, ABSENCE OF
SOCIAL LIMITATIONS, ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS, ABSENCE OF
LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING, MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY), the
effect of drug vintage on health is positive and significant for people with low initial
health, insignificant for people with high initial health, and the difference between these
effects is statistically significant.

In the case of one of the remaining two indicators

(PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS), the effect of drug vintage on health is
insignificant for both groups, and in the other case (ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION),
the effect of drug vintage on health is positive and significant only for people with high
initial health, which is somewhat puzzling 32 .
In the theoretical section, we postulated that a way to capture the impact of
interim health shocks is to include health utilization. In light of this, we ran regressions
using equation (8). Table 6 presents our results. For ease of comparison, we transfer the
results obtained from the model without health utilization (namely column 2 of Table 4)
to the first column of Table 6. The second column lists estimates for the regressions that
include utilization measures, namely number of prescriptions (prescription), number of
32

The fact that our measure of average physical limitation (MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY) provides
evidence in support of our hypothesis convinces us that this broad measure is somewhat lacking in its
ability to capture the desired effects.

25
physician visits (physician), and number of inpatient discharges (hospital). The final three
columns of Table 6 display the coefficient estimate, standard error, t-statistic and p-value
for each of these three utilization measures in corresponding regressions.
Focusing on the first two columns of Table 6, it is immediately apparent that as
hypothesized, the drug vintage coefficient has become less significant across all cases,
although the qualitative results remain robust between both specifications: all of the
‘original’ seven indicators remain positive and significant even with the inclusion of
health utilization; ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS and ABSENCE OF
LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING remain positive but are now even more
insignificant; last, PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS remains negative but is
now significant at 5.6%. In addition, the actual values of the coefficient estimate are
smaller under this new specification. This in turn implies a lower rate of technical change
and a higher cost of eliminating or alleviating a given limitation.
Turning our attention next to the coefficients of the utilization variables, we
notice that they are negative and highly significant in most instances 33 . This validates our
conjecture that health utilization variables capture health shocks and consequently shocks
affecting ‘interim’ health status. Another interesting observation is that the number of
prescription drugs is by far the most significant among all three health utilization
measures. An exception to this norm lies in the regression on ALIVE, where not
surprisingly, the number of inpatient discharges (hospital) emerges as the most significant
utilization variable affecting post-treatment health status. Finally, in regressions that
account for both the interaction term (recall Table 5) as well as health utilization, we
obtain results qualitatively similar to those in Table 5, strengthening our claim that people
in poor initial health tend to benefit most from pharmaceutical-embodied technical
change 34 .
Overall, the evidence suggests that the people in poor initial health tend to benefit
most from pharmaceutical-embodied technical change. As the following table shows, the

33

In the specification shown in Table 6, we employ the logarithm of the utilization variables in order to
highlight the negative relationship between them and each dependent (health status) variable. Our estimates
remain robust to alternative specifications of these utilization variables, including one in which they were
introduced as class variables, as well as a linear specification.
34
We do not present these results as they are also quantitatively close to those reported in Table 5.

26
health of people with low levels of education (hence low skills and income) tends to be
worse than the health of people with more education. 35

Type of limitation

Overall rate (%
of people
experiencing
limitation)
8.3%

Less-thanhigh-school
rate minus
high-school
rate
6.0%

More-thanhigh-school
rate minus
high-school
rate
-3.5%

ANY LIMITATION
WORK/HOUSEWORK/SCHOOL
LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL
FUNCTIONING
SOCIAL LIMITATIONS
COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS

9.4

4.9

-2.7

4.6
3.2

2.9
3.3

-1.2
-1.3

Hence pharmaceutical-embodied technical change may have a tendency to reduce
inequality as well as promote economic growth, broadly defined.

Summary and conclusions
For sustained economic growth to occur, technological progress is necessary.
There are two kinds of technical progress—disembodied and embodied—and both kinds
are driven by research and development. A number of econometric studies have
concluded that technical progress embodied in equipment is a major source of
manufacturing productivity growth.
Other recent research has suggested that, over the long run, growth in the U.S.
economy’s “health output” has been at least as large as the growth in non-health goods
and services. Moreover, one important input in the production of health—
pharmaceuticals—is even more R&D- intensive than equipment.
In this paper we have tested the pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress
hypothesis—the hypothesis that newer drugs increase the length and quality of life—and
estimated the rate of progress. To do this, we estimated health production functions, in
which the dependent variables are various indicators of post-treatment health status (such
as survival, perceived health status, and presence of physical or cognitive limitations),
35

The reported differences in rates are adjusted for age, sex, race, marital status, and insurance coverage.

27
and the regressors include drug vintage (the year in which the FDA first approved a
drug’s active ingredient(s)) and indicators of pre-treatment health status. We estimated
these relationships using extremely disaggregated—prescription- level—cross-sectional
data derived primarily from the 1997 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.
We found that people who used newer drugs had better post-treatment health than
people using older drugs for the same condition, controlling for pre-treatment health, age,
sex, race, marital status, education, income, and insurance coverage.
•

Survival. People consuming newer drugs during the period were more likely to
be alive at the end of the period, whether or not we control for perceived health
status at the beginning of the period. The estimates imply that the cost of the
increase in vintage required to keep the person alive is $8214. This cost seems
quite low, in comparison with other researchers’ estimates of the economic value
of a life-year: our estimate of the cost of preventing a death is lower than Murphy
and Topel’s estimate of the value of remaining alive for one month.

•

Perceived health status. Vintage has a positive and highly significant effect on
perceived health status and a quality of life index whether or not we control for
perceived health status at the beginning of the period. The rate of embodied
technical progress implied by the long-run effect is quite high: 9.3%.

•

Activity or social limitations. People were less likely to experience activity or
social limitations if they had consumed newer drugs, conditiona l on their previous
limitations (and the other covariates). The long-run estimate indicates that the
cost of preventing an activity limitation is $1745, and the annual rate of technical
progress with respect to activity limitations is 8.4%.

•

Physical limitations. Almost all of the seven detailed physical functioning
variables (lifting 10 pounds, walking 3 blocks, etc.) reflect the existence of
pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress. People consuming newer drugs
tend to experience greater increases (or smaller declines) in physical ability than
people consuming older drugs. The average rate of embodied technical progress
across all seven activities is about 4%.
In addition, we test an alternative model which accounts for health shocks

experienced during the period (between pre- and post- treatment health status), by using

28
health utilization measures such as the number of prescriptions, physician visits, and
inpatient discharges, as indicators of these shocks. As postulated, we find these utilization
variables are negatively related to post-treatment health status. While the drug vintage
estimates from this new specification are smaller and less significant than in the model
without health utilization, our qualitative results are unchanged. We argue that this does
not necessarily imply that impact of drug vintage is less – adjusting for utilization simply
decomposes the drug vintage coefficient into its direct and indirect (via utilization
variables) effects.
Last, most of the health measures indicate that the effect of drug vintage on health
is positive and significant for people with low initial health and insignificant for people
with high initial health, and that the difference between these effects is statistically
significant. This suggests that the people in poor initial health tend to benefit most from
pharmaceutical-embodied technical change. The health of people with low levels of
education (hence low skills and income) tends to be worse than the health of people with
more education. Hence, in contrast to equipment-embodied technical progress, which
tends to increase economic inequality, pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress has a
tendency to reduce inequality as well as promote economic growth, broadly defined.

29
References
Anderson, R. N. (1999), United States life tables, 1997. National vital statistics reports;
vol 47 no. 28. Hyattsville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics.
Bahk, Byong-Hyong and Michael Gort (1993), “Decomposing Learning by Doing in
New Plants”, Journal of Political Economy, 101, 561-583.
Bartel, Ann, and Frank Lichtenberg (1987), "The Comparative Advantage of Educated
Workers in Implementing New Technology," Review of Economics and Statistics 69(1),
February, 1-11.
------------------------------------------ (1991), "The Age of Technology and Its Impact on
Employee Wages," Economics of Innovation and New Technology 1, 215-31.
Fisher, Franklin M., “Embodied Technical Change and the Existence of an Aggregate
Capital Stock,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32, No. 4. (Oct., 1965), pp. 263288.
Folland, Sherman, Allen Goodman and Miron Stano, The Economics of Health and
Health Care, third edition (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001).
Griliches, Zvi, and Frank Lichtenberg (1984), "R&D and Productivity at the Industry
Level: Is There Still a Relationship?," in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Zvi Griliches,
ed. (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press).
Hobijn, Bart (2001), “Embodiment in U.S. Manufacturing,” working paper, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, March 2001.
Hulten, Charles R., “Growth Accounting When Technical Change is Embodied in
Capital,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 4. (Sep., 1992), pp. 964-980.
Jones, Charles I. (1998), Introduction to Economic Growth (New York: Norton).
Lichtenberg, Frank (2001), “Are the Benefits of Newer Drugs Worth Their Cost?
Evidence from the 1996 MEPS,” Health Affairs 20(5), September/October, pp. 241-51.
Lichtenberg, Frank, and Donald Siegel (1991), "The Impact of R&D Investment on
Productivity: New Evidence Using Linked R&D-LRD Data," with Donald Siegel,
Economic Inquiry 29 (April), 203-28.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, and Frank Lichtenberg (2002), “The Effect of Education on
Medical Technology Adoption: Are the More Educated More Likely to Use New
Drugs?,” NBER Working Paper No. 9185, Sept. 2002.

30
Murphy, Kevin, and Robert Topel (2002), “The Economic Value of Medical Research,”
in The Value of Medical Research, ed. by Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel (University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming).
Nordhaus, William D. (2002), “The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved
Health to Living Standards,” NBER Working Paper No. 8818, February; forthcoming in
The Value of Medical Research, ed. by Kevin Murphy and Robert Topel (University of
Chicago Press).
Romer, Paul (1990), “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy
98 (October), S71-S102.
Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Dan Wilson (2000), “The Production-Side Approach to
Estimating Embodied Technological Change,” mimeo.
Solow, Robert M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 70 (February), 65-94.
---------------, “The Production Function and the Theory of Capital,” Review of Economic
Studies, Volume XXIII (1955-56), pp. 101-108.
---------------, “Investment and Technical Progress,” Chapter 7 in Mathematical Methods
in the Social Sciences, 1959 (K. J. Arrow, S. Karlin, and P. Suppes, eds.), Stanford
University Press, 1960.
---------------, “Technical Progress, Capital Formation, and Economic Growth,”
The American Economic Review, Vol. 52, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the SeventyFourth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (May, 1962), pp. 76-86.
---------------, Capital Theory and the Rate of Return, (Professor F. de Vries Lectures),
Amsterdam, North Holland, 1963.
---------------, “Capital, Labor, and Income in Manufacturing,” Conference in Income and
Wealth, The Behavior of Income Shares, Princeton University Press, 1964, pp. 101-128.
Wald, A. (1940), “The Fitting of Straight Lines if Both Variables are Subject to Error,”
Annals of Mathematical Statistics 11, 284-300.
Wells, Kenneth B., et al (1996), Caring for Depression (Cambridge MA: Harvard
University Press).
Wennberg, John E. et al (1980) A Small Area Approach to the Analysis of Health System
Performance, U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Health
Resources Administration, Bureau of Health Planning; Washington, D.C.

Figure 1
Industrial R&D funds as a percent of net sales in
R&D- performing companies, 1997
12.0%

10.5%
10.0%

8.0%

6.0%
6.0%

4.0%

3.4%

3.9%

2.0%

0.0%

All Industries

Manufacturing

Machinery and
equipment (including
computers)

Source: http://caspar.nsf.gov/nsf/srs/IndRD/NSF%2001%2D305/A-21.xls

Drugs and medicines

Figure 2
Negative interaction between vintage and initial health

HPOST (post-treatment health)

high initial health
low initial health

vintage

31

Figure 3
Time line of MEPS interviews and prescribed medicine events

Time

Initial interview
(pre-treatment health)

Prescribed
medicine
events

Subsequent interview
(post-treatment health)

Figure 4
Number of new molecular entities approved each year, according to two different lists
provided by the FDA
60
List 1: NMEs approved 1950-1993
List 2: NDAs approved 1939-1997

40

30

20

10

0
19
39
19
45
19
47
19
49
19
51
19
53
19
55
19
57
19
59
19
61
19
63
19
65
19
67
19
69
19
71
19
73
19
75
19
77
19
79
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95
19
97

Number of NMEs approved

50

Year

Table 1

Table 1
Top 20 active ingredients, ranked by number of prescriptions, in the 1997 MEPS

rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

active_ingredient
acetaminophen
conjugated estrogens
hydrochlorothiazide
amoxicillin (as trihydrate)
levothyroxine sodium
ethinyl estradiol
albuterol
furosemide
hydrocodone bitartrate
potassium chloride
medroxyprogesterone acetate
digoxin
lisinopril
atenolol
nifedipine
triamterene
ibuprofen
guaifenesin
diltiazem hydrochloride
enalapril maleate

number of 1997 cumulative %
MEPS
of 1997 MEPS
prescriptions
vintage prescriptions
pre-1939
7438
3.1%
1942
5671
5.4%
1959
5389
7.7%
1973
5084
9.8%
pre-1939
4938
11.8%
1968
3840
13.4%
1981
3807
15.0%
1966
3643
16.5%
pre-1939
3298
17.9%
pre-1939
2911
19.1%
1959
2871
20.3%
1954
2823
21.4%
1987
2822
22.6%
1981
2794
23.8%
1981
2686
24.9%
1964
2383
25.9%
1974
2360
26.8%
pre-1939
2303
27.8%
1982
2254
28.7%
1985
2207
29.6%

Page 1

Table 2
Sample means: person-level vs. prescription-level

AGE
COMPLETED YEARS OF EDUCATION
male
white
medicaid
medicare
any private insurance
any public insurance
uninsured
alive
ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION
WORK/HOUSEWORK/SCHOOL
ABSENCE OF LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL
FUNCTIONING
ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS
ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS
PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS
PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS

person-level mean rx-level mean
(n = 34K)
(n = 156K)
33.8
53.7
10.4
11.3
47.5%
37.7%
79.7%
84.4%
18.7%
22.2%
13.5%
42.7%
63.9%
63.6%
20.3%
30.5%
15.8%
5.8%
99.7%
99.2%
91.7%

68.1%

90.6%
95.4%
96.8%
69.6%
76.4%

64.1%
81.1%
87.6%
47.1%
64.7%

Table 3
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from alternative models that do not control for initial health
column
initial health?

excluded
discrete
104K

3
no
included, set
missing=1900
continuous
130K

4
no
included, set
missing=1920
continuous
130K

5
no
included, set
missing=1900
discrete
130K

1.245
0.011
113.83
<.0001

1.213
0.013
96.92
<.0001

0.347
0.005
67.91
<.0001

0.502
0.007
76.62
<.0001

0.542
0.006
87.2
<.0001

2.80E-05
2.10E-05
1.34
0.1792

5.70E-05
2.40E-05
2.43
0.0152

6.20E-05
8.18E-06
7.58
<.0001

7.90E-05
1.10E-05
7.46
<.0001

6.60E-05
1.00E-05
6.52
<.0001

PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.476)
vintage coefficient
-4.00E-05 2.36E-04
standard error
6.50E-05 7.30E-05
t-stat
-0.62
3.23
p-value
0.5364
0.0013

1.14E-04
2.40E-05
4.64
<.0001

1.32E-04
3.20E-05
4.2
<.0001

1.48E-04
3.00E-05
4.93
<.0001

QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX (mean= 0.576)
vintage coefficient
-3.99E-06
standard error
5.30E-05
t-stat
-0.08
p-value
0.9394

1.15E-04
2.00E-05
5.81
<.0001

1.38E-04
2.50E-05
5.40
<.0001

1.49E-04
2.40E-05
6.11
<.0001

ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION WORK/HOUSEWRK/SCHL (mean = 0.687)
vintage coefficient
9.00E-05 5.20E-04
1.58E-04
1.97E-04
standard error
1.00E-04 1.13E-04
3.80E-05
4.80E-05
t-stat
0.89
4.59
4.19
4.07
p-value
0.3712
<.0001
<.0001
<.0001

2.78E-04
4.60E-05
6.01
<.0001

ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.817)
vintage coefficient
2.90E-04 6.60E-04
standard error
9.10E-05 1.02E-04
t-stat
3.2
6.48
p-value
0.0014
<.0001

2.38E-04
4.20E-05
5.7
<.0001

missing vintages
continuous or discrete vintage
approx. no. of observations
Rx Price (mean= $38.95)
vintage coefficient
standard error
t-stat
p-value
ALIVE (mean=0.992)
vintage coefficient
standard error
t-stat
p-value

1
no

2
no

excluded
continuous
104K

2.29E-04
5.90E-05
3.87
0.0001

9.10E-05
3.40E-05
2.68
0.0075

1.22E-04
4.40E-05
2.79
0.0053

Note: Each vintage coefficient is estimated from a separate regression of the form HPOST,i = β0 + β1
Vij + β2 Z i + diagnosis effects + uij. All models include the following person-level covariates: age, sex,
race, education, income, marital status, and indicators of insurance coverage.

Table 3 (continued)
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from alternative models that do not control for initial health
column
initial health?

4
no
included, set
missing=1920
continuous
130K

5
no
included, set
missing=1900
discrete
130K

PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.629)
vintage coefficient
-1.10E-04 -9.00E-05
1.00E-05
standard error
6.40E-05 7.20E-05
2.40E-05
t-stat
-1.81
-1.26
0.43
p-value
0.071
0.2086
0.6701

7.17E-06
3.10E-05
0.23
0.8166

-8.91E-06
2.90E-05
-0.3
0.7626

ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.878)
vintage coefficient
-9.00E-05 1.20E-05
2.40E-05
standard error
7.60E-05 8.60E-05
2.80E-05
t-stat
-1.17
0.14
0.85
p-value
0.2435
0.8876
0.3951

2.40E-05
3.70E-05
0.64
0.5216

3.60E-05
3.50E-05
1.03
0.3015

ABSENCE OF LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING (mean = 0.672)
vintage coefficient
-9.00E-05 1.90E-04
1.64E-04
1.87E-04
standard error
1.04E-04 1.17E-04
3.90E-05
5.00E-05
t-stat
-0.86
1.62
4.23
3.74
p-value
0.3893
0.1053
<.0001
0.0002

1.60E-04
4.80E-05
3.36
0.0008

MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY (mean = 0.837)
vintage coefficient
6.30E-05 1.95E-04
standard error
5.90E-05 6.60E-05
t-stat
1.07
2.95
p-value
0.2852
0.0032

1.39E-04
2.70E-05
5.15
<.0001

missing vintages
continuous or discrete vintage
approx. no. of observations

1
no

2
no

excluded
continuous
104K

excluded
discrete
104K

3
no
included, set
missing=1900
continuous
130K

1.25E-04
2.20E-05
5.68
<.0001

1.54E-04
2.80E-05
5.43
<.0001

Note: Each vintage coefficient is estimated from a separate regression of the form HPOST,i = β0 + β1
Vij + β2 Z i + diagnosis effects + uij. All models include the following person-level covariates: age, sex,
race, education, income, marital status, and indicators of insurance coverage.

Table 4
Broad health indicators
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from models excluding and including controls for initial health
column
initial health?

1
no

2
yes

3
yes

short-run effect long-run effect
(β1 )
(β1 / (1 - β3 ))
ALIVE (mean=0.992)
vintage coefficient
standard error
t-stat
p-value
dPrx / d H
rate of tech change

6.60E-05
1.00E-05
6.52
<.0001
$8,214
1.2%

6.40E-05
1.00E-05
6.38
<.0001
$8,470
1.2%

6.51E-05

PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.476)
vintage coefficient
1.48E-04
standard error
3.00E-05
t-stat
4.93
p-value
<.0001
dPrx / d H
$3,663
rate of tech change
5.8%

1.06E-04
2.50E-05
4.27
<.0001
$5,114
4.1%

2.38E-04

QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX (mean= 0.576)
vintage coefficient
1.49E-04
standard error
2.40E-05
t-stat
6.11
p-value
<.0001
dPrx / d H
$3,638
rate of tech change
4.8%

1.10E-04
2.00E-05
5.49
<.0001
$4,928
3.5%

2.00E-04

$8,325
1.2%

$2,273
9.3%

$2,711
6.4%

ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION WORK/HOUSEWRK/SCHL (mean = 0.687)
vintage coefficient
2.78E-04
1.56E-04
3.11E-04
standard error
4.60E-05
4.10E-05
t-stat
6.01
3.85
p-value
<.0001
0.0001
dPrx / d H
$1,950
$3,475
$1,745
rate of tech change
7.5%
4.2%
8.4%
ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.817)
vintage coefficient
2.38E-04
1.37E-04
standard error
4.20E-05
3.90E-05
t-stat
5.7
3.53
p-value
<.0001
0.0004
dPrx / d H
$2,278
$3,957
rate of tech change
5.4%
3.1%

2.14E-04

$2,535
4.8%

Table 4 (continued)
Broad health indicators
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from models excluding and including controls for initial health
column
initial health?

1
no

2
yes

3
yes

short-run effect long-run effect
(β1 )
(β1 / (1 - β3 ))
PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.629)
vintage coefficient
-8.91E-06
-3.00E-05
standard error
2.90E-05
2.60E-05
t-stat
-0.3
-1.1
p-value
0.7626
0.271
ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.878)
vintage coefficient
3.60E-05
1.70E-05
standard error
3.50E-05
3.20E-05
t-stat
1.03
0.52
p-value
0.3015
0.6034

-6.44E-05

4.06E-05

ABSENCE OF LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING (mean = 0.672)
vintage coefficient
1.60E-04
5.40E-05
1.10E-04
standard error
4.80E-05
0.000041
t-stat
3.36
1.31
p-value
0.0008
0.1886
dPrx / d H
$3,388
rate of tech change
4.4%
MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY (mean = 0.837)
vintage coefficient
1.39E-04
standard error
2.70E-05
t-stat
5.15
p-value
<.0001
dPrx / d H
$3,900
rate of tech change
3.1%

6.30E-05
2.00E-05
3.2
0.0014
$8,605
1.4%

2.19E-04

$2,479
4.8%

Table 5
Interaction between vintage and initial health
Estimates of marginal vintage effects, by initial health status, from models including initial health
and interaction between vintage and initial health
Column

1

2

marginal
marginal vintage vintage effect,
effect, initial
initial health=1
health=0 (β1)
(β1 + β4)
ALIVE (mean=0.992)
vintage coefficient
standard error
t-stat
p-value

1.35E-04
1.70E-05
8.08
<.0001

3

difference
(β4)

-2.00E-05
1.90E-05
-1.06
0.2895

-1.60E-04
2.90E-05
-5.32
<.0001

PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.476)
vintage coefficient
1.69E-04
standard error
4.10E-05
t-stat
4.08
p-value
<.0001

3.20E-05
4.60E-05
0.7
0.4856

-1.40E-04
7.20E-05
-1.9
0.0572

QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX (mean= 0.576)
vintage coefficient
1.79E-04
standard error
3.30E-05
t-stat
5.36
p-value
<.0001

2.90E-05
3.70E-05
0.77
0.4398

-1.50E-04
5.80E-05
-2.58
0.0099

ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION WORK/HOUSEWRK/SCHL (mean = 0.687)
vintage coefficient
4.90E-05
2.07E-04
1.58E-04
standard error
6.60E-05
4.80E-05
7.80E-05
t-stat
0.75
4.34
2.03
p-value
0.4556
<.0001
0.0427
ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.817)
vintage coefficient
7.82E-04
-3.00E-05
standard error
8.00E-05
4.30E-05
t-stat
9.81
-0.64
p-value
<.0001
0.5237

-8.10E-04
8.70E-05
-9.26
<.0001

PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.629)
vintage coefficient
-5.00E-05
-2.00E-05
standard error
5.80E-05
3.90E-05
t-stat
-0.79
-0.48
p-value
0.4278
0.6302

2.70E-05
8.10E-05
0.34
0.7375

Table 5 (continued)
Interaction between vintage and initial health
Estimates of marginal vintage effects, by initial health status, from models including initial health
and interaction between vintage and initial health

Column

1

2

marginal
marginal vintage vintage effect,
effect, initial
initial health=1
health=0 (β1)
(β1 + β4)
ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.878)
vintage coefficient
3.48E-04
-3.00E-05
standard error
8.10E-05
3.40E-05
t-stat
4.28
-0.96
p-value
<.0001
0.3364

3

difference
(β4)

-3.80E-04
8.60E-05
-4.43
<.0001

ABSENCE OF LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING (mean = 0.672)
vintage coefficient
1.77E-04
-2.00E-05
-2.00E-04
standard error
6.30E-05
5.00E-05
7.60E-05
t-stat
2.81
-0.38
-2.57
p-value
0.005
0.7054
0.0101
MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY (mean = 0.837)
vintage coefficient
4.30E-04
standard error
5.80E-05
t-stat
7.38
p-value
<.0001

-1.00E-05
2.30E-05
-0.63
0.5282

-4.40E-04
6.60E-05
-6.7
<.0001

Table 6
Broad health indicators
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from models excluding and including controls for health utilization
column
health utilization? (type)

1
no

2
yes

3
(prescription)

4
(physician)

5
(hospital)

6.40E-05
1.00E-05
6.38
<.0001

6.30E-05
1.00E-05
6.27
<.0001

-5.50E-06
3.20E-04
-0.02
0.9863

-6.10E-04
2.80E-04
-2.17
0.0297

-2.12E-02
9.38E-04
-22.55
<.0001

PERCEIVED HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.476)
vintage coefficient
1.06E-04
7.90E-05
standard error
2.50E-05
2.40E-05
t-stat
4.27
3.25
p-value
<.0001
0.0012

-2.87E-02
7.76E-04
-36.94
<.0001

-1.94E-02
6.78E-04
-28.55
<.0001

-3.90E-02
2.31E-03
-16.87
<.0001

QUALITY OF LIFE INDEX (mean= 0.576)
vintage coefficient
1.10E-04
standard error
2.00E-05
t-stat
5.49
p-value
<.0001

-2.29E-02
6.30E-04
-36.28
<.0001

-1.56E-02
5.51E-04
-28.24
<.0001

-3.81E-02
1.85E-03
-20.61
<.0001

ABSENCE OF ANY LIMITATION WORK/HOUSEWRK/SCHL (mean = 0.687)
vintage coefficient
1.56E-04
1.09E-04
-6.48E-02
-1.18E-02
standard error
4.10E-05
4.00E-05
1.25E-03
1.10E-03
t-stat
3.85
2.74
-51.95
-10.7
p-value
0.0001
0.0062
<.0001
<.0001

-8.00E-02
3.78E-03
-21.16
<.0001

ABSENCE OF SOCIAL LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.817)
vintage coefficient
1.37E-04
9.80E-05
standard error
3.90E-05
3.80E-05
t-stat
3.53
2.55
p-value
0.0004
0.0106

1.47E-02
3.60E-03
4.09
<.0001

ALIVE (mean=0.992)
vintage coefficient
standard error
t-stat
p-value

8.90E-05
2.00E-05
4.49
<.0001

-5.87E-02
1.20E-03
-49.14
<.0001

-4.97E-03
1.06E-03
-4.67
<.0001

Table 6 (continued)
Broad health indicators
Estimates of drug vintage coefficients from models excluding and including controls for health utilization
column
health utilization? (type)

1
no

2
yes

3
(rx)

4
(hosp)

5
(phy)

PERCEIVED MENTAL HEALTH STATUS (mean = 0.629)
vintage coefficient
-3.00E-05
-5.00E-05
standard error
2.60E-05
2.60E-05
t-stat
-1.10
-1.91
p-value
0.271
0.0561

-2.08E-02
7.98E-04
-26.04
<.0001

-1.15E-02
7.15E-04
-16.01
<.0001

-3.19E-02
2.45E-03
-13
<.0001

ABSENCE OF COGNITIVE LIMITATIONS (mean = 0.878)
vintage coefficient
1.70E-05
-6.89E-06
standard error
3.20E-05
3.20E-05
t-stat
0.52
-0.22
p-value
0.6034
0.8276

-2.13E-02
9.75E-04
-21.84
<.0001

-5.18E-03
8.77E-04
-5.91
<.0001

-9.19E-02
2.96E-03
-31.1
<.0001

ABSENCE OF LIMITATION IN PHYSICAL FUNCTIONING (mean = 0.672)
vintage coefficient
5.40E-05
1.30E-05
-5.09E-02
standard error
4.10E-05
4.00E-05
1.27E-03
t-stat
1.31
0.33
-40.23
p-value
0.1886
0.7405
<.0001

-2.27E-02
1.12E-03
-20.24
<.0001

-7.16E-02
3.84E-03
-18.66
<.0001

MEAN LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY (mean = 0.837)
vintage coefficient
6.30E-05
4.80E-05
standard error
2.00E-05
2.00E-05
t-stat
3.20
2.48
p-value
0.0014
0.0132

-3.47E-03
5.40E-04
-6.42
<.0001

-5.32E-02
1.86E-03
-28.67
<.0001

-1.77E-02
6.14E-04
-28.77
<.0001

