DEBT POLICY, CORPORATE TAXES, AND DISCOUNT RATES

                  Mark Grinblatt
                     Jun Liu

                Working Paper 9353
                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DEBT POLICY, CORPORATE TAXES, AND DISCOUNT RATES

                                              Mark Grinblatt
                                                 Jun Liu

                                          Working Paper 9353
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9353


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




The authors thank the UCLA Academic Senate and the Harold Price Center for Entrepreneurial Studies for
financial support and seminar participants at the University of Arizona, the University of Kentucky, and the
2002 Financial Management Association meeting for comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Mark Grinblatt and Jun Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Debt Policy, Corporate Taxes, and Discount Rates
Mark Grinblatt and Jun Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 9353
November 2002
JEL No. G0, G1

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper studies the valuation of assets with debt tax shields when debt policy is a general

time-dependent function of the asset's unlevered cash flows, value, and history. In a continuous-time

setting, it shows that the value of a project's debt tax shield satisfies a partial differential equation,

which simplifies to an easily solved ordinary differential equation for most plausible debt policies.

A large class of cases exhibits closed-form solutions for the value of a levered asset, the value of its

tax shield, and the appropriate tax-adjusted cost of capital for discounting unlevered cash flows.


Mark Grinblatt                                           Jun Liu
Anderson Graduate School of Management                   Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA                                                     UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza                                       110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                               Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER                                                 jliu@anderson.ucla.edu
mark.grinblatt@anderson.ucla.edu
    Perhaps the most popular application of financial theory is capital budgeting. Virtually
every student of finance starts his education in the field by learning how to discount future
cash flows. By the end of a first course, the student has developed the basic tools to imple-
ment a discounted cash flow analysis in a real world setting. Because the real world setting
must account for the relative advantage of debt financing, arising from the debt interest
tax subsidy, students of finance generally learn that such subsidies can be accounted for by
discounting unlevered cash flows (also referred to as “free cash flows”) at a tax-adjusted
weighted average cost of capital (or W ACC). Such tax adjustments to the discount rate
generate a value for levered assets that exceed the value they would have if they were not
levered with debt financing.1
    Despite the central importance of this topic, research on how to do a proper valuation
for capital budgeting purposes is sparse and largely ancient, particularly when it comes to
debt tax shields. An intrinsic difficulty associated with the valuation of debt tax shields
is identifying the risk of the tax deductions arising from the stream of future debt interest
expenses. The rate at which one discounts the future stream of interest-related tax shields,
and hence the value of those tax shields, has eluded prior research, except for the simplest
of cases.
    These cases impose stringent restrictions on the cash flow process and debt policy to cir-
cumvent the complex issue of risk and valuation. Among these are the models of Modigliani
and Miller (1958) and Miles and Ezzell (1985). The Modigliani and Miller debt policy is
one where the debt level is constant and debt is both perpetual and default-free. This debt
policy implies that one can discount the stream of future interest-based tax shields at the
risk-free rate. If the tax rate is constant, as they assume, the debt tax shield’s present value
is necessarily proportional to the present value of the debt because the cash flow stream from
debt and the tax shield are proportional to one another. Here, since the constant of propor-
tionality is the corporate tax rate, the present value of the debt tax shield is the product of
the corporate tax rate and the present value of the debt. Modigliani and Miller (1958) also
use this model to develop formulas for discount rates that account for the value of the tax
shield when cash flows have no tendency to grow.
    The interesting case studied by Miles and Ezzell focuses on the dynamic issuance of
perpetual risk-free debt. This case assumes: 1) the unlevered cash flow realization at each
date follows a random walk with no drift, which is paid out upon its realization (hence there
is no expected growth), 2) the unlevered cash flow stream is valued by applying a constant
discount rate, and 3) the debt-to-asset ratio is constant. Under these assumptions, the cash
flow from each date’s tax shield is of the same risk as the one period lagged unlevered cash
flow. As Grinblatt and Titman (1997, 2002) and Brealey and Meyers (2000) point out,
   1
    Despite attempts to introduce the Adjusted Present Value method into the classroom, the Weighted
Average Cost of Capital approach still vastly dominates the practitioner landscape. For example, Graham
and Harvey (2001) observe that of twelve capital budgeting techniques, many of which are long out of favor
with finance academics, the Adjusted Present Value method is the least-used method.


                                                    1
in the continuous time limit of this model, the cash flow stream from future debt-related
tax deductions is of the same risk as the stream of unlevered cash flows and thus can be
discounted at the same rate as the unlevered cash flows. Miles and Ezzell, as well as the
standard textbooks, present formulas analogous to those in Modigliani and Miller for this
alternative debt policy.
    It would be an extraordinary coincidence if cash flow processes and debt policies matched
those of the Modigliani-Miller or Miles-Ezzell models. For this reason, a more general analysis
is of great importance to the field of finance. In this paper we provide a comprehensive
analysis of the value of the risky debt tax shield for the highly general class of Markovian debt
adjustment policies. For a large set of dynamic debt policies, which have state-contingent
(and hence risky) issuance and retirement of risk-free debt, we obtain closed-form solutions.
For a still larger class of cases, we can point to a system of ordinary differential equations,
which are easily solved numerically, that generate the tax shield’s value.
    The discount rate for unlevered cash flows that accounts for the debt tax shield is also of
critical importance, both to practitioners and researchers. We study the theoretical under-
pinning of such a discount rate and relate it to the weighted average cost of capital. We can
generally derive closed-form solutions for this discount rate whenever we have closed-form
solutions for the debt tax shield. However, we also are able to show what adjustments are
needed to convert the W ACC to an appropriate discount rate. Such adjustments are almost
always needed as the W ACC is an appropriate discount rate only in the Modigliani-Miller
and Miles-Ezzell cases, or in some linear hybrid of these two well-known cases.
   Finally, we derive a formula for more general debt policies that characterizes the equity
beta as a function of the leverage ratio and the unlevered asset beta . This formula generalizes
the standard textbook formulas of Hamada (1972) and Miles and Ezzell (1985), which are
associated with the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell models, respectively.
    Our approach differs from that found in prior research on debt tax shield valuation.
In lieu of strong restrictions on cash flows, project values, asset values, discount rates, or
debt policy, we impose restrictions on the information structure. Using the option pricing
approach of Black-Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973), we assume that information follows a
Markov diffusion process. The advantage of this information structure is that it makes the
market dynamically complete. In our case, as long as the short-term risk-free rate and the
discount rate (which can be any function of the information set) for an otherwise identical
unlevered asset are specified, we can use the standard continuous-time valuation methodology
to price any future payoff, be it a future cash flow generated by the unlevered asset or a tax
shield from a complex, yet realistic, debt policy. Essentially, we are viewing the tax shield
as a derivative of the underlying unlevered asset. We can write down a dynamic portfolio
of the unlevered asset and a risk-free security that tracks the flow from the asset’s debt tax
shield for any reasonable dynamic debt policy. The no arbitrage condition, which is a partial
differential equation, generates the value of the tax shield as a function of the value of the


                                               2
unlevered asset (or equivalently, the unlevered cash flow).
    The no arbitrage valuation methodology of asset pricing theory has been applied before in
a corporate setting, perhaps most elegantly by Ross (1978). However, interesting functional
forms that link the interest tax deduction associated with an asset’s financing mix to its
unlevered cash flows provide economic insights that elude a more general framework. One
example of this is a heuristic description of how the value of the debt tax shield, as well
as the appropriate discount rate, vary with debt policies that can be viewed as weighted
averages of the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell debt policies.
    Our paper also analyzes the discrete setting, but to a more limited extent. Here, when
debt policies are linear functions of cash flows, we obtain closed-form solutions for the value
of the debt tax shield.
    Section I of the paper develops a general approach for valuing debt tax shields. It also
analyzes an extraordinarily large class which has a closed-form solution for the tax shield
and presents two larger classes of cases for which numerical computation of the value of
the debt tax shield is trivial. Section II examines the weighted average cost of capital and
relates it to valuation. It also characterizes how the W ACC is affected by dynamic debt
policies and studies when the W ACC can be used to obtain valuations that properly account
for the value of the debt tax shield. Finally, this section derives closed-form solutions for
tax-adjusted discount rates that generate the correct valuations of cash flow streams. In
most cases outside of the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell frameworks, we show that these
discount rates differ from the W ACC. Section III analyzes how to lever and unlever equity
betas and equity risk premia for arbitrary debt policies. Section IV concludes the paper.


               I. The Valuation of Debt Tax Shields
In a dynamically complete market, two assets with payoffs driven by the same source of
uncertainty, and thus instantaneously perfectly correlated, can be valued in relation to one
another. Just as an option is valued in relation to its underlying security, so too can a debt
tax shield be valued in relation to the unlevered asset it is associated with. So long as the
uncertainty behind the debt policy that generates the tax shield is tied only to uncertainty
in the unlevered cash flows, debt tax shields are simply derivatives. For this reason, most
of the paper assumes that the unlevered cash flow, the after-tax cash flow that would be
generated in the absence of debt financing, satisfies a general Markov diffusion process.
    An asset that is levered with risk-free debt has two sources of after-tax cash flow at date
t : 1) the unlevered cash flow, Xt dt, which is the after-tax flow that directly stems from the
real asset, which is assumed to be unaffected by the asset’s financing mix, and 2) the flow
from the debt interest tax shield, τc Dt rf dt, which is the product of the tax rate τc and the



                                              3
debt interest payment Dt rf dt.2 Because valuation is linear, the value of a levered asset is
the sum of the values of its two cash flow components.
   For simplicity (and without loss of generality), we let one Brownian motion, B, drive the
uncertainty. That is, between dates 0 and T , with T possibly infinite,

                                  dXt = g(t, X)Xdt + σ(t, X)XdBt .

With this assumption, the market is dynamically complete with two assets.3 This means
that a dynamic trading strategy can transform a levered asset into an unlevered asset, and
vice versa. Similarly, knowing the value of an asset for any given debt policy allows us to
compute the value of its tax shield for all debt policies. Solutions can be found with a variety
of mathematically equivalent approaches, but the most popular method involves the solution
of a differential equation generated by Ito’s Lemma and the principle of no arbitrage.
    The continuous-time setting, described above, allows valuation of almost any derivative,
including tax shields, by applying the well-known no arbitrage principle. Hence, the following
assumptions are primarily used for expositional clarity and explicit solutions:

       • The corporate tax rate, τc , is constant.

       • The risk-free interest rate, rf , is constant.4

       • There are no personal taxes,5 bankruptcy, or other market frictions associated with
         debt beyond the corporate tax (implying that the debt interest coupon rate equals the
         risk-free rate).
   2
      In order for the levered asset to have the same investment policy in the presence of debt, we assume,
without loss of generality, that the flow from the interest-based tax shield is paid out. It could be retained
in a risk-free interest bearing account and distributed later, but this has tax consequences for the firm. In
essence, such retention amounts to negative debt and it is the net debt policy for which we are computing
the tax shield. Given this definition of how to account for debt, and appropriate care taken to avoid double
counting when this cash is eventually distributed, our results apply irrespective of whether cash is retained
or paid out.
    3
      B can be a vector provided that the instantaneous changes in debt are perfectly correlated with in-
stantaneous changes in X. If the unlevered cash flow has J Brownian motion components and debt policy
depends differently on each of them, our results still go through whenever we can value the levered assets at
J distinct debt levels. Alternatively, J distinct securities can be used to value the tax shield. These could
include equity, equity options, or comparable assets at the same or distinct debt levels.
    4
      This implies that the risk-free yield curve is flat and nonstochastic. Debt maturity is irrelevant in our
model.
    5
      Personal taxes are clearly important for asset valuation and debt policy, as Green and Hollifield (2002)
prove theoretically and document empirically. Their paper analyzes the optimal capital structure for a firm
with a Modigliani-Miller debt policy, bankruptcy costs, and a cash distribution policy to equity holders that
is sensitive to the economic effects of the corporate and capital gains taxes.




                                                      4
A. Debt Policy and Levered Asset Valuation: The General Case
We begin by studying the valuation of a levered asset under a general class of debt policies.
The debt policy D can be any differentiable function of time t, unlevered cash flow X, levered
asset value V L , and history H.6 That is,

                                          Dt = D(t, Xt , VtL , Ht ).

These general debt policies can depend, in a quite complicated manner, on the history of
the asset, such as past cash flows, past debt values, past asset values, in addition to current
cash flow and current asset value. We only require that the history dependence at a given
date t be summarized by additional date t state variables. This allows us to maintain the
Markovian setting. Without loss of generality, we simplify notation by treating these state
variables as the single variable Ht .7 As long as the uncertainty associated with the path of
X spans the relevant state space for H, we will still be able to value the debt tax shield as a
function of the value of the unlevered assets. To maintain this desirable property, we assume
that Ht satisfies the diffusion

                       dHt = µH (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )dt + σH (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )dXt ,
                              = µh (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )dt + σh (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )dBt

where
               µh (t, Xt , Dt , VtL ) = µH (t, Xt , Dt , VtL ) + σH (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )g(t, Xt )Xt
and
                          σh (t, Xt , Dt , VtL ) = σH (t, Xt , Dt , VtL )σ(t, Xt )Xt .
Recognize that the functional form of the exogenously specified µh and σh can be quite
general. It would be difficult to imagine any empirically relevant debt policy that could not
be captured with this flexibility.
    Given this description of debt policy and history, it follows that the date t value of
the levered asset, VtL = V L (t, Xt , Ht ), depends on the current date, cash flow, and history.
Moreover, if the unlevered cash flow stream terminates at date T , (essentially, becomes
zero at date T and forever thereafter), the functional form of the valuation function will be
influenced by the proximity to the termination date.
   6
     The optimal debt policy, while a critical issue both in formulating Dt and the value of the tax shield, is
beyond the scope of this paper. A continuous-time model with closed-form solutions for the optimal debt
level when bankruptcy costs are traded off against a Modigliani-Miller debt policy is found in Leland’s (1994)
seminal research. In our paper, because debt can be adjusted continuously, firms can avoid bankruptcy with
certainty.
   7
     We can also regard H and the coefficients in its diffusion as vectors with virtually no change to any of
our equations.



                                                       5
    In the absence of arbitrage, dynamic completeness implies that this value necessarily
satisfies the partial differential equation (PDE)

                 ∂V L             ∂V L 1 2 2 ∂ 2 V L
                      + (g − η)X      + σ X           − rf V L
                  ∂t              ∂X    2       ∂X 2
                              ∂V L 1 2 ∂ 2 V L         2 L
                                                    h ∂ V
                 +(µh − ησh )      + σh        + σσ          X = −(X + rf τc D).           (1)
                              ∂H     2 ∂H 2          ∂H∂X
where we have dropped the arguments of g, σ, etc. for notational simplicity. If the asset has
a finite life, the terminal condition is

                                     V L (T, XT , HT ) = 0.

    This partial differential equation, a familiar extension of the well-known Black-Scholes
differential equation, is simply the no arbitrage condition associated with an asset whose
uncertainty is spanned by the payoff to a dynamic trading strategy in the unlevered asset
and a risk-free security. The η(t, X) term in equation (1), (shortened to η for notational
simplicity), is the premium per unit of risk generated by changes in B. In a corporate setting,
it would be traditional to think of this parameter as being determined by the instantaneous
discount rate of the unlevered asset. However, η also can be inferred from the levered asset’s
value for any debt policy.
    To derive the partial differential equation, note that Ito’s Lemma implies that the change
in the value of a levered asset plus all distributions of cash flow:

                              ∂V L      ∂V L      ∂V L
dVtL + (Xt + rf τc Dt )dt =        dt +      dX +      dH
                               ∂t
                               2 L      ∂X        ∂H
                                                ∂2V L       1 ∂2V L 2
                                                                      
                               1∂ V 2 2
                          +            σ X +          σσh +        σ dt + (Xt + rf τc Dt )dt
                               2 ∂X 2          ∂H∂X         2 ∂H 2 h
                               L
                                        ∂V L      ∂V L
                                                         
                               ∂V
                          =          +       gX +      µh dt
                                ∂t      ∂X        ∂H
                               2 L
                                                ∂2V L         1 ∂2V L 2
                                                                                      
                               1∂ V 2 2
                          +            σ X +          σσh X +        σ + Xt + rf τc Dt dt
                               2 ∂X 2          ∂H∂X           2 ∂H 2 h
                               L
                                        ∂V L
                                               
                               ∂V
                          +          +       σH σXdB.
                                ∂X      ∂H

      The analogous equation for an otherwise identical unlevered asset with date t value
VtU   = V U (t, X) is
                           U
                                   ∂V U       1 ∂2V U 2 2               ∂V U
                                                                 
              U             ∂V
          dVt + Xt dt =          +      gX +          σ X  + X t   dt +      XσdB
                             ∂t     ∂X        2 ∂X 2                    ∂X
                                   ∂V U          ∂V U
                      = (V U rf +       Xη)dt +       XσdB.
                                   ∂X            ∂X
                                               6
where η, defined by its placement above, is simply a convenient symbol for a scaling of the
risk premium attached to dB. We can express η in terms of the instantaneous unlevered
cost of capital, rtU as

                                                   rtU − rf
                                      η(t, X) =    ∂ ln(VtU )
                                                                .                           (2)
                                                   ∂ ln(Xt )

   Clearly, instantaneous changes in V L and V U are perfectly correlated. Thus, to prevent
arbitrage, the ratios of the risk premia per dollar invested in the levered and unlevered assets
must be proportional to the risk born per dollar invested in each of the assets. This implies


∂V L ∂V L      ∂V L      1 ∂2V L 2 2    ∂2V L         1 ∂2V L 2
    +     gX +      µh +        σ X  +        σσh X +        σ + Xt + rf τc Dt − rf VL
 ∂t   ∂X       ∂H        2 ∂X 2        ∂H∂X           2 ∂H 2 h
                           ∂V L ∂V L
                                       
                       =        +     σH Xη
                           ∂X     ∂H

which, when rearranged, gives us equation (1). In analogous fashion, the value of the tax-
shield ∆ = V L − V U satisfies the PDE
                    ∂∆              ∂∆ 1 2 2 ∂∆
                        + (g − η)X     + σ X          − rf ∆
                    ∂t              ∂X 2        ∂X 2
                                  ∂∆ 1 2 ∂ 2 ∆          ∂2∆
                    +(µh − ησH )     + σh      + σσ  h       X = −rf τc D.
                                  ∂H 2 ∂H 2            ∂H∂X
    In principle, these partial differential equations can be solved. However, without further
restrictions, these differential equations are difficult to solve, even numerically. Hence, the
remainder of this section explores cases where solutions are insightful or, from a numerical
perspective, quickly attainable. Essentially, whenever we can transform the PDE into an
ordinary differential equation (ODE), numerical solutions are easily found. We explore two
such classes of cases. In the first, all of the model’s parameters depend only on the contem-
poraneous level of the unlevered cash flow, X. Here, because there is no time dependence,
equation (1) reduces to an ordinary differential equation in X. In the second class of cases,
which we refer to as “Additively Separable Assets,” the levered asset value is additively
separable in a set of arguments, which consist of H and a finite collection of real powers of
X: X λ1 , X λ2 , . . . , X λN . The coefficients of these arguments may be time dependent. The
additively separable class of cases is particularly interesting for its ability to generate re-
markably general closed-form solutions for the value of the debt tax shield. These apply to
both finite-lived and perpetual assets. They arise whenever the N cash flow coefficients of
the value additive functions for debt and history are growing at constant exponential rates
and the remaining coefficients are constant. Given this level of generality, it appears as if
our closed-form solutions could generate fairly good approximations for the value of a debt
tax shield for most conceivable debt policies.

                                               7
B. Cash Flows and Debt with Time Independent Parameters
When the parameters of the dynamic process for X do not depend explicitly on time t
(that is, g(t, X) = g(X), σ(t, X) = σ(X), and η(t, X) = η(X)) and the debt policy D
does not depend on either time t or the history Ht , the asset value V L depends only on the
contemporaneous cash flow level, X. In this case, the PDE for the value of the levered asset
(1) becomes the second order ODE:

                                ∂V L 1 2       ∂2V L
             (g(X) − η(X))          + σ (X)X 2       − rf V L = −(X + rf τc D(X)).
                                ∂X   2         ∂X 2
which is trivial to solve numerically for any specification of g(X), σ(X), and η(X).8 Special
cases with closed-form solutions include the continuous-time versions of the Modigliani-
Miller debt policy (g(X) = 0, η(X) = η and D(X) = D implying V U = X/(rf + η) and
V L = V U + τc D) and the Miles-Ezzell debt policy, (g(X) = 0, η(X) = η and D(X) = dx X,
with dx constant, implying V U = X/(rf +η) and V L = V U +τc Drf /(rf +η)). We defer further
discussion of this as the class of debt policies analyzed next also includes the Modigliani-
Miller and Miles-Ezzell models as special cases.


C. Additively Separable Assets: Numerical Solutions
Additively separable assets have tax shields with values that are additively separable linear
functions of history, H, and any set of real powers of the cash flow, X λ . Simple examples of
additively separable assets include the constant coefficient quadratic case,

                                     VtL = VtU + cx0 + cx1 Xt + cx2 Xt2 ,

which is generated by the constant coefficient history-independent quadratic debt policy

                                         Dt = dx0 + dx1 Xt + dx2 Xt2 ,

and the constant coefficient square root case,
                                                                  p
                                        VtL = VtU + cx0 + cx1/2    Xt ,

which is generated by the constant coefficient history-independent square root debt policy
                                                   p
                                   Dt = dx0 + dx1/2 Xt .
   8
     Any two boundary conditions, which implicitly determine the debt level in all states of the world,
determine a unique solution to the differential equation. Hence, specifying the debt policy is clearly sufficient
for obtaining the levered asset’s value.




                                                       8
    A more complicated case arises when the debt level is history dependent with history
given by
                                          Z t
            −mh t− 12 (lh )2 t−lh Bt             h        l h 2         h
Ht = H0 e                            +m x
                                              e−m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−l (Bs −Bt ) Xs ds
                                            0
            Z t                                                    Z t
                                1 h 2                                               1 h 2
                 −m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−lh (Bs −Bt )
                      h                                                     h                     h
     + m  d
                e                                    Ds ds + m   v
                                                                        e−m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−l (Bs −Bt ) VsL ds
          Z t0                                                    Z 0t
                  h            1 h 2      h                               h        1 h 2        h
     + lx      e−m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−l (Bs −Bt ) Xs dBs + ld         e−m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−l (Bs −Bt ) Ds dBs
          Z0 t                                                     0
                  h            1 h 2      h
     + lv      e−m (t−s)− 2 (l ) (t−s)−l (Bs −Bt ) VsL dBs .
                 0

In this special case, the diffusion process for Ht satisfies

           dHt = (mx Xt + md Dt + mv VtL − mh Ht )dt + (lx Xt + ld Dt + lv VtL − lh Ht )dBt ,

and thus has drift and volatility of

              µh = mx Xt + md Dt + mv VtL − mh Ht ,                     σh = lx Xt + ld Dt + lv VtL − lh Ht .

This history process, with the ms and ls constant, when combined with an analogous func-
tional form for the debt process, leads to a closed-form additively separable solution for the
value of the debt tax shield, as we show in the next subsection.
    The most general class of additively separable assets has history diffusion and debt policy
of the form:
                                                                            !
                           X
                                 x     λ     v     L     d           h
              dHt =            mλ (t)Xt + m (t)Vt + m (t)Dt − m (t)Ht dt
                                    λ
                                                                                            !
                                  X
                           +            lλx (t)Xtλ   +l   v
                                                              (t)VtL     d          h
                                                                       + l (t)Dt − l (t)Ht dBt ,
                                    λ

and
                                        X
                                Dt =         dxλ (t)Xtλ + dv (t)VtL + dh (t)Ht ,
                                         λ

along with risk premia, η(t), unlevered cash flow growth rate, g(t), and volatilities, σ(t) and
σH (t), that depend only on time. An implication of g(t) and η(t) depending only on time is
that the “price-earnings ratio” for an unlevered asset, ytU = VtU /Xt , depends only on time.9
   9
       To prove this, note that Xt drops out of the ratio
                                               Z T R
                                        VtU           s         Rs U
                                            =      e t g(ω)dω e− t rω dω ds.
                                        Xt      t




                                                                 9
   One can show that the value of a levered asset with debt policy and history satisfying
these properties is of the additively separable form
                                           X
                              VtL = VtU +     cxλ (t)Xtλ + ch (t)Ht
                                                              λ

and the PDE, equation (1), is of the form10
       X ∂cx               ∂ch             X           1 X x
              λ
                  Xλ +         H + (g − η)   λcxλ X λ + σ 2   cλ λ(λ − 1)X λ
        λ
             ∂t            ∂t              λ
                                                       2    λ
        "                                                                          #
                                   X                         
            h   d h    v   d v h         x    d x     v   d v x   λ    v   d v   U
       + − k − k d − (k + k d )c H +    kλ + k dλ + (k + k d )cλ X + (k + k d )V     ch
                                                                  λ
                                       !              "                                                           !          #
              X                                           X                                  X
       −rf            cxλ X λ     h
                                +c H       = −rf τc           dxλ X λ    v
                                                                        +d       V   U
                                                                                         +       cxλ X λ     h
                                                                                                           +c H         h
                                                                                                                      +d H
                  λ                                       λ                                  λ

with k q = mq − ηlq for q ∈ {x, d, v, h}.
   Equating the coefficients of H and X λ on each side produces N + 1 ordinary differential
equations with N being the number of powers of X that appear in the debt and history
equations:
 dcxλ                   1
      + (g − η)λcxλ + σ 2 cxλ λ(λ − 1) + kλx + k d dxλ + (k v + k d dv )cxλ + (k v + k d dv )ytU δλ,1 ch
                                                                                                     
  dt                    2
        −rf cxλ + rf τc dxλ + dv cxλ + dv ytU δλ,1 = 0
                                                  

 dch                                   
      − k − k d − (k + k d )c ch − rf ch + rf τc dv ch + dh = 0
           h     d h       v    d v h
                                                                        
  dt
with δ1,λ a binary variable that takes on the value 1 if λ = 1 and 0 otherwise,11 and with the
terminal condition given by
                                      cxλ (T ) = ch (T ) = 0.
This system of Riccati equations is easily solved numerically. However, there are large classes
of cases that have closed-form solutions. We explore these below.


D. Additively Separable Assets with Closed-Form Solutions
Suppose that each of the coefficients k d (t), k v (t), k h (t), dv (t), dh (t) are constant and
                                                                             k
                                                  kλx (t) = kλx (0)egλ t
                                                                             d
                                                  dxλ (t) = dxλ (0)egλ t
  10
    Note that many of terms involving V U cancel because of the no arbitrage PDE for V U .
  11
    Without loss of generality, and only for notational simplicity, we assume that one of the powers of λ is
λ = 1 if one of dv , k v , dx1 , or k1x is non-zero. Also, note that if λi = 0, we have an exponentially growing
constant term. We explore a special case with this feature later.

                                                                  10
with the constant growth parameters gλk and gλd possibly 0. For expositional clarity, we also
assume that the mean and volatility of the unlevered cash flow growth rate, as well as the
market price of risk, are constant. That is, g(t, X) = g, σ(t, X) = σ, and η(t, X) = η. This
allows us to express the value of an unlevered asset with the growing annuity formula, as in
the Gordon Growth Model:
                                    Xt            U
                                                             
                            VtU = U        1 − e−(r −g)(T −t) .                           (3)
                                   r −g
                                                         ∂ ln(VtU )
The Gordon growth assumptions imply that                 ∂ ln(Xt )
                                                                      = 1 and that the risk premium on the
unlevered asset rU − rf = η.
    We could allow g, σ, and η to be deterministic functions of time and still achieve solutions
similar to those developed below but at the cost of expressions with confusing sets of integrals
in them. As this discussion is about the valuation of tax shields for complex debt policies,
and not about the complexities of valuation in a no-tax setting, we opt for an approach that
makes the latter valuation as uncomplicated as possible.
       Under these assumptions, the system of Riccati equations is solved by
                                                  1 − e−b(T −t)
                                    ch (t) =           ch
                                                                      ch∞ ,                                   (4)
                                               1−       ∞
                                                            e−b(T −t)
                                                    ch
                                                     ∞ +b/a

where12
                            a = k v + k d dv ,
                                 q
                            b =    (k h − k d dh + rf (1 − τc dv ))2 − 4aτc rf dh ,
                                 p
                                    b2 + 4aτc rf dh − b
                          ch∞ =
                                            2a
and for λ = λ1 , . . . , λN
   x                  x        d   rf τc dv      
                                                           −(r U −g)(T −t)
                                                                                      
  cλ (t) = rf τc dλ (t)C1 (gλ ) + U         δλ,1 C1 (0) − e                C1 (r − g) + kλx (t)C2 (gλk )
                                                                                U
                                   r −g
                                    a                      U
                                                                                    
         + k d dxλ (t)C2 (gλd ) + U       δλ,1 C2 (0) − e−(r −g)(T −t) C2 (rU − g) ,                     (5)
                                 r −g
where
                                                  x                                             x
                                         1 − e−(gλ −z)(T −t)                ch∞        1 − e−(gλ −z−b)(T −t)
                                                                                                           
                        1                                      −b(T −t)
C1 (z) =                                                     −e
              1−      ch
                       ∞
                           e−b(T −t)          gλx − z                   ch∞ + b/a          gλx − z − b
                   ch
                    ∞ +b/a
                                                  x                                  x
                       ch∞               1 − e−(gλ −z)(T −t)               1 − e−(gλ −z−b)(T −t)
                                                                                                
                                                               −b(T −t)
C2 (z) =                                                     −e
              1−      ch
                       ∞
                           e−b(T −t)          gλx − z                           gλx − z − b
                   ch
                    ∞ +b/a

  12
    For the tax shield of a finite-lived asset to have a finite value, b, given below, has to be a real number.
Also, for history to be stable, k h − k d dh + rf (1 − τc dv ) has to be positive. Throughout the paper, we assume
that parameters satisfy the transversality conditions so that the debt tax shield is finite.

                                                        11
with gλx defined by
                                                                           1
                    gλx = rf (1 − τc dv ) − (k v + k d dv )ch∞ + (η − g)λ − σ 2 λ(λ − 1).
                                                                           2


Case 1: Perpetual Assets
As T → ∞, equation (4) becomes
                                                  ch (t) = ch∞
and the N cash flow coefficients given by equation (5) simplify to

                   kλx (t)ch∞ (rf τc + k d ch∞ )dxλ (t)           ach∞ + rf τc dv
       cxλ (t) =             +                          +                                   δλ,1 ,
                   gλx − gλk         gλx − gλd            (rU − g)(rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g)

since, as T → ∞,

                                                        ch∞
                                             C1 (z) = x
                                                      gλ − z
                                                         1
                                             C2 (z) = x      .
                                                      gλ − z

This implies

                ach∞ + rf τc dv           X  k x (t)ch    (rf τc + k d ch∞ )dxλ (t)
                                                                                   
  L                                    U       λ      ∞
Vt = 1 +                v
                                     Vt +       x      k
                                                         +         x       d
                                                                                       Xtλ + ch∞ Ht .
            rf (1 − τc d ) + η − g        λ
                                              gλ − gλ             gλ − gλ


Case 2: Perpetual Debt as a Function of Cash Flows Only
When T → ∞ and dv = dh = 0, ch∞ = 0. In this case, the solution for Case 1 simplifies to

                                                          rf τc dxλ (t)
                                              cxλ (t) =
                                                           gλx − gλd

implying                            X                  r f τc
                     VtL = VtU +                                              dx (t)Xtλ .
                                     λ
                                         rf + (η − g)λ − 12 σ 2 λ(λ − 1) − gλd λ


Case 3: Debt that is a Linear Function of Asset Value Plus Constant Growth
For this special case,
                                                               d
                                           Dt = dx0 (0)eg0 t + dv VtL
with the sensitivity of debt to asset value constant; that is, dv (t) = dv . The remaining
coefficients are zero. Note that the constant growth rate component in debt, g0d , may differ

                                                          12
from g, the expected growth rate in cash flows. When dv is zero, debt grows at the constant
geometric rate of g0d (possibly zero). When dx0 (0) = 0, the debt to asset ratio is constant
over the life of the asset. Hence, this policy, as well as the stationary model described in the
prior subsection, nests both the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell debt policies. (Note that
if dv is nonzero, the expected growth rate in debt is influenced both by the expected growth
rate in V L as well as g0d .)
       This is a case where ch (t) = ch∞ = C2 (z) = 0 and the solution reduces to

                                      VtL = VtU + cx0 (t) + cx1 (t)Xt ,

with the values for cxλ from equation (5) becoming
                                                                 v   d
                                                                               !
                                                1 − e−(rf (1−τc d )−g0 )(T −t)
                            cx0 (t)=    rf τc dx0 (t)
                                                    rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d
                                                               v
                                     rf τc dv 1 − e−(rf (1−τc d )+η−g)(T −t)
                                                                             
                             x
                            c1 (t) = U
                                     r −g       rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g

   A particularly simple expression exists for a perpetual levered asset in Case 3. Here, the
coefficients above imply13
                                                                                      
               L    U                rf            x                 rf            v U
             Vt = Vt + τc                         d (t) +                         d Vt    (6)
                             rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d 0      rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g

Note that when g = g0d = dv = 0, equation (6) is the Modigliani-Miller value,

                                           VtL = VtU + τc dx0 (t)
                                                   = VtU + τc Dt .

    When dv is zero but g0d and g are nonzero, we have an extension of the Modigliani-Miller
debt policy that allows for growing debt and unlevered cash flows that are expected to grow.
As we will learn in the next section of the paper on the W ACC, the initial weighted average
cost of capital, used as a discount rate, does not generate this value as the value of the levered
asset when g0d 6= g. However, there is a simple adjustment to the W ACC that generates the
correct levered asset value.
  13
       One can also map Dt into VtL . A small amount of algebraic manipulation reveals

                                                            g − η − g0d
                                                                                  
                          L    U        rf                                     v U
                       V t = Vt +             τc Dt +                         d Vt .
                                     rf − g0d         rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g

Thus, the value of the debt tax shield is the sum of the Modigliani-Miller debt tax shield (with constantly
growing debt) and a term which may be positive or negative. The sign of the final term in parentheses
depends on whether g − η, the risk-adjusted growth rate of the unlevered cash flows, is larger than g0d , the
growth rate for the nonstochastic debt component.

                                                        13
    When dx0 (t) = 0, debt policy is an extension of the continuous-time Miles and Ezzell debt
policy that allows for cash flows with nonzero expected growth. In this case, equation (6)
indicates that there is a proportional relationship between the value of a levered asset and
its otherwise identical unlevered counterpart:
                                                rf + η − g
                                  VtL =               v
                                                                 VtU
                                          rf (1 − τc d ) + η − g

implying
                                                      rf
                                   VtL = VtU +               τc Dt .
                                                  rf + η − g

    If g0d = g, the debt tax shield can be written as a simple weighted average of the tax shields
for the Miles-Ezzell constant leverage ratio debt policy and the extended Modigliani-Miller
debt policy (with possibly growing debt). In this case, equation (6) reduces to
                                            rf                         rf
                       VtL = VtU + wt            τc Dt + (1 − wt )            τ c Dt
                                          rf − g                   rf + η − g

where the weight
                                                                   dv
                                                                          
                                          rf − g
                               wt =                           1−               .
                                    rf (1 − τc dv ) − g          Dt /VtL
This weight is monotonically decreasing in dv , the sensitivity of debt to the value of the
asset, holding Dt fixed.14
    The Modigliani-Miller debt tax shield, which multiplies wt above, has a smaller value
than its Miles-Ezzell counterpart, which multiplies (1 − wt ) above.15 Hence, for the same
initial debt level, increasing the debt sensitivity coefficient, dv , while holding the initial debt
level fixed, reduces the value of the tax shield. This is because the value of the debt tax
shield falls when its risk increases, other things equal. If the debt sensitivity coefficient, dv ,
exceeds Dt /VtL , so that wt is negative, the leverage ratio will rise as the asset’s value increases
and fall when it decreases. In this case, the value of the asset will be below that obtained
with the constant leverage ratio Miles-Ezzell debt policy. Conversely, if dv is negative, so
that some of the existing debt is retired when the asset’s value rises,16 and debt is issued
when the asset’s value declines, the value of the debt tax shield will be above the τc Dt value
proposed by Modigliani and Miller. This confirms the intuition in Grinblatt and Titman
(1997, 2002) and suggests that the appropriate discount rate for unlevered cash flows will be
  14
      To see this, it is necessary to obtain an equation for the weight without VtL . This is accomplished by
substituting the former equation into the latter and solving for wt .
   15
      This and the statements that follow from it assume that η, the risk premium for the unlevered cash
flow, is positive. If the unlevered cash flow has a negative risk premium, the Miles-Ezzell value exceeds the
Modigliani-Miller value.
   16
      This debt paydown pattern has been estimated in empirical work by Kaplan and Stein (1990).


                                                     14
a weighted average of the W ACCs proposed by Miles and Ezzell and Modigliani and Miller.
For dv > Dt /VtL , the weight on the Modigliani-Miller W ACC must be negative, for dv < 0,
it is above 1, and otherwise, it lies between 0 and 1. As we will show later, the weighting
on the W ACC formulas of Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell is identical to the weighting
of the respective tax shields given here.
    The linear debt policy in Case 3 easily extends to discrete time. The linearity implies
that over any discrete interval, the levered asset is a fixed-weight portfolio of an otherwise
identical unlevered asset and a risk-free security. In this case, the values of the levered
and unlevered assets are perfectly correlated, as both are linear functions of the cash flow.
Solving the difference equations that generate the no arbitrage value of the levered asset in
an analogous manner yields the discrete time analogue to equation (6):17
                                                                                                 
  L     U                rf            x                     rf (1 + rf + η)                  v U
Vt = Vt + τc                          d (t) +                                                d Vt .
                 rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d 0      (1 + rf )(rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g) − ηrf τc dv
This valuation solution nests both the discrete-time Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell debt
policies as special cases.
    The discrete case valuation formula, provided above, applies only to an infinitely-lived
asset. A similar approach generates a discrete time closed-form solution for a finite-lived
asset. It is omitted for the sake of brevity.


  II. Tax-Adjusted Discount Rates for Unlevered Cash
      Flows and the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
For finance practitioners, discounting expected unlevered cash flows at a tax-adjusted dis-
count rate is the most popular way to value an asset. This section studies the relation
between this discount rate and the after-tax weighted average cost of capital. It develops
formulas for these discount rates for a variety of debt policies and shows when and why
naive application of the weighted average cost of capital as the appropriate discount rate can
generate erroneous valuations.
    We take the perspective of an investor at date 0. This investor would like to know the
discount rate, applied to expected future unlevered cash flows, that generates V0L . Our
analysis will show that this discount rate is rarely the W ACC computed at date 0. Before
we do this, it is important to study the W ACC and how it evolves through time.
  17
    Simple algebraic manipulation indicates that the mapping from Dt to VL associated with the equation
below is given by

                                                (1 + rf )(g − η − g0d ) + η(rf − g0d )
                                                                                                 
                           rf
            VtL = VtU +          τ c   Dt +                                                d v U
                                                                                              V t   .
                        rf − g0d            (1 + rf )(rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g) − ηrf τc dv



                                                  15
A. Risk, Expected Return, and the W ACC
In continuous time, the weighted average cost of capital of an asset is defined to be the asset’s
instantaneous expected return, rL , less the return component due to the debt tax shield:
                                                                   Dt
                                     W ACCt = rtL − rf τc              .                               (7)
                                                                   VtL

A levered asset’s date t instantaneous expected return, equivalent to its “pre-tax weighted
average cost of capital,” is defined by18
                                           Et (dVtL ) + Xt dt + rf τc Dt dt
                                rtL dt =                                    .                          (8)
                                                        VtL

   This expected return has three components: the expected “capital gain,” the unlevered
cash flow, and the cash flow from the debt tax shield.19 One can readily show from the no
arbitrage condition that
                             ∂ ln VtL                               L
                                                                     
                 L                                         L ∂ ln Vt
                rt = rf +             + σH (t, Xt , Dt , Vt )           η(t, Xt )Xt .
                               ∂Xt                             ∂Ht
Combining this equation with equation (7) provides a direct formula for computing a W ACC
given the value of the levered asset:
                                      ∂ ln VtL                               L
                                                                              
                             Dt                                     L ∂ ln Vt
       W ACCt = rf (1 − τc L ) +               + σH (t, Xt , Dt , Vt )           η(t, Xt )Xt . (9)
                             Vt         ∂Xt                             ∂Ht

     Equation (9) is a generalization of the Modigliani-Miller adjusted cost of capital formula.
It is convenient formula for computing the W ACC given the extensive closed-form solutions
computed in the last section. For example, in the case of constant debt for a finite-lived
asset with zero expected growth and a constant risk premium for unlevered cash flows,
                                                ∂ ln V L
                                                         =0
                                                  ∂H
and
                                       ∂ ln VtL  VU 1
                                                = tL .
                                         ∂Xt     Vt Xt
In this case, the levered asset has a value of

                                   VtL = VtU + τc Dt (1 − erf (T −t) ),
  18
     This expected return is the appropriate discount rate for the “capital cash flow stream,” which is the
net payout to all cash flow claimants. See Ruback (2002) for a lucid discussion of the advantages of this
approach.
  19
     As mentioned earlier, the latter flow must be paid out to maintain the same investment policy and
capital gains appreciation as an otherwise identical unlevered asset.

                                                     16
the formula for the W ACC reduces to
                                                                  
                              U         Dt       Dt       rf (T −t)
                   W ACCt = r     1 − τc L − τc η L (1 − e          ) .
                                        Vt       Vt
Note that the term in brackets is decreasing in T and converges to zero for perpetual assets.
Hence, this formula generates a smaller W ACC than that generated by the Modigliani and
Miller formula for perpetual assets.
   It is also possible to write down a differential equation for the W ACC. Substituting the
expected return formula, equation (8), into equation (7) implies
                                                     
                                              Et dVtL + Xt dt
                                W ACCt dt =                    .                        (10)
                                                     VtL
Applying Ito’s lemma to this equation, we find that the W ACC satisfies the PDE
                  L
                             ∂V L 1 2 2 ∂ 2 V L           L
                                                             1 2 ∂2V L        ∂2V L
                                                                                    
            L     ∂V                                 h ∂V
W ACC × V =           + gX        + σ X           +µ        + σh       + σσh          V L + X.
                   ∂t        ∂X     2       ∂X 2       ∂H    2 ∂H 2          ∂H∂X

   To understand the relation between the W ACC and stochastic discount rates for unlev-
ered cash flows, observe that ρt , the date t stochastic instantaneous discount rate for Xt that
generates the value of the levered asset, satisfies the stochastic integral equation
                                        Z ∞ h R              i
                                                    s
                                   L
                                Vt =        Et e− t ρω dω Xs ds.
                                               t

By the Feynman-Kac theorem, any ρt that satisfies this stochastic integral equation also
satisfies the PDE
          L
                    ∂V L 1 2 2 ∂ 2 V L         L
                                                  1 2 ∂2V L         ∂2V L
                                                                          
   L       ∂V                             h ∂V
ρV =           + gX     + σ X        2
                                       +µ        + σh     2
                                                            + σσh           V L + X.
            ∂t      ∂X   2     ∂X           ∂H    2 ∂H             ∂H∂X

Since the PDE that ρ has to solve is identical to the PDE that the W ACC solves (by Ito’s
lemma), the following proposition must hold:20

Proposition 1 The W ACC is identical to the stochastic instantaneous discount rate that
generates the levered asset value when applied to the unlevered cash flows.

    This insight is not very useful for capital budgeting practitioners. As equation (9) indi-
cates, the W ACC at a future date depends on the state variables, X and H, at that date.
Hence, future W ACCs are generally stochastic when viewed from date 0, the relevant date
of the valuation.
  20
    Obviously, there is no reason for the boundary conditions to differ or for either of the partial differential
equations to be ill-behaved.

                                                       17
B. The Appropriate Tax-Adjusted Discount Rates
Even though the W ACC is generally stochastic, it may be that some construct related
to the W ACC can be used to discount expected future unlevered cash flows to date 0 in
a manner that accounts for the tax shield. This subsection explores this issue. We first
begin by analyzing a discount rate, known at date 0, that translates the expected unlevered
cash flow at date s into its value an instant earlier. We call this the “tax-adjusted forward
rate.” Once having developed an understanding what this tax-adjusted forward rate is,
and how to compute it, we prove that the W ACC is an appropriate tax-adjusted discount
rate whenever the term structure of tax-adjusted forward rates is flat. These forward rates,
while computable, are fairly impractical for capital budgeting purposes. However, they
are consistent with a single tax-adjusted discount rate for unlevered cash flows — the tax-
adjusted hurdle rate for the IRR — which generates the same present value. Moreover,
when the unlevered assets are perpetual and the Gordon-Growth assumptions apply, this
hurdle rate, denoted ρ∗ , is easily obtained with a simple formula.
   Define date 0’s tax-adjusted forward discount rate for cash flows at date s, fs , by
                                                        
                                         E0 dVsL + Xs ds
                                 fs ds =                   .                              (11)
                                             E0 [VsL ]
This is clearly an appropriate discount rate. It is known at date 0, and the recursive rela-
tionship expressed in equation (11), applied iteratively, implies
                                      Z ∞ R
                                               t
                                  L
                                V0 =       e− 0 fs ds E0 [Xt ] dt.                     (12)
                                        0

   How does this series of forward rates relate to the W ACC? At most horizons, the
comparison is meaningless because the future W ACCs are stochastic when viewed from date
0. As a general matter, the ratio of date 0 expectations in equation (11), used to compute
the date s forward rate, differs from the date 0 expectation of W ACCs . Moreover, the
expectations in equation (11), while obtainable, do not lend themselves to simple expressions.
    Despite this, developing an understanding of tax-adjusted forward rates is useful for
understanding when the W ACC can be used for discounting. Trivially, fs converges to
W ACC0 as s approaches zero. Because f0 = W ACC0 , and fs is an appropriate instantaneous
discount rate for date s cash flows, it follows that whenever fs = f0 for all s, W ACC0 is an
appropriate discount rate for unlevered cash flows.

Proposition 2 Whenever the term structure of tax-adjusted forward rates is flat (fs =
f0 , ∀s), the W ACC is an appropriate tax-adjusted discount rate for unlevered cash flows.

   Two cases where this situation arises are the no-growth Modigliani-Miller model and the
Miles-Ezzell model (with or without cash flow growth). The only other situation where the

                                             18
forward term structure is flat is when debt policy is any weighted average of debt policies in
these two models, but only for g = g0d . We explore this shortly.
   The rarity of an equivalence between the initial W ACC or expected future W ACCs and
the corresponding forward rates should not be surprising. Although equations (10) and (11)
look similar, Jensen’s inequality alone prevents the expectation of the former from equalling
the latter when VtL , as well as the overall ratio in equation (10), are stochastic.
      Date 0’s constant tax-adjusted discount rate, ρ∗ , is defined by the equation
                                          Z ∞
                                                 ∗
                                     L
                                   V0 =       e−ρ t E0 [Xt ]dt.
                                                      0

In cases where the unlevered cash flows have perpetual constant growth g, this tax-adjusted
discount (hurdle) rate is most easily computed as

                                                                X0
                                                   ρ∗ = g +         .                                           (13)
                                                                V0L

Equation (13), an algebraic manipulation of the growing perpetuity formula, allows us to
obtain ρ∗ from the formulas for V0L developed in the prior section.21


C. Classes of Cases with Easy Numerical Solutions
Recall from the last section that the values of assets with time-independent cash flows and
debt policy, as well as assets with additively separable history diffusion and debt equations
could easily be obtained numerically. In the former class of cases, the fundamental valuation
equation reduces to an ordinary differential equation in X. In the latter class, it reduces to
a system of Riccati equations. In these cases, the W ACC and appropriate discount rate, ρ∗
are similarly solved. Just as numerical solutions for V L are easily obtained, so too are the
W ACC using equation (9). For ρ∗ , the formula in equation (13) generates the discount rate
directly from the numerically solved V L . 22 Similarly, the forward rates are the solutions to
ordinary differential equations which can be solved numerically.23
    Obviously, it is more illuminating to analyze closed-form solutions for these interesting
variables. We turn our attention to this next.
 21
      With a finite-lived asset, ρ∗ is easily identified implicitly as the parameter that solves
                                                  X0        −(ρ∗ −g)(T −t)
                                                                            
                                         V0L =          1 − e                 .
                                                 ρ∗ − g

 22
      For finite-lived assets, this discount rate can be easily solved implicitly, as described in the prior footnote.
 23
      The ODEs are available upon request.




                                                           19
D. Additively Separable Assets with Closed-Form Solutions
Consider, as in the last section, the case where history follows the diffusion

      dHt = (mx (t)Xt + md Dt + mv VtL − mh Ht )dt + (lx (t)Xt + ld Dt + lv VtL − lh Ht )dBt ,

and debt policy has the functional form
                                  X
                            Dt =      dxλ (t)Xtλ + dv VtL + dh Ht .
                                            λ

                                                                 d                                      k
Recall that g, η, and σ are constant, dxλ (t) = dxλ (0)egλ t , mxλ (t) − ηlλx (t) = kλx (t) = kλx (0)egλ t ,
and T = ∞. Here, the partial derivatives in equation (9) have closed-form solutions, allowing
us to express the W ACC as an explicit function of the unlevered cash flows, history state
variable, and leverage ratio, Dt /Vt , as follows:

                                      1/(rf + η − g) + λ cxλ (t)λXtλ−1 + ch (t)σH
                                                      P
                            Dt
     W ACCt = rf 1 − τc L +                                                                ηXt ,      (14)
                                               VtU + λ cxλ (t)Xtλ + ch (t)Ht
                                                    P
                            Vt
where the c coefficients are explicitly given in the prior section of the paper and with
                              X
                        σH =      lλx (t)Xt + ld Dt + lv VtL − (lh + σ)Ht .
                                      λ



Case 1: Perpetual Assets
Here, equation (14) simplifies to the same expression, but with

                                                  ch (t) = ch∞

and
                      kλx (t)ch∞ (rf τc + k d ch∞ )dxλ (t)       (k v + k d dv )ch∞ + rf τc dv
          cxλ (t) =             +                          +                                   δλ,1 ,
                      gλx − gλk         gλx − gλd            (rU − g)(rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g)
and where the constants gλx and ch∞ are given in the previous section of the paper. By
contrast, the constant tax-adjusted discount rate is
                                                            X0
                                      ρ∗ = g + P       x     λ
                                                                            .
                                                    λ cλ (0)X0   + ch∞ H0


Case 2: Perpetual Debt as a Function of Cash Flows Only
Consider, as in the last section, the case where
                                            X
                                       Dt =    dxλ (t)Xtλ ,
                                                      λ


                                                          20
                                                        d
g, η, and σ are constant, dxλ (t) = dxλ (0)egλ t , and T = ∞. For this case, we showed that
                               X                      r f τc
                 VtL = VtU +                             1 2            dx (t)Xtλ .
                                                                       d λ
                                 λ
                                   rf + (η − g)λ − 2 σ λ(λ − 1) − gλ

This valuation solution simplifies equation (14) to

                                        1/(rf + η − g) + λ cxλ (t)λXtλ−1
                                                        P
                                 Dt
              W ACCt = rf (1 − τc L ) +                                  ηXt ,
                                               VtU + λ cxλ (t)Xtλ
                                                     P
                                 Vt
where
                                                      rf τc dxλ (t)
                              cxλ (t)   =                                       ,
                                          rf + (η − g)λ − 12 σ 2 λ(λ − 1) − gλd
while the constant tax-adjusted discount rate
                                                                       X0
                       ρ∗ = g +                                   rf τc                       .
                                        V0U                                           x     λ
                                                  P
                                              +       λ rf +(η−g)λ− 1 σ 2 λ(λ−1)−g d dλ (0)X0
                                                                    2             λ



    This happens to be a case where the presentation of the term structure of tax-adjusted
forward rates computed from the date 0 valuation date will not significantly lengthen the
paper. To do this, we need to take date 0 expectations of VsL . Given the lognormal process
for Xs , the formula for the conditional λth moment of Xs is
                                                   1 2     1 2 2
                                E0 Xsλ = X0λ eλ(g− 2 σ )s+ 2 λ σ s
                                    

which can be substituted into the expected value of equation (11). Thus,
                                                                                         1   2   1   2 2
                                                  X                   X0λ eλ(g− 2 σ )s+ 2 λ σ s
                  E0 [VsL ]   =   V0U egs     +       τc rf dxλ                                   .
                                                  λ
                                                                  rf + (η − g)λ − 21 σ 2 λ(λ − 1)

It follows that
                                                1 2     1 2 2                                               1   2     1    2 σ2 s
                                                                 λ λ(g− 2 σ )s+ 2 λ
         dE0 [VsL ]     U  gs
                              X
                                       x (λ(g − 2 σ ) + 2 λ σ )X0 e
                    = V0 ge +   τc rf dλ                                                                                            .
           ds                 λ
                                               rf + (η − g)λ − 12 σ 2 λ(λ − 1)

We now have all the ingredients to compute the date s tax-adjusted forward rate. It is given
by the formula:
                                                                                                      1 2       1 2 σ2 s
                                                                  (λ(g− 21 σ 2 )+ 12 λ2 σ 2 )X0λ eλ(g− 2 σ )s+ 2 λ
                    V0U (rf + η)egs +                      x
                                                  P
                                                  λ τc rf dλ                  rf +(η−g)λ− 12 σ 2 λ(λ−1)
             fs =                                                                  1 2
                                                                      λ λ(g− 2 σ )s+ 2 λ σ s
                                                                                             1 2 2                         .
                                                                 x X0 e
                                     V0U egs
                                                      P
                                                  +     λ τc rf dλ rf +(η−g)λ− 1 σ 2 λ(λ−1)
                                                                                 2


   It is easily verified that W ACC0 = f0 , but obviously, the date s W ACC depends on
Xs and thus cannot be identical to fs . Moreover, the date s forward rate is not the date 0

                                                             21
expectation of the date s W ACC, irrespective of whether expectations are taken with respect
to the actual probability density function or the probability density function generated by
the risk-neutral measure.

Case 3: Perpetual Debt that is a Linear Function of Asset Value Plus Constant
Growth
Recall that for this special case, explored in the last section, debt policy is given by
                                                           d
                                      Dt = dx0 (0)eg0 t + dv VtL

and a perpetual levered asset has a particularly simple functional form for its valuation:
                                                                                    
            L      U               rf            x                 rf            v U
          Vt = Vt + τc                          d (t) +                         d Vt .
                           rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d 0      rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g
This valuation solution simplifies equation (14) to
                                               Dt                  ηXt
                    W ACCt = rf (1 − τc          L
                                                   )+                              ,
                                               Vt     (rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g)VtL

with VtL given by the equation immediately above, while the appropriate tax-adjusted con-
stant discount rate, ρ∗ , is given by
                                                               X0
                ρ∗ = g +                                                                          .
                                                rf                             rf
                           V0U + τc                        dx (t)
                                          rf (1−τc dv )−g0d 0
                                                                    +   rf (1−τc dv )+η−g
                                                                                          dv V0U

   Using equation (11), the simple valuation formula for this case can be used to show that
the tax-adjusted forward discount rate is given by the weighted average
                               γ0 (s)                γ1 (s)
                   fs =                   g0d +                 (rf (1 − τc dv ) + η)
                          γ0 (s) + γ1 (s)       γ0 (s) + γ1 (s)
where the coefficients
                                             rf τc dx0 (0)     d
                               γ0 (s) =                v   d
                                                             eg0 s ,
                                        rf (1 − τc d ) − g0
                                                    X0
                               γ1 (s) =                v
                                                                 egs ,
                                        rf (1 − τc d ) + η − g
and
                                          V0L = γ0 (0) + γ1 (0).

    It is possible to compare forward rates, W ACCs, and appropriate constant tax-adjusted
discount rates here but the discussion is more illuminating if we focus on several special cases
of this example.

                                                      22
Case 3a: Constantly Growing Debt with No Stochastic Component and No
Expected Cash Flow Growth
In this extension of the Modigliani-Miller debt policy that accounts for the possibility of
growing debt, g = dv = 0, and rf > g0d > 0. The γ0 (s) and γ1 (s) coefficients above simplify
to
                                       rf τc D0 g0d s    d
                              γ0 (s) =        d
                                                e = ∆0 eg0 s ,
                                       rf − g0
                                         X0
                              γ1 (s) =          = V0U ,
                                       rf + η

implying
                                         d
                                 ∆0 eg0 s g0d     V0U       U
                           fs = U             d +       d r .
                               V0 + ∆0 eg0 s V0U + ∆0 eg0 s
   The initial W ACC, which is identical to f0 , is

                                  ∆0 d V0U U
                      W ACC0 =        g +      r
                                  V0L 0 V0L
                                                
                                    U         D0      η        D0
                                = r     1 − τc L −         gdτ
                                                         d 0 c L
                                              V0   rf − g0     V0

However, the tax-adjusted constant discount rate is
                                       U
                                                                 
                       ∗    X0     U V0     U          rf      D0
                      ρ = L =r           =r     1−          τc      ,
                           V0        V0L            rf − g0d V0L

which the initial W ACC exceeds by the amount
                                  ∆0 d      rf       D0
                                     g =
                                    L 0
                                                 gdτ
                                               d 0 c L
                                                        .
                                  V0     rf − g0     V0


Case 3b: Modigliani-Miller Static Debt Policy with Constant Expected Growth
in Cash Flows
Here we assume that g > 0, but that dv = g0d = 0. In this case

                             γ0 (s) = τc D0
                                          X0
                             γ1 (s) =            egs = V0U egs ,
                                      rf + η − g

implying
                                                V0U gs U
                                         fs =       e r .
                                                V0L

                                                23
   The initial W ACC, which is identical to f0 , is
                                      V0U U
                                                            
                                                U         D0
                          W ACC0 = L r = r          1 − τc L .
                                      V0                  V0
However, the tax-adjusted constant discount rate is
                                    X0        V0U U
                             ρ∗ =       + g =     (r − g) + g
                                    V0L       V0L
                                    V0U U      D0
                                  =   L
                                        r + gτc L
                                    V0         V0
which exceeds the initial W ACC by gτc VDL0 .
                                          0



Case 3c: The Modigliani-Miller Model with Equal Growth in Debt and Expected
Cash Flows
The last two cases illustrated that the W ACC was not an appropriate tax-adjusted constant
discount rate. This is because it changed over time. In Case 3a, the initial W ACC was too
large because it was expected to decrease. In Case 3b, the initial W ACC was too small
because it was expected to increase. It is natural to think that if dv = 0 but g0d = g > 0, so
that debt growth keeps pace with the expected growth of the cash flows, the initial W ACC
will still work. This indeed is the case. To prove this, note that here
                               ∆0 d V0U U
                                                              
                                                 U         D0         η        D0
             W ACC0 = f0 = L g0 + L r = r            1 − τc L −            gdτ
                                                                         d 0 c L
                              V0       V0                  V0      rf − g0     V0
Thus, W ACC0 = ρ∗ whenever
                             ∆0 d V0U U        (rU − g)V0U
                                g +    r = g +             ,
                             V0L 0 V0L             V0L
which only occurs when g0d = g.
    This happens to be a case in which the forward rate is independent of s. By Proposition
2, the initial W ACC has to work as an appropriate tax-adjusted discount rate under this
condition.

Case 3d: A Combination of the Extended Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell
Debt Models with Equal Growth in Debt and Expected Cash Flow
Here, we generalize Case 3c and once again show that the initial W ACC is an appropriate
discount rate for unlevered cash flows. In this example, g0d = g but dv may be nonzero.
These assumptions imply:
                          γ0 (s)           X0                  1
                                     = 1− L ×
                     γ0 (s) + γ1 (s)       V0      rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g
                          γ1 (s)       X0                1
                                     =   L
                                           ×                           .
                     γ0 (s) + γ1 (s)   V0     rf (1 − τc dv ) + η − g

                                                24
   To compute fs , the former ratio multiplies g, while the latter multiplies rf (1 − τc dv ) + η,
and then the two products are summed. Thus,
                                                                   X0
                              fs = f = ρ∗ = W ACC0 = g +               .
                                                                   V0L

When g0d 6= g, fs depends on s. Hence, within Case 3, it is only by imposing the condition
g0d = g that one can use the initial W ACC as an appropriate discount rate. This discount
rate can be thought of as a weighted average of the W ACC from a Miles and Ezzell debt
policy at an initial debt of D0 and the W ACC from a Modigliani and Miller debt policy at
an initial debt of D0 . Specifically, denote the W ACCs of Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell
as

                                                     D0       gη    D0
                          W ACC0M M = rU (1 − τc       L
                                                         )−       τc L
                                                     V0     rf − g V0
                                                               D0
                                  W ACC0M E = rU − τc rf           ,
                                                               V0L
respectively. Then the discount rate given above

                 W ACC0 = ρ∗ = f = w0 W ACC0M M + (1 − w0 )W ACC0M E ,

where
                                                                dv
                                                                       
                                       rf − g
                            w0 =                           1−               .
                                 rf (1 − τc dv ) − g          D0 /V0L


Case 3e: The Growth Extension of the Miles-Ezzell model
Consider the case with dv = D0 /V0 , dx0 (0) = 0. This is a continuous-time version of the
Miles-Ezzell model, but with the extension of expected growth in cash flows. Here,
                                                    Xt
                                       VtU =
                                                rf + η − g

and
                                                    rf
                                  VtL = VtU +              τc Dt .
                                                rf + η − g
In this case, since γ0 (s) is zero, the date s forward rate is independent of s, which has the
value
                                                            D0
                                      f = ρ∗ = r U − r f τ c L
                                                            V0
This tax-adjusted discount rate is identical to the weighted average cost of capital.



                                                25
    To understand this from another perspective, recognize that everything is stationary
here, and that the flow from the debt tax shield, being proportional to the unlevered cash
flow, shares its discount rate, so that

                                         rL = rf + η.

The W ACC, from equation (7), is therefore the constant
                                                           D
                                 W ACCt = rf + η − rf τc
                                                           VL
where, by assumption, D/V L is the same at all points in time. Note that the growth rate of
the cash flows never appears when the W ACC is written as a function of the leverage ratio,
but that it affects V L above.


E. Discussion
To develop an intuitive understanding of the results above it is useful to first review why
discounting unlevered cash flows at the initial after-tax weighted average cost of capital
sometimes accounts for the value of the debt tax shield. Let’s begin with the perpetual
level debt model of Modigliani and Miller. Because the market value of the debt financing
never changes in this model, it is useful to think of the Modigliani and Miller analysis as the
valuation of the debt tax shield of a zero beta debt strategy. In such a model, the familiar
equation V L = V U + τc D reflects the separate valuations of the two components of the asset:
the unlevered after-tax cash flow stream, with stochastic value Xt at date t, and the stream
of cash flows from the interest-based tax shield, Drf τc , which is constant and identical at
every date. Note that the gross (as opposed to net) pre-tax weighted average cost of capital,
which is also the gross expected return on the levered asset, is

                            1 + rL = 1 + (D/V L )rf + (E/V L )rE .

This can be viewed as the expected cash flow per dollar of assets to investors who buy an
asset, hold it for an instant, and then liquidate it. Both the asset value and the flow include
the debt tax shield. Hence, the gross after-tax W ACC

                             1 + (D/V L )rf (1 − τc ) + (E/V L )rE

is just the expected flow to investors per dollar of levered assets, less the expected flow
per dollar of assets from the debt tax shield, (D/V L )rf τc . This net flow is identical to the
unlevered cash flow per dollar of levered assets. Viewed with the arrow of time in reverse,
this insight implies that if we discount the unlevered cash flows at the after-tax W ACC,
we end up back where we started, with the one dollar value of the assets, including that
component of value generated by the debt tax shield.

                                              26
    It is easy to see that this insight about the zero beta debt strategy does not easily extend
to the case of an asset with a value that tends to grow. Here, the value of the unlevered
asset is affected by the growth rate, but the debt tax shield, having a perpetual value of τc D
is not affected by it. Because the value of such a constant debt tax shield tends to decline
over time as a proportion of total asset value, the initial after-tax weighted average cost of
capital is an inappropriate discount rate for all future cash flows. Essentially, the weighted
average cost of capital is changing over time. In this simple case, we learned that there is a
single discount rate that can be used to discount all future unlevered cash flows: the sum of
the initial after-tax W ACC and gτc D/V L , the latter being the product of the growth rate
of the unlevered cash flows, the tax rate, and the debt to value ratio. For a firm with a 4%
growth rate, and a 50% tax rate and leverage, this alone represents a 100 basis point error
in the discount rate, even given the true unlevered cost of capital. We can see that if the
risk of the levered asset is not expected to change, as in the Modigliani-Miller model of debt
adjustment, which assumes no growth, discounting the expected unlevered cash flow stream
at the initial W ACC generates the value of the levered assets, including the debt tax shield.
    The other case where the risk of the levered asset is not expected to change arises in an
extension of the Miles and Ezzell (1985) model. Their case is one where the debt level is
adjusted over time to maintain a constant debt to value ratio. This is a positive beta debt
strategy even though the debt, at issue, is risk-free. The perpetually constant W ACC is an
appropriate discount rate in this case, but the valuation is never out of peril if the actual
debt policy associated with the asset differs from the policy implicit in the formulas used for
the valuation. For example, if the unlevered asset’s risk premium is twice the risk-free rate,
the Miles-Ezzell tax shield is a mere one-third that of the Modigliani-Miller debt tax shield
for the same debt level. If the risk-free rate is 4%, the bias in the W ACC from applying a
Miles-Ezzell formula to Modigliani-Miller debt policy becomes 200 basis points, even if the
unlevered cost of capital for the asset is estimated perfectly.
    These problems can become much more severe when the unlevered cost of capital is from
comparison assets with debt policies that are also mismatched to the formulas. For example,
an asset with a nonstochastic trend to grow its debt but pay it down if the cash flows turn out
to be surprisingly good, has a very low W ACC other things equal. Unless this is recognized,
unlevering such an asset with a standard formula tends to produce too low an unlevered
cost of capital. Similarly, obtaining the W ACC of such an asset at a target debt level using
the standard formulas tends to produce too large a W ACC. By contrast, consider an asset
for which debt has a nonstochastic retirement trend, but for which debt tends to increase
rapidly when cash flows are surprisingly good. Applying the standard formulas to such an
asset tends to generate unlevered costs of capital that are too high given a known W ACC
and a W ACC at a target debt level that is too low given the asset’s unlevered cost of capital.
If the former asset has a known W ACC and is used to generate the W ACC for the latter




                                              27
asset, (or vice versa), the bias can easily run to 500 basis points or more.24


              III. Levering and Unlevering Equity Betas
The relationship between equity betas and unlevered asset betas is critical for valuation.
Equity betas, unlike asset betas, are observed. Hence, to obtain the necessary discount
rates, valuations analyze the traded equity of assets that are deemed similar to the asset
being valued. The problem is that the risk of the traded equity of comparison assets is
affected by the leverage policy associated with the comparison asset. It is generally necessary
to undo the leverage-induced distortion on the equity beta of the comparison asset(s) in order
to obtain the critical valuation inputs: the unlevered asset beta or unlevered cost of capital.
This section explores how to do this.
       The return on an unlevered asset is given by
                       dV U + Xt dt             ∂ ln V U        ∂ ln V U
                                                        
                                    =   r f + η            dt +          σdB.
                           VU                   ∂ ln X          ∂ ln X
while the return on a levered asset is given by
dV L + Xdt + rf τc Ddt            ∂ ln V L      ∂ ln V L           ∂ ln V L      ∂ ln V L
                                                                                     
                       = rf +              + σH            ηX dt+           + σH            σXdB.
          VL                         ∂X           ∂H                 ∂X            ∂H
The ratio of the terms that multiply dB in the two equations above represent the effect
of leverage on volatility. With risk-free debt, the proportional effect on beta is the same.
Moreover, with risk-free debt, the equity beta of a levered asset always is 1 + D/E times the
beta of the underlying asset (including the asset component from the tax shield.)25 It follows
that the formula for levering and unlevering equity betas involves multiplying 1 + D/E by
the ratio of the terms that multiply dB above. That is,
                                                 VL           VL
                                        Dt ∂ ln     + σH ∂ ln
                                          
                             E
                           βt = 1 + L           ∂X
                                                    ∂ ln V U
                                                             ∂H
                                                                 βtU
                                        Et             ∂X

with the derivatives taken at date t.
    The above equation suggests that whenever there is a closed-form solution for the levered
asset value, there is a closed-form solution for the equity beta formula, obtainable after first
taking partial derivatives. For example, the extension of the Modigliani-Miller debt policy
with g 6= 0 and g0d 6= 0 has
                                          ∂ ln V L
                                                   =0
                                            ∂H
  24
    Moreover, this analysis assumes that the WACC is an appropriate discount rate, which it rarely is.
  25
    This is just an inversion of the portfolio formula that generates the beta of the levered asset as a
portfolio-weighted average of the beta of its debt (zero) and equity (β E ).

                                                  28
and
                                     ∂ ln V L  V U ∂ ln V U
                                              = L
                                       ∂X      V     ∂X
which implies                                                      
                                                       rf          Dt
                            βtE   = 1 + 1 − τc                      L
                                                                        βtU .
                                                    rf − g0d       Et
When g0d is nonzero, this formula differs from the leveraging-unleveraging formula proposed
by Hamada (1972) for the Modigliani and Miller debt policy. It also differs from this formula
when g = g0d = 0 but the asset has a finite life. In the latter case,

                                           ∂ ln V L
                                                    =0
                                             ∂H
and
                                  ∂ ln V L   V U ∂ ln V U
                                           = L              .
                                     ∂X      V     ∂X
However, because the finite horizon debt tax shield has a different value than the perpetual
debt tax shield, the formula reduces to
                                                                 
                          E                     −rf (T −t)
                                                              Dt
                         βt = 1 + 1 − τc (1 − e            )        βU .
                                                               EtL t

   By contrast, the extension of the Miles-Ezzell policy with g 6= 0 has

                                           ∂ ln V L
                                                    =0
                                             ∂H
and
                                   ∂ ln V L   ∂ ln V U
                                            =          = 1/X
                                     ∂X         ∂X
implying                                                 
                                                     Dt
                                     βtE   =       1+ L       βtU .
                                                     Et
This is identical to the formula proposed by Miles and Ezzell and it applies to both an
infinitely-lived and finite-lived asset (in contrast to the Hamada formula for the Modigliani-
Miller debt policy).
    For a perpetual asset that is a hybrid of the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell debt
policies, as given in Case 3 of the prior sections of the paper, the equity beta formula is
                                   v                                  
                  E                     d                   rf            Dt U
                 βt = 1 + 1 + τc              −1                             β .
                                      Dt /Et        rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d Et t



                                                   29
The formula above is a weighted average of the beta leveraging formulas of Hamada/Modigliani-
Miller and Miles-Ezzell. That is
                                                                   
               E                        rf      Dt                    Dt
             βt = wt 1 + 1 − τc                       + (1 − wt ) 1 +        βtU
                                     rf − g0d EtL                     Et

with the weight on Hamada/Modigliani-Miller formula

                                   rf − g0d               dv
                                                               
                        wt =                         1−           .
                             rf (1 − τc dv ) − g0d      Dt /VtL

   There are several additional cases with simple closed-form solutions for the equity beta.
These parallel cases 1 and 2 in the prior two sections of the paper. Since these involve mere
substitutions and elementary calculus, we omit them for the sake of brevity.
   Finally, we note that since equity risk premia are proportional to equity betas, the for-
mulas for leveraging and unleveraging equity risk premia are the same as those above, with
the levered and unlevered equity risk premia substituting for their respective betas above.


                                   IV. Conclusion
This paper has undertaken a comprehensive valuation of debt tax shields. In as many cases
as possible, we offered closed-form solutions for the values of levered assets and the associated
debt tax shields. Our approach for obtaining these present values was the APV approach.
The tax-adjusted discount rates that generate the present values were reverse engineered, in
that we needed to use the present values to generate closed-form solutions for the discount
rates. In this sense, we are in the APV camp, rather than the W ACC camp, and like many
academics fail to understand why the APV approach is not viewed as the simpler technique.
Obviously, however, both approaches are equivalent and it is possible to generate correct
valuations either way once the debt policy and cash flow process are known.
    The examples explored in this paper are particularly useful in that most dynamic debt
policies can be thought of as fitting into one of these examples. The examples demonstrated
that it is possible to develop intuition from polar cases so that a manager can heuristically
assess how his discount rate and debt tax shield value will change, given the dynamic nature
of the policy. For instance, firms with debt policies that sluggishly but positively react
to changes in the value of the firm’s unlevered assets might be expected to have a debt
tax shield with a value that lies somewhere between the Modigliani-Miller and Miles-Ezzell
values. The appropriate tax-adjusted constant discount rate for the future cash flows of the
unlevered assets, as well as the formulas for levering and unlevering equity betas will also
lie between the values given by the polar cases. Moreover, when firms engage in what we
term “negative beta debt policies,” paying down debt as the cash flow prospects brighten,

                                               30
and vice versa, the formulas for the debt tax shield, discount rate, and levered equity betas
are again weighted averages of the two polar cases, with a negative weight on the formula
associated with the Miles-Ezzell positive-beta debt strategy and a weight above one on the
Modigliani-Miller zero-beta debt strategy formula.
    The comprehensive treatment of debt tax shields presented here is essential for practi-
tioners. Confusion has proliferated because the formulas that previously had been developed
for the simplest of cases are generally treated as black boxes without a clear understand-
ing of where they come from. It is rare when pedagogy appropriately links the formulas
for levering and unlevering betas to the value of the tax shield. The Miles-Ezzell valuation
can easily be 1/3 the valuation using the Modigliani-Miller approach. It is quite common,
however, to observe both students and finance professors mix the Miles and Ezzell formula
for leveraging and unleveraging equity with Modigliani-Miller inputs, thinking that they are
getting a valuation of τc D for the debt tax shield. In properly linking the values of tax shields
for different debt policies to discount rates and laying out the theory behind this linkage, we
hope to remedy some of this confusion.
     This paper is important, however, not just for those doing corporate valuations, but for
those doing research on capital structure and bankruptcy costs. In particular, it provides
a comprehensive set of benchmarks for the impact of debt on asset values in a market that
is frictionless, except for taxes. Empirical research by Graham (2000) and by Kemsley and
Nissim (2001) indicates that for the average U.S. firm, debt tax shields in the U.S. are about
the size of τc D. Clearly, more research that describes the cross-sectional variation in this
estimate is coming, and is warranted. To properly estimate bankruptcy costs from extensions
of this research, it is critical to know the value of the debt tax shield in a market where the
only friction is taxes. We believe that research in this area has been hindered by a lack of
understanding of benchmark valuations. In plugging this hole in the literature, we hope to
stimulate additional research.




                                               31
                                   References
 [1] Brealey, Richard and Stewart Meyers (2000), Principles of Corporate Finance,
     McGraw-Hill/Irwin.

 [2] Graham, John (2000), “How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt?” Journal of Finance,
     Vol. 55, No. 5, pp. 1901-1942.

 [3] Graham, John, and Campbell Harvey (2000), “The Theory and Practice of Corporate
     Finance: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 60, No. 2-3,
     pp. 187-243.

 [4] Green, Richard C., and Burton Hollifield (2002), “The Personal-Tax Advantages of
     Equity,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming, Vol. 67, No. 2.

 [5] Grinblatt, Mark and Sheridan Titman (2002, 2nd ed.; 1997, 1st ed.), Financial Markets
     & Corporate Strategy, McGraw-Hill/Irwin.

 [6] Hamada, Robert (1972), “The Effect of the Firm’s Capital Structure on the Systematic
     Risk of Common Stocks,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 435-452.

 [7] Kemsley, Deen and Doron Nissim (2002), “Valuation of the Debt-Tax Shield,” forth-
     coming, Journal of Finance.

 [8] Leland, Hayne (1994), “Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital
     Structure,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 1213-1252.

 [9] Miles, James and Russell Ezzell (1985), “Reformulating Tax Shield Valuation,” Journal
     of Finance, Vol. 40, No. 5 , pp. 1485-1492.

[10] Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Fi-
     nance and the Theory of Investment,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 48, No.
     3, pp. 261-297.

[11] Ross, Stephen (1978), “A Simple Approach to the Valuation of Risky Streams,” Journal
     of Business, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 453-475.

[12] Ruback, Richard (2002), “Capital Cash Flows: A Simple Approach to Valuing Risky
     Cash Flows,” Financial Management, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp.85-103.




                                           32
