                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      AN EVALUATION OF INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE
                             STRATEGIES FOR ESTIMATING
                          THE EFFECTS OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS

                                           Joseph G. Altonji
                                             Todd E. Elder
                                          Christopher R. Taber

                                          Working Paper 9358
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9358


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




This research was supported by the Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University, the National
Science Foundation under grant SBR 9512009, and the NIH-NICHD under grant R01 HD36480-03. We are
grateful to Timothy Donohue for excellent research assistance and to Jeffrey Grogger, Derek Neal, and
participants in seminars at Boston College, Northwestern University, University College London, University
of Virginia, and University of Wisconsin for helpful comments. We are responsible for the remaining
shortcomings of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Joseph Altonji, Todd Elder, and Christopher Taber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
An Evaluation of Instrumental Variable Strategies for Estimating the
Effects of Catholic Schools
Joseph Altonji, Todd Elder, and Christopher Taber
NBER Working Paper No. 9358
November 2002
JEL No. I2, C2

                                             ABSTRACT



       Several previous studies have relied on religious affiliation and the proximity to Catholic
schools as exogenous sources of variation for identifying the effect of Catholic schooling on a wide

variety of outcomes. Using three separate approaches, we examine the validity of these instrumental
variables. We find that none of the candidate instruments is a useful source of identification of the
Catholic school effect, at least in currently available data sets

Joseph G. Altonji                      Todd E. Elder
Yale University                        Institute of Labor and Industrial Relations
Economic Growth Center                 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
27 Hillhouse Avenue                    213 ILIR Building
P.O. Box208269                         504 East Armory Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269               Champaign, IL 61822
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu


Christopher R. Taber
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
ctaber@northwestern.edu
1         Introduction
The question of whether private schools provide better education than public schools is at
the center of the current national debate over the role of vouchers, charter schools, and other
reforms that increase choice in education.          Since Catholic schools account for about two
thirds of private school enrollment in the U.S., assessing the eﬀectiveness of Catholic schools
is an important part of the assessment of private schooling. This is especially true in light of
a recent U.S. Supreme Court decision that permits students to use publicly financed vouchers
to pay tuition at religious schools. Simple cross tabulations or multivariate regressions of
outcomes such as high school graduation and college enrollment typically show a substantial
positive eﬀect of Catholic school attendance. However, the positive eﬀects of Catholic school
attendance may be due to nonrandom selection into Catholic schools that induces spurious
correlations between Catholic school attendance and unmeasured family characteristics that
are favorable to education.
        All serious studies of public/private school diﬀerences acknowledge this sample selection
problem and most wrestle with it in one way or another.1 In the absence of experimental
data, the main option is to find a nonexperimental source of variation Zi in Catholic school
attendance that is exogenous with respect to the outcome under study.                     The problem,
however, is that most student background characteristics that influence schooling decisions,
such as income, attitudes, and education of the parents, are likely to influence outcomes
independently of the school since they are likely to be related to other parental inputs.
These variables must be included in the vector of controls Xi to avoid omitted variables
bias. Characteristics of private and public schools such as tuition levels, student body
characteristics, or school policies are likely to be related to the eﬀectiveness of the schools
and so are poor candidates for excluded instruments.
        Two influential papers provide potential instrumental variables. Evans and Schwab
(1995) treat Catholic schooling as exogenous in much of their analysis, but also present
estimates that rely in part on the assumption that religious aﬃliation aﬀects whether a per-
son attends a Catholic school but has no independent eﬀect on the outcome under study.
    1
    A few examples of early studies of Catholic schools and other private schools are Coleman et al (1982),
Noell (1982), Goldberger and Cain (1982), Alexander and Pallas (1985), and Coleman and Hoﬀer (1987).
Recent studies include Evans and Schwab (1993,1995), Tyler (1994), Neal (1997), Figlio and Stone (1998),
Grogger and Neal (2000), Sander (2001), and Jepsen (forthcoming). Murnane (1984), Witte (1992), Chubb
and Moe (1990) and Cookson (1993), and Sander (2001) provide overviews of the discussion and references
to the literature.


                                                    1
Specifically they use a dummy variable for aﬃliation with the Catholic church (Ci ) as their
excluded variable. Some support for this assumption is evidenced by the fact that being
Catholic is strongly correlated with Catholic school attendance, while Catholics are not far
from national averages on many socio-economic indicators. Evans and Schwab find a strong
positive eﬀect of Catholic school attendance on high school graduation and on the proba-
bility of starting college. However, as Murnane (1985), Tyler (1994), and Neal (1997) note,
being Catholic could well be correlated with characteristics of the neighborhood and family
that influence the eﬀectiveness of schools.2
       Neal (1997) uses proxies for geographic proximity to Catholic schools as an exogenous
source of variation in Catholic high school attendance (see also Tyler, 1994). The basic
assumption is that the location of Catholics or Catholic schools was determined by historical
circumstances unrelated to unobservables that influence performance in schools. Using data
from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), Neal estimates bivariate probit
models of Catholic high school attendance and high school graduation, in which Catholic
school eﬀects are identified by excluding whether the person is Catholic, the fraction of
Catholics in the county population, and the number of Catholic schools in the county.3
       The interaction between whether a person is Catholic and the availability of Catholic
schools is a natural alternative to using distance or religion separately. It is quite possible
that proximity to Catholic schools is related to diﬀerences in regional and family characteris-
tics that have a direct influence on schooling and labor market outcomes, given that Catholic
schools are somewhat concentrated by region.4 However, since “tastes” for Catholic schooling
   2
     Neal (1997) points out that one problem with using Ci as an instrumental variable when estimating
Catholic school eﬀects (as in Neal (1997) and Evans and Schwab (1995)) is that religious identification might
be influenced by the school type attended. Neither study investigates the issue. In the case of NELS:88 we
use the parent’s report of religious aﬃliation while the student is in eighth grade as our religion measure.
Cross tabulations of diﬀerences between the parent’s report and the child’s tenth grade report with whether
the child attends a Catholic high school suggest that attending a Catholic high school influences the child’s
report. However, our NELS:88 results are not very sensitive to using the child’s report in place of the parent’s
eighth grade report. Consequently, our evidence on the importance of this issue is mixed.
   3
     His results are not sensitive to adding Catholic to the outcome equation. However, in the appendix
we show that in our data nonlinearities in the eﬀects of religion and family background rather than the
location variables are the main source of identification when we use Neal’s measures of proximity to Catholic
schools. Tyler (1994) uses the fraction of students in the school district who attended Catholic schools as
an instrument. However, Tyler does not allow this variable or other detailed geographic variables to have a
direct eﬀect on the outcome. Tyler notes that his aggregated measure of school choice is likely to be aﬀected
by district level variation in family or school characteristics that aﬀect outcomes as well as by distance to
Catholic schools. For both reasons, his results should be discounted.
   4
     Hoxby (1995) discusses geographical concentration by region, much of which is associated with the
geographic concentration of the Catholic population in the past.



                                                       2
depend strongly on religious preference, the interaction between distance (Di ) and religious
aﬃliation will have an eﬀect on Catholic school attendance that is independent of the sep-
arate eﬀects of religious aﬃliation and distance. In particular, Catholic school attendance
is likely to be much more sensitive to distance for Catholics than for non-Catholics. Conse-
quently, one can control for both religious aﬃliation and for distance from Catholic schools,
as well as for a set of other geographic characteristics (such as city size, region, labor market
characteristics, average family income, and public school characteristics), while excluding the
interaction Ci × Di from outcome models. However, the case that Ci × Di may be a valid
instrument even if Ci and Di are not is far from bulletproof. Catholic parents who want
their children to attend Catholic schools might choose to live near Catholic schools. This
could lead to a positive or negative bias depending on the relationship between preferences
for Catholic school and the error component in the outcome equation. Also, past immigra-
tion patterns and internal migration from city to suburb and across regions may have led
to diﬀerences between Catholics and non-Catholics in the correlation between proximity to
Catholic schools and observed and unobserved components of family background.
   In this paper we explore the validity of Ci , Di , and Ci × Di as exogenous sources of
variation for identifying the eﬀects of Catholic schooling on educational attainment and
achievement. Religion and proximity have figured prominently in the literature regarding
Catholic schools, but there is a need for a systematic eﬀort to evaluate these measures as
valid instrumental variables. We use multiple data sets and methods to perform such an
evaluation. Our main data set is the National Educational Longitudinal Survey of 1988
(NELS:88), but we also report results based on the National Longitudinal Study of the High
School Class of 1972 (NLS-72). For each instrument, we present 2SLS and bivariate probit
estimates that rely on the particular instrument as the source of identification and compare
the results to OLS and univariate probit estimates.
   In addition to examining the a priori case for the instruments, the face plausibility and
precision of the IV estimates, and the consistency across data sets, we assess the quality of
the instruments in two other ways. The first approach takes advantage of the fact that few
students who attend public 8th grades attend Catholic high school.          This provides some
justification for using the coeﬃcient on the instrument in a reduced-form outcome equation
from a sample of public eighth grade attendees in NELS:88 as an estimate of the direct link
between Catholic religion and the outcome.



                                               3
       The second approach uses a methodology introduced in Altonji, Elder and Taber (2001)
(hereafter, AET) to assess the instrumental variable results. AET’s approach is based on
the idea of using the degree of selection on observables as a guide to how much selection
there is on unobservables.5 In an ideal world, the instrument would be randomly assigned
either by nature or through a controlled experiment. In this case, the instruments would
be uncorrelated with both the observed and unobserved determinants of the outcome. Short
of that, the hope in using an IV strategy is that the observed variables that are used as
controls in the outcome equation are systematically chosen so that the instrumental variable
has no relationship with the unobserved variables that determine the outcome, conditional
on the observables.        However, as AET argue, major data sets with large samples and
extensive questionnaires are not designed to address one relatively specific question, such
as the eﬀectiveness of Catholic schools using a particular IV approach, but rather to serve
multiple purposes.        Because there are a limited number of factors that we know how to
collect, can aﬀord to collect, and expect to matter for a particular outcome, many relevant
variables are left out. In such a world, it is prudent to consider an alterative benchmark
case in which the observed variables are a random subset of the factors that influence the
outcome rather than the perfect control set given the instrument. This is particularly true
in the absence of strong prior information about the sources of variation in the instrument.
AET show that under certain conditions, the regression coeﬃcients relating the instrumental
variable to the regression index of the observables in the outcome equation and to the error
term in the outcome equation will be the same. We use their approach to estimate what
the bias in the IV estimates would be if the assumption of equal selection on observables and
unobservables were correct. We restrict ourselves to NELS:88 because the calculation only
makes sense when a rich set of observables is available.
       We began our study with the strong prior that the reliance on the interaction between
distance from Catholic schools and Catholic religion to identify the Catholic school eﬀect
could overcome potential objections to the exclusion of location variables and religion from
the outcome equations, thereby providing convincing estimates of the Catholic school eﬀect.
Unfortunately, we end it with the negative conclusion that distance, religion, and distance
   5
     Researchers often informally argue for the exogeneity of membership in a “treatment group” or of an
instrumental variable by examining the relationship between group membership or the instrumental variable
and a set of observed characteristics, or by assessing whether point estimates are sensitive to the inclusion
of additional control variables. See for example, Currie and Duncan (1995), Engen et al (1996), Poterba et
al (1994), Angrist and Evans (1998), Jacobsen et al. (1999), Bronars and Grogger (1994), and Udry (1998).


                                                     4
interacted with religion are all problematic instrumental variables, at least in the existing
national data sets.
      In Section 2 we discuss the data from NLS-72 and NELS:88 that are used in the study.
In Section 3 we present results using religion as the source of identification and provide some
initial evidence on the direct eﬀect of being Catholic on educational attainment. We also
introduce and apply AET’s method of using the observables to assess the potential for bias
from an association between the instrument and the unobservables.         In Section 4 and in
Section 5 we present results using distance and the interaction between distance and religion
as the excluded instruments. Section 6 concludes.


2      Data
2.1     NELS:88
NELS:88 is a National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) survey which began in the
Spring of 1988. The base year sample is a two stage stratified probability sample in which
a set of schools containing eighth grades were chosen on the basis of school size and pri-
vate/public status. In the second stage, as many as 26 eighth grade students from within a
particular school were chosen based on race and gender. A total of 1032 schools contributed
student data in the base year survey, resulting in 24,599 eighth graders participating. Sub-
samples of these individuals were reinterviewed in 1990, 1992, and 1994. The NCES only
attempted to contact 20,062 base-year respondents in the first and second follow-ups, and
only 14,041 in the 1994 survey. Additional observations are lost due to attrition.
    Parent, student, and teacher surveys in the base year provide a rich set of information
on family and individual background, as well as pre-high school achievement, behavior, and
expectations of success in high school and beyond. Each student was also administered
a series of cognitive tests in the 1988, 1990, and 1992 surveys to ascertain aptitude and
achievement in math, science, reading, and history. We use standardized item response
theory (IRT) test scores that account for the fact that the diﬃculty of the 10th and 12th
grade tests taken by a student depends on the 8th grade scores. We use the 8th grade test
scores as control variables and the 10th and 12th grade reading and math tests as outcome
measures.
    For each respondent, a measure of distance from the nearest Catholic high school was
obtained by computing the distance from the zip code centroid of the respondent’s eighth

                                              5
grade school to the zip code centroid of the closest Catholic high school6 . From this in-
formation we constructed our distance measure Di , which is a vector of mutually exclusive
indicators for distance less than 1 mile, 1 to 3 miles, 3 to 6 miles, 6 to 12 miles, and 12 to
20 miles, with greater than 20 miles treated as the omitted category. Our religion indicator
Ci is 1 if parents indicated that they are Catholic in response to a question about religious
aﬃliation in the base year survey and is 0 otherwise.
       Our main outcome measures are high school graduation (HSi ) and college attendance
(COLLi ).      HSi is one if the respondent graduated high school by the date of the 1994
survey, and zero otherwise.7        COLLi is one if the respondent was enrolled in a four-year
university at the date of the 1994 survey and zero otherwise.8               The indicator variable for
Catholic high school attendance, CHi , equals one if the current or last school in which the
respondent was enrolled was Catholic as of 1990 (two years after the eighth grade year) and
zero otherwise.9 Unless noted otherwise, the results reported in the paper are weighted.10

2.2       NLS-72
The NLS-72 is a Department of Education survey of high school students that contains infor-
mation on 22,652 persons who were seniors during the 1971-1972 academic year. Additional
interviews were conducted in 1973, 1974, 1976, 1979, and 1986.               The final sample sizes are
19,489 students from 1192 public high schools and 71 Catholic high schools for the college
attendance indicator variable, 14,671 students from 879 public high schools and 57 Catholic
   6
      Detailed information on zip code characteristics of the eighth grade school (at the zip code level) is
available on the NELS:88 Restricted Use files. For the NELS:88 analysis, the zip code of every Catholic
high school in the United States in 1988 was obtained from Ganley’s Catholic High Schools in America:
1988. The distance from a particular zip code centroid to the centroids of all the catholic high schools was
calculated using an algorithm obtained from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
    7
      We obtain similar results using a “drop out” dummy variable which equals one if a student dropped out
of high school by 1992, or if the student dropped out of high school by 1990 and was not reinterviewed in
1992 or 1994, zero otherwise. This variable catches dropouts who left the survey by 1990 and were either
dropped from the sample or were nonrespondents.
    8
      Our major findings are robust to whether or not college attendance is limited to 4-year universities,
full-time versus part-time, or enrolled in college “at some time since high school” or at the survey date.
    9
      A student who started in a Catholic high school and transferred to a public school prior to the tenth
grade survey would be coded as attending a public high school (CH = 0). If such transfers are frequently
motivated by discipline problems, poor performance, or alienation from school, then misclassification of
the transfers as public high school students could lead to upward bias in estimates of the eﬀect of CH on
educational attainment. AET present evidence that this issue is of minor importance.
  10
      The sampling scheme in the NELS:88 is complicated and explained in more detail in AET (2002).
The results are somewhat sensitive to the use of sample weights, although our main findings are robust to
weighting. Given the sampling scheme the weighted estimates are clearly preferred.



                                                     6
high schools for the math and reading score variables, and 16,276 students from 1191 public
high schools and 71 Catholic high schools for the years of academic education variable.11
       The variable Ci is 1 for students who indicated they were Catholic in response to a
base year question about religious aﬃliation and is 0 otherwise. Distance from the nearest
Catholic high school was recorded as the distance in air miles between the centroids of the
zip code of residence reported in the first follow-up, and the zip code of the nearest Catholic
high school.12 The follow-up survey included an indicator for whether the respondent had
moved between their senior year of high school and the survey date, so the 10,530 students
who moved were assigned the mean value of distance for all non-movers who attended the
same high school.13
       In the original design, schools with a high percentage of minority students and in low
income areas are overrepresented, and sampling weights also vary with whether the school
is public or private. The results are not sensitive to weighting procedures, so the estimates
reported below are based on unweighted data.


3        Using Religious Aﬃliation to Identify the Catholic
         School Eﬀect
In Table 1, we present univariate probit, OLS, bivariate probit, and 2SLS estimates of the
Catholic school eﬀect for our three separate instrumental variables.                   The table footnotes
provide a list of the family background, city size, region, student characteristics, and eighth-
grade behavioral and academic outcomes that are included in both the equations for CHi
and the outcomes (Yi ). In this section our focus is on the first column in which we use Ci
as the excluded instrument and include Di but not Ci × Di in the equations for both CHi
and Yi . In sections 4 and 5 we will discuss the results from the second and third column,
respectively.
  11
     The 2236 students who did not report their religious aﬃliation are excluded from the analysis. We
also drop an additional 495 students for whom we could not impute distance from the nearest Catholic
high school, reducing the sample size to 19,921. We also exclude 111 cases in which the student attended a
non-Catholic private school, and additional observations are lost because data for key control variables and
outcomes are missing.
  12
     The zip code of every Catholic high school in existence in the United States is listed in the US Department
of Education’s “Universe of Private Schools”.
  13
     The 495 students who were dropped because no distance measures could be created for them either
attended one of the 26 high schools for which there are no valid observations on distance, or did not have
valid values for the geographic move variable. These schools were part of NLS-72’s “backup sample”, and
the students in this subsample were lost because they were excluded from the first follow-up.


                                                       7
       In NELS:88 the 2SLS estimate for high school graduation is 0.34 (0.08). This point
estimate is extremely large, given that the sample mean of HSi is 0.84.                 The bivariate
probit estimate of the average marginal eﬀect is a more reasonable value of 0.128, but it is
still double the univariate probit estimate. The estimates of the eﬀect on enrollment in a
four-year college in 1994 are also unreasonably large, as the 2SLS coeﬃcient of 0.40 (0.10)
is larger than the sample mean of 0.29. The bivariate probit estimate of 0.170 is also well
above the univariate probit estimate of 0.094.
       We obtain a diﬀerent pattern in NLS-72 (bottom panel). For this data set the analysis
conditions on enrollment in 12th grade, so one should not expect these results to exactly
mirror those in NELS:88. The probit estimate of the eﬀect of CHi on college attendance
is 0.068, which is roughly equal to the two stage least squares estimate of 0.06 (0.04). This
apparent similarity should be interpreted carefully, as the 2SLS standard error is substantial.
In fact, the point estimate is not significantly diﬀerent from zero even though it implies a
large Catholic schooling eﬀect.14
       The bivariate probit estimate is only -0.002, but it should be kept in mind that the
source of identification in the bivariate probit case is a complicated nonlinear function of
the variables in the model for CHi and not simply Ci , even though only Ci is excluded from
the outcome equation.       In particular, we suspect that the interaction between Ci and Di
plays an important role and leads to a reduction in the point estimate relative to 2SLS for
reasons that will become clear when we discuss the results based on Ci × Di . We analyze
the bivariate probit in the appendix and conclude that identification comes primarily from
the functional form assumption rather than the exclusion restrictions. Thus we focus on the
2SLS results when thinking about the validity of particular instruments.
       Table 2 reports OLS and two stage least square estimates of the eﬀect of Catholic high
school on test scores in NELS:88 and a variety of outcomes in NLS-72. Column (1) shows
that the 2SLS estimates are larger for both NELS test scores than the single-equation ones,
although the 2SLS coeﬃcients are noisy. The standard deviation of these tests is 10, so
the 2SLS estimate of 2.64 implies a large impact on 12th grade math scores. However,
the fact that the OLS estimates are uniformly smaller indicates that either 2SLS is biased
upward or that Catholic high school students are actually negatively selected on the basis
  14
   The NELS:88 results change very little when we condition the analysis on making it to 12th grade or
on HS = 1, so we cannot attribute the similarity of the results from 2SLS and single-equation methods in
NLS-72 but not NELS:88 to the fact that NLS-72 is limited to those who have made it to 12th grade.



                                                   8
of unmeasured factors which are correlated with test scores. The NLS-72 test score results
follow the opposite pattern—2SLS estimates are negative while OLS is large and positive for
both reading and math. It should be kept in mind that the NLS-72 results do not control
for eighth grade achievement.
       To summarize, in NELS:88 the 2SLS estimates using Ci as the exclusion restriction imply
that the Catholic school eﬀect is very large, particularly for educational attainment. The
results based on NLS-72 are more mixed but are consistent with a substantial positive eﬀect
on educational attainment.         One might be tempted to conclude that IV estimates, while
unreasonably large, bolster the probit and OLS evidence that the true eﬀect is substantial.
In the remainder of this section, we explore whether this is the right interpretation.

3.1       Comparing the Characteristics of Catholics and non-Catholics
Column (1) of Table 3a presents sample means of a set of family background characteristics,
student characteristics, eighth grade outcomes, and high school outcomes in NELS:88, and
Column (2) shows the diﬀerence between Catholics and non-Catholics in these means.15 The
table shows that Catholics are 7 percentage points more likely to graduate high school and
8 percentage points more likely to be enrolled in a four year college in 1994. Diﬀerences in
tenth and twelfth grade test scores are more modest but all show a significant advantage for
Catholic students. If Catholic was as good as randomly assigned, these diﬀerences would be
entirely attributed to the fact that Catholics are more likely to attend Catholic high school.
It would then be troubling if Catholic appeared to be related to variables determined prior to
high school enrollment. Consequently, we begin our evaluation of Catholic religion as an ex-
cluded instrument by following the common practice of simply comparing the characteristics
of Catholics and non-Catholics in both NELS:88 and NLS-72.
       Unfortunately, diﬀerences by Ci appear in many of the family and student characteristics
and eighth grade outcomes in Table 3a. There is a modest positive association between
Catholic religion and parental educational expectations, with a gap of 0.04 in the fraction of
parents who expect their children to attend some college and 0.03 in the fraction who expect
at least a college degree.16 While the diﬀerential in family income is positive, it is negative in
  15
     In Table 3a the outcome variables are weighted with the same weights used in the regression analysis,
so that the 10th and 12th grade test scores are weighted using first and second follow-up panel weights,
respectively, and high school graduation and college attendance are weighted by third follow-up weights. All
other variables are weighted using second follow-up panel weights.
  16
     Some of the variables used in our multivariate models are excluded from Table 3a to keep them man-


                                                     9
mother’s and father’s education. However, Table 3a also shows that Catholic students have
favorable characteristics across a broad set of measures available in eighth grade, such as test
scores, grades, and teacher evaluations of the student’s behavior. Among these eighth grade
variables, only the “unpreparedness index” variable does not vary favorably with Ci . The
discrepancy in the fraction of students who repeated a grade in grades 4-8 is -0.03, and the
gap in the fraction of students who are frequently disruptive is -0.02. The existence of gaps in
favor of Catholic students across several dimensions suggests that Catholic and non-Catholic
students diﬀer in many respects, some of which may be unobservable to empirical researchers.
Since these diﬀerences also contribute to high school and post-high school outcomes (see AET
for evidence), doubts arise regarding the validity of using Ci as an instrumental variable for
Catholic high school attendance.
   In NLS-72, the diﬀerences are less pronounced, although it appears that overall Catholic
religion has a weak positive association with favorable family background characteristics.
Log family income is 0.07 higher for Catholics, who are also five percentage points less likely
to be members of families which meet NLS-72’s definition of low socio-economic status. There
are also essentially no diﬀerences in parental education levels or pre-high school student
educational expectations, with an insignificant negative gap of -0.01 (0.007) in an indicator
for whether the student decided to attend college before high school.
   Given the overall picture of Tables 3a and 3b, we anticipate that the use of Ci as an
instrumental variable will likely result in positively biased estimates of Catholic schooling
eﬀects in NELS:88, and perhaps a small positive bias in NLS-72, although it is diﬃcult to
gauge the extent of the bias. The richness of the NELS:88 data permits us to use two more
formal procedures to gauge its magnitude and direction.

3.2     The Eﬀect of Catholic Religion for Students from Public Eighth
        Grades
One way to assess the endogeneity of Catholic religion is to identify a sample of persons
for whom Catholic high school is not a serious option, and then interpret the coeﬃcient
on Ci in a single equation model as an estimate of the direct eﬀect of Catholic religion on
the outcome. Only 0.3% of public school eighth graders in our eﬀective sample go on to
attend Catholic high school; the percentage is 0.7% among public eighth grade attendees
ageable given sample sizes. The expectations variables in Table 3a are excluded from our outcome models
because if Catholic school has an eﬀect on outcomes, this may be influence expectations.


                                                  10
whose parents are Catholic. For the moment we abstract from the fact that restricting the
analysis to the public eighth-grade sample will induce some selection bias in estimates of the
direct relationship between Catholic religion and the outcome. We argue at the end of the
section that taking account of such selection bias strengthens the evidence against Ci as an
instrument.
       To motivate the exercise in this section suppose that

(1)                                  Yi = αCHi + Xi0 γ + εi ,

where Xi is uncorrelated with εi . The problem is that CHi and potentially Ci may be
correlated with the error term. If we estimate α by 2SLS using Ci as an instrument for CHi
the bias is
                                                          ei , εi )
                                                      Cov(C
                                   2SLS bias =
                                                      λV ar(Cei )
                                                      φ
                                                 =      ,
                                                      λ
                                                                       ei ,εi )
      ei are the residuals of a regression of Ci on Xi , φ is
where C                                                           Cov(C
                                                                                  and λ is the probability
                                                                        ei ) ,
                                                                   V ar(C
limit of the coeﬃcient on Ci from the first stage regression. Now suppose there is an event
pi on which we can condition for which Pr(CHi = 1 | pi ) = 0. In our application this event
is attendance of a public eighth grade by individual i. Assume that the joint distribution
of (Xi , Ci , εi ) is independent of pi . Consider a regression of Yi on Xi and Ci conditional on
pi . Under these conditions, the coeﬃcient on Ci in (1) will converge to φ. Since we have a
consistent estimate of λ from the first stage regression, we can obtain a consistent estimate
of the bias ψ by taking the ratio φ/λ or by estimating the parameter ψ in the regression
model



(2)                                                    b + ωi
                                      Yi = Xi0 γ + [Ci λ]ψ

on the public eighth grade sample.
       In column 1 of Table 4 we report estimates of the bias parameter ψ using this approach.17
We present separate equations estimated for HSi , COLLi , and the 12th grade math and
reading test scores.      The vector Xi includes all of the other controls that were included
  17
     Eliminating the 36 students who attended public 8th grade and went on to Catholic high school has
little eﬀect on the results.

                                                 11
in our models in Tables 1 and 2.               For ease of comparison, the table also presents the
corresponding 2SLS estimates from Table 1 and 2.
       The results are striking—the implied bias in the 2SLS estimate is 0.34 (0.08) for HSi , which
is identical to the 2SLS coeﬃcient itself.18              The large potential bias should raise a great
deal of concern about using Catholic as an instrument, particularly given the remarkable
similarity between the magnitudes of the bias and the 2SLS estimate.                         In our view, this
evidence alone is suﬃcient to rule out Ci as a useful instrument.
       In the college attendance case the (unreported) estimate of φ is 0.038 (0.013). Catholic
students are nearly four percentage points more likely to enroll in a four year college than non-
Catholics even when Catholic high school is not a serious option. This relationship implies
a bias of 0.29 (0.11) in 2SLS estimates, so it seems likely that the large 2SLS estimates in
Table 1 result from the endogeneity of Ci with respect to both high school graduation and
college attendance. Similar calculations imply that the math test score estimate from Table
2 can largely be explained by potential bias of 1.85 (1.41) for the 12th grade math scores.
Part of the college attendance and test score eﬀects may be “real,” as these large corrections
are still smaller than the 2SLS point estimates, but the substantial evidence of endogeneity
of Ci combined with the imprecision of the estimates prevents any firm conclusions about
the eﬀect of Catholic high school on these outcomes.
       We now return to the selection problem induced by focusing only on public eighth graders.
The analysis in this section has treated public eighth grade attendance as if it were randomly
assigned. We typically would expect positive selection of Catholics into Catholic grade
schools. That is, Catholic students who attend Catholic grade schools are likely to have
higher values of εi in equation (1) than Catholic public school students. Since non-Catholics
are much less likely to attend Catholic schools this eﬀect will lead to a negative bias in
Cov(Cei , εi ) when we condition on public school attendance.19 This would imply that our
estimates of φ/λ are biased downward, which makes the results in this section even more
surprising.
  18
      To see how we arrive at this figure, note that the estimate of φ in the HS equation is 0.044 (0.011). That
is, the graduation probability among students who go to public eighth grade is estimated to be 0.044 higher
for Catholics than non-Catholics, even though hardly any of these students attend Catholic high schools.
Since λ is estimated to be 0.130 (0.009), the bias is approximately 0.34 (=0.044/0.130).
   19
      To see this in a simple case, abstract from observables so that C  ei = Ci , and assume that non-Catholics
do not attend Catholic schools, that E(εi | Ci ) = 0 unconditional on pi , and that there is positive selection
into Catholic eighth grades so that E(εi | Ci = 1, pci ) > E(εi | Ci = 1, pi ), where pci is the complement of pi .
This implies that E(εi | Ci = 1, pi ) < 0 and thus the bias is negative.



                                                        12
3.3       Using the Observables to Assess the Bias from Unobservables
In this section we extend the methodology of AET to assess the potential bias in the instru-
mental variables estimates. For simplicity we focus on the linear case when illustrating the
procedure although the methods are also applicable to non-linear models.
      Let the outcome Yi be again determined by



(3)                                 Yi = αCHi + Xi0 γ + εi ,

where γ is defined so that cov(εi , Xi ) = 0.
      CHi is potentially endogenous and thus correlated with εi . We assume that our in-
strument Zi does not influence Yi directly, but is correlated with CHi . However, Zi is not
necessarily a valid instrument because it may be correlated with εi .
      Define β, π, and λ to be the coeﬃcients of the least squares projections



(4)                                 Proj (Zi | Xi ) = Xi0 π,
(5)                           Proj (CHi | Xi , Zi ) = Xi0 β + λZi .

Define vi and ui as the residuals of these projections, so that

(6)                                vi ≡ Zi − Xi0 π
(7)                                ui ≡ CHi − Xi0 β − λZi .

and note that vi and ui are orthogonal to Xi by construction. Consider the regression of Yi
on (Xi0 β + λZi ) and Xi . The coeﬃcient on (Xi0 β + λZi ) in this regression converges to
                                                cov (vi , εi )
(8)                                   b =α+
                                      α                        .
                                                 λvar(vi )
One can see from (8) that the crucial assumption justifying the validity of Zi as an instrument
is that

(9)                                      cov(vi , εi ) = 0.

Under this condition, 2SLS yields a consistent estimate of α.
      In contrast we consider the case in which Zi is not a valid instrument and the researcher
does not have a strong prior about how it is determined. In particular, rather than assume

                                                13
that the choice of Xi ensures that vi is uncorrelated with εi , assume that Xi is random subset
of all of the factors that determine Yi in addition to CHi. In AET we derive Condition 1-IV
(not shown), as an alternative to the assumption cov(vi , εi ) = 0. Condition 1-IV says that
the eﬀect on Zi of a unit change in the index of observables that determine Yi and the index
of unobservables is the same. The condition can be written as
                                        cov(vi , εi )   cov(Xi0 π, Xi0 γ)
(10)                                                  =                   .
                                         var(εi )         var(Xi0 γ)


       Describing the assumptions that lead to (10) requires that we introduce more of the
notation from AET. Let the outcome Yi be determined as



                                       Yi = αCHi + Wi0 Γ
                                            = αCHi + Xi0 ΓX + ξ i ,

where Wi is the vector of characteristics (observed and unobserved) that fully determine Yi
and Γ is the causal eﬀect of Wi on Yi . In the second part of the equation X is the vector of
observed variables, ΓX is the corresponding subvector of Γ, and the error component ξ i is an
index of the unobserved variables. Because it is extremely unlikely that the control variables
Xi are all unrelated to ξ i , we work with (3) where γ is defined so that cov(εi , Xi ) = 0.20
       The precise conditions that imply Condition 1-IV are given in AET, but basically it
requires the following three types of assumptions:

   1. the elements of Xi are chosen at random from the full set of factors Wi that determine
         Yi ,

   2. the number of elements in Xi and Wi is large, and none of the factors dominates the
         distribution of the instrument Zi or the outcome Yi ,

   3. the relationship between the observable elements Xi and the unobservables obeys a
         very strong assumption that is similar to, but weaker than the standard assumption
         cov(Xi , ξ i ) = 0 that is maintained when applying instrumental variables estimators.21
  20
     Consequently, γ captures both the direct eﬀect of Xi on Yi∗ , ΓX , as well as the relationship between Xi
and the mean of ξ i . Note that Wi0 Γ = Xi0 ΓX + ξ i = Xi0 γ + εi .
  21
     Mean independence of ξ i and Xi is maintained in virtually all studies of selection problems, because
without it, α is not identified even if one has a valid exclusion restriction (the exception is when the instrument


                                                        14
    Under these assumptions the relationship between the indices of observables in the equa-
tion for Zi and the outcome equation will be the same as the relationship between the indices
of unobservables in the two equations, as implied by (10).
    In the case in which Zi is an indicator variable such as Ci , (10) can be rewritten as


             E(εi | Zi = 1) − E(εi | Zi = 0)   E(Xi0 γ | Zi = 1) − E(Xi0 γ | Zi = 0)
(11)                                         =                                       .
                        V ar(εi )                            V ar(Xi0 γ)
                E(Xi0 γ|Zi =1)−E(Xi0 γ|Zi =0)
    The term              V ar(Xi0 γ)
                                                is the normalized shift in the index of observables in the
                                                                           E(εi |Zi =1)−E(εi |Zi =0)
outcome equation that is associated with Zi , while the term                        V ar(εi )
                                                                                                       is the corre-
sponding normalized shift in the distribution of unobservables. This is a formalization of the
common practice of checking for a systematic relationship between an instrumental variable
                                                                                  E(Xi0 γ|Zi =1)−E(Xi0 γ|Zi =0)
and the mean of the elements of Xi . Intuitively, if one estimates                          V ar(Xi0 γ)
                                                                                                                  and
finds that it is substantially diﬀerent from zero, one may be worried that the null hypothesis
E(εi | Zi ) = 0 is wrong.
    We can use (11) to approximate the amount of bias in 2SLS estimates of Catholic school-
ing eﬀects if selection on unobservables is similar to selection on observables. Combining
is uncorrelated with Xi as well as εi , as when the instrument is randomly assigned in an experiment). If
the observables are correlated with one another, as in most applications, then the observed and unobserved
determinants of Yi are also likely to be correlated.
   Assume that the conditional expectation is linear. Following the notation above, define γ and εi to be the
slope vector and error term of the “reduced form”

                                            E (Yi − αCHi | Xi ) ≡ Xi γ
                                       Yi − E (Yi − αCHi | Xi ) ≡ εi .

Let the projection of Zi on Wi be
                                                Proj (Zi | Wi ) = Wi0 Π.
One may easily adapt the analysis in appendix A.2 of AET to obtain a suﬃcient set of assumptions for
Condition 1-IV in that paper or equivalently, (10) above, to hold. The suﬃcient assumptions are assumptions
1. and 2. above and
                  P∞                                     P∞
                     =−∞ E (Wij Wij− ) E (Πj Γj− )           =−∞ E(W̃ij W̃ij− )E (Πj Γj− )
(***)             P∞                                  = P∞                                 ,
                     =−∞ E (Wij Wij− ) E (Γj Γj− )           =−∞ E(W̃ij W̃ij− )E (Γj Γj− )

where W̃ij is the component of Wij that is orthogonal to Xi . Roughly speaking (***) says that the regression
of Zi on Yi − αCHi is equal to the regression of the part of Zi that is orthogonal to Xi on the corresponding
part of Yi − αCHi . One can show that this condition holds given assumptions 1 and 2 under the standard
assumption E(ξ i | Xi ) = 0. However, E(ξ i | Xi ) = 0 is not necessary for (***). For example, the analysis in
appendix A.2 AET implies that (***) will also hold if E (Πj Γj− ) is proportional to E (Γj Γj− ) regardless
of the correlations among the Wij .




                                                          15
equations (3)-(7), one can rewrite

                         Yi = αλvi + Xi0 [γ + α (β + λπ)] + αui + εi .

Since vi is orthogonal to Xi and ui , the asymptotic bias from two stage least squares would
be
                         cov(λvi , εi )
         plim(b
              α − α) =
                          var (λvi )
                         var (Zi )
(12)                   =            [E(εi | Zi = 1) − E(εi | Zi = 0)]
                         λvar (vi )
                         var (Zi ) V ar(εi )
(13)                   =                    0
                                               [E(Xi0 γ | Zi = 1) − E(Xi0 γ | Zi = 0)] .
                         λvar (vi ) V ar(Xi γ)

where we have used (11) to obtain (13) from (12). The hypothesis of equal selection on
observables and unobservables provides a way of identifying [E(εi | Zi = 1) − E(εi | Zi = 0)],
and therefore the asymptotic bias of instrumental variable estimates, since the other terms
in the last line of (12) are readily and consistently estimable. AET develops extensions to
the case of latent dependent variables, so both probit and linear 2SLS bias calculations are
given where appropriate.
     We wish to stress at the outset that one should not make too much of the specific
estimates of bias, which are based on strong assumptions about the symmetry of selection of
observables and unobservables. In AET, we argue that the relationship between the indexes
of unobservables that determine CHi and Yi is likely to be weaker than the relationship
between the indexes of observables, in part because many of the factors that determine
graduation and college attendance are determined after 8th grade and are excluded from Xi
by design.    We are less clear about the force of this argument in the case of Ci and the
other instruments we consider. The variables Ci , Di , and Ci × Di could all be correlated
with pre and post 8th grade influences on Yi that are not correlated with CHi , but these
correlations could be stronger or weaker than the link between factors that determine CHi
and Yi . However, we suspect that they are considerably weaker, which means that bias
estimates will be too large in absolute value.
     One may refine the bias calculations to account for the fact that the variation in the
instrument may only be over a specific dimension. For example, Di only varies across zip
code, and so must be orthogonal to variation in Xi0 γ and in εi that is within zip code.
Consequently, we adjust the bias estimates by using variance in E(Xi0 γ) across zip codes

                                              16
relative to the variance within zip codes as a guide to the variance in E(εi | Di ) relative to
the cross area variance in εi .22
       Column (1) of Table 5 presents the results, which are quite striking. In the case of high
                                                                         b if we include Di
school graduation, for linear 2SLS we calculate a bias of 0.52 (0.23) in α
among the set of variables used to form the index of observables and 0.84 (0.26) if we exclude
it. These are both huge potential biases, greater in magnitude than the implausibly large
2SLS point estimate, which is repeated in this table for convenience. The table reports a
similar calculation in the 2SLS estimate of α when COLLi is the dependent variable. In
this case, the bias estimate under the assumptions leading to (11) is 0.45 (0.21), which is
slightly larger than the 2SLS estimate of 0.40.               If selection on unobservables follows the
same pattern as selection on observables, there is a huge bias in the IV estimates when Ci
is used as an instrument, at least for the cohort of children sampled in NELS:88.23                          The
results reinforce our conclusions based on the public 8th grade sample. However, we also
wish to stress that the bias estimates have large standard errors and are best interpreted as
a warning sign of potential trouble rather than a precise estimate of the what the bias is.
       The bottom panels of Table 5 repeats the calculations for 12th grade test scores. These
calculations use estimates of the reliability of the NELS:88 tests to provide a rough adjust-
ment for the fact that much of the variance in εi is due to noise in the tests and thus is
unrelated to Ci .24 The calculations suggest that there is the potential for substantial bias
  22
      With sibling data one could refine the calculations to some degree based on the observation that the
eﬀects of parents religious background is common to siblings. At least in the context of an additively
separable model, the connection between Ci and εi must involve the component of εi that is common to
siblings. One could use the value of [E(Xi0 γ | Ci = 1) − E(Xi0 γ | Ci = 0)] relative to the cross family variance
in Xi0 γ as a guide to [E(εi | Ci = 1) − E(εi | Ci = 0)] relative to cross family variation in εi . Unfortunately,
NELS:88 does not identify siblings and, because of its design, is likely to include only siblings who are twins
or very close in age.
   23
      This conclusion is also supported by calculations not reported that use a two stage probit procedure.
See Elder (2002) for details.
   24
      The adjustment is performed by multiplying the estimate of plim(α̂ − α) based on (12) by (reliability-
R )/(1 − R2 ), where reliability is the estimate of the reliability of the particular test, and R2 is the R2 of
  2

the model for the particular test. To see the justification, let the composite error term be ε∗ = ε + ς where ς
is the component of test scores due to noise in the test. One minus the reliability of the test is an estimate
of var(ς)/var(Yi + ς) where Yi is the true test score. The value 1 minus the R2 of the test score model
is an estimate of [var(ε) + var(ς)]/var(Yi + ς),and note that var(ε) = [var(ε)/(var(ε) + var(ς))]var(ε∗ ).
Consequently,
                  2
   var(ε) = (1−R )−(1−reliability)
                     1−R2          var(ε∗ ).
          2
   The R is 0.60 for 12th grade reading and 0.74 for 12th grade math (using the 2SLS estimate of the model
and ignoring the correlation between CHi and εi ), and the reliability is 0.85 for 12th grade reading and 0.94
for 12th grade math. Consequently, the correction scales down the bias estimates by 0.625 for reading and
0.770 for math.



                                                       17
when using Ci as an instrument, but the estimates are very imprecise. In the case of math
the bias estimates of 2.02 (0.75) and 1.87 (0.74) (depending again on whether Di is used in
the calculations) preclude any firm conclusions. In general, we cannot rule out the possi-
bility of a positive eﬀect of Catholic high school attendance on achievement test scores, but
the large potential biases are suggestive that the use of Ci as an instrument is not a reliable
way to assess the magnitude of these eﬀects.
    The conclusion that we draw from these calculations is that IV procedures based on
Ci lead to huge point estimates but may also be subject to a great deal of bias. In this
circumstance, Ci is not a useful instrumental variable despite its powerful association with
CHi .    This inference is fully consistent with the evidence for a large direct association
between Ci and the outcomes in the public 8th grade sample.          We do not have a good
understanding of why the gap between the IV estimates of the Catholic school eﬀect and
the probit or linear probability estimates are so much larger in NELS:88 than in NLS-72
or in High School and Beyond (See Evans and Schwab, 1995). Unfortunately, we lack the
rich set of primary school data required to use the relative degree of selection on observables
to explore the discrepancy in IV results across data sets. The variability across data sets,
which in part may reflect changes over time in the composition of the Catholic population
in the U.S., is an additional reason to be cautious about the use of Ci as an instrument.



4       Instrumental Variables Estimates using Proximity to
        Catholic Schools
In this section we evaluate proximity (Di ) as a source of identifying variation. The main
theoretical justification for Di is that it should aﬀect the costs of attending a Catholic
high school, while the main concern is that the location of Catholic high schools may be
associated with characteristics of the population, public schools, post-secondary schools,
and labor market, all of which influence outcomes.
    In Column (2) of Table 1 we report estimates with Di as the excluded instrument. It
is important to re-emphasize that because of the nonlinearity of the bivariate probit model,
both Di and the interaction between Di and Ci play a role in identification in the bivariate
probit case (as well as the method of using two-stage probits), so the 2SLS estimates are
cleaner in this regard. The 2SLS estimate of -0.04 (0.10) is surprising but too imprecise for


                                               18
us to draw any inferences from it. The 2SLS estimate for COLLi is 0.31 (0.11) in NELS:88
and 0.44 (0.20) in NLS-72. Both estimates are much larger than the estimated marginal
eﬀect of 0.085 from the univariate probit in NELS:88 and 0.070 from NLS-72. Column (2)
of Table 2 presents the results for test scores in NELS:88 and NLS-72. These coeﬃcients
vary across specifications, but for the NLS-72 test scores they imply very large eﬀects. On
their face, these findings appear implausible, so we next explore the degree to which they
are influenced by bias using the same methods as in section 3.
   In Column (3) of Table 3a we report the relationship between a wide set of observables
in NELS:88 and a student’s distance from the nearest Catholic high school. For simplicity
we collapsed the vector Di into a dummy variable D6i , which is equal to 1 for person i if she
lives less than 6 miles from the nearest Catholic high school and zero otherwise, and present
the diﬀerence in these means by D6i . Among the eighth grade measures, such as teacher
evaluations of the student’s behavior, there is little diﬀerence between those who live close to
Catholic high schools and those who do not. However, there is a positive relationship between
Di and most of the family background measures. There is also a positive association between
proximity and both student and parental educational expectations. Similar diﬀerences by
D6i appear in NLS-72 (Table 3b).       These diﬀerences in family motivation and students’
home environment introduce the possibility that there might also be unmeasured diﬀerences
which could aﬀect outcomes and lead to bias in models using Di as an instrumental variable
in both NLS-72 and NELS:88.
   In column (2) of Table 4 we report estimates of the bias coeﬃcient ψ based on the
equation

(14)                                                 b + ωi
                                   Yi = Xi0 γ + [Di0 λ]ψ

for public eighth graders from NELS:88. In (14), Di0 λ b is the index of distance dummies
weighted by their coeﬃcients λb in the first stage equation for CHi . The estimate of ψ is
-0.05 (0.12) in the equation for HSi and 0.37 (0.12) in the equation for COLLi . There is not
much evidence for bias in the HSi equation given the large standard error, but this is not
surprising given that the 2SLS estimate is also noisy and does not indicate a positive eﬀect.
For COLLi , the implied bias is slightly larger than the 2SLS estimate, reaﬃrming the notion
that one should not put too much stock in inferences using Di as an instrument for college
attendance, at least in NELS:88.     In the case of reading the bias check is uninformative
given the large standard error on ψ. For 12th grade math scores, the evidence in favor of a

                                              19
positive eﬀect of CHi is dampened by the fact that implied bias estimates are large in this
case as well. Given both the evidence of endogeneity and the large standard errors of the
2SLS estimates, we conclude that the 2SLS estimates using Di are not useful in drawing
conclusions regarding test scores.25
    Finally, we apply the AET methodology for assessing the potential bias due to selec-
tion on unobservables. The extension of the methods to account for fact that Di is a
                                                                                                  cov(Di0 λ,εi )
vector is straightforward, with the relevant condition analogous to (10) being                      var(εi )
                                                                                                                   =
cov(Di0 λ,Xi0 γ) 26
  var(Xi0 γ )
                .     The results are in Column (2) of Table 5. The estimates computed under the
assumption of equal selection on observables and unobservables show the potential for large
positive biases for both HSi and COLLi . The fact that the bias estimates for the two diﬀer-
ent outcomes have the same sign is not surprising, since it reflects the similarity in the eﬀects
of Xi on the two education outcomes. While the specific bias estimates are noisy and are
probably overstated for reasons discussed above, the large estimate for COLLi suggests that
the 2SLS coeﬃcients are not informative. Finally, for 12th grade math scores, the estimates
of 1.72-1.76 (depending on whether Ci is included in the calculations involving Xi0 γ) again
do not preclude a small Catholic schooling eﬀect, but instrumental variables estimates using
Di do not provide a reliable gauge of the strength or even the sign of the eﬀect.
    Although we are unable to directly evaluate Di as an instrument in NLS-72 other than
the informal analysis based on Table 3b, the calculations based on NELS:88 cast further
doubts on the validity of the large estimates obtained for outcomes in this data set.


5       Instrumental Variables Estimates using the Interac-
        tion
Finally, we turn to the interaction between Ci and Di as the source of identifying variation.
In Column (3) of Table 1 we report probit, bivariate probit, linear probability and 2SLS
estimates of the eﬀect of CHi on high school graduation and college attendance. Column (3)
of Table 2 presents results for test scores. All of the models include both Ci and Di among
the controls.
  25
     It should be noted that the public 8th grade analysis is likely less informative for Di than for Ci because
of the likelihood that distance from Catholic elementary school and distance from Catholic high school are
closely related. Consequently, selection issues may have a bigger eﬀect on the coeﬃcient on the index when
the distance variables are involved than when only religion is involved.
                                                                              Cov(X 0 γ,Z )
  26
     Note that equation (10) can be written similarly as Cov(ε      i ,Zi )
                                                                var(εi )    = var(Xi 0 γ)i because εi and υi are
                                                                                      i
orthogonal Xi .


                                                      20
       The results vary across the diﬀerent outcomes. In the case of educational attainment,
the bivariate probit and 2SLS point estimates are negative in two of the three cases. For
test scores, the 2SLS estimates lie below the OLS ones in three of the four cases, with 12th
grade math score coeﬃcients being fairly large and negative in both data sets. However,
in all cases in NELS the standard errors are too large in relation to the diﬀerence between
the OLS and 2SLS estimates for the 2SLS estimates to help much in modifying conclusions
about α. This is less true in the NLS-72.
       We have investigated the properties of the instrument using the same set of procedures
that we used for Ci and Di with the same bottom line. Given the imprecision in some of the
estimates, the lack of previous work using Ci ×Di as an instrument, and space considerations,
we will not get into the details.27 However, the weight of the evidence in Tables 1-5 leads us to
be very skeptical of the interaction as an exclusion restriction. In particular, there is evidence
in both data sets that the diﬀerence between Catholics and non-Catholics in favorable family
background characteristics rises with distance from the nearest Catholic high school. If the
link between Ci × Di and εi followed the same pattern, the 2SLS estimates would be biased
downward. We suspect that this underlies that the negative coeﬃcients for some outcomes in
both data sets, particularly NLS72. We conclude that Ci × Di is not a very useful source of
variation for the purpose of estimating the Catholic school eﬀect, at least not in the context
of NELS:88 or NLS-72.
  27
    In Column (4) of Table 3a we report the coeﬃcient on C ×D6i from regressions of the various background
and outcome variables indicated in the rows on Ci , Di , and Ci ×D6i . The results for the eighth grade measures
are mixed, with Ci × D6i being positively associated with indicators for whether the student got into a fight
at school, but negatively correlated with the “repeated grade” indicator. There are also slight comparative
advantages in eighth grade GPA and reading scores. In contrast, family background, student expectations,
and parental expectations are generally negatively correlated with Ci × D6i , with striking diﬀerences in
parental education levels and expectations.
   For NLS-72, the estimates in Table 3b imply that the diﬀerence in mother’s and father’s education between
Catholics and non- Catholic students who live within 6 miles of a Catholic high school is 0.33 and 0.32 years
lower, respectively, than the diﬀerence among Catholic and non Catholic student who live more than 6 miles
from a Catholic high school. The incomes of Catholics relative to non-Catholics also rise with distance,
and all of these figures are nearly identical to the corresponding ones in NELS:88. Additionally, student
educational expectations are strongly correlated with Ci × D6i , with a coeﬃcient of -0.06 (0.016). We have
not investigated why low SES Catholics are disproportionately located near Catholic high schools, but if the
unobservable parental traits that influence the outcomes we study follow a similar pattern, then our 2SLS
estimates of the eﬀect of Catholic schools are likely to be negatively biased for both the NLS-72 and NELS:88
cohorts.




                                                      21
6     Conclusion
We present evidence on the validity of using three sources of variation Catholic school
attendance–religious aﬃliation, proximity to Catholic schools, and the interaction between
religion and proximity–as a way to identify the eﬀect of attending Catholic high school.
The simplest evidence comes from the relationship between the instrument candidates and
the means of a large set of observable measures in NELS:88 and NLS-72. In NELS:88, we use
the fact that very few students who attend public eighth grade go on to attend Catholic high
school as the basis for interpreting the association between an outcome and an instrument
in a sample of public eighth graders as an estimate of the direct link between the instrument
and the outcome in question. The final approach applies a method introduced in AET that
takes advantage of the rich set of observable demographic, family background, and eighth
grade outcome data in NELS:88. The idea is that if the observed variables included as
controls are representative of the factors that determine the outcomes, then the relationship
between observables and the instruments can be used as a guide to the relationship between
the error term in the outcome equation and the instruments.
    We will not attempt to restate all the results, which are sometimes contradictory across
outcomes and data sets. Our main conclusion is that none of the candidate instruments is
a useful source of identification of the Catholic school eﬀect, at least in the NELS:88 data
set. For example, we find a strong relationship between Catholic religion and educational
achievement in the sample of public eighth graders, who almost never attend Catholic high
school. We obtain similar results for distance from the nearest Catholic high school in the
case of college attendance.   We also find a fairly strong relationship between the instru-
ments and in the index of observed variables that determine the outcomes. Although we
cannot formally evaluate the magnitude of bias in NLS-72, the strong relationship between
observables and distance in these data, in conjunction with the NELS:88 findings, raises the
likelihood of serious doubts that the results found are due to a genuine causal eﬀect.
    We wish to stress that we are not advocating literal interpretation of specific estimates
of bias based on the public eighth grade sample or the AET methodology. However, the ev-
idence strongly suggests that the candidate instruments are not valid instrumental variables
for Catholic high school. Future research on the eﬀects of Catholic schooling will hopefully
introduce new methods, such as those described in AET, which do not necessitate exclusion
restrictions. Alternatively, future work may involve either new exclusion restrictions alto-


                                             22
gether or diﬀerent measures of religion or proximity to Catholic schools than the ones that
we and others have considered. Finally, experiments along the lines of Howell and Peter-
son (2002), while diﬃcult to run, have large advantages in identifying the eﬀect of Catholic
school attendance on outcomes.



References
 [1] Alexander, Karl L., and Aaron M. Pallas, “School Sector and Cognitive Performance:
    When is a Little a Little,” Sociology of Education, LVIII (1985), 115-128.

 [2] Altonji, Joseph G., and Rosa Matzkin, “Panel Data Estimators for Nonseparable Models
    with Endogenous Regressors” NBER Working Paper No. T0267 March 2001.

 [3] Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, “Selection on Observed
    and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Eﬀectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Northwest-
    ern University, revised April 2002.

 [4] Angrist, Joshua D., “Instrumental Variables Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects
    in Econometrics and Epidemiology,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Technical
    Working Paper No. 115, November 1991.

 [5] Angrist and Evans, ”Children and their Parent’s Labor Supply: Evidence from Exoge-
    nous Variation in Family Size” American Economic Review, 88 (1988), 450-477.

 [6] Bronars, Stephen G. , and Jeﬀ Grogger, ”The Economic Consequences of Unwed Moth-
    erhood: Using Twins as a Natural Experiment,” American Economic Review 80(1994),
    1141-56.

 [7] Bryk, Anthony S., Valerie E. Lee, and Peter B. Holland, Catholic Schools and the
    Common Good, Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1993.

 [8] Cameron, Stephen V. and Heckman, James J., “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic
    Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,” Journal of
    Political Economy, 106(1998).

 [9] Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, “The Economic Returns to School Quality: A Partial
    Survey,” Working Paper #334, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, 1994.

                                            23
[10] Chubb, John E., and Terry M. Moe, Politics, Markets, and America’s Schools (Wash-
    ington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1990).

[11] Coleman, James S., Thomas Hoﬀer, and Sally Kilgore, High School Achievement: Pub-
    lic, Catholic, and Private Schools Compared (New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc., 1982).

[12] Coleman, James S., and Thomas Hoﬀer, Public and Private Schools: The Impact of
    Communities (New York, NY: Basic Books, Inc., 1987).

[13] Cookson, Peter W., Jr., “Assessing Private School Eﬀects: Implications for School
    Choice,” in Edith Rasell and Richard Rothstein, eds., School Choice: Examining the
    Evidence (Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute, 1993).

[14] Currie, Janet, and Thomas Duncan, “Does Head Start Make a Diﬀerence?” American
    Economic Review, 85 (1990), 341-64.

[15] Engen, Eric, William Gale, and John Karl Sholz, “The Illusory Eﬀects of Saving Incen-
    tives on Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10 (1996), 113-138.

[16] Evans, William N., and Robert M. Schwab, “Finishing High School and Starting College:
    Do Catholic Schools Make a Diﬀerence?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110 (1995),
    947-974.

[17] Evans, William N., and Robert M. Schwab, “Who Benefits from Private Education:
    Evidence from Quantile Regressions,” Department of Economics Working Paper, Uni-
    versity of Maryland, August 1993.

[18] Figlio, David N., and Joe A. Stone, “Are Private Schools Really Better?,” Research in
    Labor Economics, (2000).

[19] Goldberger, Arthur S., and Glen C. Cain, “The Causal Analysis of Cognitive Outcomes
    in the Coleman, Hoﬀer and Kilgore Report,“ Sociology of Education, LV (1982), 103-122.

[20] Grogger, Jeﬀ and Derek A. Neal, “Further Evidence on the Eﬀects of Catholic Secondary
    Schooling,” Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Aﬀairs, 2000, 151-201.

[21] Heckman, James J., “Varieties of Selection Bias,” American Economic Review, 80(1990).



                                           24
[22] Hoxby, Caroline Minter., “Do Private Schools Provide Competition for Public Schools,”
    NBER Working paper, 1995.

[23] Howell, William G. and Paul E. Peterson, The Education Gap:Vouchers and Urban
    Schools, Brookings Press, (2002).

[24] Jepsen, Christopher, “The Eﬀectiveness of Catholic Primary Schools, ” forthcoming in
    Journal of Human Resources.

[25] Jacobsen, Joyce P., James W. Pearce III, and Joshua L. Rosenbloom, “The Eﬀect of
    Childbearing on Married Women’s Labor Supply and Earnings,” Journal of Human
    Resources 34(3), Summer 1999, pp. 449-474.

[26] Ludwig, Jens, “Educational Achievement in Public, Private, and Catholic Schools: New
    Evidence on What We Know (and Don’t Know),” working paper, Georgetown Univer-
    sity, 1997.

[27] Murnane, Richard J., “A Review Essay - Comparisons of Public and Private Schools:
    Lessons from the Uproar.“ Journal of Human Resources 19 (1984), 263-77.

[28] Neal, Derek, “The Eﬀects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Attainment,”
    Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1997), 98-123.

[29] Sander, William H. Catholic Schools: Private and Social Eﬀects. Boston: Kluwer Aca-
    demic Publishers, 2001.

[30] Tyler, Brian S., “An Analysis of Public and Catholic Secondary Education and the
    Earnings of Men,” University of Chicago Ph.D. Thesis (1994).

[31] Taber, Christopher, “Semiparametric Identification and Heterogeneity in Discrete
    Choice Dynamic Programming Models,” Journal of Econometrics 96(2000), 201-229.

[32] Udry, Christopher, “Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the House-
    hold”, Journal of Political Economy, 104 (1996), 1010-1046.

[33] Witte, John F., “Private School Versus Public School Achievement: Are There Findings
    That Should Aﬀect the Educational Choice Debate,” Economics of Education Review,
    XI (1992), 371-394.


                                           25
Appendix: A Comparison Between Bivariate Probits
and Two Stage Least Squares
Evans and Schwab (1995) and Neal (1997) apply bivariate probits of Catholic schooling and
an educational outcome such as either high school graduation or college attendance using
data from High School and Beyond and NLSY, respectively. Both papers emphasize the
importance of an exclusion restriction in the model for identification. As we have already
noted, Evans and Schwab (1995) primarily use Catholic religion, excluding it from the out-
come equation but including it in the Catholic schooling decision. Neal (1997) uses an
indicator for Catholic religion along with county level measures of the density of Catholics
and the availability of Catholic schools. Both of these papers find positive eﬀects of Catholic
schools that are estimated fairly precisely.    The bivariate probit results reported in this
paper generally follow the same pattern, with estimates being much more precise and rea-
sonable than linear specifications. It is therefore worth investigating the reasons why our
instrumental variables results are so noisy and in many cases seem unreasonable, while the
bivariate probits seem to show plausible results that are precisely estimated.
   At this point it is useful to more closely examine identification in the bivariate probit
model. The specification used in Neal (1997), Evans and Schwab (1995), and here is

                             CHi = 1(g(Xi ) + ui > 0)
                                Yi = 1(αCHi + f (Zi ) + εi > 0),

where 1(·) is the indicator function taking the value one if its argument is true and zero
otherwise. Identification of the α coeﬃcient is the primary focus of these studies. This
model is similar to other types of selection models (see, e.g., Heckman, 1990, Cameron and
Heckman, 1998, or Taber, 2000), so we appeal to the results in that literature.
   As is well known, identification of α essentially requires two assumptions:

  1. Either (a) parametric assumptions on the distribution of the error terms or (b) support
     conditions on g(Xi ).

  2. Either (a) an exclusion restriction specifying that a variable belongs in the Catholic
     schooling equation but not in the selection equation or (b) parametric restrictions on
     f and g.


                                               26
    That is, identification can be achieved by combining either 1(a) or 1(b) with either 2(a)
or 2(b). Evans and Schwab (1995) and Neal (1997) implicitly assume that identification
comes from the exclusion restrictions. However, both papers (and this one) also assume g
and f are linear, i.e., g(Xi ) = Xi0 β and f (Zi ) = Zi0 γ, which can be shown to satisfy 2(b)
so that an exclusion restriction is not necessary. Since identification can be achieved from
either the exclusion restriction or the linearity assumption, in practice it is diﬃcult to know
which assumption drives identification in the empirical application.
    Evans and Schwab (1995) experiment with both bivariate probits and two stage least
squares. They also employ two diﬀerent instruments, Catholic religion and the percentage of
Catholics in the county, which are similar to Neal’s (1997) exclusion restrictions. When they
run two stage least squares, they find implausible estimates in some specifications, depending
on the specific exclusions maintained. Neal (1997) does not report results based on linear
2SLS.
    In order to better assess what is identifying the bivariate probit models, as well as facil-
itate an easier comparison between the results of this paper and the previous literature, we
examine the sensitivity of our results from NLS-72 to diﬀerent specifications using bivariate
probits. We use a sample design based loosely on Neal (1997), in that we look at individuals
from urban areas and examine separate eﬀects for blacks and whites.28 The results are re-
ported in Table A1. We obtain results which are similar to Neal’s in several respects. First,
the univariate probit coeﬃcient of 0.640 (0.198) implies a large positive eﬀect for non-whites.
Second, the coeﬃcient from a bivariate probit specification which uses Neal’s exclusion re-
strictions for urban minorities, Catholic religion and the county-level ratio of Catholics to
the overall population, is actually larger than the univariate one—0.879 (0.523)—although this
diﬀerence is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Third, the estimates appear at first glance
to be of a reasonable magnitude. In particular, the probit coeﬃcients are comparable to the
ones reported both in Neal (1997) and in Table 1 of this paper. However, the marginal ef-
fects of 0.239 and 0.329 for the univariate and bivariate models, respectively, are suspiciously
large.
    Table A1 also shows that for urban minorities, the estimated bivariate probit coeﬃcients
are relatively insensitive to exclusion restrictions, and appear to be largely driven by the
functional form assumptions embedded in these models. To see this, note that the precision
  28
     We have not replicated the analysis for NELS:88 for several reasons. Most importantly, we could not
accurately match students to counties, as no county-level identifiers are available in these data at present.


                                                     27
of the estimates does not vary much with specification, even when only a “weak” instrument
such as Ci × Di is excluded–or there are no excluded instruments at all (bottom row).
The standard error of the coeﬃcient on CHi is smaller in both of these cases than when
the more powerful instrument Ci is excluded, which seems at odds with the notion that
the exclusions are driving identification.         In contrast, 2SLS estimates swing wildly across
specifications, with the results being similar to Evans and Schwab (1995) and our own earlier
results; we typically find improbably large eﬀects with standard errors that are suﬃciently
large that any estimate within the realm of plausibility would not be significantly diﬀerent
from zero at conventional levels. In the most precisely-estimated specification involving all
three exclusion restrictions, the coeﬃcient of 0.331 (0.254) implies a huge eﬀect yet is not
significant. In the case of the weakest instrument, Ci × Di , the coeﬃcient of 2.572 (2.442) is
so large that it cannot be interpreted literally within the linear probability framework, yet
it is still insignificantly diﬀerent from zero.
       The results for whites are again fairly similar across specifications, although the precision
of the estimates now varies with the choice of instrument. In the 2SLS case, both precision
and the coeﬃcients themselves are relatively constant except when Ci × Di is used as an
exclusion restriction. It appears that in this subsample, the exclusion restrictions are driving
a larger share of identification than they were for urban minorities, but that the linear index
assumption in conjunction with normality is still playing a large role.
       Although the specifications of Table A1 do not involve exact replications of the analyses
of either Evans and Schwab (1995) or Neal (1997),29 we believe that they do shed some
light on the sources of the apparent discrepancies in the results. Table A1 suggests that
the proximity measures in both of these studies do not play a key role in identification in
NLS-72, as standard errors in the 2SLS models are prohibitively large in cases in which
Catholic religion is not an excluded instrument.             Bivariate probit models can sometimes
produce misleading results which are consistent with a reasonably exogenous instrumental
variable, when in fact identification is stemming from an invalid instrument in combination
with functional form assumptions. In order to isolate the role of each of these factors, it is
necessary to implement IV strategies that rely on nothing other than exclusion restrictions
  29
    We could not replicate Neal (1997) exactly because he used an indicator for whether students attended a
Catholic high school in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth that is not available in the public release
version of the data set. We experimented with NLSY using an indicator for whether the student attended
public school. We obtained results qualitatively similar to those based on NLS-72, with the bivariate probit
results being even less sensitive to exclusion restrictions than in NLS-72.


                                                     28
for identification.




                      29
                                                                   Table 1
                    Probit, Bivariate Probit, OLS, and 2SLS Estimates of Catholic Schooling Effects
                                                  NELS:88 and NLS-72
         Weighted, Marginal Effects of Nonlinear Models Reported, (Huber-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                                                                             Excluded Instruments
                                        (1)                                      (2)                                 (3)
                                  Catholic (Ci )                           Distance (Di )             Catholic×Distance (Ci × Di )
HS Graduation (NELS:88)
  Probit (controls                     0.065                                    0.047                              0.052
  exclude “instrument”)               (0.025)                                  (0.025)                            (0.026)

  Bivariate Probit                     0.128                                    -0.007                             -0.022
                                      (0.032)                                  (0.085)                            (0.119)

  OLS                                  0.041                                    0.021                              0.023
                                      (0.014)                                  (0.014)                            (0.015)

  2SLS                                 0.34                                    -0.04                                0.09
                                      (0.08)                                   (0.10)                              (0.11)
College in 1994 (NELS:88)
  Probit (controls                     0.094                                    0.085                              0.077
  exclude “instrument”)               (0.022)                                  (0.022)                            (0.022)

  Bivariate Probit                     0.170                                    0.103                              -0.043
                                      (0.055)                                  (0.062)                            (0.070)

  OLS                                  0.128                                    0.119                              0.111
                                      (0.026)                                  (0.026)                            (0.026)

  2SLS                                 0.40                                     0.31                                -0.11
                                      (0.10)                                   (0.11)                              (0.12)
College in 1976 (NLS-72)
  Probit (controls                     0.068                                    0.070                              0.067
  exclude “instrument”)               (0.016)                                  (0.016)                            (0.016)

  Bivariate Probit                    -0.002                                    -0.052                             -0.080
                                      (0.028)                                  (0.035)                            (0.035)

  OLS                                  0.071                                    0.075                              0.072
                                      (0.015)                                  (0.016)                            (0.016)

  2SLS                                 0.06                                     0.44                                -0.25
                                      (0.04)                                   (0.20)                              (0.11)
Notes:
(1) All models other than univariate probits instrument for Catholic High School attendance (CHi ).
(2) Controls for all NELS:88 models include the demographic, family background, geography, and 8th grade variables listed in Table 3a. Controls
for all NLS-72 models include the demographic, family background, and geography variables listed in Table 3b. When Di is used as an instrument,
Ci is included as a control; when Ci is an instrument, Di is included; and when Di × Ci is an instrument, both Di and Ci are included.
(3) Sample sizes: N=8560 (HS Graduation), N=8313 (College Attendance in NELS), N=19,489 (College Attendance in NLS-72)
                                                           Table 2
                              OLS and 2SLS estimates of Catholic Schooling Effects
                                             NELS:88 and NLS-72
                             Weighted, (Huber-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                                                                          Excluded Instruments
                                                     (1)                     (2)                             (3)
                                               Catholic (Ci )           Distance (Di )     Catholic×Distance (Ci × Di )

12th Grade Reading Score (NELS:88)
  OLS                                            1.16 (0.37)              1.03 (0.37)                 1.14 (0.38)
  2SLS                                           1.40 (1.54)             -1.09 (1.84)                 1.24 (1.82)

12th Grade Math Score (NELS:88)
  OLS                                            1.03 (0.31)             1.00 (0.31)                   0.92 (0.32)
  2SLS                                           2.64 (1.21)             2.43 (1.45)                  -2.63 (1.57)

12th Grade Reading Score (NLS-72)
  OLS                                            2.06 (0.34)             2.54 (0.37)                  2.50 (0.36)
  2SLS                                          -1.34 (0.99)             8.69 (4.53)                  0.50 (2.32)

12th Grade Math Score (NLS-72)
  OLS                                            1.52 (0.33)              1.77 (0.35)                  1.71 (0.36)
  2SLS                                          -0.07 (0.96)             11.05 (4.47)                 -3.94 (2.27)

Notes:
(1) All 2SLS models instrument for Catholic High School attendance (CHi ).
(2) Controls for all models include those described in notes to Table 1. When Di is used as an instrument,
Ci is included as a control; when Ci is an instrument, Di is included; and when Di × Ci is an instrument,
both Di and Ci are included as controls.
(3) Sample sizes: N=8,166 (NELS 12th Reading), N=8,119 (NELS 12th Math)
 N=16,276 (NLS Academic Years of School), N=14,671 (NLS Reading and Math scores),
                                                                Table 3a
                                            Comparison of Means of Key Variables
                                      by Value of Distance, Catholic, and their Interaction
                                                            NELS:88
                                                 (1)                   (2)                    (3)                       (4)
                                             Overall Mean       Difference by Ci       Difference by Di        Difference by Ci × Di
Demographics
  Female                                          0.50                  0.01                   0.00                      0.00
  Asian                                           0.04                  0.01                  0.04                      -0.02
  Hispanic                                        0.10                  0.19                  0.08                       0.03
  Black                                           0.13                 -0.15                  0.08                      -0.13
  White                                           0.73                 -0.05                  -0.20                      0.12

Family Background
  Mother’s education                             13.14                 -0.26                   0.17                     -0.36
  Father’s education                             13.42                 -0.07                   0.17                     -0.31
  Log of family income                           10.20                  0.11                   0.12                     -0.02
  Mother only in house                            0.15                 -0.04                   0.02                     -0.03
  Parent married                                  0.78                  0.06                  -0.02                      0.03

Geography
  Rural                                           0.32                 -0.15                  -0.44                      0.05
  Suburban                                        0.44                  0.06                   0.08                      0.00
  Urban                                           0.24                  0.09                  0.36                      -0.05

Expectations
  Schooling expectation                          15.17                  0.15                   0.31                     -0.06
  Very sure to graduate high school               0.83                 -0.01                   0.00                     -0.01
  Parents expect some college                     0.88                  0.04                   0.05                     -0.02
  Parents expect college grad                     0.78                 0.03                    0.06                     -0.04
  Expect white collar job                         0.46                  0.03                   0.06                     -0.01

8th Grade Variables
  Delinquency Index                               0.69                 -0.05                   0.03                     -0.04
  Got into fight                                  0.27                 -0.01                   0.01                      0.05
  Rarely completes homework                       0.21                 -0.05                   0.00                      0.00
  Frequently disruptive                          0.13                  -0.02                  -0.01                      0.00
  Repeated grade 4-8                              0.08                 -0.03                   0.01                     -0.03
  Risk Index                                      0.72                 -0.07                  -0.01                     0.01
  Grades Composite                                2.89                  0.04                   0.00                      0.07
  Unpreparedness Index                           10.82                  0.00                   0.08                     -0.09
  8th Grade reading score                        50.32                  0.40                   0.03                      1.15
  8th Grade math score                           50.33                  0.55                   0.45                      0.06

Outcomes
  10th Grade reading score                       50.16                 0.65                    0.58                      0.60
  10th Grade math score                          50.21                 0.93                    0.75                     -0.50
  12th Grade reading score                       50.40                 0.52                    0.88                     -0.17
  12th Grade math score                          50.38                 1.18                    1.03                     -0.70
  Enrolled in 4 year college in 1994              0.29                 0.08                    0.08                     -0.05
  HS Graduate                                     0.84                 0.07                    0.01                      0.01

  Attended Catholic HS                            0.06                 0.13                    0.12                     0.15

Notes:
(1) Difference by Ci × Di is obtained from the coefficient on Ci × Di in a regression including Ci and Di as controls
(2)Sample Size: N=16,070
                                                                Table 3b
                                            Comparison of Means of Key Variables
                                      by Value of Distance, Catholic, and their Interaction
                                                            NLS-72
                                                 (1)                    (2)                    (3)                       (4)
                                             Overall Mean        Difference by Ci       Difference by Di        Difference by Ci × Di
Demographics
  Female                                           0.50                 -0.01                   0.03                     0.03
  Hispanic                                         0.04                  0.11                   0.01                    -0.07
  Black                                            0.15                 -0.15                   0.04                    -0.08

Family Background
  Mother’s education                              12.19                 -0.13                  0.16                     -0.33
  Father’s education                              12.43                  0.06                   0.40                    -0.32
  Log of family income                             8.93                  0.07                  0.11                     -0.03
  Father Blue Collar                               0.24                  0.01                  -0.03                    -0.01
  Low SES Indicator                                0.29                 -0.05                  -0.06                     0.00
  English Primary Language                         0.92                 -0.06                  -0.02                     0.03
  Family Receives Daily Newspaper                  0.88                  0.04                   0.06                     0.01
  Mother Works                                     0.50                 -0.06                   0.03                     0.01

Geography
  Rural                                            0.23                 -0.14                  -0.30                     0.05
  Suburban                                         0.48                 0.06                   0.02                     -0.04
  Urban                                            0.29                 0.08                   0.28                     -0.01

Expectations
  Decided to go to college pre-HS                  0.41                 -0.01                   0.04                    -0.06

Outcomes
  Enrolled in college by 1976                      0.38                 0.01                    0.05                    -0.06
  Reading Score                                   50.01                 0.30                    0.46                     0.55
  Math Score                                      49.98                 0.58                    0.40                    -0.10
  Years of Academic PSE, 1979                      1.61                 0.03                    0.22                    -0.23

  Attended Catholic HS                             0.06                 0.19                    0.07                    0.15

Notes:
(1) Difference by Ci × Di is obtained from the coefficient on Ci × Di in a regression including Ci and Di as controls
(2)Sample Size: N=19,921
                                                             Table 4
                                                                                          b + ωi
    Comparison of 2SLS Estimates1 and Bias Implied by OLS Estimation of Yi = Xi0 γ + [Zi0 λ]ψ
     on the Public Eighth Grade Subsample2 ; Various Outcomes and instruments; NELS:88 Sample
                       Weighted, (Huber-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)

OUTCOME (Y )                                                           INSTRUMENTS (Zi )
                                            (1)                          (2)                               (3)
                                        Catholic                       Distance                  Catholic×Distance

High School Graduation
   Implied Bias in 2SLS (ψ)            0.34 (0.08)                  -0.05 (0.12)                      0.15 (0.12)
   2SLS Coefficient                    0.34 (0.08)                  -0.04 (0.10)                      0.09 (0.11)

College Attendance
   Implied Bias in 2SLS (ψ)            0.29 (0.11)                  0.37 (0.12)                      -0.23 (0.13)
   2SLS Coefficient                    0.40 (0.10)                  0.31 (0.11)                      -0.11 (0.12)

12th Grade Reading Score
   Implied Bias in 2SLS (ψ)            0.54 (1.68)                  -0.51 (2.08)                     -0.50 (1.99)
   2SLS Coefficient                    1.40 (1.54)                  -1.09 (1.84)                      1.24 (1.82)

12th Grade Math Score
   Implied Bias in 2SLS (ψ)            1.85 (1.41)                  1.83 (1.69)                      -4.37 (2.06)
   2SLS Coefficient                    2.64 (1.21)                  2.43 (1.45)                      -2.63 (1.57)



Notes:
(1) Controls for all models include those described in notes to Table 1. In Column 1, D is included as a control; in Column 2,
Ci is included as a control; and in Column 3, both Di and Ci are included as controls.
                                 b + ωi is estimated by OLS using the NELS:88 sample of those who attended public
(2) The model Yi = Xi0 γ + [Zi0 λ]ψ
eighth grade schools. Sample sizes: N=7,701 (HS Graduation), N=7,481 (College Attendance), N=7377 (12th reading),
N=7380 (12th math). λ  b is the coefficient on Zi in the first stage equation for CHi . The sample sizes for the first stage
equations are listed in Tables 1 and 2 for the various outcomes. The 2SLS coefficients are from Tables 1 and 2.
                                                            b is previously estimated from a model of CHi attendance.
(3) Reported standard errors of ψ account for the fact that λ
                                               Table 5
            Estimates of Catholic Schooling Effects and Estimates of Potential Bias
                             Using AET Methodology, NELS:88
                  Weighted, (Huber-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                                                    Excluded Instruments
                              (1)                      (2)                           (3)
                           Catholic                   Distance              Catholic×Distance
HS Graduation
   2SLS Coefficient       0.34 (0.08)               -0.04 (0.10)                0.09 (0.11)
   Bias 1                 0.52 (0.23)                0.15 (0.16)                0.14 (0.24)
   Bias 2                 0.84 (0.26)                0.06 (0.14)                    ...

College in 1994
   2SLS Coefficient       0.40 (0.10)                0.31 (0.11)                -0.11 (0.12)
   Bias 1                 0.45 (0.21)                0.46 (0.22)                 0.15 (0.26)
   Bias 2                 0.45 (0.21)                0.40 (0.20)                     ...

12th Reading Score
   2SLS Coefficient       1.40 (1.54)               -1.09 (1.84)                1.24 (1.82)
   Bias 1                 1.18 (1.06)                2.49 (1.59)                2.59 (1.14)
   Bias 2                 1.42 (1.07)                2.11 (1.40)                    ...

12th Math Score
   2SLS Coefficient       2.64 (1.21)                2.43 (1.45)                -2.63 (1.57)
   Bias 1                 2.02 (0.75)                1.76 (1.03)                 1.42 (0.88)
   Bias 2                 1.87 (0.74)                1.72 (0.98)                     ...

Notes:
(1) Controls included are described in Table 1 notes.
(2) Sample sizes: N=8560 (HS Graduation), N=8313 (College Attendance in NELS), N=8,166 (12th Reading),
N=8,199 (12th Math).
(3) “Bias 1” calculations use all variables, while ”Bias 2” excludes Di and Ci in the bias calculations.
(4) Standard Errors of the bias calculations obtained from a 100-replication bootstrap
                                               Table A1
             Comparison of Linear and Non-Linear Models of College Attendance in NLS-72
                                   (Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                         [Marginal Effects of Non-Linear Models in Brackets]

                                                                           Sample
                                     Non-whites in cities (N=1532)                  Whites in cities (N=5326)
                                     Nonlinear          Linear                      Nonlinear          Linear
                                      Models           Models                        Models            Models
                                     (Probits)      (OLS/2SLS)                      (Probits)        (OLS/2SLS)
Single Equation Model                   0.640               0.239                     0.253                0.093
(OLS/Probit)                           (0.198)             (0.070)                   (0.062)              (0.022)
                                       [0.239]                                       [0.093]
Two Equation Models:
  Excluded Instruments:
  %CCHi and CH/Pi                       1.471               1.375                     0.048                0.115
                                       (0.442)             (0.583)                   (0.250)              (0.158)
                                       [0.517]                                       [0.018]

   Ci and %CCHi                         0.879               0.054                      -0.090             -0.036
                                       (0.523)             (0.309)                    (0.121)             (0.050)
                                       [0.329]                                       [-0.033]

   Ci , %CCHi , and CH/Pi               1.106               0.331                      -0.085             -0.034
                                       (0.460)             (0.254)                    (0.118)             (0.048)
                                       [0.409]                                       [-0.031]

   Ci only                              0.761              -0.093                     -0.133              -0.056
                                       (0.543)             (0.324)                    (0.130)             (0.054)
                                       [0.285]                                       [-0.049]

   Ci × Di                              1.333               2.572                      -0.121             -0.395
                                       (0.516)             (2.442)                    (0.262)             (0.169)
                                       [0.478]                                       [-0.044]

   None                                 1.224                 ...                     -0.094                 ...
                                       (0.542)                ...                    (0.301)                 ...
                                       [0.446]                                       [-0.034]


Notes:
(1) Sample is taken from counties in the NLS-72 which had a population of greater than 250,000 in 1980.
(2) All equations control for parents’ education and income levels and SES, whether father is a blue-collar worker, county
population, gender and race.
(3) The Instrument “%CCH i ” refers to the percent of the county which reports they are Catholic church members,
and “CH/P i ” to Catholic schools per person in the county.
