                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 MOTHER’S EDUCATION AND THE INTERGENERATIONAL
                        TRANSMISSION OF HUMAN CAPITAL:
                     EVIDENCE FROM COLLEGE OPENINGS AND
                              LONGITUDINAL DATA

                                               Janet Currie
                                              Enrico Moretti

                                          Working Paper 9360
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9360


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




Tom Kane, Claudia Goldin, Lance Lochner, Justin McCrary and seminar participants at UCLA, Berkeley,
London School of Economics, IZA, Heidelberg University, NBER Summer Institute, Columbia, CUNY, UC
Davis, University of Washington at Seattle, the University of Colorado at Denver, UC San Diego, Princeton
and Yale provided very helpful comments. We also thank Michael Greenstone and Ken Chay for sharing
their Vital Statistics data and David Card for sharing his data on colleges that closed. Rebecca Acosta, Ben
Bolitzer and Anna-Maria Bjornsdotter provided excellent research assistance. We thank NIH (Currie) and
the UCLA Senate (Moretti) for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital:
Evidence from College Openings and Longitudinal Data
Janet Currie and Enrico Moretti
NBER Working Paper No. 9360
November 2002
JEL No. I1, I2, J0

                                            ABSTRACT



       We estimate the effect of maternal education on birth outcomes using data from the Vital
Statistics Natality files for 1970 to 1999. We also assess the importance of four potential channels

through which maternal education may improve birth outcomes: use of prenatal care, smoking
behavior, marriage, and fertility. In an effort to account for unobserved characteristics of women that
could induce spurious correlation, we pursue two distinct empirical strategies. First, we construct

panel data by linking women in different years of the Vital Statistics records and examine the effects
of changes in education on changes in birth outcomes. Second, we have compiled a new data set on
openings of two and four year colleges between 1940 and 1990. We use data about the availability
of colleges in the woman's county in her 17th year as an instrument for maternal education


       Our findings using the two approaches are similar. Higher maternal education improves

infant health, as measured by birthweight and gestational age. It also increases the probability that

a new mother is married, reduces parity, increases use of prenatal care, and reduces smoking,

suggesting that these are important pathways for the ultimate effect on health.




Janet Currie                                           Enrico Moretti
Department of Economics, UCLA                          Department of Economics, UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue                                     405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                             Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER                                               and NBER
currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu                           Moretti@econ.ucla.edu
