                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  EXPLAINING THE FLOOD OF
                                    ASBESTOS LITIGATION:
                                CONSOLIDATION, BIFURCATION,
                                    AND BOUQUET TRIALS

                                            Michelle J. White

                                           Working Paper 9362
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9362


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




I am grateful for comments from Donald Dewees, Michael Noel, Kathy Spier and participants at talks at the NBER
Summer Institute in Law & Economics and the American Enterprise Institute. The NSF Economics Program
provided support under grant number 0212444. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Explaining the Flood of Asbestos Litigation:
Consolidation, Bifurcation, and Bouquet Trials
Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9362
December 2002
JEL No. K1, K4, I1

                                             ABSTRACT



        The number of asbestos personal injury claims filed each year is in the hundreds of thousands
and has been increasing rather than decreasing over time, even though asbestos stopped being used
in the early 1970’s. Eighty firms have filed for bankruptcy due to asbestos liabilities—including 30
filings since the beginning of 2000.


              This paper examines why asbestos claims are increasing over time. Because large
numbers of asbestos claims are filed in particular courts, judges in these courts have adopted
procedural innovations intended to clear their dockets by encouraging mass settlements. These
innovations cause trial outcomes to change in plaintiffs’ favor. As a result, the innovations make
the asbestos crisis worse by giving plaintiffs’ lawyers an incentive to file large numbers of additional
claims in the same courts. The paper uses a new dataset of asbestos trials to test the hypothesis that
three important procedural innovations—consolidated trials, bifurcation, and bouquet trials--favor
plaintiffs and therefore encourage the filing of additional claims. I find that bifurcation and bouquet
trials nearly triple plaintiffs’ expected return from trial, while consolidations of up to seven lawsuits
raise plaintiffs’ expected return from trial by one- third to one-half.


Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr.
La Jolla CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu
                       Explaining the Flood of Asbestos Litigation:
                                                                                               1
                     Consolidation, Bifurcation, and Bouquet Trials


                “The hazards of asbestos were described by the Roman historian Pliny...”2


I.       Introduction
      One hundred million people in the U.S. were occupationally exposed to asbestos. Asbestos
exposure can cause a variety of diseases--ranging from pleural plaque to mesothelioma and
other cancers—usually after a long latency period.3 At least 600,000 individuals have filed
claims for damage resulting from asbestos exposure and, because individuals typically file
claims against multiple defendants, the total number of claims is much larger (Carroll et al,
2002). In the year 2000 alone, twelve large companies reported that 520,000 new asbestos
claims were filed against them.4 Insurers of asbestos defendants have paid out around $32
billion in compensation and heavy liability for asbestos claims has caused about 80 firms to file
for bankruptcy—30 of them since the beginning of 2000.5 But defendants’ bankruptcies haven’t
ended the asbestos mass tort. Instead, plaintiffs’ lawyers are filing ever more claims on behalf
of plaintiffs whose injuries are less severe against defendants whose involvement with asbestos
production is increasingly tangential. With an unlimited supply of both plaintiffs and
defendants, asbestos has become the largest mass tort in U.S. legal history. Two recent
predictions of its total cost came out at $200 and 275 billion—suggesting that asbestos may end
up costing more than Superfund.6
     Asbestos claims are concentrated in a few courts and the volume of claims in these courts
makes it infeasible to hold individual trials for all claimants. Fearing judicial gridlock, judges
have responded by developing new legal procedures intended to resolve large numbers of cases




1
  I am grateful for comments from Donald Dewees, Michael Noel, Kathy Spier and participants at talks at the NBER
Summer Institute in Law & Economics and the American Enterprise Institute. The NSF Economics Program
provided support under grant number 0212444.
2
  Quoted in Castleman (1996, p. 358).
3
  American Academy of Actuaries (2001).
4
  This figure is taken from 10-K filings of 12 large companies that report asbestos liabilities. Data for number of
claims filed in 1999 or 2001 is substituted if figures for 2000 are unavailable.
5
  See Carroll et al (2002) and White (2002).
6
  The two studies are Angelina and Biggs (2001) and Bhavatula et al (2001).


                                                                                                                      2
at minimal cost in court time.7 One important procedural innovation is consolidated trials, which
are trials of multiple asbestos claims simultaneously before a single jury. The jury makes
separate decisions for each plaintiff against each defendant.8 Another innovation is bifurcation,
which divides the trial into two or more phases. In bifurcated trials, the jury decides liability in
phase one and damages in phase two; while in reverse bifurcated trials, the order is reversed.
After phase one, the trial is suspended and the judge directs the parties to negotiate a
settlement—with the judge sometimes becoming intimately involved in the negotiations. The
judge may threaten that, if the parties do not settle, s/he will direct the jury to consider punitive
damages.9 A third innovation is the “bouquet” trial. Here, a small group of cases is selected for
trial from a larger group that may include thousands of cases. At the end of the bouquet trial, the
judge directs the parties to settle the large group of cases based on the template of the small
group outcomes. If negotiations break down, the judge may threaten to use the same jury to
decide additional cases in the large group.
       A couple of examples are useful. A reverse bifurcated bouquet trial of 12 plaintiffs’
asbestos claims in Mississippi in 1998 resulted in phase one compensatory damage awards that
totaled $48 million. When the judge threatened to send the issue of punitive damages to the
same jury, the defendants settled the 12 cases, reportedly for the full amount of the damage
awards. The judge then scheduled an additional 63 cases for trial before the same jury.
Defendants lodged an emergency appeal with the Mississippi Supreme Court seeking to
disqualify the judge for bias, but their appeal was denied. Defendants then settled all of the
remaining 1,738 claims in the large group on extremely favorable terms for plaintiffs. In a
bifurcated trial in West Virginia in 2002 that involved 4,000 plaintiffs from 35 states suing a
single defendant, liability and a punitive damages multiplier were decided during phase one.
After phase one, the judge instructed the parties to negotiate a settlement of all 4,000 claims.
Although settlement negotiations are still on-going, they are likely to succeed because the jury’s


7
  Current centers for asbestos litigation include Kanawha County, West Virginia, and Jefferson County, Mississippi,
but these have varied over time. See below. Mullenix (1991) and Saks and Blanck (1992) discuss the development
of these innovations.
8
  Consolidations differ from class actions, where a judge certifies a class that combines all claims of a particular type
into a single case and the jury makes a single decision for all. In consolidations, multiple claims that involve
common issues are joined and may be tried together, but separate decisions are made for each. The U.S. Supreme
Court did not allow class actions of asbestos lawsuits and state courts have followed its lead. See Cabraser (1998).
9
  See Willgang (1987) for discussion of how judges in asbestos trials often act as mediator and/or schedule
settlement conferences in their chambers.


                                                                                                                        3
decision that the defendant must pay punitive damages of three times any compensatory damage
award makes proceeding to the damages phase extremely risky for the defendant.10
      My hypothesis in this paper is that judges’ attempts to save trial time by encouraging mass
settlements of asbestos claims have made the asbestos crisis worse by encouraging plaintiffs’
lawyers to flood the courts with additional claims. The mechanism works in the following way.
Because of the large numbers of claims filed in particular courts, judges in these courts adopt
procedural innovations that are intended to reduce trial time and encourage large numbers of
cases to settle. These procedural innovations also change trial outcomes in a pro-plaintiff
direction. But when large numbers of asbestos claims are settled on favorable terms for
plaintiffs, then plaintiffs’ lawyers find it profitable to file additional claims in the same courts.
This worsens the gridlock and pressures the judge to continue using the innovations. Because of
the nature of asbestos exposure, the numbers of potential plaintiffs and potential defendants are
virtually unlimited and, as a result, the asbestos mass tort keeps growing.11
     In this paper, I use a new dataset of asbestos trials from 1987 – 2002 to test the hypothesis
that the three procedural innovations caused asbestos trial outcomes to become more pro-
plaintiff. The results show that bifurcated trials and bouquet trials cause plaintiffs’ expected
return from trial to nearly triple, while consolidations of up to seven cases raise plaintiffs’
expected return from trial to increase by one-third to one-half.
     Section II of the paper gives some background concerning asbestos litigation. Section III
examines how the three procedural innovations are predicted to affect trial times, settlement
probabilities, and trial outcomes. Sections IV and V present the data and empirical evidence on
trial outcomes. Section VI concludes.




10
  The first case is Cosey v. E.D. Bullard Co., Civ. No. 95-0069 (Miss. Cir. Ct. Jefferson County 1995), discussed in
Schwartz and Lorber (2000, p. 255) and Parloff (2002). The West Virginia case was characterized by the judge as a
consolidated trial but not a bouquet trial. The trial originally involved 8,000 claims and 250 defendants, but half of
the plaintiffs and all of the defendants except Union Carbide settled by the start of the trial. See Jonathan D.
Glater, “Many Concerns Settle 8,000 Asbestos Suits,” New York Times, Sept. 25, 2002, and “West Virginia Jury
Finds Union Carbide Product Defective, Premises Unsafe,” Mealey’s Litigation Reporter: Asbestos, vol. 17:19,
Nov. 1, 2002.

11
  See Carroll et al (2002) for figures showing that claims against five major defendants rose sharply during the
1990’s.


                                                                                                                         4
II.       Asbestos Litigation: Some Background. An important factor in asbestos litigation is
that most claimants have little or no asbestos-related impairment at the time they file claims.
The main asbestos diseases are mesothelioma, lung and other cancers, asbestosis, and pleural
plaque. Mesothelioma is cancer of the pleural membrane around the lungs and organs and is
generally fatal within a short period after diagnosis. Asbestos claims involving lung cancer are
problematic because many asbestos plaintiffs were smokers. Smoking and asbestos exposure
can each cause lung cancer alone and, if both are present, the probability of lung cancer rises
sharply. Asbestosis is non-cancerous scarring of the lungs due to inhaled asbestos fibers, which
causes loss of lung capacity. It varies widely in severity from non-disabling to severely
disabling. Along with mesothelioma, asbestosis is uniquely associated with asbestos exposure.
Pleural plaque is scarring or thickening of the pleural membrane and is generally non-disabling.
During the 1980’s, about 20% of asbestos claims involved some type of cancer, but this figure
had fallen to about 10% by the mid-1990’s.12
     The probability of victims’ asbestos disease becoming more serious depends on the length and
intensity of their exposure, but because asbestos diseases involve a long latency period, most
victims’ disease will not progress further. Nonetheless, plaintiffs have an incentive to file
lawsuits as soon as they discover their asbestos exposure even if they are unimpaired, because if
they delay, statutes of limitations that begin to run when harm is discovered may prevent them
from filing in the future. And even if they can file later, defendants may have gone bankrupt in
the meantime.13 Thus asbestos litigation is characterized by claimants with little or no
impairment racing to file early.14
     As the original asbestos product producers have gone bankrupt, plaintiffs’ law firms’ attention
has shifted to a new set of defendants, including firms whose products contained asbestos (such
as automobile and auto parts manufacturers), firms that sold asbestos-containing products (such
as Sears), and firms whose production processes use asbestos insulation (such as food processors



12
   See Carroll et al (2002). Note that the disease distribution of asbestos claimants differs from the disease
distribution of asbestos trials --see below.
13
   When firms file for bankruptcy, they set up compensation trusts for asbestos victims, but the levels of
compensation are much lower than in the tort system. See White (2002) for discussion.
14
   Courts in some states put non-impaired claimants on an “inactive docket” that prevents them from suing
immediately, but allows them to sue in the future if they develop a serious asbestos disease. But they still face the
risk that defendants’ funds will run out before they can sue. See Behrens (2002) for discussion. Miceli and
Segerson (2002) provide a model showing the conditions under which there is a race to file lawsuits.


                                                                                                                        5
and textile producers). At least 6,000 separate firms covering nearly all SIC codes have been
named as defendants in asbestos lawsuits (Carroll et al, 2002).
     The asbestos plaintiffs’ bar is a concentrated industry, with more half of all asbestos claims
handled by only ten plaintiffs’ law firms. Each of these firms represents thousands of
plaintiffs.15 Law firms recruit plaintiffs by advertising widely. They also offer factory workers
free lung X-rays to screen for asbestos fibers in return for workers signing retainer agreements
with the firm. Large numbers of textile workers have filed asbestos claims over the past few
years based on X-ray screening. These workers were exposed to asbestos because textile
factories have ventilation systems to filter textile fibers out of the air which were lined with
asbestos insulation. Because X-rays can detect low levels of asbestos fibers and because
screeners tended to find asbestos fibers more often than they are actually present, few of these
workers have any disability (see Carroll et al, 2002).
     Plaintiffs’ lawyers are formally retained on a contingency fee basis, keeping 33 to 40% of the
settlement or damage award.16 For plaintiffs’ law firms to make a profit representing asbestos
claimants, they must be able to obtain judgments or settlements on behalf of minimally injured
plaintiffs, since a large majority of asbestos claims are of this type. Because trials are time-
consuming and contingency fees do not compensate plaintiffs’ lawyers for their time spent at
trial, they greatly favor settlements over trials. Plaintiffs’ lawyers’ power goes well beyond the
formal agreements that they sign with plaintiffs. Because plaintiffs are unsophisticated,
plaintiffs’ lawyers rather than plaintiffs determine the litigation strategy. Also, plaintiffs’ law
firms may negotiate mass settlements with particular defendants that specify only a total dollar
payment, so that the lawyer decides how to divide the settlement among plaintiffs.
     Plaintiffs’ law firms have a great deal of influence over the litigation process. Most asbestos
claims are filed in state courts and law firms concentrate claims in the most pro-plaintiff
jurisdictions. Also, plaintiffs’ law firms take advantage of state joinder rules to join or
consolidate groups of claims whose size and composition favor plaintiffs. For example,
Mississippi is a favored location for asbestos litigation because its liberal joinder rules allow
asbestos claims to be litigated there even if neither the plaintiff nor the defendant is located in


15
  The law firm of Baron & Budd handles 12,000 asbestos claimants. See Parloff (2002) and Carroll et al (2002).
16
  Contingency fees in asbestos litigation have been in the range of 33-40% since the early 1980’s and did not fall
over time as asbestos litigation became more routine. This is probably because of the high concentration of claims
among a small number of plaintiffs’ law firms. See Carroll et al (2002) for data.


                                                                                                                     6
Mississippi. The only requirement is that the claim must be joined to another claim that involves
a Mississippi resident suing an out-of-state defendant. This allows large blocks of claims from
all over the country to be consolidated in Mississippi. Mississippi is also favorable for plaintiffs
because it has no limits on the size of punitive damage awards.17
     Judges also have enormous influence over asbestos litigation and plaintiffs’ lawyers have an
incentive to choose jurisdictions where judges and juries are pro-plaintiff. Judges decide when
to schedule a particular trial, whether to use the three procedural innovations, whether to admit
particular types of evidence in court, and (in some states) whether to instruct the jury to consider
punitive damages as well as compensatory damages. Some judges allow plaintiffs’ lawyers to
decide which claims to include in consolidated or bouquet trials and allow lawyers to delay
announcing plaintiffs’ names until shortly before the trial begins. This benefits plaintiffs because
defense lawyers may not have time to verify plaintiffs’ work histories or disease claims before
the trial begins. Some judges also encourage the parties to negotiate mass settlements and may
become personally involved in the negotiations. Plaintiffs’ lawyers also favor courts located in
inaccessible places, because defendants’ lawyers must travel to these places for trials, while
plaintiffs’ lawyers are more likely to live nearby. (See Bell, 2002.)
     In asbestos trials, strict liability is applied if the jury determines that the plaintiff was exposed
to asbestos and not adequately warned of its dangers. Generally plaintiffs are in a strong position
on warnings, because producers knew or should have known of the dangers of asbestos exposure
long before they began to put warnings on their products. However plaintiffs often have little
evidence showing that they were exposed to particular defendants’ asbestos products.

III.       Theoretical Discussion


17
  Texas law was similarly favorable to plaintiffs, but was changed in 1995 to restrict joinder and limit punitive
damages. See “Texas Forum Non Conveniens Law Constitutional, State Supreme Court Rules,” Mealey’s Litigation
Review: Asbestos,vol. 14:12, July 16, 1999, and Rothstein (2001).




                                                                                                                7
    Because asbestos plaintiffs are unsophisticated and plaintiffs’ lawyers represent thousands of
cases, plaintiffs’ lawyers (rather than plaintiffs) decide on litigation strategy. Plaintiffs’ lawyers
are assumed to maximize the combined expected return to themselves and plaintiffs, minus the
opportunity cost of their time. The combined expected return from going to trial in a particular
asbestos lawsuit is p D + ε π − wT 1 − R + X . Here pπ is the plaintiff’s lawyer’s
                     π π                π   π
prediction of the plaintiff’s probability of winning at trial and Dπ is the predicted damage award

if the plaintiff wins. Both compensatory and punitive damages are included. ε π is the error in

the plaintiff’s lawyer’s predictions. T 1 is the time required for a single-plaintiff trial and w is the
opportunity cost of the plaintiff’s lawyer’s time per unit. Rπ is the risk premium that plaintiffs’
lawyers are willing to give up to obtain the certainty of settlement rather than face the
uncertainty of trial. It depends on the plaintiff’s lawyer’s degree of risk aversion, the variance of
the trial outcome, and the degree of correlation of outcomes across claims. X π measures the

external effect of the particular case on other cases that the same law firm represents. X π is
positive when plaintiffs’ lawyers expect the trial outcome to be unusually favorable and when
they represent large numbers of other plaintiffs whose claims would be more valuable following
the trial.
    The defendant’s expected cost of going to trial is p δ Dδ + ε δ + Cδ + Rδ + X δ . Here the δ
subscripts denote the defendant and most of the terms are analogous to those for the plaintiff.
Defendants, unlike plaintiffs, are assumed to be informed and to make their own litigation
decisions. Cδ is the defendant’s legal cost of going to trial. The risk premium Rδ is the amount

that the defendant is willing to pay to obtain the certainty of settlement. Rδ increases as the case
poses a bigger threat to the defendant’s solvency and ability to avoid bankruptcy. Although
bankruptcy limits firms’ liability for damages and therefore reduces risk, managers suffer heavy
losses if bankruptcy occurs. For defendants, the external effect X δ of the particular case is on
the number of future cases filed against them. Settling low damage claims is likely to cause
many new claims to be filed, because representing low damage claims is more profitable if they
settle. In contrast, settling high damage claims has little effect on the number of future filings,




                                                                                                           8
since representing high damage claims is profitable even if they go to trial. Thus X δ is zero for
high damage claims and negative for low damage claims.18
      A necessary condition for settlement to occur is:

                  pπ Dπ + ε π − wT 1 − Rπ + X π < p δ Dδ + ε δ + Cδ + Rδ + X δ                              (1)

The probability of settlement is assumed to increase as the settlement range, which equals the
right hand side minus the left hand side of (1), gets larger.
     Now turn to the procedural innovations used in asbestos litigation. Since judges’ goal is to
save court time by encouraging settlements, we examine how each of the three innovations affect
the amount of time spent in trial and the probability of settlement. Also, because our data is for
asbestos trials rather than settlements, we examine the effect of the procedural innovations on
trial outcomes.
     Consolidation. In both state and Federal court, lawsuits that are consolidated must have
“common issues of law or fact.” Issues that are common across asbestos claims include evidence
concerning the harmful effects of asbestos and the causal relationship between exposure to
asbestos and development of particular diseases. In addition, consolidations often involve
plaintiffs who worked at the same workplace. For these groups, common issues of fact also
include evidence concerning the specific asbestos products that the claimants were exposed to,
what the defendants knew about the dangers of asbestos and when they knew it (the “state-of-
the-art” defense), and whether the defendants provided adequate warning of danger from contact
with asbestos products.
     Consider first the effect of consolidation on the amount of time required for trial.
Suppose the judge could either hold independent trials of N asbestos lawsuits or a single
consolidated trial of all N cases. The amount of time required for a consolidated trial of N cases
is T N . A consolidated trial saves court time if T N < NT 1 . Why do consolidated cases save
court time? One factor is that only a single jury rather than N separate juries must be impaneled.




18
   This simple model assumes that a single plaintiff bargains with a single defendant. Although the empirical work
concerns multiple asbestos claims that may be consolidated for trial, plaintiffs are nearly always represented by a
single plaintiffs’ law firm. See Spier (2002) for a model in which multiple plaintiffs bargain with a single insolvent
defendant, so that there are externalities among the plaintiffs that affect their bargaining strategies. I ignore these
effects here. See Wittman (1985) for discussion of the standard model of trial versus settlement.


                                                                                                                          9
Second, common issues are presented only once rather than multiple times. Thus judges have an
incentive to consolidate multiple asbestos cases for trial in order to save court time.
     Now consider how consolidation affects the probability of settlement. Consolidation is likely
to make trial outcomes more highly correlated than if the same cases had independent trials.
First, the same judge and jury make decisions that apply to all of the plaintiffs and therefore the
same decision-making process is applied to all N cases. If the trials were instead independent,
then there would be a different jury for each plaintiff, there might be a different judge, and even
the same judge might make different decisions across trials. Second, in consolidated trials the
evidence for all of the plaintiffs is presented to the jury before it makes any decisions. This
means that the evidence is more homogeneous in consolidated trials than in independent trials.
These factors tend to increase the degree of positive correlation of outcomes in a consolidated
trial.
     Suppose two cases have the same observable characteristics but each has an error term. A
standard measure of trial risk for both cases is the ratio of the standard deviation of the combined
outcomes to the mean of the combined outcomes:

                               (1 / 2 µ ) 2σ 2 (1 + ρ )

Here σ 2 is the combined variance of the outcomes, µ is the combined mean outcome, and ρ is
the correlation coefficient. If the two cases have independent trials and the correlation
coefficient is zero, then the risk of trial is ( 2 / 2)(σ / µ ) = .707( σ / µ ). If the two cases are
consolidated for trial but the correlation coefficient remains zero, then the risk of trial is
unchanged. Now suppose the cases are consolidated for trial and this raises the correlation of the
outcomes, so that ρ increases from 0 to .5. Then risk rises to .866( σ / µ ).19 Thus if
consolidation increases the degree of positive correlation of the outcomes, both risk
premiums Rδ and Rπ are predicted to rise and therefore settlement is more likely to occur. I
show below that the average correlation coefficient of the outcomes is higher when cases have
consolidated trials than when cases that had independent trials are randomly assigned to groups
of the same size.

19
  This is the standard insurance result that risk per case falls when an insurer writes more policies that are
uncorrelated. If n cases are consolidated rather than 2 and the outcomes are independent, then the risk measure
increases by a factor of   n / n rather than 2 / 2 .


                                                                                                                  10
       Consolidation also affects the probability of settlement via its effect on legal costs.
Consolidation raises defendants’ legal costs because individual plaintiffs sue many different
defendants and each defendant must be represented at the trial even if it is sued by only one
plaintiff. Thus defendants’ lawyers have to attend longer trials than they would if the claims
were tried independently and this raises the probability of settlement. In contrast, consolidation
has relatively little effect on plaintiffs’ legal costs, since the same lawyers represent all of the
plaintiffs.
       Overall these factors suggest that case consolidation reduces trial time and raises the
likelihood of settlement. Thus judges with many asbestos cases on their dockets have an
incentive to use it.
        Now consider how consolidation affects trial outcomes. As discussed above, consolidation
changes the information set available to the jury, because juries hear evidence about all of the
plaintiffs whose claims are consolidated before they make their decisions for any one plaintiff.
One possibility is that juries award more to plaintiffs who are not disabled when they have
consolidated trials with other plaintiffs whose disease is more severe, because the jury infers that
less severe diseases will inevitably become more severe over time. Also defendants in asbestos
trials often appear callous because they failed to label their products as dangerous and this often
makes juries more sympathetic to plaintiffs. In consolidated trials, there are more defendants and
therefore a higher probability that at least one defendant will appear callous, which benefits all of
the plaintiffs. Finally, suppose plaintiffs in a consolidated trial consist of both smokers and non-
smokers. Defendants are likely to argue that smokers’ disease was caused by smoking rather
than asbestos (the “smoking defense”). But in a consolidated trial, the jury can observe that non-
smoking plaintiffs have the same disease even though they never smoked, and therefore may
infer that asbestos rather than smoking caused the smokers’ disease. This could lead the jury to
award higher damages to smokers in consolidated trials. These examples suggest that outcomes
are likely to be more favorable to plaintiffs in consolidated trials than independent trials.20
       Bifurcation.21 Judges can choose among straight bifurcation, reverse bifurcation, or no
bifurcation. In straight (reverse) bifurcation, the jury decides liability (damages) in the first
phase of the trial. Then the trial is suspended while settlement bargaining takes place. If the
20
  However additional information in theory could cause outcomes to change in either direction. See Selwin and
Picus (1987) for a description of an asbestos trial that illustrates the smoker scenario.
21
     See Landes (1993) for a model of bifurcated trials.


                                                                                                                11
parties do not settle, then the same jury decides damages (liability) in the second phase of the
trial. Punitive damages may be decided as part of either phase or may be put off to a separate
phase three. In litigation generally, straight bifurcation is more common than reverse
bifurcation, because defendants win about half of all cases and straight bifurcation saves the
court time required for the damages phase of the trial when plaintiffs win. However in asbestos
trials, reverse bifurcation is more common. Judges may use reverse bifurcation because
defendants’ probability of winning is lower in asbestos cases than in litigation generally, so that
the gain from resolving liability is smaller. Also damages are more uncertain than liability, so
that deciding damages reduces uncertainty by more than deciding liability and therefore has a
bigger impact on the probability of settlement. (See below for data.) In the discussion below, I
consider only the comparison of reverse bifurcation versus no bifurcation.
    Suppose a consolidated trial of N cases may use reverse bifurcation. Phases one and two of
a reverse bifurcated trial are assumed to take T1 N and T2 N days of trial time, respectively.
Assume that total trial time for both phases of a reverse bifurcated trial is greater than that for a
non-bifurcated trial of N cases, or T1 N + T2 N > T N . Expected trial time for a reverse bifurcated

trial is T1 + (1 − s rb )T2 , where s rb is the probability of settlement following phase one. Judges
         N                N



choose reverse bifurcation over no bifurcation if expected trial time is lower when the trial is
reverse bifurcated, or:


                              T1 + (1 − s rb )T2 ≤ T N
                                N             N
                                                                                      (3)

I argued above that the probability of settlement is higher when more cases are consolidated, so

that s rb increases as N rises. In addition, T N increases faster than T1 N as N rises, so that the

magnitude of the difference between the left and right hand sides of (3) increases as N rises.
These considerations suggest that judges are more likely to use reverse bifurcation as more cases
are consolidated for trial.
     Suppose we compare the probability of settlement following phase one of a reverse
bifurcated trial versus before the trial begins. Resolving damages increases the probability of
settlement by resolving the two sides’ disagreement over D, which is likely to be their main
source of disagreement. Although the remaining legal costs of trial are lower after phase one of
the trial and this reduces the probability of settlement, the former effect is likely to more than


                                                                                                        12
outweigh the latter. This suggests that if settlement has not occurred by the time the trial begins,
judges will find it attractive to use reverse bifurcation, because part of the time required for a full
trial can still be saved if the parties settle after the first phase.
     Now consider the effects of reverse bifurcation on the outcome of trial. Studies of other
types of litigation suggest that juries’ decisions concerning damages often reflect a mixture of
evidence concerning both damage and liability (see Wittman, 1986, and White, 1992). Thus
reverse bifurcation may affect trial outcomes by eliminating part of the evidence that juries
would otherwise consider in making their damage decisions. In asbestos trials, the evidence
concerning damage is often strongly in the plaintiff’s favor (because the plaintiff has a disease
that is only caused by asbestos), while the evidence concerning liability is often weak (because
the plaintiff cannot show that s/he was exposed to particular asbestos products). If the jury had
both types of evidence, then it might decide that the plaintiff’s damages amount to, say,
$500,000, but because jury members disagree on whether to find the defendant liable, the jury
might award damages of only $250,000. However in a reverse bifurcated trial, the jury does not
hear evidence concerning liability during phase one, so that in the example it would award
damages of $500,000 rather than $250,000. Although juries might compensate for higher
damage awards by finding defendants not liable more frequently in phase two, this will not be
observed if the parties settle following phase one. This suggests that trials that use reverse
bifurcation are likely to have higher damage awards than non-bifurcated trials.
    “Bouquet” trials. In a bouquet trial, a small group of S cases is selected to be tried together
from a large group of size N. Following the trial, the judge directs the parties to negotiate a mass
settlement of the remaining N – S cases, based on the outcomes in the bouquet trial. The
alternative to a bouquet trial is a single consolidated trial. For simplicity, I assume that the
bouquet trial is not bifurcated, although reverse bifurcation and bouquet trials may be combined.
     Do bouquet trials save trial time? Suppose the probability of settlement following a bouquet
trial of S cases is sb , the time required for the bouquet trial is T S , and the time required to try

the remaining N - S cases is T N −S . The cost in trial time of a consolidated trial is T N and the
expected cost in trial time of a bouquet trial is T S + (1 − sb )T N − S , where sb is the probability of

settling the large group of N-S cases after the bouquet trial. Bouquet trials save trial time over
consolidated trials if:



                                                                                                            13
                                        T S + (1 − s b )T N − S ≤ T N .                       (4)

Bouquet trials become more attractive as N increases, because consolidated trials are subject to
diseconomies of scale as the number of cases increases.22 As N increases, T S remains the same,
but T N −S and T N both increase, so that condition (4) is satisfied at lower levels of sb . This

suggests that judges’ incentive to use bouquet trials increases as the number of asbestos cases on
their dockets rises. In effect, using a bouquet trial allows the judge to get the time savings from
a consolidated trial, even when the number of cases is so large that a consolidated trial would be
impractical.
        Now consider how the probability of settlement differs when the parties negotiate over
settling N - S cases following a bouquet trial of S cases versus when they negotiate over settling
N cases without a bouquet trial. Because judges often continue to use the same jury for
additional cases in the large group if the parties do not settle the small group, the bouquet trial
reduces the differences between pπ versus pδ and between Dπ versus Dδ for cases in the large
group and it also signals that the outcomes of the large group will be highly correlated with the
outcomes of the small group. Both effects make settlement more likely.
       Finally, consider how bouquet trials affect damage awards. Because judges have
considerable control over the size of damage awards and are assumed to want the parties to
settle, consider whether high versus low damage awards in the bouquet trial are more likely to
lead to a mass settlement of the large group. In the standard trial versus settlement model given
in eq. (1) above, higher predicted damage awards increase the likelihood of trial rather than
settlement occurring. However higher damage awards in the bouquet trial context are likely to
have the opposite effect, because they threaten the defendant firms’ solvency and therefore raise
defendants’ risk premium, Rδ . For example in the Mississippi bouquet trial discussed above,
damage awards in the small group were $4,000,000 per plaintiff and the large group contained
1738 plaintiffs. Thus if the large group were tried before the same judge and jury, a possible
outcome was that total damages as high as ($4,000,000)(1,738) = $7 billion could be awarded.
Even paying a small fraction of this figure could exhaust the insurance coverage and threaten the



22
     As N gets large, jury members tend to forget the evidence and few jurors are willing to serve.



                                                                                                      14
solvency of many defendants and they therefore were willing to pay high amounts to settle.23 On
the other side, if damage awards in bouquet trials are low, then defendants prefer to avoid
settling because of concern that settling will encourage plaintiffs’ lawyers to file additional
claims, i.e., X δ is low or negative. Thus judges gain when bouquet trials result in high damage
awards, because the parties are more likely to agree to a mass settlement following the trial.
     These results suggest that judges have an incentive to use the three procedural innovations
because they save trial time and increase the probability of settlements. But the innovations are
also predicted to improve trial outcomes for plaintiffs.

IV. Data and summary statistics

     The dataset consists of all asbestos trials reported in Andrew’s Asbestos Litigation Reporter
or Mealey’s Litigation Reporter: Asbestos from mid-1987 to mid-2002.24 Trials are included in
the dataset as long as the judge or jury reached a decision on either liability or damages.
Regardless of whether trials were individual or consolidated, each plaintiff is a separate
observation. There are about 5,500 observations.
     Variables that are plaintiff-specific include the plaintiff’s alleged disease, whether the
plaintiff died before trial, whether the plaintiff smoked, the number of defendants that each
plaintiff sues, a dummy variable that equals one if the plaintiff’s claim was consolidated for trial
with one or more additional plaintiffs whose disease was more severe, and the outcome of the
trial. Variables that are trial-specific include the date of the trial, the state in which the trial
occurred, whether the trial was in state or Federal court, the number of claims consolidated,
whether the trial was bifurcated or reverse bifurcated, and whether it was a bouquet trial.
     Summary statistics are given in Table 1. More than one-quarter of all trials occur in
Pennsylvania, because large numbers of workers were exposed to asbestos at Philadelphia-area
naval shipyards. Other states with large numbers of trials include New York, Texas, California,
and West Virginia. Surprisingly, Mississippi has only one-half of one percent of trials, although




23
   If high damages are awarded, then even if defendants are confident that they would be overturned on appeal,
defendants cannot appeal without posting a bond equal to the amount of the damage award, which they often cannot
do without violating loan covenants. Priest (1997) has argued that large class actions hurt defendants by threatening
their solvency and therefore forcing them to settle rather than go to trial.
24
   Pre-1990 data are taken from Andrew’s and more recent data from Mealey’s.


                                                                                                                 15
it is reported to have 20% of asbestos lawsuits (see Parloff, 2002). About one-tenth of asbestos
trials occur in Federal court, with the rest in state courts.
      Diseases are divided into four levels of increasing severity: pleural plaque (13% of trials),
asbestosis (42%), lung and other cancers (12%), and mesothelioma (16%). The remaining 16%
of plaintiffs have missing disease data—most of them were in large consolidated trials.25
About 10% of individual plaintiffs are identified as smokers. Smoking is identified only when
the defendant used smoking as a legal defense at trial and this occurs mainly in lung cancer
cases: about 42% of plaintiffs with lung cancer are identified as smokers, compared to only 7%
of other plaintiffs. Because virtually all plaintiffs are male, no sex variable is used. The average
age of plaintiffs who were alive at the time of trial was 63. About 13% of plaintiffs died before
their trials.
     Turning to the procedural variables, about 24% of plaintiffs had single-plaintiff trials, while
the remainder had consolidated trials of two or more plaintiffs. 34% of consolidated trials
involved 2 through 7 plaintiffs, with the distribution fairly uniform over this range. The
remaining 42% of trials involved 8 or more plaintiffs, of which the largest consolidation in the
dataset involved 328 claims. About 16% of plaintiffs had bifurcated or reverse bifurcated trials
(most were reverse bifurcated) and 0.6% had bouquet trials.26 One-third of plaintiffs in
consolidated trials were combined with at least one plaintiff who had a higher-level disease.
As discussed in the theoretical section, plaintiffs who have consolidated trials are also more
likely to have bifurcated trials: the overall correlation between bifurcated trials and consolidated
trials is .19 and the correlation between bifurcated trials and consolidated trials of eight or more
plaintiffs is .35. But the correlation between bouquet trials and bifurcated trials is small.
     Half of all claims involve a single defendant, 14% involve two defendants, 12% involve three
defendants, and about 23% involve four or more. Most plaintiffs originally sue many more




25
   Note that 28% of all asbestos trials involve plaintiffs who claim to have some type of cancer, compared to only
11% of all asbestos claims. See Carroll et al (2002), p. 64, for data on asbestos claims.
26
   The bifurcated trial variable equals one if the Reporter identified the trial as bifurcated or reverse bifurcated. The
bouquet trial variable equals one if the Reporter article or another news article identified the trial as such (not
necessarily using this term). The number of bouquet trials in the dataset is small because they are rarely appealed
and therefore are rarely mentioned in Reporter articles. The coefficients of the bouquet trial variable could be
biased upward if the only bouquet trials that are identified are those with high damage awards. An early bouquet
trial that occurred in Texas in 1990 (the Cimino trial) is exc luded because it was quite different from later bouquet
trials.


                                                                                                                        16
defendants, but defendants are only counted if they did not settle by the time the jury decided on
a verdict.27
     The outcome variables are given at the bottom of table 1. Plaintiffs win 69% of asbestos
trials—a high figure compared to most types of litigation.28 The average compensatory damage
award, conditional on damages being positive, is $804,000 (all dollar figures are in 1987
dollars).29 Conditional on the defendant being found liable, plaintiffs’ probability of being
awarded punitive damages is 35%, which is much higher than the figure of 6% reported by
Eisenberg et al (1997) for general litigation. The average punitive damage award, conditional on
punitive damages being positive, is $1.12 million. The expected return from going to trial,
including both types of damage, is $636,000.
     In the theoretical section, I discussed how reverse bifurcation reduces expected trial time,
because resolving damages increases the probability of settlement by more than resolving
liability. Table 2 gives the risk of damage versus the risk of liability, as measured for both by the
ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. The risk of liability for compensatory damages is .66,
which is much lower than the risk of compensatory damages themselves of 2.8. Similarly, the
risk of liability for punitive damages is 1.75, while the risk of punitive damages themselves is
6.7. Table 2 also shows that the correlation of liability for compensatory versus punitive
damages is .41, while the correlation of the two types of damages is only .17. (The latter figure
is for all trials; damages are set equal to zero if no damages were awarded.)
     Now turn to whether consolidating claims for trial makes trials more risky by increasing the
degree of correlation of the outcomes. To answer this question for two-plaintiff trials, I first
compute the correlation coefficient of the outcomes of all two-plaintiff trials. Then as a
comparison, I randomly assign all single-plaintiff trials in pairs and compute the correlation
coefficient of the outcomes for the random pairs. The correlation coefficient for the actual

27
   Typically, plaintiffs sue all producers of asbestos-containing products that they were exposed to during their
working lives, except those that have gone bankrupt. They rarely sue their employers, because the workers’
compensation system limits employers’ liability. See Brodeur (1985) for discussion of plaintiffs’ lawyers’ early
attempts to sue employers under workers’ compensation.
28
   Plaintiffs are coded as winning if any of the defendants was found liable. The damage award is the total for all
defendants who are found liable. States vary in whether they apply joint and several liability to damage awards
(meaning that all defendants who are found liable are responsible for up to the entire damage award) or whether the
jury divides the damage award among the defendants. See Chang and Sigman (2000) for discussion of joint and
several liability.
29
   Note that defendants do not necessarily pay the damage awards listed here, since it may be reduced (“remitted”)
by the trial judge and/or reduced or reversed on appeal. Also defendants may file for bankruptcy following the
award. On the other hand, pre-judgment interest is added to damage awards and it is often high in asbestos cases.


                                                                                                                  17
consolidated trials is predicted to be higher than the correlation coefficient for the random pairs.
However, a problem with the randomization procedure is that plaintiffs who had single-plaintiff
trials could never have been paired with plaintiffs whose trials occurred in other states.
Therefore before assigning the single-plaintiff trials in pairs, I first estimate probit (tobit)
regressions explaining whether plaintiffs win (the damage award) as a function of a set of
dummy variables for states that either had large numbers of trials or are particularly pro-plaintiff
or pro-defendant. From the regression results I compute predicted values for the outcome
variable and then use the predicted values to compute the correlation coefficient for the random
pairs. The analogous procedure is followed for three-plaintiff consolidated trials, etc.30
     Results are shown in table 3 separately for each of the outcome variables. The first entry in
the table shows that the actual correlation coefficient of liability in two-plaintiff consolidations is
.71, compared to only .37 in single-plaintiff trials that were randomly paired. For compensatory
damages, the figures are .76 versus .31 and, for expected total damages, they are .90 versus .35.
These results support the hypothesis that consolidating cases for trial causes the outcomes to
become more highly correlated. Consolidation therefore increases the probability of settlement
by making trials more risky. The results for larger consolidations show that the correlation
coefficient for expected total damages increases from .90 to .97 as the number of consolidated
claims rises from two to seven. But the correlation coefficient falls to .60 for consolidations of
eight plaintiffs or more.
     Table 4 gives information on how trial outcomes have varied over time. The number of trials
was higher in the earlier years of the sample than in the later years. The probability of plaintiffs
winning has remained fairly constant over time, but real damage awards--compensatory and
punitive--have risen sharply.

V. Empirical Results




30
   For consolidations of three or more, the reported correlation coefficient is the average value of the off-diagonal
terms in the correlation matrix. The state dummy variables used in the regressions are the same as those reported in
tables 5 and 6 below, plus Illinois and Maryland. Adding disease and smoking variables to the regressions used to
correct for state did not change the results in table 3.


                                                                                                                   18
     The left hand column of table 5 gives the results of a probit regression explaining whether
plaintiffs won.31 The figures are marginal effects, with robust standard errors clustered by trial
in parentheses. Asterisks indicate statistical significance at the 95% level.
     Turn first to the effects of the procedural innovations. When two or three plaintiffs’ claims
are consolidated for trial, plaintiffs’ probability of winning rises by 15 percentage points
compared to single-plaintiff trials and, when four or five plaintiffs’ claims are consolidated,
plaintiffs’ probability of winning rises by 11 percentage points. Both effects are highly
significant. These results suggest that small consolidations give plaintiffs an important
advantage in litigation. Larger consolidations have a positive effect on plaintiffs’ probability of
winning, but they are not statistically significant. When trials are bifurcated or reverse
bifurcated, plaintiffs’ probability of winning rises by 29 percentage points and, in a bouquet trial,
plaintiffs’ probability of winning rises by 21 percentage points. Both effects are statistically
significant. Thus bifurcated and bouquet trials give plaintiffs a substantial advantage.
      The regression includes dummy variables for seven states that either have many asbestos
trials or are particularly pro-plaintiff or pro-defendant (the excluded group consists of all other
states). The results show that three states are particularly pro-plaintiff: plaintiffs’ probability of
winning is 28, 16 and 14 percentage points higher in West Virginia, Mississippi, and Texas than
in the excluded states, respectively. Not surprisingly, all three states have attracted substantial
numbers of asbestos filings. In contrast, plaintiffs are 6 percentage points less likely to win in
Pennsylvania than in the excluded states.32 These results suggest that plaintiffs’ lawyers get high
returns from concentrating their filings of asbestos claims in pro-plaintiff states. Cases tried in
Federal court are not significantly more likely to lead to verdicts favoring plaintiffs than those
tried in state courts.
     Now turn to the disease and smoking variables. The excluded disease category is pleural
plaque and the excluded smoking category is non-smoker. Because of the close relationship
between lung cancer and smoking, these variables are entered separately and also interacted.
Plaintiffs who have mesothelioma are 13 percentage points more likely to win than those who
have pleural disease, while plaintiffs who have lung cancer and also smoke are 20 percentage

31
   Note that the disease variables are both severity measures and indicators of liability, since certain diseases are
uniquely associated with asbestos exposure.
32
   The percent of asbestos filings in Texas, Mississippi and West Virginia rose from 7% in 1970-87 to 38% in 1994-
97; while the percent of filings in Pennsylvania declined from 17% to 3% during the same period. See Carroll et al
(2002), p. 32. Adding additional state dummies to the probit model did not change the results.


                                                                                                                        19
points less likely to win. Both effects are statistically significant. Presumably the negative effect
of lung cancer and smoking together reflects juries’ difficulty in deciding whether asbestos
exposure or smoking caused the disease. However smoking by itself increases plaintiffs’
probability of winning by 13 percentage points and the effect is statistically significant. The
positive effect of smoking probably occurs because smokers on average are sicker than non-
smokers.33 A surprising result is that having a consolidated trial with a plaintiff whose disease is
in a higher category reduces rather than increases plaintiffs’ probability of winning, by 6
percentage points. This suggests that consolidation with other plaintiffs who have a more severe
disease does not benefit plaintiffs who have a less severe disease. However consolidation with
other plaintiffs who have the same disease but are more disabled may still benefit plaintiffs.
However the data do not allow us to test this latter effect.
     The last set of variables examines whether having multiple defendants at trial affects
plaintiffs’ probability of winning. When there are two defendants rather than one, plaintiffs’
probability of winning rises by 7 percentage points, but when there are four or more defendants,
plaintiffs’ probability of winning falls by 6 percentage points. Both effects are statistically
significant. Thus multiple defendants have a mixed effect on trial outcomes.
     The second and third columns of table 5 give the results of a Tobit regression explaining
compensatory damages. The sample is all cases in which damages were decided, so that
damages are truncated at zero when the plaintiff lost. Coefficients and robust standard errors
clustered by trial are given in column two and marginal effects are given in column three.
Figures are in thousands of 1987 dollars.
     The results show that consolidated trials have mixed effects on damage levels. Plaintiffs in
consolidated trials of up to five claims received between $90,000 and $137,000 more, while
plaintiffs in larger consolidations of eight or more claims received $173,000 less. Only the latter
effect is statistically significant. However bifurcated trials and bouquet trials both have large
positive effects on damage levels: the marginal effects are $628,000 and $2,410,000,
respectively, and both are statistically significant. The large positive effects of bifurcated and
bouquet trials on damages may reflect judges favoring plaintiffs in their conduct of these trials in
order to increase the likelihood that settlement negotiations will succeed.


33
  When the regression was re-run with an interaction term between smoking and the number of cases consolidated,
the interaction term was not significant.


                                                                                                             20
     The state dummy variables show that the same states that are particularly pro-plaintiff on
liability are also pro-plaintiff on damages. Plaintiffs in Mississippi, West Virginia and Texas
received $1.6 million, $467,000, and $394,000 more in compensatory damages than plaintiffs in
the excluded states, respectively. Plaintiffs also received $751,000 more in New York and
$187,000 less in Pennsylvania than in the excluded states. These results again suggest that
plaintiffs’ lawyers gain substantially from choosing to litigate in favorable jurisdictions.
Plaintiffs also received significantly higher damage awards if they have mesothelioma or other
types of cancer, rather than pleural plaque, and if they are smokers. As in the regression
explaining whether plaintiffs win, this is probably because smokers are sicker than other
plaintiffs.
    Having two defendants at trial rather than one raises the damage award by $219,000 and the
effect is significant at the 5% level. However damage awards are not significantly different
when there are three or more defendants rather than one. These results suggest that juries tend to
award higher damages when the costs are shared among a small number of defendants.
    Table 6, column 1, reports a probit model explaining whether plaintiffs receive punitive
damages. The sample consists all trials in which at least one defendant was found liable for
compensatory damages. Turning to the procedural innovations, the largest effect is that of
bifurcated trials, which are associated with an increase of 54 percentage points in plaintiffs’
probability of winning punitive damages. Plaintiffs are also 6 to 18 percentage points more
likely to receive punitive damages when trials are consolidated, although the results are only
borderline significant (the 2-3 case consolidation variable has a p value of .085 and the 6-7 case
consolidation variables has a p value of .073). Thus when juries award punitive damages to any
plaintiff in a consolidated trial, they are more likely to award punitive damages to the other
plaintiffs in the consolidated trial as well. However, plaintiffs in bouquet trials are 28 percentage
points less likely to receive punitive damages. This is probably because bouquet trials usually
settle before the punitive damage phase of the trial.
    The same states that are pro-plaintiff on compensatory damages are also much more likely to
award punitive damages: plaintiffs in Mississippi, Texas, and West Virginia are 36 to 51
percentage points more likely to receive punitive damages than plaintiffs in the excluded states.
In contrast, plaintiffs in Pennsylvania are 42 percentage points less likely to be awarded punitive
damages than plaintiffs in the excluded states. Plaintiffs with severe diseases are also much



                                                                                                        21
more likely to receive punitive damages. Those with mesothelioma, lung cancer (for non-
smokers), and other cancer are 17, 26, and 28 percentage points more likely to receive punitive
damages and all of these effects are significant. However plaintiffs are 20 percentage points less
likely to receive punitive damages if they have lung cancer and also smoked. Finally, plaintiffs
are significantly less likely to receive punitive damages when there are more than four
defendants at trial. This may reflect the fact that juries must impose the punitive damage award
on a particular defendant and they may it difficult to pick out a particular defendant when they
all engaged in similar behavior.
  The second and third columns of table 6 give the results of a Tobit model explaining the level
of punitive damages. The sample is all plaintiffs who received compensatory damages; punitive
damages are truncated at zero if none were awarded. The results show that plaintiffs in
consolidated trials do not receive significantly different punitive damage awards than plaintiffs in
independent trials. Plaintiffs in bifurcated and bouquet trials receive less in punitive damages,
but the effects are not statistically significant. Thus none of the procedural innovations have
significant effects on the size of punitive damage awards. The fact that bifurcated and bouquet
trials tend to have lower punitive damages may reflect the fact that these trials are more likely to
settle before they reach the punitive damages stage, i.e., judges are generally successful in their
efforts to obtain mass settlements before the trials are completed.
   Punitive damages are significantly higher in the same three pro-plaintiff states: awards were
$397,000 to $570,000 higher in Texas, West Virginia and Mississippi than in the omitted states.
Also, plaintiffs in Pennsylvania receive significantly lower punitive damages than plaintiffs in
the omitted states. None of the disease or smoking variables are statistically significant in
explaining the size of punitive damage awards.
   Taking the results in tables 5 and 6 together, the models explaining whether damages are
awarded consistently fit better than the models explaining the level of damages. For compensatory
damages, the R 2 value is .19 for whether damages are awarded, compared to only .01 for the level
of damages. For punitive damages, the values are .50 versus .03. These results are in accord with
Sunstein et al’s (2002) experiments in which mock juries hear legal cases and decide on both types
of damages. They found that for both types of damages, juries make fairly predictable decisions
concerning whether or not to award damages, but erratic and unpredictable decisions concerning
the dollar amounts of damages.



                                                                                                       22
     Finally, table 7 combines the results from tables 5 and 6 to compute the effect of the procedural
variables and other selected variables on plaintiffs’ expected return from trial.34 The main result of
the paper is that procedural innovations have very large effects on trial outcomes. In particular,
plaintiffs in bifurcated and bouquet trials on average receive $1.2 million more than plaintiffs in
non-bifurcated and non-bouquet trials, which nearly triples their expected return from trial. Those
in bifurcated trials receive higher awards of both compensatory and punitive damages, while those
in bouquet trials receive higher compensatory damages but lower punitive damages. Plaintiffs in
consolidated trials of up to seven plaintiffs receive between $200,000 and $305,000 more than
plaintiffs in independent trials, but plaintiffs in large consolidated trials of eight or more plaintiffs
receive slightly less. The fact that large consolidations appear to have a different effect on trial
outcomes than small consolidations may be due to the fact that large consolidations often have
missing disease information. Plaintiffs in the three most pro-plaintiff states of Mississippi, West
Virginia and Texas receive $2.1 million, $1.3 million, and $1 million more than plaintiffs in the
excluded states, respectively. Thus it is not surprising that all three of these states have become
centers for asbestos litigation.

VI. Conclusion

       Judges in courts with many asbestos claims encourage plaintiffs and defendants to agree to
mass settlements and I argue that this has made the asbestos crisis worse. The mechanism
works in the following way. Because of the large numbers of claims filed in particular courts,
judges in these courts adopt procedural innovations that are intended to reduce trial time and
encourage large numbers of cases to settle. But judges’ leverage to encourage mass settlements
of asbestos claims is higher when trial outcomes favor plaintiffs rather than defendants and, as a
result, judges tend to adopt procedural innovations that are pro-plaintiff. But when large
numbers of asbestos claims are settled on favorable terms for plaintiffs, then plaintiffs’ lawyers
find it extremely profitable to file additional claims in the same courts. Because of the nature of
asbestos exposure, the class of potential plaintiffs and defendants is virtually unlimited and, as a
result, the asbestos mass tort keeps growing.



34
  The increase in expected damage is (dp)D + (dD)p, where p and D are the mean values of the probability of
damages and the damage level and dp and dD are the marginal effects taken from table 5. The same procedure is
applied separately to compensatory and punitive damages.


                                                                                                                23
   In the paper, I use a new dataset of asbestos trials from 1987-2002 to test the hypothesis that
procedural innovations commonly used in asbestos trials favor plaintiffs. I find that in bifurcated
or bouquet trials, plaintiffs’ expected gain from trial increases by $1.2 million, or by nearly
200%, compared to their expected gain in non-bifurcated and non-bouquet trials. Also in
consolidated trials of up to seven plaintiffs, plaintiffs receive between $200,000 and $305,000
more, an increase in their expected return of 31 to 48 percent. These figures include both
compensatory and punitive damages. Thus the procedural innovations substantially increase
plaintiffs’ lawyers’ incentives to file additional asbestos claims. Finally in the three most pro-
plaintiff states of Mississippi, West Virginia and Texas, the expected return from trial increases
by one to two million dollars compared to the other states. Thus it is not surprising that all three
of these states have become centers for asbestos litigation.




                                                                                                       24
                                             References

American Academy of Actuaries, Public Policy Monograph, “Overview of Asbestos Issues and
Trends,” Dec. 2001. www.actuary.org/pdf/casualty/mono_dec01asbestos.pdf.

Angelina, Michael, and Jennifer Biggs, “Sizing Up Asbestos Exposure,” Mealey’s Litigation
Report: Asbestos, vol. 16:20, pp. 32-38, Nov. 26, 2001.

Behrens, Mark A., “Some Proposals for Courts Interested in Helping Sick Claimants and Solving
Serious Problems in Asbestos Litigation,” Baylor Law Review, vol. 54:2, pp. 332-358 (2002).

Bell, Griffin B. (2002), “Asbestos Litigation and Judicial Leadership: The Courts’ Duty to Help
Solve the Asbestos Litigation Crisis,” Briefly... Perspectives on Legislation, Regulation, and
Litigation, vol. 6:6, pp. 1-50.

Bhagavatula, Raji, Rebecca Moody, and Jason Russ, Asbestos: A Moving Target, A.M. Best’s
Review, vol. 102:5, pp. 85-90, Sept. 1, 2001.

Brickman, Lester, “The Asbestos Litigation Crisis: Is there a Need for an Administrative
Alternative?” Cardozo L. Rev., vol. 13, p. 1819 (1992).

Brodeur, Paul, Outrageous Misconduct: The Asbestos Industry on Trial. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1985.

Cabraser, Elizabeth (1998), “Life After Amchem: The Class Struggle Continues, Loyola Law
Review, vol. 31, pp. 373-394.

Castleman, Barry I., Asbestos: Medical and Legal Aspects, 4th edition (1996).

Carroll, S.J., D. Hensler, A. Abrahamse, J. Gross, M.White, S. Ashwood, and E. Sloss, Asbestos
Litigation Costs and Compensation: An Interim Report. Santa Monica: RAND Corporation
DB-397-ICJ, 2002.

Chang, Howard, and Hilary Sigman (2000), “Incentives to Settle under Joint and Several
Liability,” J. of Legal Studies, vol. 29(1), Part 1, pp. 205-237.

Eisenberg, Theodore, et al (1997), “The Predictability of Punitive Damages,” J. of Legal Studies,
vol. 36(2) (pt. 2), p. 623-662.

Landes, William M. (1993), “Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis,” J. of
Legal Studies, vol. 22, n1, pp. 99-134.

Miceli and Segerson (2002), “Do Exposure Suits Produce a ‘Race to File’? An Economic
Analysis of a Tort for Risk,” working paper, University of Connecticut.




                                                                                                    25
Mullenix, Linda S. (1991), “Beyond Consolidation: Post-aggregative Procedure in Asbestos
Mass Tort Litigation,” William and Mary Law Review, vol. 32, pp. 475-536.

Parloff, Roger, “Asbestos: The $200 Billion Miscarriage of Justice,” Fortune, Monday March 4,
2002.

Priest, George (1997), Procedural versus Substantive Controls of Mass Tort Class Actions,
Journal of Legal Studies, vol. 26, p. 521.

Rothstein, Paul F. (2001), “What Courts Can Do in the Face of the Never-Ending Asbestos
Crisis,” Mississippi Law Journal, vol. 71, pp. 1-71.

Saks, Michael J., and Peter D. Blanck (1992), “Justice Improved: The Unrecognized Benefits of
Aggregation and Sampling in the Trial of Mass Torts,” Stanford Law Review, vol. 44, pp. 815-.

Schwartz, V.E., and L. Lorber, “A Letter to the Nation’s Trial Judges: How the Focus on
Efficiency is Hurting You and Innocent Victims in Asbestos Liability Cases,” Am. J. of Trial
Advocacy, vol. 24, Fall 2000, pp. 247-271.

Selvin, M., and L. Picus (1987), “The Debate over Jury Performance,” RAND R-3479-ICJ.
Spier, Kathryn E. (2002), “Settlement with Multiple Plaintiffs: The Role of Insolvency,” J. of
Law, Economics and Org., vol. 18:2, pp. 295-323.
Sunstein, Cass R., Reid Hastie, John W. Payne, David A. Schkade, and W. Kip Viscusi, Punitive
Damages: How Juries Decide. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002.

White, Michelle J. (2002), “Why the Asbestos Genie Won’t Stay in the Bankruptcy Bottle,”
paper to appear in a symposium issue of the University of Cincinnati Law Review.

White, Michelle J. (1992), “An Empirical Test of the Comparative and Contributory Negligence
Rules in Accident Law," RAND Journal of Economics, Autumn 1989, pp. 308-330.

Willgang, Thomas E. (1987), Trends in Asbestos Litigation. Washington, D.C.: Federal Judicial
Center.

Wittman, Donald (1985), “Is The Selection of Cases for Trial Biased?” J. of Legal Stud., vol.
XVI(1), pp. 185-214.

Wittman, Donald (1986), “The Price of Negligence under Differing Liability Rules,” J. of Law
and Economics, vol. 29:1, pp. 151-162.




                                                                                                 26
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                              Mean     Std. Dev.
State in which trial occurred
   Pennsylvania                                              .272         .445
   Texas                                                     .141         .348
   New York                                                  .130         .336
   California                                                .102         .302
   West Virginia                                             .081         .272
   New Jersey                                                .056         .231
   Mississippi                                               .006         .078
If Federal court                                              .10         .302
Number of cases consolidated for trial
   1 (individual trials)                                     .235         .424
   2-3                                                       .113         .317
   4-5                                                       .129         .335
   6-7                                                       .101         .302
   8 or more (max = 328)                                     .422         .493
If bifurcated trial                                          .163         .370
If bouquet trial                                             .006         .075
Disease
   Mesothelioma                                              .159         .365
   Lung cancer                                               .105         .307
   Other cancer                                              .017         .128
   Asbestosis                                                .416         .493
   Pleural plaque                                            .131         .338
   Disease missing                                           .164         .370
   Number of disease levels (if consolidated trial)          1.99         .977
   If higher disease at trial (if consolidated trial)        .329         .470
Demographic variables
   Years of exposure                                         23.3         12.6
   Age at trial (if alive)                                    63          10.0
   If died before trial                                      .131         .337
   If plaintiff smokes                                       .104         .305
Number of defendants at trial
   1                                                         .510         .500
   2                                                         .142         .349
   3                                                         .120         .325
   4 or more                                                 .228         .420
Outcome variables
  If defendant found liable                                  .693         .461
  Compensatory damages (if positive)                       $804,000    $1,740,000
  If punitive damages (if def. found liable)                 .353         .480
  Punitive damages (if positive)                          $1,120,000   $2,530,000
  Expected total damages                                   $636,000    $1,780,000



                                                                                    27
                                       Table 2:
                      Relative Risk of Liability versus Damages


                                                         Compensatory             Punitive
                                                           Damages                Damages
Risk of defendant being found liable for:                    .66                   1.75
Risk of damages:                                             2.8                    6.7
Risk of damages (if compensatory damages > 0)                2.2                    2.3
Risk of expected total damages:                                           2.8
Correlation of the probabilities of winning                              .405
compensatory versus punitive damages
Correlation of compensatory and punitive                                 .166
damages

    Note: The figures in the first four lines are the standard deviation divided by the mean. Unless
                            otherwise noted, figures are based on all trials.




                                                                                                       28
                             Table 3:
             Correlation Coefficients of Outcomes in
Consolidated Trials versus Random Groups of Single-Plaintiff Trials


   Number         Actual         If         Compen-           If        Punitive       Expected
   of cases       versus      compen-        satory        punitive     damages          total
   per trial     random        satory       damages       damages                      damages
                              damages                     awarded
                              awarded
                  Actual        .71             .76          .87           .98            .90
  2              Random          .37            .31          .29           .33            .35
                  Actual         .68            .60          .93          .996            .92
  3
                 Random          .28            .34          .29           .30            .38
                  Actual         .65            .96          .86           .96            .88
  4 or 5
                 Random          .31            .40          .20           .23            .34
                  Actual         .65            .98          .91           .63            .97
  6 or 7         Random          .30            .43          .17           .43            .43
  8 or more       Actual         .68            .52          .89           .87            .60
                 Random          .35           .335          .18           .25            .25

 Notes: The correlation coefficient equals the average value of the off-diagonal terms in
 the correlation matrix. For trials of 4 or 5 plaintiffs, only the values for the first four
 plaintiffs are used in the calculations when there are five claims. The same procedure is
 followed for consolidations of 6-7 and 8 or more. Expected total damages =
 max[Compensatory Damages,0] + max[Punitive Damages,0].




                                                                                                  29
                                     Table 4:
           Variation in Number of Trials and Damage Awards over Time

                        (Dollar figures in thousands of 1987 dollars.)

          Proportion   Prob. of       Compensatory         Prob. of        Punitive
           of Trials   Plaintiff         damages           Punitive        damages
                       Winning         (if positive)       Damages       (if positive)
                                                            (if def.
                                                            liable)
1987-88     .021         .68              $543                .30          $496
 1989       .105         .88               725                .71           622
 1990       .149         .69               412                .25           552
 1991       .213         .82               608                .59           732
 1992       .074         .70               461                .16          1,323
 1993       .100         .47               548                .35           342
 1994       .087         .55               690                .14          2,319
 1995       .061         .56               922                .14          1,103
 1996       .041         .63              1,056               .24          1,132
 1997       .037         .65               857                .33          2,001
 1998       .031         .66              1,275               .28          3,077
 1999       .020         .73              1,504               .15          1,772
 2000       .025         .65              1,414               .25          1,875
2001-02     .036         .62              3,500               .27          2,717
 (part)




                                                                                         30
                                               Table 5:
             Results Explaining Whether Plaintiffs Win and Compensatory Damages
                                 If Plaintiffs      Compensatory Damages ($000)
                                     Win

                                       Probit                            Tobit
                                      (marginal         (coefficients)           (marginal
                                       effects)                                   effects)
 Procedural innovations
  2-3 case consolidation            .155 (.022)*          140 (109)                 90
  4-5 case consolidation            .114 (.026)*          213 (154)                137
  6-7 case consolidation             .036 (.039)         21.9 (191)                 14
  >= 8 case consolidation            .054 (.036)        -269 (140)*               -173
  Bifurcated trial                  .290 (.022)*         977 (141)*                628
  Bouquet trial                     .213 (.038)*       3,750 (1610)*              2,410
 State
  Mississippi                       .160 (.057)*       2,550 (1,460)              1,640
  West Virginia                     .278 (.021)*         726 (209)*                467
  Texas                             .140 (.033)*         614 (165)*                394
  Pennsylvania                       -.058 (.034)       -292 (120)*               -187
  New York                           .086 (.043)       1,170 (262)*                751
  California                         .024 (.042)         21.5 (151)                 14
  New Jersey                        .100 (.036)*        -246 (129)*               -158
 If Federal court                   -.014 (.049)        -98.5 (161)                -63
 Disease and smoking
  Mesothelioma                       .130 (.032)*       1,190 (159)*               763
  Lung cancer (smoker)               -.196 (.077)*       -307 (210)                -197
  Lung cancer (non-smoker)            -.039 (.049)        71.2 (182)                 45
  Other cancer                        -.093 (.070)        583 (310)                374
  Asbestosis                         -.062 (.033)*       -102 (95.5)                -65
  Disease missing                     -.014 (.070)      -730 (270)*                -468
  If plaintiff dead                   -.018 (.025)       -49.2 (121)                -32
  If plaintiff smokes                .130 (.028)*        203 (103)*                130
  Higher disease level at trial      -.064 (.034)*       -171 (121)
 Number of defendants
  2                                .069 (.027)*         340 (105)*               219
  3                                -.026 (.040)          177 (164)               114
  4 or more                       -.058 (.033)*          19.6 (147)               13
 Constant                                               -116 (243)
 Year variables                      Included             Included
           2
 Pseudo R                             .1920                .0147
 Number of obs.                        5008                 4692
 Number of censored                                         1678
 observations
Note: the pseudo R 2 value for the tobit regression is calculated without clustering the error terms.



                                                                                                        31
                                               Table 6
          Results Explaining Whether Plaintiffs Receive Punitive Damages and Amount
                                If Plaintiffs Win              Punitive Damages ($000)
                               Punitive Damages
                                      Probit                             Tobit
                               (marginal effects)         (coefficients)      (marginal effects)
 Procedural innovations
  2-3 case consolidation           .109 (.065)              234 (570)                 42
  4-5 case consolidation           .062 (.075)             -533 (569)                -95
  6-7 case consolidation           .181 (.105)              189 (716)                 34
  >=8 case consolidation           .084 (.082)             -876 (639)               -157
  Bifurcated trial                .542 (.111)*          -1,560 (1,450)              -279
  Bouquet trial                   -.277 (.108)          -2,910 (2,890)              -523
 State
  Mississippi                     .510 (.209)*           3,170 (1,850)               570
  West Virginia                   .498 (.122)*           2,210 (952)*                397
  Texas                           .362 (.073)*           2,650 (558)*                477
  Pennsylvania                   -.424 (.041)*         -5,760 (1,120)*            -1,036
  New York                        -.067 (.094)             -172 (982)                -31
  California                       .072 (.079)           -1,220 (693)               -219
  New Jersey                       .045 (.114)          -1,950 (874)*               -350
 If Federal court                -.265 (.061)*           -1,190 (735)               -350
 Disease and smoking
  Mesothelioma                         .172 (.089)*            634 (593)                114
  Lung cancer (smoker)                 -.201 (.064)*          -624 (956)                -112
  Lung cancer (non-smoker)             .256 (.087)*            679 (713)                122
  Other cancer                         .282 (.134)*          1,640 (1,190)              293
  Asbestosis                             .095 (.065)           347 (482)                  62
  Disease missing                      .614 (.087)*          1,390 (1,240)              250
  If plaintiff dead                     -.005 (.043)          -96.5 (447)                -17
  If plaintiff smokes                    .011 (.083)          -369 (601)                 -66
  Higher disease level at trial         -.031 (.066)          -949 (501)
 Number of defendants
  2                                   -.035 (.054)            -28.6 (456)               -5.1
  3                                   -.002 (.081)            -245 (600)                 -44
  4 or more                          -.226 (.078)*           -1,210 (736)               -217
 Constant                                                   -2,530 (1,380)
 Year variables                         Included                Included
   2             2
 R or pseudo R                            .512                   .0296
 Number of observations                   3471                    2597
 Number of censored                                               2130
 observations
Note: the pseudo R 2 value for the tobit regression is calculated without clustering the error terms.




                                                                                                        32
                                  Table 7
           Predicted Changes in the Expected Return from Trial
                                      (000$)


                            Compen-     Punitive    Total    Change in
                             satory     Damages    Damages   Expected
                            Damages                           Return:
Procedural innovations
 2-3 case consolidation      $142          $63      $305       48%
 4-5 case consolidation      $154          $46      $200       31%
 6-7 case consolidation       $28         $256      $284       45%
 >=8 case consolidation      -$92          $51      -$41      -6.5%
 Bifurcated trial            $585         $617     $1,200     188%
 Bouquet trial              $1,780       -$574     $1,210     189%
State
 Mississippi                $1,220        $907      $2,130     334%
 West Virginia               $467         $823      $1,290     203%
 Texas                       $325         $672      $1,020     160%
 Pennsylvania               -$160        -$974     -$1,130    -178%
 New York                    $564        -$102       $463       73%
If Federal court             -$51        -$439      -$503      -79%
Disease and smoking
 Mesothelioma                 $596        $334       $988     155%
 Lung cancer (smoker)        -$237       -$317      -$543     -85%
 Lung cancer (non-smoker)      $11        $431       $476      75%
 Other cancer                 $211        $534       $792     125%
 Disease missing             -$332        $921       $589      93%
 If plaintiff smokes          $157       -$7.7       $146      23%




                                                                         33
