                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               HUMAN CAPITAL AND EARNINGS
                                 DISTRIBUTION DYNAMICS

                                             Mark Huggett
                                            Gustavo Ventura
                                              Amir Yaron

                                          Working Paper 9366
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9366


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




Earlier versions of this paper circulated under the title .Distributional Implications of a Benchmark Human
Capital Model.. We thank Jim Albrecht, Martin Browning, Eric French, Jonathan Heathcote, Krishna Kumar,
Victor Rios-Rull, Thomas Sargent, Neil Wallace, Kenneth Wolpin and seminar participants at NBER Con-
sumption Group, Rochester, PSU-Cornell Macro Theory Conference, Midwest Macro Conference, Tulane,
Pennsylvania, NYU, Stanford, Wharton and VCU for comments. This work was initiated when the second
author was affliated with the University of Western Ontario. He thanks the Faculty of Social Sciences for
financial support. The third author thanks the Rodney White Center for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Mark Huggett, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Human Capital and Earnings Distribution Dynamics
Mark Huggett, Gustavo Ventura, and Amir Yaron
NBER Working Paper No. 9366
December 2002
JEL No. D3, J24, J31
                                       ABSTRACT



Mean earnings and measures of earnings dispersion and skewness all increase in US data over most
of the working life-cycle for a typical cohort as the cohort ages. We show that a benchmark human
capital model can replicate these properties from the right distribution of initial human capital and

learning ability. These distributions have the property that learning ability must differ across agents
and that learning ability and initial human capital are positively correlated.




Mark Hugget                                            Gustavo Ventura
Department of Economics                                Economics Department
Georgetown University                                  Pennsylvania State University
Washington, D.C. 20057-1036                            601 Kern Building
mh5@georgetown.edu                                     University Park, PA 16802
                                                       cjv10@psu.edu

Amir Yaron
Department of Finance
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA, 19104-6367
and NBER
yaron@wharton.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
A wide variety of theories have been advanced to explain the general shape of the
earnings distribution and the dynamics of the earnings distribution for a cohort as the
cohort ages. The list includes models highlighting stochastic earnings shocks, human
capital accumulation, sorting of individuals across job types and public learning of
individual productivity among others.1 In this paper we assess the degree to which
a benchmark human capital model is able to replicate the quantitative properties of
the dynamics of the US earnings distribution.
    The speciÞc properties that we focus on relate to how average earnings and mea-
sures of earnings dispersion and skewness change for a typical cohort as the cohort
ages. To characterize these age eﬀects, we use earnings data for US males and em-
ploy a methodology, described later in the paper, for separating age, time and cohort
eﬀects in a consistent way for a variety of earnings statistics. Our Þndings, summa-
rized in Figure 1, are that average earnings, earnings dispersion and earnings skewness
increase with age over most of the working life cycle.

                                   [Insert Figure 1 a-c Here]

   We assess the ability of a benchmark human capital model to replicate the pat-
terns in Figure 1. We list two reasons for why such an assessment is of interest. First,
human capital models have been central in the earnings distribution literature and are
widely used in the literatures on labor, growth, inequality and public Þnance among
others. However, at present it is not clear which earnings distribution facts can be
replicated, why this is the case, and which facts pose a challenge and thus motivate
additional theoretical structure.2 This paper Þlls this void by providing a systematic,
    1
     Neal and Rosen (1999) review this literature.
    2
     Earnings distribution facts have long been interpreted as being qualitatively consistent or in-
consistent with speciÞc human capital models. This is standard in the earnings and wage regression
literature (e.g. Card (1999)) and in the many excellent reviews of human capital theory (e.g. Weiss
(1986), Mincer (1997) and Neal and Rosen (1999)). In contrast, Heckman (1975, 1976), Haley
(1976), Rosen (1976) and a number of related papers did provide a quantitative assessment. How-
ever, distributional implications were not addressed because model parameters were estimated so
that the age-earnings proÞle produced by one agent in the model best matched the average earnings
proÞle in the data. Our work is closest to the work by Heckman, Lochner and Taber (1998) and
Andolfatto, Gomme and Ferrall (2001) who use human capital models with agent heterogeneity to
analyze the time variation in the skill premium and average earnings, income and wealth proÞles,
respectively.


                                                 2
quantitative assessment of the degree to which a well-known and widely-used human
capital model is able to replicate a wide variety of earnings distribution facts. Sec-
ond, quantitative models of the earnings distribution should arguably be central in
the positive and normative analysis of distributional questions. Currently, modern
versions of the life-cycle, permanent-income hypothesis, in which either earnings or
wages are taken as exogenous random processes, have been dominant in much of this
literature (e.g. the consumption, saving and wealth distribution literature and the lit-
erature on social security and income tax reform). We expect that in the near future
models with deeper foundations for individual earnings heterogeneity will dominate.
This paper takes one step in this direction by highlighting the importance of initial
conditions. Additional steps will be needed to resolve the question of the importance
of initial conditions versus shocks over the life cycle.3
    We assess the Ben-Porath (1967) model. This is a well-known and widely-used
human capital model. In our version of this model, an agent is born with some
immutable learning ability and some initial human capital. Each period an agent
divides available time between market work and human capital production. Human
capital production is increasing in learning ability, current human capital and time
allocated to human capital production. An agent maximizes the present value of
earnings, where earnings in any period is the product of a rental rate, human capital
and time allocated to market work.
    Our assessment focuses on the dynamics of the cohort earnings distribution pro-
duced by the model from diﬀerent initial joint distributions of human capital and
learning ability across agents. Our Þndings are striking. We establish that the earn-
ings distribution dynamics documented in Figure 1 can be replicated quite well by
the model from the right initial distribution. In addition, the model produces the
key properties of the cross-sectional earnings distribution. These conclusions are not
sensitive to the precise value of the elasticity parameter in the human capital produc-
tion function, nor are they sensitive to the age at which human capital accumulation
begins.
    The initial distributions which replicate the patterns in Figure 1 rely crucially on
diﬀerences in learning ability across agents. Age-earnings proÞles for agents with high
learning ability are steeper than the proÞles for agents with low learning ability. This
is the key mechanism for how the model produces increases in earnings dispersion
and skewness for a cohort as the cohort ages. Earnings proÞles are steeper for high
ability agents since early in life they allocate a relatively larger fraction of their time
  3
      Keane and Wolpin (1997) address this question in a model with an occupational choice decision.


                                                  3
to human capital production and thus have low earnings, while their time allocation
decisions and high learning ability imply that later in the life cycle they have higher
levels of human capital and, hence, earnings. This mechanism is also consistent with
regularities long discussed in the human capital literature such as the fact that time
allocated to skill acquisition is concentrated at young ages, that age-earnings proÞles
are steeper for people with high amounts of schooling and measured learning ability
and that the present value of earnings increases in a measure of learning ability.4
    We also contrast the implications of the model with evidence on persistence in
individual earnings. The model implies that over time both individual earnings levels
and earnings growth rates are strongly positively correlated. Evidence from US data
shows that earnings levels are positively correlated but that earnings growth rates one
year apart are negatively correlated. This and related evidence suggests that there is
potentially an important role for idiosyncratic shocks that lead to mean reversion in
earnings. These shocks are by construction absent from the benchmark model.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and our empirical
methodology. Section 3 presents the model. Section 4 discusses the parameter values.
Section 5 presents the central Þndings of the paper. Section 6 concludes.


2         Data and Empirical Methodology
2.1         Data
The Þndings presented in the introduction are based on earnings data from the PSID
1969-1992 family Þles. We utilize earnings of males who are the head of the house-
hold. We consider two samples. We deÞne a broad sample to include all males who
are currently working, temporarily laid oﬀ, looking for work but are currently unem-
ployed, students, but does not include retirees. The narrow sample equals the broad
sample less those unemployed or temporarily laid oﬀ. We note that the theoretical
model we analyze is not a model of unemployment or lay oﬀs. This would suggest
that the narrow sample is more relevant. However, since the results are not sensitive
to the choice of sample we present the results for the broad sample.
    We consider males between the ages of 20 and 58. This is motivated by several
considerations. First, the PSID has many observations in the middle but relatively
fewer at the beginning or end of the working life cycle. By focusing on ages 20-58, we
have at least 100 observations in each age-year bin with which to calculate age and
    4
        Lillard (1977) provides evidence on the last two points.


                                                     4
year-speciÞc earnings statistics. Second, near the traditional retirement age there is a
substantial fall in labor force participation that occurs for reasons that are abstracted
from in the model we analyze. This suggests the use of a terminal age that is earlier
than the traditional retirement age. We also restrict the sample to those with strictly
positive earnings. This is not essential to our methodology but it does allow us to
take logs as a convenient data transformation. This restriction almost never binds.5
Finally, we exclude the Survey of Economic Opportunities (SEO) sample which is
a subsample of the PSID that over samples the poor. Given all the above sample
selection criteria, the average and standard deviation of the number of observations
per panel-year are 2137 and 131 respectively.

2.2     Construction of Age ProÞles
We focus the analysis on cohort-speciÞc earnings distributions. Let epj,t be the real
earnings at percentile p of the earnings distribution of agents who are age j at time t.
These agents are from cohort s = t − j (i.e., agents who were born in year t − j).6 We
assume that the percentiles of the earnings distribution epj,t are determined by cohort
eﬀects αps , age eﬀects βjp and shocks ²pj,t . The relationship between these variables is
given below both in levels and in logs, where the latter is denoted by a tilde.

                                           epj,t = αsp βjp ²pj,t

                                       ẽpj,t = α̃sp + β̃jp + ²̃pj,t
   This formulation is consistent with the theoretical model that we present in the
next section. In particular, in a steady state of the model with a constant growth
rate of the rental rate of human capital, epj,t is produced by a cohort eﬀect αsp that is
proportional to the rental rate in cohort year s, a time-invariant age eﬀect βjp and no
shocks (i.e. ²pj,t ≡ 1 and ²̃pj,t ≡ 0). Expressed somewhat diﬀerently, in steady state the
cross-sectional, age-earnings distribution just shifts up proportionally each period.
   5
     Most of those who report being laid oﬀ, unemployed or students turn out to have some earnings
during the year.
   6
     Real values are calculated using the CPI. To calculate epj,t we use a 5 year bin centered at age
j. For example, to calculate earnings percentiles of agents age j = 30 in year t = 1980 we use data
on agents age 28 − 32 in 1980. We also use a 5 year bin centered at ages 20 and 58. To do this we
use data on agents age 18-22 and 56-60.




                                                    5
    We use ordinary least squares to estimate the coeﬃcients α̃sp and β̃jp for various
percentiles p of the earnings distribution.7 In Figure 2 we graph the age eﬀects of
diﬀerent percentiles of the levels of the earnings distribution by plotting βjp . The age
eﬀects βjp are scaled so that each graph passes through the geometric average value at
age j = 40 of epj,t across all cohorts.8 The percentiles considered in Figure 2 range from
a low of p = .025 (earnings such that 2.5 percent of the agents are below this value)
to a high of p = .99 (earnings such that 99 percent of the agents are below this value).
We consider 23 diﬀerent percentiles p = .025, .05, .10, ..., .90, .925, .95, .975, .99.

                                       [Insert Figure 2 Here]

    The Þndings in Figure 1a-c in the introduction are all calculated directly from
the results graphed in Figure 2. Figure 1a shows that average earnings increase with
age over most of the working life cycle. Early in the life cycle this follows because
earnings at all percentiles in Figure 2 shift up with age. Later in the life cycle this
follows from the strong increase with age at the highest percentiles of the earnings
distribution despite the fact that earnings at the median and lower percentiles are
already decreasing with age. The increase in earnings dispersion in Figure 1b, using
the Gini coeﬃcient as a measure of earnings dispersion, follows from the general
fanning out of the distribution which is a striking feature of Figure 2. The increase
in the skewness measure with age in Figure 1c is implied by the strong fanning out
at the top of the distribution observed in Figure 2.

2.3      Alternative Views of Age Eﬀects
A more general speciÞcation of the regression equation used in the last subsection
would allow the percentiles of the earnings distribution to be determined by time
eﬀects γtp in addition to age βjp and cohort αps eﬀects as in the equation below. Once
again, a logarithm of a variable is denoted by a tilde. Time eﬀects can be viewed as
eﬀects that are common to all individuals alive at a point in time. An example would
be a temporary rise in the rental rate of human capital that increases the earnings of
all individuals in the period.
   7
     Each regression has J × T dependent variables regressed on J + T cohort dummies and J age
dummies. T and J denote the number of time periods in the panel and the number of distinct age
groups, which in our case equal J = 58 − 20 and T = 1992 − 1969.
   8
     More speciÞcally, we plot βjp ep40 /β40
                                          p
                                             , where ep40 is the geometric average real earnings at age 40
and percentile p in the data.


                                                    6
                                        epj,t = αsp βjp γtp ²pj,t

                                  ẽpj,t = α̃sp + β̃jp + γ̃tp + ²̃pj,t
    The linear relationship between time t, age j, and birth cohort s = t − j limits
the applicability of the regression speciÞcation above. SpeciÞcally, without further
restrictions the regressors in this system are co-linear and these eﬀects cannot be
estimated. This identiÞcation problem is well known in the econometrics literature.9
In eﬀect any trend in the data can be arbitrarily reinterpreted as a year (time) trend
or alternatively as trends in ages and cohorts.
    Given this problem, our approach is to determine how sensitive the age eﬀects in
Figure 1 and 2 are to alternative restrictions on the coeﬃcients (α̃sp , β̃jp , γ̃tp ). One view,
which we label the cohort dummies view, comes from constructing Figure 2 by setting
time eﬀects to zero (i.e. γ̃tp = 0) as was done in the last subsection. A second view,
which we label the time dummies view, comes from constructing Figure 2 by setting
cohort eﬀects to zero (i.e. α̃ps = 0).10 A third view, which is intermediate to both
previous views, comes from constructing Figure 2 after allowing age, cohort and time
eﬀects but with the restriction that time eﬀects are mean zero and are orthogonal
to a time trend.11 This restriction implies that time trends are attributed to cohort
and age eﬀects rather than time eﬀects. We label this last view the restricted time
dummies view.

                                [Insert Figure 3 (a-c) Here]

    Figure 3 highlights the age eﬀects on average earnings, earnings dispersion and
earnings skewness using these three views. The results are that all three views lead
to the same qualitative results. Quantitatively, the cohort dummies view is almost
indistinguishable from the restricted time dummies view. The time dummies view
produces a ßatter proÞle of earnings dispersion as compared to the cohort dummies or
restricted time dummies view. In the remainder of the paper we focus on the results
from the cohort dummies view highlighted in Figure 1.
   9
     See, for example, Hanoch and Honig (1985), Deaton and Paxson (1994) and Ameriks and Zeldes
(2000).
  10
     Each regression has J ×T dependent variables regressed on T time dummies and J age dummies.
This regression has J less regressors than the regression incorporating cohort eﬀects.
                                                   PT                   PT
  11
     Formally, this normalization requires that T1 t=1 γ̃t = 0 and T1 t=1 γ̃t t = 0. Appendix A
provides more details on how we carry out this estimation.


                                                   7
2.4    Related Empirical Work
Our empirical work is related to previous work both at a substantive and a method-
ological level. At a substantive level, labor economists have examined patterns in
mean earnings and measures of earnings dispersion and skewness at least since the
work of Mincer (1958, 1974), where the focus was on cross-section data. A common
Þnding from cross-section data is that mean earnings is hump-shaped with age and
that measures of earnings dispersion tend to increase with age. A number of studies
(e.g. Creedy and Hart (1979), Shorrocks (1980), Deaton and Paxson (1994), Stor-
resletten et. al. (2001)) have examined the pattern of earnings dispersion in cohort
or repeated cross-section data and have found that dispersion tends to increase with
age.12 Schultz (1975), Smith and Welch (1979) and Dooley and Gottschalk (1984)
present evidence that dispersion proÞles are U-shaped in that a measure of dispersion
decreases early in the life cycle and then later increases with age. We Þnd a slight
U-shape in the dispersion proÞle when dispersion is measured by the Gini coeﬃcient.
    At a methodological level, our work and a number of the studies cited above go
beyond the early work based on a single cross-section. In particular, these studies
separate age eﬀects from cohort and/or time eﬀects using panel data or repeated
cross-sections. For example, Deaton and Paxson (1994) focus on how the variance of
log earnings and the variance of log consumption in household-level data evolves over
the life cycle. Their main results are based on regressing the variance of log earnings
of a cohort on age and cohort dummies. They use the estimated age coeﬃcients to
highlight the eﬀect of aging. The methodology that we employ is broadly similar.
However, since we are interested in several earnings statistics there is the issue that
if we were to employ this procedure on each separate statistic of interest then age
and cohort eﬀects would be extracted in a diﬀerent way for each statistic. Our
proposed solution is to employ the same procedure directly on the percentiles of the
age and cohort speciÞc earnings distributions. This procedure produces the age eﬀects
graphed in Figure 2. Using Figure 2, one can calculate the resulting age eﬀects for
any statistic of interest, knowing that cohort and/or time eﬀects have been extracted
in a consistent way.
  12
     Creedy and Hart (1979) and Shorrocks (1980) use individual-level data, whereas Deaton and
Paxson (1994) and Storresletten et. al. (2001) use household-level data.




                                              8
3      Human Capital Theory
An agent maximizes the present value of earnings over the working lifetime by dividing
available time between market work and human capital production.13 This present
value is given in the decision problem below, where r is a real interest rate and
earnings in a period equal the product of the rental rate of human capital wj , the
agent’s human capital hj and the time spent in market work (1 − lj ). The stock of
human capital increases when human capital production oﬀsets the depreciation of
current human capital. Human capital production f(hj , lj , a) depends on an agent’s
learning ability a, human capital hj and the fraction of available time lj put into
human capital production. Learning ability is Þxed at birth and thus does not change
over time.
                                     J
                                     X
                               max         wj hj (1 − lj )/(1 + r)j−1
                                     j=1


                   subject to lj ∈ [0, 1], hj+1 = hj (1 − δ) + f (hj , lj , a).

    We formulate this decision problem in the language of dynamic programming.
The value function Vj (h; a) gives the maximum present value of earnings at age j
from state h when learning ability is a. The value function is set to zero after the last
period of life (i.e. VJ+1 (h; a) = 0). Solutions to this problem are given by optimal
decision rules hj (h; a) and lj (h; a) which describe the optimal choice of human capital
carried to the next period and the fraction of time spent in human capital production
as functions of age j, human capital h and learning ability a.

                     Vj (h; a) = max
                                   0
                                     wj h(1 − l) + (1 + r)−1 Vj+1 (h0 ; a)
                                   l,h


                       subject to l ∈ [0, 1], h0 = h(1 − δ) + f(h, l, a).

   We focus on a speciÞc version of the model described above that was Þrst analyzed
by Ben-Porath (1967). In this model, the human capital production function is given
by f (h, l, a) = a(hl)α . Proposition 1 below presents key results for this model.
  13
    We note that utility maximization implies present value earnings maximization in the absence
of a labor-leisure decision and liquidity constraints. Hence, nothing is lost for the study of human
capital accumulation and the implied earnings dynamics if one abstracts from consumption and asset
choice over the life-cycle.


                                                  9
     Proposition 1: Assume f (h, l, a) = a(hl)α , α ∈ (0, 1), the depreciation rate δ ∈
[0, 1), the rental rate equals wj = (1 + g)j−1 and the gross interest rate (1 + r) is
strictly positive. Then

     (i) Vj (h; a) is continuous and increasing in h and a, is concave in h and hj (h; a)
     is single-valued.

     (ii) If in addition aAj (a)α + (1 − δ)Aj (a) ≥ Aj+1 (a), then the optimal decision
     rules are as follows:
                                   (
                                       aAj (a)α + (1 − δ)h for h ≥ Aj (a)
                     hj (h; a) =
                                         ahα + (1 − δ)h    for h ≤ Aj (a)
                                   (
                                       Aj (a)/h             for h ≥ Aj (a)
                     lj (h; a) =
                                           1                for h ≤ Aj (a)

                                   aα(1 + g) 1 J−j X (1 + g)(1 − δ)       1
                     Aj (a) ≡ (             ) 1−α ( [               ]k ) 1−α
                                     1+r           k=0   (1 + r)

    Proof: See the Appendix.
    We now comment on the implications of Proposition 1. First, the fact that Vj (h; a)
is concave in human capital means that each period the decision problem is a concave
programming problem. Thus, standard techniques can be used to compute solutions
regardless of any further restrictions on the parameters of the model.
    Second, the optimal decision rule for human capital says that, holding a Þxed,
human capital production in a period is the same for agents in a cohort as long as
current human capital is above a cutoﬀ level Aj (a). Thus, time in human capital
production is inversely related to the current level of human capital. Agents with
human capital below the cutoﬀ level Aj (a) spend all available time in human capital
production. The parameters of the model are restricted in Proposition 1(ii) to get a
simple, closed-form solution. These restrictions amount to the assumption that once
an agent stops full-time schooling (i.e current human capital is above the cutoﬀ level)
then the agent never returns to full-time schooling (i.e. future human capital remains
above future cutoﬀ levels). The parameter values used in this paper satisfy these
restrictions.
    Third, the optimal decision rule puts a number of restrictions on human capital
and earnings distribution. Notice that if all agents within an age group have the

                                              10
same learning ability and have positive earnings, then as agents age, human capital
dispersion within the cohort must decrease. More precisely, the Lorenz curves for
human capital can be ordered in the sense that the Lorenz curve for age j lies strictly
below the Lorenz curve for age j + 1 and so on. This is easy to see from plotting
the decision rule on a 45 degree line diagram since agents with the lower human
capital have higher human capital growth rates. Later on we will present a parallel
argument that shows that the Lorenz curve for earnings can also be ordered. The fact
that decision rule hj (h; a) is increasing in both human capital and learning ability
has implications for the identity of high and low earners. In particular, at the end
of the working life cycle the agents who are high earners are those who started oﬀ
with high initial human capital and/or ability. This is true since at the end of the
life cycle earnings are proportional to human capital. In addition, the fact that
hj (h; a) increases in both components means that in order to match observed earnings
dispersion at the end of the working life cycle requires that there is suﬃcient dispersion
in human capital and ability at the beginning of the life cycle. This is key for this
paper as it focuses on characterizing the nature of initial agent heterogeneity that is
critical for replicating observed earnings distribution dynamics.


4     Parameter Values
The Þndings of this paper are based on the parameter values indicated in Table 1.
The time period in the model is a year. An agent’s working lifetime is taken to be
either 39 or 49 model periods, which corresponds to a real life age of 20 to 58 and
10 to 58 respectively. These two values allow us to explore diﬀerent views about
when the human capital accumulation mechanism highlighted by the model begins.
The real interest rate is set to 4 percent. The rental rate of human capital equals
wj = (1 + g)j−1 and the growth rate is set to g = .0014. This growth rate equals
the average growth rate in average real earnings over the period 1968-92 in our PSID
sample.14 Within the model the growth rate of the rental rate equals the growth
rate of average earnings, when rental growth and population growth are constant and
when the initial distribution of human capital and ability is time invariant. Given
the growth in the rental rate, we set the depreciation rate to δ = 0.0114 so that
the model produces the rate of decrease of average real earnings at the end of the
  14
     The growth rate of average wages (e.g. total labor earnings divided by total work hours) over
1968-92 in our PSID sample equals .0017.



                                               11
working life cycle documented in Figure 1.15 The model implies that at the end of
the life cycle negligible time is allocated to producing new human capital and, thus,
the gross earnings growth rate approximately equals (1 + g)(1 − δ). When we choose
the depreciation rate on this basis the value lies in the middle of the estimates in the
literature surveyed by Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (1999).
    Estimates of the elasticity parameter α of the human capital production function
are surveyed by Browning et. al. (1999). These estimates range from 0.5 to almost
1.0. We note that this literature estimates α so that the earnings proÞle produced by
one agent in the model best Þts the earnings data. Thus, the maintained assumption is
that everyone is identical at birth so that the initial distribution of learning ability and
human capital across agents is a point mass.16 We note that this initial distribution
is unrestricted by the theory and therefore treat it as a free parameter in our work.
Thus, we remain agnostic about the value of α and assess the model for values between
0.5 and 1.0.

                                  Table 1: Parameter Values
              Model        Interest     Rental   Depreciation           Production
             Periods         Rate       Growth      Rate                 Function
            J = 39, 49     r = .04     g = .0014  δ = .0114            α ∈ [0.5 − 1.0)

5     Findings
5.1     Earnings Distribution Dynamics
Earnings distribution dynamics implied by the model are determined in two steps.
First, we compute the optimal decision rule for human capital for the parameters
described in Table 1. Second, we choose the initial distribution of the state variable
to best replicate the properties of US data documented in Figure 1. The Appendix
describes how these steps are carried out.
    We consider both parametric and non-parametric approaches for choosing the
initial distribution. In the parametric approach this distribution is restricted to be
  15
     We use a rate of growth in earnings at the end of the life cycle equal to -0.01. The growth rate
in mean earnings at the end of the life-cycle from Fig. 1 is -0.0107 and -0.0078 for age groups 55-58
and 50-58 respectively.
  16
     Heckman et. al. (1998) allow for agent heterogeneity. They estimate model parameters so that
earnings of one agent in the model best match earnings data for individuals sorted by a measure of
ability and by whether or not they went to college.


                                                 12
jointly, log-normally distributed. This class of distributions is characterized by 5
parameters. In the non-parametric approach, we allow the initial distribution to
be any histogram on a rectangular grid in the space of human capital and learning
ability. In practice, this grid is deÞned by 20 points in both the human capital
and ability dimensions and thus, there are a total of 400 bins used to deÞne the
possible histograms. In both approaches we search over the vector of parameters that
characterize these distributions so as to minimize the distance between the model and
data statistics for mean earnings, dispersion and skewness.17
    The results are presented in Figure 4 and 5 for the parametric and non-parametric
case under the assumption that human capital accumulation starts at a real life age
of 10 and 20, respectively. Note that the model implications are very similar for these
two diﬀerent starting ages. For a better visual presentation, we graph in all cases
results for only the central value of α = 0.7. We emphasize that similar quantitative
patterns emerge for all values of α between .5 and .9. These Þgures demonstrate
that the model is able to replicate the qualitative properties of the US earnings
distribution dynamics presented in Figure 1 both when the initial distribution is
chosen parametrically and non-parametrically. Moreover, the results for the non-
parametric case are quite striking: the model replicates to a surprising degree the
quantitative features of US earnings distribution dynamics.

                                           [Insert Figure 4 (a-c) Here]

                                           [Insert Figure 5 (a-c) Here]

    As a measure of the goodness of Þt, we present in Table 2 the average (percentage)
deviation, in absolute terms, between the model implied statistics and the data.18 By
this measure, on average the model implied statistics diﬀer from the data by 2.5% to
3.8% in the non-parametric case for diﬀerent values of the elasticity parameter of the
  17
    More precisely, we Þnd the parameter vector γ characterizing the initial distribution that solves
the minimization problem below, where mj , dj , sj are the statistics of means, dispersion and inverse
skewness constructed from the PSID data, and mj (γ), dj (γ), sj (γ) are the corresponding model
statistics.
                            J
                            X
                      min         ([log(mj /mj (γ))]2 + [log(dj /dj (γ))]2 + [log(sj /sj (γ))]2 )
                       γ
                            j=1


  18
                                      PJ
       The goodness of Þt measure is [ j=1 | log(mj /mj (γ))| + | log(dj /dj (γ))| + | log(sj /sj (γ))|]/(3J).


                                                           13
production function. In the parametric case, the Þt is naturally not as good; in this
case the model diﬀers from the data by 5% to 7.5%. Graphically, the parametric case
produces too much earnings skewness in each age group. Nonetheless, a parsimonious
representation of the initial distribution can go a long way towards reproducing the
dynamics of the US age-earnings distribution.19

                           Table 2: Mean Absolute Deviation (%)

           Case                  α = 0.5     α = 0.6 α = 0.7 α = 0.8 α = 0.9

                      Panel A: Accumulation starts at Age 10
           Non-Parametric    3.5      3.2       2.6       2.5                      2.8
           Parametric        7.5      6.4       5.9       5.2                      6.2
                          Panel B: Accumulation starts at Age 20
           Non-Parametric           3.1         3.5         2.8         3.9        3.8
           Parametric               6.8         7.0         5.2         5.0        6.4

    To close this section, we note that the benchmark human capital model is also suc-
cessful in an alternative dimension. SpeciÞcally, features of the cross-section earnings
distribution implied by the model are roughly in line with the corresponding features
in cross-section data. We construct the cross-section earnings distribution implied
by the data using the cohort-speciÞc earnings percentiles in Figure 2 together with
the assumption that the population growth rate is 1%. The cross-sectional earnings
distribution has a Gini coeﬃcient of 0.33, a skewness measure of 1.16 and a fraction of
earnings in the upper 20%, 10%, 5% and 1% of 40.2%, 25.1%, 15.5% and 4.7% respec-
tively. The model for α = 0.7 in the non-parametric case implies a cross-sectional
  19
    A natural question is whether one can always exactly match the age-earnings dynamics in Figure
1 or 2, given that the theory does not restrict the initial distribution and thus, eﬀectively oﬀers an
inÞnite number of free parameters. The answer is no. In section 5.3 we show, for the case where all
agents are born with the same learning ability but diﬀerent human capital levels, that the model can
never match even the qualitative properties of the age-earnings dynamics in the data, despite the fact
that the class of initial distributions considered is inÞnite dimensional. Intuitively, one can match
any distribution of earnings in the terminal period J with an unrestricted distribution of initial
conditions. Furthermore, matching the terminal earnings distribution pins down a unique initial
distribution of human capital, given the monotonicity of the optimal decision rule of human capital,
since this initial distribution is over a single variable (i.e., human capital). However, to match the
patterns in Figure 1 or 2 one needs to match the terminal distribution and the distribution in all
previous periods.


                                                 14
earnings distribution with a Gini coeﬃcient of 0.327, a skewness measure of 1.18,
with corresponding fractions of earnings in the upper tail of 40.9%, 27.0%, 17.5% and
6.1%.

5.2     Properties of Initial Distributions
Tables 3 and 4 characterize properties of the initial distributions that produce the
earnings distribution implications highlighted in Figures 4 and 5. Several regularities
are apparent. First, the properties of means, dispersion, skewness and correlation in
Table 3 for the non-parametric case are similar to those in Table 4 for the parametric
case. Thus, the economic content of what the model and the data in Figure 1 impose
on the initial distribution appears not to be too sensitive to whether or not one
restricts this initial distribution in a parsimonious way.
    Second, initial human capital and learning ability are positively correlated when
the human capital accumulation process articulated by the model starts at age 10 but
much more highly correlated when the process starts at age 20. This Þnding is implied
by the dynamics of the model. In particular, distributions which at age 10 have low
correlation induce more highly correlated distributions in each successive period as
agents age. This occurs, according to Proposition 1, since in each period high ability
agents produce more human capital than low ability agents, holding initial human
capital at the beginning of life equal.
    Third, mean learning ability declines as the curvature parameter α increases, while
the opposite is true for mean initial human capital. To gain intuition, note that for
given learning ability and initial human capital a higher value of α lowers earnings
early in life and raises earnings later in life — in eﬀect rotating individual age-earnings
proÞles counter-clockwise. This follows, see Proposition 1, since as α increases time
spent working early in life decreases whereas end of life human capital increases.
Raising mean initial human capital and lowering mean learning ability serves to rotate
the age-earnings proÞles clockwise to counteract the eﬀect of increasing α. Finally,
note that when accumulation starts at age 10, the model implies that net human
capital accumulation for a cohort is positive over the life cycle.20
    Finally, a prominent feature in Tables 3 and 4 is that dispersion in learning ability
declines as α increases. To understand this result, focus on dispersion in earnings, and
hence human capital, at the end of the life cycle. Terminal human capital equals initial
  20
     To see this point note that mean earnings at age 58 equals 100 and the rental rate of human
capital equals wj = 1.0014j−1 . Thus, mean human capital must be slightly less than 100 at age 58
to match the earnings data at that age.


                                               15
human capital after depreciation plus an amount due to the production of human
capital over the life cycle. One can show that dispersion in the second component
increases as α increases. Thus, to replicate the pattern in Figure 1, a reduction in
learning ability dispersion helps counteract this increase in terminal human capital
dispersion.


       Table 3: Ability and Human Capital at Birth (Non-Parametric Case)

      Statistic                α = 0.5 α = 0.6    α = 0.7   α = 0.8 α = 0.9

                       Panel A: Accumulation starts at Age 10
      Mean (a)                   0.466   0.319      0.209    0.139     0.087
      Coef. of Variation (a)     0.601   0.463      0.358    0.243     0.212
      Skewness (a)               1.303   1.190      1.183    1.168     1.103
      Mean (h1 )                  69.6    71.4      74.9      76.0      83.5
      Coef. of Variation (h1 ) 0.456     0.453      0.422    0.397     0.261
      Skewness (h1 )             1.152   1.146      1.151    1.155     1.142
      Correlation (a, h1 )        0.10   0.205      0.305    0.397     0.418
                       Panel B: Accumulation starts at Age 20
      Mean (a)                   0.453   0.320      0.210    0.134     0.089
      Coef. of Variation (a)     0.669   0.504      0.365    0.324     0.168
      Skewness (a)               1.251   1.188      1.147    1.131     1.111
      Mean (h1 )                  86.8    88.1      93.4      94.5      99.6
      Coef. of Variation (h1 ) 0.475     0.486      0.510    0.457     0.501
      Mean (h1 )                  86.8    88.1      93.4      94.5      99.6
      Skewness (h1 )             1.148   1.163      1.167    1.135     1.124
      Correlation (a, h1 )       0.621   0.689      0.781    0.792     0.741




                                        16
         Table 4: Ability and Human Capital at Birth (Parametric Case)

      Statistic                  α = 0.5 α = 0.6   α = 0.7   α = 0.8 α = 0.9

                      Panel A: Accumulation starts at Age 10
      Mean (a)                   0.499    0.322     0.207    0.139     0.089
      Coef. of Variation (a)     0.514    0.436     0.353    0.235     0.198
      Skewness (a)               1.125    1.092     1.061    1.027     1.010
      Mean (h1 )                  64.0    69.2      74.7     75.1       78.6
      Coef. of Variation (h1 )   0.454    0.453     0.434    0.403     0.184
      Skewness (h1 )             1.100    1.100     1.090    1.077     1.071
      Correlation (a, h1 )       0.070    0.145     0.171    0.333     0.351
                      Panel B: Accumulation starts at Age 20
      Mean (a)                   0.467    0.321     0.209    0.136     0.088
      Coef. of Variation (a)     0.613    0.474     0.347    0.257     0.158
      Skewness (a)               1.191    1.109     1.058    1.033     1.012
      Mean (h1 )                  86.7    89.5      92.3     96.6      100.1
      Coef. of Variation (h1 )   0.427    0.439     0.481    0.468     0.459
      Skewness (h1 )             1.088    1.092     1.109    1.105     1.100
      Correlation (a, h1 )       0.600    0.621     0.781    0.792     0.796

5.3    Importance of Ability and Human Capital Diﬀerences
We now provide insights on the importance of ability diﬀerences versus initial human
capital diﬀerences in producing the results in Figures 4 and 5. We concentrate on
two extreme cases: agents diﬀer initially only in human capital or only in ability.
The analysis Þnds that learning ability diﬀerences are essential in reproducing the
facts we focus on. However, diﬀerences in initial human capital implied by the joint
distribution are also important; without them, the model cannot replicate the facts
in a satisfactory way.
Human Capital Diﬀerences
    We now argue that the model with diﬀerences only in human capital across agents
produces quite generally a counterfactual implication. First, recall from section 3
that when all agents in a cohort have the same learning ability that human capital
dispersion must decrease over time. Essentially, the result was due to the fact that
for interior solutions all agents within a cohort produce the same amount of human

                                         17
capital. Thus, human capital growth rates are largest for those with the smallest
human capital levels. This then implies that any amount of human capital dispersion
at the end of the life cycle had to be due to even greater dispersion in human capital
at the beginning of the life cycle.
    Since human capital is not directly observable, the implication above may seem
of secondary importance. We stress now a related implication for earnings dispersion
which is fundamentally at odds with the data displayed in Figure 1. Within the model,
earnings in period j equals ej = wj (hj −Aj (a)) = wj (hj−1 (1−δ)+aAj−1 (a)α −Aj (a)).
This follows from the case of interior solutions in Proposition 1 after substituting for
hj using the optimal decision rule for human capital accumulation. Using this result,
we can write the growth rate of an individual’s earnings as follows:


      ej /ej−1 = (wj /wj−1 )[(hj−1 (1 − δ) + aAj−1 (a)α − Aj (a))/(hj−1 − Aj−1 (a))]
    Diﬀerentiating this equation with respect to human capital, it is straightforward
to establish that earnings growth falls as human capital, and thus earnings, increase.
This then implies, as for the case of human capital, that the Lorenz curve for earnings
within a cohort can be ordered: the one for a given age j lies below that for age j + 1
and so on. Thus, the model implies that any measure of earnings dispersion that is
consistent with the Lorenz ordering (e.g. the Gini coeﬃcient) must decrease monoton-
ically with age.21 This prediction is contradicted by the earnings dispersion patterns
documented in Figure 1. We then conclude that the model with only diﬀerences in
initial human capital cannot replicate the facts. Thus, diﬀerences in learning ability
must play a key role in generating the right dynamics of the earnings distribution.
Learning Ability Diﬀerences
    We now consider the polar case in which all agents have the same initial human
capital but diﬀer in learning ability. To explore the model implications in this case,
we place a grid on values of learning ability, and search for the distribution of learning
ability and the common, Þxed value of initial human capital that best reproduces the
facts presented in Figure 1. Our Þndings are presented in Figure 6 where the model
begins to operate when agents are at a real life age of 10. Starting the model later
produces even more strongly counterfactual implications.
    The model in this case generates a much more pronounced U-pattern for earnings
dispersion than is present in the data. To understand why this occurs recall that all
  21
     This result also holds for the case of non-interior solutions since in the model the fraction of
agents with zero earnings declines monotonically over time.


                                                 18
individuals start life with the same level of human capital. Optimal accumulation
then dictates that early in the life cycle agents with high learning ability devote most
or all available time to accumulating human capital, and thus their earnings are lower
than those of their low ability counterparts. The bottom of the U-shape occurs where
earnings of high ability agents overtake those of lower ability agents. After this point,
earnings dispersion increases as high ability agents have higher levels of human capital
as they age, and devote more and more time to market work.

                               [Insert Figure 6 a-c Here]

5.4    Persistence in Individual Earnings
So far we have looked at how the earnings distribution changes as agents age. How-
ever, it is possible that diﬀerent theoretical models may all be able to replicate the
patterns of means, dispersion and skewness in US cohort data, but diﬀer in their
implications for earnings persistence. The latter is a topic that has spawned consid-
erable attention in the labor, consumption, and income distribution literatures and
for which the benchmark model has strong implications. In addition, it is of indepen-
dent interest to investigate the performance of the benchmark model in terms of a
number of facts that we did not force it to match. Such an exercise is a useful step in
evaluating the benchmark model as a quantitative theory of the earnings distribution
and its dynamics.
    We now characterize the extent to which several measures of persistence in the
model are consistent or not with the corresponding measures from US data. We
consider three measures of persistence in cohort data: (1) the correlation of individual
earnings levels across periods, (2) the correlation of individual earnings growth rates
across periods and (3) the growth rates of group earnings across periods. The Þrst
two measures are standard in describing the persistence of individual earnings. One
key motivation for focusing on the last measure is the following. If diﬀerences in
learning ability are key in explaining the patterns of Fig. 1 as we argued earlier, then
the model implies that in the middle of the life cycle individuals with high earnings
will tend to be those with high learning ability , while the opposite would be true
for individuals of relatively low earnings. Since this argument suggest that the slopes
of earnings proÞles are increasing in learning ability, the group of individuals with
relatively high earnings may also display high earnings growth rates relative to the
low earnings group. We argue below that on this last point the implications of the
model are at odds with the data.

                                           19
    Table 5 shows the results for various age groups within the model, when the ini-
tial distribution of human capital and ability is selected using the non-parametric
methodology. For ease of exposition, we report results only for the case when accu-
mulation starts at age 10 and α = 0.7. To report growth rates of group earnings,
we divide individuals according to their labor earnings in three groups (bottom 20%,
central 20% and upper 20%) at ages 40 and 45, and compute future growth rates
over 5 years. Table 5 shows that the model implies high persistence in earnings levels
as well as growth rates. Table 5 also clearly illustrates that individuals belonging to
high earnings groups at ages 40 and 45 show higher future growth rates than their
low earnings counterparts.


                   Table 5: Persistence in Individual Earnings α = 0.7

       Statistic                   Age (j) = 45                 Age (j) = 40

                             Panel    A: Correlation - Levels
       Correlation(Ej , Ej−1 )        0.9999                  0.9997
       Correlation(Ej , Ej−5 )        0.9966                  0.9854
       Correlation(Ej , Ej−10 )       0.9679                  0.8671

                          Panel B: Correlation - Growth Rates
       Correlation(zj , zj−1 )      0.9995                 0.9994
       Correlation(zj , zj−5 )      0.9960                 0.9652
       Correlation(zj , zj−10 )     0.9750                 0.5229

                            Panel C: 5-year Growth rates (%)
       Top 20%                         2.71                   8.02
       Central 20%                    -1.59                   0.45
       Bottom 20%                     -2.34                  -0.64
       Ej and zj = log(Ej /Ej−1 ) denote earnings and earnings growth rates, respectively.


    We now compare the results in Table 5 with estimates from US data. The corre-
lation of earnings levels has been examined in US data by Parsons (1978) and Hyslop
(2001) among others. They Þnd that earnings among US males are positively corre-
lated for all horizons considered and that the correlation typically falls as the horizon
increases. Hyslop Þnds that the average correlation is 0.83 for a one year horizon

                                               20
and 0.59 for a six year horizon. Parsons Þnds that correlations are typically higher
for older age groups. These results are qualitatively consistent with those from the
human capital model.
    A diﬀerent picture emerges for the correlation of growth rates. Abowd and Card
(1989) estimate the correlation in earnings growth rates for US males. They Þnd
that the average correlation of earnings growth rates one year apart is negative and
equal to about −0.34, and close to zero when the growth rates are more than one
year apart. Baker (1997) reports similar Þndings. Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron
(2001) report high but stationary persistence in log-earnings which imply slightly
lower negative autocorrelations of growth rates one year apart. Processes with similar
dynamics have also been estimated by McCurdy (1982) and Hubbard, Skinner and
Zeldes (1994). The results estimated from the data are thus clearly inconsistent with
those implied by the model. These results are suggestive of a key ingredient present
in stochastic models of the earnings distribution, namely, shocks that cause earnings
to be mean reverting.
    To study this issue in more detail we examine earnings growth rates at diﬀerent
percentiles of the earnings distribution. We are not aware of existing results that
characterize empirically the future growth rates of high earnings groups vs. low
earnings groups that could be compared to the results presented in Table 5. We
therefore carry out such an analysis using US male earnings data from the PSID, and
proceed in two conceptually diﬀerent ways.22 Figure 7 displays 5 year growth rates in
group means for a variety of initial ages. Figure 7a provides the growth rates for each
group (those in the top, mid, and bottom 20% percentiles respectively) as of their age
plus 5 years. Hence, this Þgure shows the growth rates of those who ended up in the
bottom, mid, and bottom 20% percentiles; we label this case the “backward case”.
Not surprisingly, those in the top 20% percentile had large growth rates and conversely
those at the bottom had the lowest growth rates. Figure 7b provides the 5 year
growth rates for these groups constructed at the initial age. Hence, this Þgure shows
the growth rates of those who started at these respective percentiles; we label this case
the “forward case”. These growth rates display a reverse order relative to both Figure
7a and the results in Table 5. That is, those who started at the bottom have the largest
growth rates, while those at the top have the lowest growth rates. Although some of
this evidence can be driven by measurement errors, the overall message is that there
is some important component of mean reversion in individual earnings, even at prime
age earnings years. Put diﬀerently, these observations constitute another indication
 22
      See the Appendix for precise details.


                                              21
of the presence of sizeable and idiosyncratic shocks that lead to mean reversion in
earnings. The model we analyze clearly abstracts from such shocks and as a result,
is not consistent with this last evidence.

                               [Insert Figure 7 a-b Here]


6    Conclusion
We assess the degree to which a widely-used, human capital model is able to replicate
the age dynamics of the US earnings distribution documented in Figure 1. We Þnd
that the model can account quite well for these age-earnings dynamics. In addition, we
Þnd that the model produces a cross sectional earnings distribution closely resembling
that implied by the age-earnings dynamics documented in Figure 2. Our Þndings
indicate that diﬀerences in learning ability across agents are key. In particular, in
the model high ability agents have more steeply sloped age-earnings proÞles than low
ability agents. These diﬀerences in earnings proÞles in turn produce the increases
in earnings dispersion and skewness with age that are documented in Figures 1 and
2. These Þndings are robust to the age at which the human capital accumulation
mechanism described by the model begins and to diﬀerent values of the elasticity
parameter of the human capital production function. We also Þnd that, despite its
relative success in replicating the cohort facts, the model is inconsistent with evidence
related to the persistence of individual earnings.
    We mention two areas in which future work seems promising. The Þrst has to
do with the fact that the distribution of agents by initial human capital and ability
is unrestricted by the model. Models of the family can provide restrictions on this
initial distribution. For this class of models, an assessment of the ability to replicate
the facts of age-earnings dynamics and intergenerational earnings correlations is a
natural next step.
    The second area for future work deals with the fact that the model examined
here abstracts from many seemingly important features. Three such features are
the absence of a leisure decision, an occupational choice decision and shocks that
make human capital risky. We comment on this last feature. First, allowing for
risky human capital would be one way of integrating deeper foundations for earnings
risk into the standard consumption-savings problem considered by the literature on
the life-cycle, permanent-income hypothesis. This literature has examined in detail
the determinants of consumption and Þnancial asset holdings over the life cycle, but


                                           22
no comparable eﬀort has been put into investigating the accumulation of human
capital. Second, while there seems to be agreement that human capital is risky there
is relatively little work that analyzes diﬀerent sources of risk and then determines their
quantitative importance.23 Two interesting questions for a theory with risky human
capital are (i) can such a model account for both the distributional dynamics of
earnings and consumption over the life cycle? and (ii) what fraction of the dispersion
in lifetime earnings can be accounted for by initial conditions versus shocks? We plan
to explore these questions in future work.




  23
     Within a human capital model, shocks can no longer be modeled as exogenous shocks to earnings.
Instead, they must be modeled at a deeper level as shocks to the depreciation of human capital, to
learning ability, to the employment match, to rental rates and so on. Each one of these alternatives
poses diﬀerent modeling as well as empirical challenges.


                                                23
References
   Ameriks, J. and S. Zeldes (2000), How do Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?,
   manuscript.
   Andolfatto, D, Gomme, P. and C. Ferrall (2000), Human Capital Theory and
   the Life-Cycle Pattern of Learning and Earning, Income and Wealth, mimeo.
   Ben-Porath, Y. (1967), The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle
   of Earnings, Journal of Political Economy, 75, 352-65.
   Browning, M., Hansen, L. and J. Heckman (1999), Micro Data and General
   Equilibrium Models, in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. J.B. Taylor and M.
   Woodford, (Elsevier Science B.V, Amsterdam).
   Card, D. (1999), The Causal Eﬀect of Education on Earnings, in Handbook of
   Labor Economics, Volume 3, ed. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card.
   Creedy, J. and P. Hart (1979), Age and the Distribution of Earnings, Economic
   Journal, 89, 280-93.
   Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (1994), Intertemporal Choice and Inequality, Journal
   of Political Economy, 102, 437-67.
   Dooley and Gottschalk (1984), Earnings Inequality Among Males in the United
   States: Trends and the Eﬀect of Labor Force Growth, Journal of Political Econ-
   omy, 92, 59- 89.
   Haley, W. (1976), Estimation of the Earnings ProÞle from Optimal Human
   Capital Accumulation, Econometrica, 44, 1223-38.
   Hanoch, G, and M. Honig (1985), “True” Age ProÞles of Earnings: Adjusting
   for Censoring and for Period and Cohort Eﬀects, Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 67, 383-94.
   Heckman, J. (1975), Estimates of a Human Capital Production Function Em-
   bedded in a Life Cycle Model of Labor Supply, in Household Production and
   Consumption, ed. N. Terleckyj, Columbia University Press, New York.
   Heckman, J. (1976), A Life-Cycle Model of Earning, Learning and Consump-
   tion, Journal of Political Economy, 84, S11-S44.

                                      24
Heckman, J., Lochner, L. and C. Taber (1998), Explaining Rising Wage In-
equality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor
Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents, Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 1-58.

Hyslop, D. (2001), Rising US Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply:
The Covariance Structure of Intrafamily Earnings, American Economic Review,
91, 755- 77.

Hubbard G. R., J. Skinner, and S. Zeldes (1994), The Importance of Pre-
cautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Savings, Carnegie
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40, 59-126.

Keane, M. and Wolpin, K., The Career Decisions of Young Men, Journal of
Political Economy, 105(3), 473-522.

Lillard, L. (1977) Inequality: Earnings vs. Human Wealth, American Economic
Review, 67, 42-53.

MaCurdy T. (1982) The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Struc-
ture of Earnings in Longitudinal Data Analysis Journal of Econometrics, 18,
83-118.

Mincer, J. (1958), Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distri-
bution, Journal of Political Economy, 66, 281- 302.

Mincer, J. (1974), Schooling, Experience and Earnings, Columbia University
Press, New York.

Mincer, J. (1997), The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of
Earnings: Variations on a Theme, Journal of Labor-Economics, 15 (1), Part 2.

Neal, D. and S. Rosen (1999), Theories of the Distribution of Earnings, in
Handbook of Income Distribution, ed. A. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, North
Holland Publishers.

Parsons, D. (1978), The Autocorrelation of Earnings, Human Wealth Inequality,
and Income Contingent Loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics , 92, 551-69.

Press, W. et. al. (1992), Numerical recipes in FORTRAN, Second Edition,
Cambridge University Press.

                                  25
Rosen, S. (1976), A Theory of Life Earnings, Journal of Political Economy, 84,
S45-S67.

Schultz, T. (1975), Long-Term Change in Personal Income Distribution: The-
oretical Approaches, Evidence, and Explanations, in The “Inequality” Contro-
versy: Schooling and Distributive Justice, ed. D. Levine and M. Bane, (New
York, Basic Books).

Shorrocks, A. (1980), Income Stability in the United States, in Statics and
Dynamics of Income, ed. Klevmarken and Lybeck.

Smith and Welch (1979), Inequality: Race Diﬀerences in the Distribution of
Earnings, International Economic Review, 20, 515-26.

Stokey, N. and R. Lucas with E. Prescott (1989), Recursive Methods in Eco-
nomic Dynamics, (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).

Storresletten, K., Telmer, C. and A. Yaron (2001), Consumption and Risk Shar-
ing Over the Life Cycle, NBER Working Paper # 7995.

Weiss, Y. (1986), The Determination of Life-Cycle Earnings, in Handbook of
Labor Economics, Volume I , ed. O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, Elsevier Science
Publishers.




                                   26
A      Appendix
A.1     Proposition 1
To prove Proposition 1 it is useful to reformulate the dynamic programming problem
by expressing earnings as a function of future human capital and ability. The resulting
earnings function is denoted G(h, h0 , a; j).


                   Vj (h; a) = max
                                0
                                   G(h, h0 , a; j) + (1 + r)−1 Vj+1 (h0 ; a)
                                  h


               h0 ∈ Γ(h, a) ≡ [h(1 − δ) + f (h, 0, a), h(1 − δ) + f (h, 1, a)]

Proof of Proposition 1:
    (i) The existence of the value function follows by repeated application of the
Theorem of the Maximum starting in the last period of life. To apply the Theorem
of the Maximum, we make use of the continuity of G(h, h0 , a; j) and the fact that the
constraint set is a continuous and compact-valued correspondence. These are easily
veriÞed. To show that the value function increases in h and a, note that this holds in
the last period since VJ (h; a) = wJ h. Backward induction establishes the result for
earlier periods using the fact that G(h, h0 , a; j) increases in h and a.
    The concavity of the value function in human capital follows from backwards
induction by applying repeatedly the argument used in Stokey and Lucas (1989, Thm.
4.8). To apply this argument, we make use of three properties. First, the graph of the
constraint set {(h, h0 ) : h ∈ R+
                                1
                                  , h0 ∈ Γ(h, a)} is a convex set for any given ability level
a. This follows from the fact that the human capital production function is concave
in current human capital. Second, G(h, h0 , a; j) is jointly concave in (h, h0 ). This can
be easily veriÞed. Third, the terminal value function VJ+1 (h; a) ≡ 0 is concave in
human capital.
    The decision rule hj (h; a) is single-valued since the objective function is strictly
concave and the constraint set, for given (h; a), is convex. The objective function
is strictly concave because the value function is concave and because G(h, h0 , a; j) is
strictly concave in h0 .
    (ii) DeÞne Vj (h; a) recursively, given VJ (h; a) = (1 + g)J−1 h, as follows:
                                PJ−j (1+g)(1−δ) k
      Vj (h; a) = [(1 + g)j−1       [
                                  k=0   (1+r)
                                               ] ]h + C   j (a)   for h ≥ Aj (a).


                                                27
                      1
      Vj (h; a) =        V (h(1
                    (1+r) j+1
                                  − δ) + ahα ; a) for h ≤ Aj (a)

      Cj (a) ≡ (1 + r)−1 (Cj+1 (a) + Dj+1 aAj (a)α ) − (1 + g)j−1 Aj (a), where CJ (a) = 0
                         PJ−j (1+g)(1−δ) k
      Dj ≡ [(1 + g)j−1       [
                           k=0    (1+r)
                                        ] ]

    Now verify that the functions (Vj (h; a), hj (h; a)) satisfy Bellman’s equation. Ver-
iÞcation amounts to checking that hj (h; a) satisÞes Bellman’s equation without the
max operation and that it achieves the maximum in the right-hand-side of Bellman’s
equation. Since the Þrst part is routine, the proof focuses on the second part. A
suﬃcient condition for an interior solution is given in the Þrst equation below. The
second equation follows from the Þrst after substituting the relevant functions evalu-
ated at h0 = hj (h; a). Here we make use of the assumption on the cutoﬀ values Aj (a)
                                        0
in Prop 1(ii) since we substitute for Vj+1 (h0 ; a) assuming interior solutions obtain in
future periods. Rearrangement of the second equation implies that Aj (a) is deÞned
as in Prop 1(ii).

                          −G2 (h, h0 , a; j) = (1 + r)−1 Vj+1
                                                           0
                                                              (h0 ; a)

                                                (1 + g)j J−j−1
                                                          X (1 + g)(1 − δ)
            (1 + g)j−1 (1/(aα))Aj (a)1−α =                    [            ]k
                                                 (1 + r) k=0    (1 + r)
    It remains to consider the possibility of a corner solution. The Þrst equation below
gives a suﬃcient condition for a corner solution. The second equation follows from
the Þrst after substitution. Since Vj+1 is concave in human capital, it is clear that
  0
Vj+1  is bounded below by the derivative above the cutoﬀ human capital level Aj+1 (a).
Thus, from the interior solution case, the second equation holds whenever h ≤ Aj (a).

                          −G2 (h, h0 , a; j) ≤ (1 + r)−1 Vj+1
                                                           0
                                                              (h0 ; a)

                                                      1
                    (1 + g)j−1 (1/(aα))h1−α ≤                0
                                                           Vj+1 (hj (h; a); a)
                                                   (1 + r)




                                              28
A.2     Computation
We sketch the computation algorithm for the non-parametric case.

 Step 1: Calculate the optimal decision rule hj (h; a).

 Step 2: Put a grid on learning ability and initial human capital (h, a) and calculate
     life-cycle proÞles of human capital, hours and earnings from these grid points.

 Step 3: Find the initial distribution.

    To calculate the optimal decision rule in step 1, for any value of learning ability
a, we put a non-uniform grid on human capital of 300 points on [0, h∗ ], where the
choice of h∗ may be revised depending on the results of step 3. We calculate the
optimal decision rule for human capital at gridpoints starting from period j = J − 1
by solving the dynamic programming problem starting from period J − 1, given
VJ (h; a) = wJ h. Since the value function is concave in human capital each period, the
dynamic programming problem is a concave programming problem. Golden section
search (see Press et al (1992), ch. 10) is used to calculate hj (h; a) at gridpoints. To
carry this out, we calculate the value function oﬀ gridpoints using linear interpolation.
Backward recursion on Bellman’s equation produces hj (h; a) for j = 1, ..., J − 1.
    In step 2 we put a grid of 20 points on [0, a∗ ] and 20 points on [0, h∗ ]. This implies
a total of 400 points (h, a). Using the decision rule from step 1, we simulate life-
cycle proÞles of labor earnings from any initial pair (h, a). Since decision rules are
computed at gridpoints of human capital holdings, but its values are not restricted to
lie on these gridpoints, we use linear interpolation to calculate values oﬀ gridpoints.
    In step 3 we use the Simplex algorithm, as described by Press et al (1992, ch.
10), to Þnd the 400 values of the histogram over [0, h∗ ] × [0, a∗ ] that minimizes the
distance between model and data statistics. For any trial of the vector describing the
initial distribution, we calculate the mean, dispersion and skewness statistics at each
age using the calculated life-cycle proÞles and the guessed initial distribution. The
calculation of decision rules and the posterior life-cycle simulation are independent
of the initial distribution. This reduces computation time as life-cycle proÞles are
calculated only once and stored to be used later in the calculation of the relevant
statistics in all the trials required by the simplex method. If the histogram that best
matches the data puts strictly positive weight on (h, a) pairs where a = a∗ or h = h∗ ,
then the upper bounds are increased and steps 1-3 are repeated.



                                            29
A.3     Data
A.3.1    Restricted Time Eﬀects
Below we provide details for implementing the restricted time eﬀects discussed in
section 2.3. Let X = [αs , βj , γt ] be the matrix of cohort, age and time dummies with
the number of rows equal to the number of {j, t} pairs available for earnings ej,t ,
where for simplicity we omit the dependence on percentile p. DeÞne the unrestricted
regression e = Xb + ². Note, here e is the vector of all possible ej,t , and b is the vector
of unrestricted dummy coeﬃcients. The problem is that due to the linear relationship
between time, age, and cohort, the matrix (X 0 X)−1 is singular, so this unrestricted
version can not be implemented.
    Let ca be the number of age and cohort dummies available, and T be the number
of time dummies available. DeÞne the matrix R and W as indicated below. The
matrix R has two rows corresponding to our two restrictions of setting the mean time
dummies to zero and setting time dummies be orthogonal to trend. Let b∗ be the
corresponding vector of b that obeys this normalization. That is Rb∗ = 02×1 . It
turns out that in spite of the fact that (X 0 X)−1 is singular the matrix W below is
non-singular.
                                      "                              #
                                          01×ca   11×T
                                R=                                                      (1)
                                          01×ca 1, 2, ...T
                                          "                      #
                                              X 0 X −R0
                                  W =
                                               R 02×2
    DeÞne the vectors V and s as indicated below, where λ is the Lagrange multiplier
on the restricted least square residual (or moment conditions). Then the moment
conditions corresponding to this minimization is V = W d. Since W is invertible
we have d = W −1 V and therefore have the solution to the desired restricted set of
estimates b∗ .
                                              "              #
                                                  X 0e
                                      V =
                                                  02×1
                                               "         #
                                                    b∗
                                          d=
                                                    λ




                                               30
A.3.2    Group Growth Rates
Figure 7 is based on a subset of the data used in section 2. SpeciÞcally, for each panel
year we track each agent’s earnings throughout the next Þve years. Our selection
criteria is identical to that described earlier, except that now we require agents to
be in the sample for the next 5 consecutive years. We deÞne age and cohort speciÞc
growth rate as follows. Let the average k-period growth rate  h P   of those persons i who  i
                                                  j                        j+k   1 PN     j
were of age j during time period t be deÞned as ēt,t+k = log N N
                                                                1
                                                                         e     /
                                                                     i=1 i,t+k N     i=1 i,t ,
                                                                                         e
where i sums over the number of people N who were age j in year t. We compute
this growth rate measure for j = 36, 37, ...52, and t = 1, 2, ..T . The data ējt,t+k is then
used to recover the ’age’ eﬀects by applying the same regression with cohort and age
eﬀects as described in section 2.2.
    Figure 7 provides the age eﬀects corresponding to ējt,t+k for the bottom, middle
and top 20 percentiles. In Figure 7a the sum is over those who are in the bottom
(middle or top) 20 percent at time t. In Figure 7b the sum is over those agents who
were in the bottom (middle or top) 20 percent at time t + k. All the Þgures are based
on 5 year growth rates, that is k = 5.




                                             31
                 Fig. 1-a Mean Earnings: PSID Data


120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20

  0
       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58
                                   Age




                Fig 1-b Dispersion (Gini Coeff.): PSID Data

0.45
 0.4
0.35
 0.3
0.25
 0.2
0.15
 0.1
0.05
  0
       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58
                                   Age




               Fig 1-c Skewness (Mean/Median): PSID Data

1.4
1.2
  1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
  0
       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58
                                   Age
                Fig. 2 Earnings Percentiles (0.025-0.99): PSID Data




700


600


500


400


300


200


100


  0
      20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58
                                             Age
               Fig 3-a Mean Earnings: PSID Data


120

100
                                                       Cohort Dummies
 80
                                                       Time Dummies
 60

 40                                                    Restricted Time
                                                       Dummies
 20

  0
       20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                         Age




              Fig. 3-b Dispersion (Gini Coeff.): PSID Data

0.45
 0.4
0.35
                                                       Cohort Dummies
 0.3
0.25                                                   Time Dummies
 0.2
0.15                                                   Restricted Time
                                                       Dummies
 0.1
0.05
  0
       20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                         Age




              Fig 3-c Skewness (Mean/Median): PSID Data

1.4

1.2

 1                                                     Cohort Dummies

0.8                                                    Time Dummies
0.6
                                                       Restricted Time
0.4                                                    Dummies
0.2

 0
      20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                         Age
Fig. 4-a Mean Earnings: Non-Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

 120

 100

  80
                                                                Data
  60                                                            Age 10
                                                                Age 20
  40

  20

   0
        20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                              Age




Fig. 4-b Dispersion: Non-Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

  0.45
   0.4
  0.35
   0.3
                                                                Data
  0.25
                                                                Age 10
   0.2
                                                                Age 20
  0.15
   0.1
  0.05
       0
           20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                              Age




 Fig. 4-c Skewness: Non-Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

  1.4

  1.2

    1
                                                                  Data
  0.8
                                                                  Age 10
  0.6
                                                                  Age 20
  0.4

  0.2

    0
           20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                              Age
 Fig. 5-a Mean Earnings: Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

  120

  100

   80
                                                                    Data
   60                                                               Age 10
                                                                    Age 20
   40

   20

    0
        20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                               Age



 Fig. 5-b Dispersion: Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

 0.45
  0.4
 0.35
  0.3
                                                                    Data
 0.25
                                                                    Age 10
  0.2
                                                                    Age 20
 0.15
  0.1
 0.05
    0
        20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                               Age



Fig. 5-b Skewness: Parametric Initial Distribution (alpha=0.7)

  1.4

  1.2

    1
                                                                    Data
  0.8
                                                                    Age 10
  0.6                                                               Age 20
  0.4

  0.2

    0
        20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                               Age
Fig. 6-a Mean Earnings: Fixed Initial Human Capital (Accumulation Starts Age 10)

      140

      120

      100

       80                                                        Data
       60                                                        alpha=0.7

       40

       20

        0
            20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                                 Age




  Fig. 6-b Dispersion: Fixed Initial Human Capital (Accumulation Starts Age 10)

        0.5
       0.45
        0.4
       0.35
        0.3
                                                                  Data
       0.25
                                                                  alpha=0.7
        0.2
       0.15
        0.1
       0.05
          0
                20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                                  Age




  Fig. 6-c Skewness: Fixed Initial Human Capital (Accumulation Starts Age 10)


       1.4

       1.2

            1

       0.8                                                         Data
       0.6                                                         alpha=0.7

       0.4

       0.2

            0
                20 23 26 29 32 35 38 41 44 47 50 53 56
                                  Age
             Fig. 7-a 5-year Growth Rates (Backward Case)
                     Bottom 20%      Central 20%     Top 20%

      40
      30
      20
      10
(%)


        0
      -10
      -20
      -30
      -40
            36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
                                     Age




             Fig. 7-b 5-year Growth Rates (Forward Case)
                     Bottom 20%      Central 20%     Top 20%

      25
      20
      15
      10
(%)




       5
       0
       -5
      -10
            36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
                                     Age
