NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT RELIEF: WHAT DO THE MARKETS THINK?
Serkan Arslanalp
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 9369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9369
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

We thank Jeremy Bulow for helpful conversations and Rania A. Eltom for able research assistance. Henry
gratefully acknowledges financial support from an NSF CAREER Award and the Stanford Institute for
Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Debt Relief: What Do the Markets Think?
Serkan Arslanalp and Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 9369
December 2002
ABSTRACT
The stock market appreciates by an average of 60 percent in real dollar terms when countries
announce debt relief agreements under the Brady Plan. In contrast, there is no significant increase
in market value for a control group of countries that do not sign agreements. The results persist after
controlling for IMF agreements, trade liberalizations, capital account liberalizations, and
privatization programs. The stock market revaluations forecast higher future net resource transfers
and GDP growth. While markets respond favorably to debt relief in the Brady countries, there is no
evidence to suggest that current debt relief efforts for the Highly-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs)
will achieve similar results.

Serkan Arslanalp

Peter Blair Henry

Stanford University

Stanford University

Department of Economics

Graduate School of Business

Landau Economics Building

Stanford, CA 94305-5015

579 Serra Mall

and NBER

Stanford, CA 94305-6072

pbhenry@stanford.edu

serkan@stanford.edu

I. Introduction
Bono and Jesse Helms want debt relief for highly indebted poor countries
(HIPCs). The Pope and 17 million people are behind them. On June 17, 1999, the lead
singer of U2 presented 17 million signatures in support of the Jubilee 2000 Debt Relief
Initiative to Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder at a meeting of G8 leaders in Cologne,
Germany. In a Papal Bull on November 29, 1998, Pope John Paul II called on wealthy
nations to relieve the debts of developing nations in order to “remove the shadow of
death.”
Opponents of debt relief occupy less hallowed ground but are no less zealous
about their cause, citing at least three reasons why the debt relief campaign is misguided.
First, debt relief alone cannot solve the problem of third world debt. Even if all debt
were forgiven, it will accumulate again if income does not grow faster than expenditure
(O’Neill, 2002). Second, debt relief can create perverse incentives for debtor countries—
by relaxing budget constraints, debt relief may induce governments into prolonging bad
economic policies (Easterly, 2001a). Third, rewriting debt contracts may hurt a debtor’s
reputation and hinder its ability to obtain future loans (Easterly, 2001b).
Moral proponents of debt relief can point to three counterarguments in their
defense. First, some debts are illegitimate. There is a precedent for canceling debt that is
odious— incurred without the consent of the people and not for their benefit— and
Kremer and Jayachandran (2002) present a feasible way of doing so. Second, debt relief
can benefit both creditors and debtors (Krugman, 1988; Sachs, 1989). Third, and related
to the second point, it is good accounting practice to write off debts that cannot be

1

collected. That way, future loans can be given on a sounder economic basis (Sachs and
Huizinga, 1987; Summers, 2000).
Does debt relief help or hurt the recipient? This paper takes a new approach. We
ask the stock market to opine. In March of 1989 the United States government formally
approved an initiative by Treasury Secretary Nicolas Brady calling for debt relief for
third world countries. Between 1989 and 1995, sixteen developing countries reached
debt relief agreements under the Brady plan. This paper examines the response of each
debtor country’s stock market to the news of its own Brady agreement. Figure 1 conveys
the central fact. The stock market appreciates by an average of 60 percent in real dollar
terms when countries announce the signing of a Brady debt relief agreement.
The stock market is forward looking. It asks what discount rates and cash flows
lie ahead. The effect of debt relief on discount rates and cash flows follows from the
collective action problem that it is designed to solve. If each creditor would agree to
forgive some of its claims, then the debtor country would be better able to service the
debt owed to each creditor. Consequently, the expected value of all creditors’ claims
would rise. Forgiveness will not happen without coordination, however, because any
individual creditor would prefer to free ride, maintaining the full value of its claims while
others write off some debt (Krugman, 1988; Sachs, 1989). By forcing all creditors to
take a haircut, debt relief solves the collective action problem and paves the way for
profitable new lending (Cline, 1995). The new capital inflow reduces discount rates in
the debtor country by relaxing the intertemporal budget constraint (Obstfeld and Rogoff,
1996). Also, to the extent that a country suffers from debt overhang, debt relief increases

2

the incentive to invest and may raise expected future growth rates and cash flows
(Krugman, 1989; Sachs, 1989).
The stock market removes the temporal dimension of the analysis by collapsing
the entire expected future stream of debtor-country discount rates and cash flows into a
single summary statistic: the change in the value of the stock market. However, it is
important not to look at debtor-country stock market responses in isolation. Suppose that
the Brady Plan coincides with a global shock unrelated to debt relief that reduces
discount rates and increases cash flows. Debtor-country stock markets will rise, but so
too will stock markets in countries that do not sign debt relief agreements.
In order to assess whether the Brady country stock market boom was due to the
announcement of debt relief agreements or a common shock, we compare the stock
market response of the Brady countries with the market response of a similar group of
countries that did not sign Brady deals. Figure 1 shows that the control group does not
experience a significant increase in stock prices; the market response in debtor countries
cannot be explained by an unobservable common shock.
Reporting the results in real dollar terms also requires caution. In countries with
high inflation, the rate of depreciation of the official nominal exchange rate may not keep
pace with inflation. Under such a scenario, the real dollar value of the stock market may
become artificially inflated. To account for this possibility, Section II analyzes the stock
market using real local-currency stock returns. The conclusions are unaltered. The stock
market responds in a positive and statistically significant manner to debt relief
agreements, but there is no significant market response for the control group.

3

Many countries enter into IMF programs immediately following the
announcement of their Brady Plan. Therefore, it is possible that debt relief agreements
drive up stock prices because they signal future IMF programs. We investigate this
possibility by examining whether stock markets respond positively to IMF agreements
that are not accompanied by debt relief. Section IV demonstrates that this is not the case.
Similarly, countries receive Brady deals in return for committing to economic
reforms that are designed to increase openness and raise productivity. So, it is possible
that stock prices go up because debt relief signals future reforms. Again, this is not the
case.

The market response to debt relief remains significant when controlling for

concurrent reforms: trade liberalization, privatization, and capital account liberalization.
After grappling with concerns about robustness in Section IV, Section V turns to
issues of interpretation. Why do stock prices rise? Is this a spurious result? Or, does the
stock market rationally forecast future changes in future fundamentals? Again, theory
points to the net resource transfer (NRT) and future growth. If market values rise
because debt relief paves the way for profitable new lending, then the stock market
responses should have some predictive power for future changes in the NRT. Similarly,
if debt relief improves future growth prospects, then the stock market responses should
have some predictive power for future changes in output. While this approach does not
provide definitive evidence, the stock market responses do help predict the change in the
NRT and GDP growth for up to five years following the agreements.
Would debt relief for the HIPCs produce the salutary effects achieved by the
Brady Plan? We do not think so. The Brady Plan worked because debt relief was the
appropriate policy response for a group of countries where the collective action problem

4

genuinely stood in the way of profitable new lending.

In a companion paper, we

demonstrate that the collective action problem is not the primary obstacle to growth in the
HIPCs (Arslanalp and Henry 2002). Rather, the principal obstacles are a lack of basic
institutions and social infrastructure, problems that debt relief is unlikely to solve
(Easterly 2001b)
Debt relief has become synonymous with the HIPCs, but a number of middleincome developing countries are also substantially indebted (Easterly 2001b; Birdsall and
Williamson 2002). Furthermore, Section VI of this paper shows that these middleincome countries bear far greater resemblance to the Brady countries than do the highly
indebted poor countries. And yet the middle-income debtors are not part of the debt
relief conversation. In other words, our results point to a cruel irony. The debt relief
debate focuses myopically on the HIPCs, whose problems debt relief cannot solve, while
countries that would actually benefit from debt relief receive precious little consideration.

II. Data and Descriptive Findings
Table I provides a complete list of the countries in the treatment and control
groups. The treatment group consists of all countries that received a Brady Plan. There
are 16 such countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland,
Uruguay, and Venezuela. The table also gives the announcement date of each country’s
Brady Plan. The principal source of dates is Table 5.3 on page 234 of International Debt
Reexamined (Cline, 1995). However, the book does not provide announcement dates for

5

Bolivia, Nigeria, Panama, Peru and the Philippines1.
retrieved

announcement

dates

using

(http://web.lexis-nexis.com/universe).2

the

For these five countries we

Lexis-Nexis

Academic

Universe

We verified the accuracy of the search by

matching the dates obtained from Lexis-Nexis with those in the Quarterly Economic
Reports of the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU).

IIA. Selection of the Control group
The control group consists of all developing countries that: (1) Did not receive a
Brady plan; and (2) Have stock market data in the International Finance Corporation
(IFC) Emerging Market Data Base going back to at least 1994. There are 16 such
countries: Chile, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey, and
Zimbabwe.
Since the treatment group consists of countries whose stock markets respond to
external shocks, it is crucial that the control group contains countries whose stock
markets will also respond to such shocks. If the control group consists of countries in
such an abject state of development that their economies lack basic institutions, then their
stock markets may not respond positively no matter how favorable the external shocks.
In other words, it is important to ask whether the selection of the control group introduces
statistical bias into our findings.

We address this concern by examining the

characteristics of the two groups in some detail.

1

Cline (1995) provides only the year of the announcement for the Philippines and only the implementation
date for Nigeria and Bolivia. It does not provide any dates for Panama and Peru because these countries
were still negotiating their debt relief agreements at the time of the publication.
2
A data appendix containing the complete list of articles that were uncovered by the Lexis Nexis search is
available upon request.

6

The treatment group and the control group display similar geographical
dispersion. Both groups contain countries from Latin America, Asia, Africa, and Eastern
Europe. One significant difference is that Latin American countries comprise the largest
fraction of countries in the treatment group. The control group, however, consists mostly
of Asian counties.

History suggests that the relatively heavier weighting of Asian

countries in the control group will make that group the stronger economic performer. We
confirm this suspicion by comparing the treatment group and the control group using two
standard measures of economic performance, growth and inflation.
The control group outperforms the treatment group on both measures. Table I
shows that between 1980 and 1999 the median growth rate of per capita GDP for the
control group was 3 percent. The treatment group grew by only 1 percent per year during
the same time period. GDP growth was also less volatile in the control group. The
standard error of GDP growth for the control group was 1 percent, as compared to 2
percent for the treatment group. Finally, the control group has a lower and less volatile
rate of inflation: a median of 11 percent and a standard deviation of 3 percent. The
corresponding numbers for the treatment group are 27 and 18.
To summarize, the median country in the control group has faster and less volatile
growth together with lower and less volatile inflation than its treatment group
counterpart. To the extent that superior long-run economic performance is positively
correlated with better-managed economies, we would expect stock markets in the median
control-group country to be more responsive to any auspicious common shock. If there is
any selection bias, it works against finding a significantly large revaluation in the Brady
countries. In other words, the bias, if any, strengthens our results.

7

IIB. Stock Market Data
The principal source of stock market data is the IFC’s Emerging Markets Data
Base (EMDB)3. Stock price indices for individual countries are the dividend-inclusive,
U.S. dollar-denominated and local currency-denominated IFC Global Indices. For most
countries, EMDB’s coverage begins in December 1975, but for others coverage only
begins in December 1984. Each country’s U.S. dollar-denominated stock price index is
deflated by the U.S. consumer price index (CPI), which comes from the IMF’s
International Financial Statistics (IFS). The local currency-denominated index is deflated
by the local consumer price index for each country, which is also obtained from the IFS.
Returns and inflation are calculated as the first difference of the natural logarithm of the
real stock price and CPI, respectively. All of the data are monthly.
Reliable stock market data exist for only 10 of the Brady countries: Argentina,
Brazil, Ecuador, Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, and Venezuela.
We bring back Bolivia, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Panama, and
Uruguay into the picture in Section V where we move the focus of analysis from
financial to real data.

IIC. Descriptive Findings: Stock Market Responses to Debt Relief Announcements
This subsection presents evidence on how the stock market responds to news of a
future debt relief agreement. For each country in the treatment group we calculate the
average monthly stock return over the entire sample. The average monthly return is a
proxy for the expected monthly return. Subtracting a country’s expected return from its
actual return gives the abnormal return. Now let month [0] be the month in which a
3

For Ecuador, the source of stock market data is the Global Financial Data Base.

8

Brady debt relief announcement takes place, for a given country. Similarly, let [-12]
denote the 12th month before the debt relief announcement, so that [-12, 0] denotes the
one-year window preceding the announcement. The cumulative abnormal return for a
country is defined as the sum of its abnormal returns from month –12 to month 0.
Figure 1 plots the average cumulative abnormal return across all ten Brady
countries in event time. The average Brady country stock market experiences cumulative
abnormal returns of 60 percent in real dollar terms. In other words, the real dollar value
of the stock market increases by 60 percent more than it does in a typical year. Now look
at the graph for the control group. If a common shock caused the run-up in equity prices
in the Brady countries, then we should see a run-up in the stock prices of the control
group as well. This is not the case. The average cumulative abnormal return for the
control group is close to 0. The preliminary conclusion is that the stock price increase in
the debtor countries is not due exclusively to a common shock that has favorable effects
on all emerging stock markets.
One concern is that the results may be sensitive to whether real returns are
measured in dollars or local currency units. To address this concern, Figure 2 replicates
the graph using real local currency returns instead of real dollar returns. Figure 2 is
virtually identical to Figure 1. Since the choice of currency makes little difference, the
formal empirical analysis in Section III focuses on the dollar-denominated returns.
Outliers are another source of potential concern.

Since there are only ten

countries in the Brady stock market group, one country may dominate the results. To
explore this possibility we conduct median tests in the following way. For each of the ten
countries we compute the median annual stock return. The stock return in the 12-month

9

period preceding the Brady announcement exceeds the median, annual return for every
country except Peru. We also conducted median tests in local currency and the results
were the same.

Peru is the only country whose stock return during the 12-month

announcement window was less than its median 12-month return.

III. Methodology and Formal Empirical Results
We evaluate the statistical significance of the relationships apparent in Figure 1
by estimating the following regression:
Rit = α i + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROLit + ε it .

(1)

Where Rit is the real return in dollars on country i ’s stock market index in month t,
BRADYit is a dummy variable that is equal to one in [-12, 0]. CONTROL is a dummy
variable that is equal to one in all of the control countries in Brady-Announcement
months [-12, 0]. We also estimate BRADY and CONTROL using nine-month [-9, 0],
six-month [-6, 0], and three-month [-3, 0] windows. The country-specific intercepts
allow for the possibility that average expected returns may differ across countries due to
imperfect capital market integration.
Equation (1) constrains the coefficients on BRADY to be the same across all
months, which means that the parameter γ 1 measures the average monthly stock market
response to all Brady Plan Announcements. Since the dummy variable for the event
window is twelve months long, the total stock market response to debt relief for the
Brady countries is given by twelve times the parameter estimate.
A different estimation technique would be to use a seemingly unrelated regression
(SUR). This approach would have the advantage of providing a unique coefficient

10

estimate for each country for each event. However, there are also disadvantages to this
approach. The low power of hypothesis tests in unconstrained systems severely weakens
the ability of the event study methodology to detect the impact of the event. Second,
SUR requires a balanced panel. Due to the limited time series availability of stock
market data, creating a balanced panel would result in discarding some of the 10 debt
relief events. Given data limitations, the pooled cross-section time series framework
seems appropriate.
With an unbalanced panel, it is not possible to relax the assumption of no
contemporaneous correlation of the error term across countries. Therefore, we will take
indirect precautions. Specifically, three of the alternative regression specifications to
equation (1) will estimate abnormal returns relative to the World stock market index, US
stock market index, and finally IFC’s emerging stock market index. Since all of the
sample countries are emerging markets, the inclusion of a composite emerging market
index as a right-hand-side variable will partially control for contemporaneously
correlated disturbance terms. Including the emerging market index does not change the
results.

IIIA. Basic Results
The first row of Table II (Panel A)— labeled ‘Country-Specific Mean’— gives
the results from the baseline specification in equation (1). White standard errors are
reported in parentheses. Column (1a) shows that the coefficient on BRADY for the
twelve-month window [-12, 0] is 0.05 and is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
Multiplying the coefficient by 12 gives the total effect, a 60-percent increase in the real

11

dollar value of the stock market. Column (1b) gives the coefficient estimate for the
CONTROL dummy.

In contrast to the estimate for the BRADY countries, the

revaluation effect associated with the control group is economically weak, 0.005, and
statistically insignificant. Column (1c) provides the p-value from a two-sided F-test of
the hypothesis that the coefficient estimate on BRADY is equal to the coefficient
estimate on CONTROL. The p-value for this test is 0.001. The difference between the
BRADY estimate and the CONTROL estimate is statistically significant. In other words,
the stock market in BRADY countries rises by roughly 60 percentage points more than it
does in the CONTROL group.
The results using nine-month, six-month, and three-month windows are all
consistent with the 12-month estimates. The coefficient estimate of BRADY ranges from
0.048 to 0.052 and is statistically significant in every specification. Furthermore, the
BRADY estimate is always significantly larger than the estimate of CONTROL. Row 2
of Table II (Panel A)— labeled, ‘Constant Mean’— presents estimates of equation (1)
using a constant intercept term, α , instead of country-specific intercept terms. The
results are almost identical to those in Row 1.

IIIB. Controlling For World Stock Markets
Equation (1) provides a parsimonious baseline specification of abnormal returns,
but it does not allow for the influence of world stock markets on local returns. In order to
do so, we follow Kho, Lee and Stulz (2000) and use the international capital asset pricing
model (ICAPM) to measure the expected return on each country’s stock market index.
Specifically, we now estimate:

12

Rit = α i + β RtW + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROL + ε it ,

(2)

Where RtW is the real return in dollars on the Morgan Stanley Capital Market Index
(MSCI) in month t. While barriers to the international movement of capital may raise
questions about the economic assumption of an ICAPM, as a purely statistical matter,
returns on world stock market indices do have some predictive power for stock returns in
the countries under consideration (Henry 2000a).4
Row 3 of Table II (Panel A) presents estimates of BRADY and CONTROL using
equation (2). Row 4 presents estimates that use real U.S. stock returns, RtUS , in place of
RtW . Row 5 presents estimates that use the real dollar return on the IFC Emerging

Market index, RtLDC , in place of RtW . Row 6 presents estimates that use all three sets of
world stock returns simultaneously. The results in Rows 3 through 6 perfectly mirror
those under the benchmark specification in Rows 1 and 2. The coefficient on BRADY is
statistically significant under all four ICAPM specifications. The point estimate ranges
from 4.9 to 3.9 percent per month, and the estimate of BRADY is significantly larger
than the estimate of CONTROL in all but the three-month window estimates.

IIIC. Other Robustness Checks
The estimates in Panel A of Table II adjust for cross-country heteroscedasticity
and cross-country correlation, but they do not account for potential serial correlation in
the error terms.

Hence, White standard errors may not be sufficient to ensure the

4

For conceptual discussions of the international capital asset pricing model see Frankel (1994); Stulz
(1999a); Tesar (1999); Tesar and Werner (1995); and Tesar and Werner (1998). For empirical evidence on
the real effects of increased capital market integration, see Henry (2000b).

13

reliability of the estimates in Panel A. To address this concern, Panel B of Table II reestimates all of the specifications in Panel A using Feasible Generalized Least Squares
(FGLS). FGLS allows for the possibility of serial correlation, in addition to correcting
for cross-country heteroscedasticity.
The estimations using FGLS yield the same conclusions as the OLS estimates in
Panel A. Every FGLS point estimate of BRADY in Panel B of Table II is statistically
significant.

The FGLS monthly point estimates of BRADY are smaller than those

obtained using OLS, but they are still large. The smallest point estimate for the twelvemonth window is 0.034— a total revaluation of greater than 40 percent. Furthermore, the
coefficient on BRADY remains significantly larger than the coefficient on CONTROL in
all of the specifications except for some of those that use 3-month windows.

IV. Do IMF Programs and Economic Reforms Drive the Results?
Three central facts emerge from Sections II and III: (1) Stock markets in debtor
countries experience a positive and statistically significant revaluation in response to
news of debt relief; (2) the effect is large and it is not an artifact of the currency in which
the revaluation is measured; and (3) the response is uniformly positive across debtor
countries.
The control group also experiences a mild revaluation, but the 50-percentagepoint difference between the estimates of BRADY and CONTROL is statistically
significant and cannot be explained by a common shock. Having ruled out common
shocks as an explanation, the following subsection of the paper examines whether the

14

Brady countries’ stock market revaluations are driven by the prospect of debt relief or the
expectation of future IMF programs and economic reforms.

IVA. IMF Programs
Countries receive debt relief in return for agreeing to commit to economic reforms
that are designed to increase openness and raise productivity (Cline, 1995). In other
words, Brady agreements may also constitute implicit news about the entire future
schedule of economic reforms.

Official country agreements with the International

Monetary Fund illustrate the point.

Column 3 of Table III shows that an official

agreement with the IMF immediately precedes, or follows on the heels of, every Brady
deal.
Since IMF programs followed all of the Brady agreements, Brady agreements
may drive up stock prices because they signal future IMF agreements. Because every
debt relief agreement closely coincides with an IMF agreement, we cannot disentangle
the debt relief effect by inserting into equation (3) a dummy variable for IMF programs
that coincide with debt relief announcements. An IMF dummy constructed in that way
would be collinear with the BRADY dummy and present the attendant econometric
problems.
Therefore, we adopt a different tack. We examine whether the stock market
responds to IMF agreements that are not accompanied by debt relief. We do this by
constructing for each country a list of all IMF programs that did not occur within a year
(before or after) of the announcement of its Brady debt relief agreement. We then create

15

a dummy variable, IMFPROGRAM, which takes on the value one for all such programs,
and estimate the following regression:

Rit = α + β RtW + γ 1IMFPROGRAM it + ε it

(4)

Following the earlier specifications, we estimate twelve-month, nine-month, six-month,
and three-month windows. If the stock market responds positively to IMF agreements
that are not accompanied by debt relief, then the estimate of γ 1 should be positive and
significant.
There is no evidence that the stock market responds positively to IMF agreements
that are not associated with a Brady Debt Relief Agreement. The coefficient estimate of
IMFPROGRAM is negative and statistically insignificant in every specification. The
estimate for the twelve-month window is –0.016; the estimate for the nine-month window
is -0.011; the estimate for the six-month window is -0.004; the estimate for the threemonth window is -0.027.5

IVB. Economic Reforms
Just as debt relief agreements may signal future IMF agreements, IMF agreements
may in turn signal countries’ commitment to future economic reforms (Williamson, 1994;
Collins, 1990; Bruno and Easterly, 1996). By transitivity, debt relief may signal future
economic reforms. If debt relief agreements are a signal of future productivity-enhancing
reforms, then the results in Table II may erroneously attribute the stock market
revaluation to debt relief instead of the future reforms.

5

The insignificance of the IMFPROGRAM variable is consistent with evidence that the market responds
positively to IMF agreements, only when they are announced in the midst of high inflation (Henry, 2002).

16

Columns 2 through 4 of Table III present a list of critical economic reform dates
in each country.

Broadly speaking, economic reforms fall into one of four areas:

stabilization, privatization, trade liberalization, and capital account liberalization. The
previous subsection on IMF programs addresses stabilization issues. This subsection
focuses on the latter three reforms.
We use the Economist Intelligence Unit’s Quarterly Economic Reports to identify
the date of trade liberalization. We check the EIU dates against the trade liberalization
dates in the World Bank Publication, Trends in Developing Economies (1994) and the
dates in Sachs and Warner (1995). We identify privatization dates with the World Bank

Privatization Transaction Database, which contains the names and dollar amounts of all
privatizations occurring between 1988 and 1999. We use the database to identify the first
year in which there were recorded sales of stated owned enterprises. Once we know the
year of the first sale, we search the EIU’s quarterly economic reports for the month in
which the start of the privatization program was announced. We also check the EIU to
make sure that there were no privatizations preceding the starting date of the database.
Finally, the capital account liberalization dates come from Henry (2000).
A close examination of Table III illustrates the point of the exercise. All of the
treatment countries began implementing major economic reforms before, during and after
the Brady period. There is sufficient heterogeneity (staggering) in the timing of the
economic reforms to allow us to control directly for their effect on stock prices. To do
so, we construct a series of reform dummies for each country: TRADE; PRIVATIZE;
LIBERALIZE.

These variables take on the value 1 during the month a reform is

17

announced and in each of the preceding 11 months. We then estimate the following
regression:

Rit = α i + β RtW + γ 1BRADYit + γ 2CONTROLit + γ 3TRADEit + γ 4 PRIVATEit + γ 5CAPITALit + ε it
(5)
Table IV presents the results. Panel A gives the White-corrected OLS estimates.
Panel B gives the FGLS estimates. The coefficient on BRADY is significant at the 1
percent or 5 percent level for every window. The point estimate of 0.05 suggests an
average revaluation of 5 percent per month during the debt relief announcement window.
The third row of the table shows that the coefficient on BRADY is significantly different
from the coefficient on CONTROL for all of the specifications. Consistent with a
number of previous papers, the capital account liberalization dummy is significant for the
[-6, 0] and [-3, -1] windows. There is little evidence that the other reforms do much to
stock prices during the sample period. Table IV suggests that the Brady Plan is an
important source of market revaluation, even after controlling for the effect of
contemporaneous economic reforms.

IVC. Is it a Halo Effect?
Since we find no significant effect of real economic reforms, it is important to ask
whether the documented rise in stock prices associated with the Brady Deal is spurious.
In other words, is there a temporary halo effect associated with Brady countries, a kind of
irrational exuberance about the efficacy of debt relief that is not justified by subsequent
changes in the fundamentals? Two pieces of evidence suggest that this is not the case.
First, although the point estimates of the market responses to reforms are not
significant, it does not follow that economic reforms are unimportant. On the contrary,

18

economic reforms are an essential complement, which help ensure the viability of debt
relief agreements. Figure 3 illustrates the point. In the three countries in which reforms
stalled temporarily— Jordan, Nigeria, and the Philippines— the initial rise in valuations
is completely wiped out.

In other words, debt relief does little good unless it is

accompanied by real changes that alter a country’s underlying economic fundamentals.
Second, ex-post evidence suggests that the stock market revaluations are not
simply a halo effect. Specifically, the next section of the paper demonstrates that the
stock market accurately forecasts changes in real fundamental variables such as GDP
growth and the Net Resource Transfers (NRT). In particular, high GDP growth, and
positive NRTs follow after all stock market revaluations.

V. Exploring the Fundamentals: Why Do Market Values Rise?
If the stock market increases are not spurious, they should reflect a fall in future
discount rates and or a rise in cash flows.

Accordingly, this section of the paper

examines the extent to which the ex-ante changes in market valuation rationally forecast
ex-post changes in discount rates and cash flows.
The effect of debt relief on discount rates follows from the collective action
problem that debt relief is designed to address. To understand the collective action
problem it is useful to introduce the idea of the net resource transfer (NRT). The NRT is
the net flow of real resources into a country, and therefore has direct implications for
discount rates.6

6

Discount rates in developing countries are notoriously hard to measure. Financial repression and other
market distortions, which characterized these countries prior to the Brady Plan, make it difficult to assess
the true change in the risk-free rate from official interest rates. Instead of looking at official interest rate
measures, which may not reflect the true scarcity of capital, we use the change in the NRT as a proxy.

19

As rich countries with high capital to labor ratios will export capital to poor
countries where the rate of return is higher, poor countries typically experience positive
NRTs. However, the NRT may suddenly turn negative when collective action problems
arise— adverse shocks or poor economic management may drive risk averse creditors to
call in existing loans and make potential new creditors unwilling to lend. Since lending
would be profitable if not all creditors tried to get their money at once, the negative NRT
outcome is inefficient. By forcing all creditors to take a haircut, debt relief solves the
collective action problem and paves the way for profitable new lending (Cline, 1995).
The new capital inflow reduces discount rates in the debtor country by relaxing the
intertemporal budget constraint (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1996).
The effect of debt relief on cash flows also follows from the theory. If a country
suffers from a debt overhang, then debt relief may increase the incentive to invest and
raise expected future growth rates (Krugman, 1989; Sachs, 1989). To the extent that
corporate cash flows are positively correlated with GDP, a higher GDP growth rate
implies a faster growth trend for cash flows.

VA. Is There a Change in Net Resource Transfers?
Since debt relief may reduce discount rates by restoring positive net resource
transfers to countries where it hat turned negative, the large positive ex-ante changes in
market valuation should be associated with positive changes in the NRT. Panel A of
Table V presents data on the Net Resource Transfer in event time. The table shows a
clear pattern. The sign of the NRT changes twice for the Brady countries. In every one
of the years from [-18, -9] the median net resource transfer is positive for the Brady

20

countries. In year –8, roughly the time of the debt crisis, the NRT turns negative and
remains so until after the Brady Plan. After the Brady Plan, net resource flows become
positive for the rest of the sample.
Again, it is important to ask whether the reversal in the sign of the NRT in the
Brady countries can be explained by a common shock. The evidence from the control
group in Panel B of Table V suggests that this is not the case. The median level of NRT
to the countries in the control group was positive for all but two years from 1970 to 2000.
Panel B of Table V shows that the reversal in the direction of the net resource
transfer is particularly striking for some individual Brady countries.

In Brazil, for

instance, after 10 consecutive years of negative resource transfers, the NRT turns positive
in the year of the announcement of the Brady plan and remains positive for the rest of the
sample. In 5 of 10 Brady countries with stock market data --Brazil, Jordan, Mexico,
Philippines, and Venezuela –the NRT becomes positive within the first year of the Brady
plan7. In Argentina and Ecuador, the NRT turned positive in the year preceding the plan.
In Poland, the NRT turned positive in 1991, admittedly long before its debt relief plan
was unveiled. However, following Poland’s plan, there was a three-fold increase in the
level of NRT. In fact, Peru is the only country from this group, which did not experience
a change in NRT concomitant with its Brady plan. Peru is also the only country in the
group, which did not experience a positive and significant stock market revaluation in
anticipation of the plan.
The numbers in Panel B also demonstrate that debt relief without economic
reform has only ephemeral success in restoring positive NRTs. After initially turning
positive, the NRT becomes negative in 3 out of the 10 Brady countries with stock
7

In Nigeria, the NRT turned positive two years after the Brady plan.

21

markets: Nigeria, Philippines, and Venezuela.

The last paragraph of Section IVB

identifies Nigeria and the Philippines as non-reformers at the time of their Brady Plan.
And Venezuela, according to Sachs and Warner (1995) significantly reversed its reforms
after two years of successful implementation.
On the other hand, economic reform without debt relief is not sufficient to restore
positive NRTs. We checked to see whether the NRT to Brady countries became positive
following the economic reform dates in Table III. None of these reforms by themselves
are successful in reversing the sign of the NRT. Only after the implementation of debt
relief does the NRT turn positive. Again, this fact should not be interpreted to mean that
economic reforms are unimportant. Indeed, the NRT remains positive only as long as
countries sustain their economic reforms. Here is the point: While economic reforms are
important for raising the productivity of capital, reforms by themselves may not be
sufficient to overcome collective action problems.
Turning to Panel B, we see that Brady countries without stock markets do not
systematically experience the reversal in the NRT that we see in the Brady stock market
countries. The median NRT for the non-stock market Brady countries turned negative
only once between [-18, 0]. Although Panama and Uruguay have certainly experienced
changes in the NRT following their Brady Plans, it is harder to make that assessment for
the other countries. The net resource transfers to Bolivia, Bulgaria, Costa Rica, and the
Dominican Republic have almost always been positive, even during the debt crisis years.
This pattern may suggest that debt relief for these poorer countries was not as
effective as it was for the other countries for which dependable stock markets data were

22

available. Section VI explores why this may be the case, but before doing so we now
examine whether debt relief is associated with changes in growth.

VB. Is There a Change in Growth?
Since debt relief may increase expected future growth rates, positive ex-ante
changes in market valuation should be associated with higher than normal future GDP
growth. Figure 4 shows that countries grow faster following the Brady Plan. The graph
plots the average deviation of the growth rate of per capita GDP from its country-specific
mean in event time for all 16 Brady countries versus that of the control group. The
message is clear. The Brady countries experience abnormally high growth rates in each
of the five years following the Brady plan. There is no significant change in the growth
rates of the control group.

VC. Does the Stock Market Rationally Forecast the Changes?
Table VI shows that the stock market revaluations appear to rationally forecast
higher future NRTs. There is a strong correlation between the sign of the cumulative
abnormal return on the stock market and the change in the sign of the NRT. In 9 of 10
countries, stock markets correctly predict the change in the sign of the NRT within the
two years following the Brady Plan.
Next, Table VI shows that the stock market revaluations, which occur in
anticipation of the Brady Plan, also appear to forecast higher future GDP growth
outcomes. There is a strong correlation between the sign of the cumulative abnormal
return on the stock market and the sign of the deviations of output growth from its long-

23

run mean. In 9 of 10 countries, markets predicted the abnormal GDP growth in the year
following the Brady Plan. In 9 of 10 countries, the markets predicted the positive
cumulative abnormal GDP growth for the next two years, and similarly in 8 of the 10
countries for the next five years after the Brady Plan.

VI. Do the Results Suggest that the HIPC Initiative Will Work?
Easterly (2001b) argues that debt relief is unlikely to promote investment, reform
or growth in the HIPCs. We think that he is right. Yes, markets rise in anticipation of the
Brady Plan.

And ex-post data on net resource transfers and growth confirm the

rationality of the markets’ forecast. But there are vast differences between the Brady
countries and the HIPCs.
Theory suggests that in order for a country to be a legitimate candidate for debt
relief, it must satisfy two necessary (but not sufficient) conditions. First, the collective
action problem must stand in the way of net capital inflows to that country. Second, the
country must have a social infrastructure that is sufficiently well developed to ensure that
net capital inflows will be channeled into growth-generating investment.
The data in Sections I through V suggest that the Brady countries meet both
necessary conditions. In contrast, this section argues that the HIPC countries do not
satisfy either. Specifically we demonstrate that: (1) Capital flows to the HIPC countries
are not deterred by the collective action problem; (2) There has never been significant
scope for profitable lending to the HIPC countries; and (3) The absence of profitable
investment opportunities stems from a lack of social infrastructure.

24

VIA. The Collective Action Problem Does Not Deter Capital Flows to the HIPCs
The Brady Plan worked because it alleviated the collective action problem,
clearing the way for renewed and profitable lending to the Brady countries. In contrast,
HIPC countries have never suffered from a negative NRT. Panel A of Table V (column
5) shows that the NRT to the HIPC countries has always been positive. If the goal of
debt relief is to restore positive NRTs, then it is not clear how this policy will help a set
of countries that have experienced an uninterrupted stream of positive net resource flows
since 1971.

VIB. There is Little Scope for Profitable Lending to the HIPC Countries
Although things went sour in 1982, international lenders had expected to make
money by lending to the Brady countries. Presumably, this is why they did so in the first
place. In contrast, there has never been any such expectation for the HIPCs. Table VII
throws the contrast into relief. As early as 1974, loans to the private sector (private debt
+ foreign direct investment + portfolio equity) comprised almost half of the total net
resource flow to the Brady stock market countries. On the other hand, international
lending to the private sector has never been a significant fraction of the total net resource
flows into HIPC countries. As a fraction of total inflows, loans to the private sector in
the HIPC countries have never exceeded 10 percent and have been as low as 4 percent8.
Furthermore, there has also been a shift in the composition of international
lending to the Brady countries, away from the public sector and toward the private sector.
Table VII shows that at the peak of the debt crisis (1985-89) grants plus public and
publicly guaranteed debt accounted for 73 percent of the net resource transfer to the
8

Table VIII provides a complete list of all the HIPC countries.

25

Brady countries. By 1994, lending to the private sector— foreign direct investment
(FDI), portfolio equity, and private debt— constituted the chief source of net resource
flows. No such shift has taken place in the HIPC countries. In fact, the opposite has
occurred—official flows and flows to the public sector have become more, not less,
important. The role of grants has increased to the point where they now constitute the
majority of the net resource flows to the HIPC countries.

VIC. Poor Social Infrastructure Explains the Absence of Profitable Investment
Recent advances in law and finance help explain the virtual absence of private
capital flows to the HIPCs. The degree to which a country’s law protects the legal rights
of minority shareholders exerts a significant influence on that country’s access to external
finance, (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (LLSV) 1997, 1998, 2002;
Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). If investors get poor protection they will stay away. Outside
finance will dry up, and fewer resources will be available for growth (Dornbusch, 2000).
This insight is germane to the present discussion. The median Brady country ranks lower
than the median G7 country on every component of the LLSV index of investor
protection: shareholder rights, creditor rights, efficiency of judicial system, rule of law,
and rating of the accounting system.
Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) show that weaker investor protection lowers the
marginal product of capital and can eliminate the incentive for capital to flow from rich
to poor countries. According to their argument, the capital, which does flow to the Brady
countries, pales in comparison to what we would see in a world where minority

26

shareholders in the Brady countries enjoyed the same legal protection as their U.S.
counterparts.
While the Brady countries rank low on the LLSV index, the HIPC countries do
not even make the list. If private capital trickles to Brady countries because they fare
poorly on the LLSV index, then woe to the HIPCs whose capital markets and investor
protection laws are not sufficiently developed to even merit a ranking.
Having capital markets that are not sufficiently developed to make the LLSV
ranking is probably correlated with having weak social institutions in general. In turn,
social infrastructure can be a crucial factor in determining the level of human capital
accumulation and the marginal product of capital (Kremer 1993). In other words, the rate
of return to private lending in HIPC countries is low because they lack the institutional
development that is necessary to create an environment where: (1) entrepreneurs can earn
an economically fair rate of return on capital; and (2) lenders have an incentive to extend
capital to the private sector.
We investigate this claim by using the Hall and Jones (1999) measure of social
infrastructure to compare the HIPC and Brady countries. Hall and Jones construct their
measure for 130 countries. The median G7 country ranks 14th; the median Brady country
ranks 63rd; the median HIPC country ranks 102nd. Moreover, all of the G7 countries are
in the highest 20th percentile; all of the Brady countries, except for Nigeria and
Dominican Republic, are in the highest 70th percentile; 27 of the 38 HIPC countries with
available data are in the lowest 30th percentile.
We also compared HIPC and Brady countries using the average value of their
score on the Heritage House Index of Economic Freedom from 1995 to 2002. The results

27

are similar. Out of 161 countries, the median G7 country ranks 14th; the median Brady
country ranks 59th; the median HIPC country ranks 110th. Moreover, all of the G7
countries are in the highest 20th percentile; all the Brady countries, except for Bulgaria,
are in the highest 60th percentile; 24 of 39 HIPC countries with available data are in the
lowest 40th percentile over the same period.
It is interesting to note that a number of highly or moderately indebted countries
closely resemble the Brady countries, but have received no consideration for debt relief.
For example, consider Indonesia, Pakistan, Colombia, Jamaica, Malaysia, and Turkey.
The median LLSV score for this group of six countries is 4.6 out of 10. The median
LLSV score for the Brady countries is 4.9. Similarly, the median country in the group of
6 ranks 61st on the Hall and Jones (1999) measure of social infrastructure; the median
Brady country ranks 63rd. Finally, the median country in the group of six ranks 58th on
the Heritage House Index of Economic Freedom; the Median Brady country ranks 59th.
While we do not suggest that countries should receive debt relief based solely on their
resemblance to Brady countries, the analysis suggests that debt relief for the group of six
would constitute a much more efficient use of resources than debt relief for the HIPCs.

VII. Conclusion
Largely because of the HIPC Initiative, debt relief has become synonymous with
the poorest of poor countries. Developing countries that are equally indebted but have
higher incomes do not receive any consideration for debt relief. For example, Easterly
(2001b) shows that Latin American and Caribbean countries are on average more
indebted than HIPC countries. Birdsall and Williamson (2002) call for extending the
debt relief initiative to include a number of more developed emerging economies. Our

28

results support their call and point to a cruel irony. Relatively developed but highly
indebted emerging economies may be the most promising candidates for debt relief, but
current efforts focus exclusively on HIPC countries where debt relief is least likely to
achieve any efficiency gains.

29

References
Arslanalp, Serkan, and Peter B. Henry. 2002. “All Debts Are Not Alike.” Mimeo,
Stanford University.
Birdsall, Nancy and John Williamson. 2002. Delivering on Debt Relief: From IMF Gold
to a New Aid Architecture. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. 1996. Inflation’s children: Tales of crises that
beget reforms. American Economic Review, 86 (2), 213-217.
Bulow, Jeremy. 2002. First World Governments and Third World Debt. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, No.1:2002, 229-55.
Bulow Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1988. Cleaning up Third World Debt
Without Getting Taken to the Cleaners. Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 4
No. 1, Winter 1990, pp.31-42
Cline, William. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington, DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Cline, William. 1997. “Debt Relief for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries: Lessons from
the Debt Crisis of the 1980s.” in External Finance for Developing Countries.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Collins, Susan M. 1990. Lessons from Korean economic growth. American
Economic Review, 80, (2), 104-107.
Dornbush, Rudiger. 2000. Check the laws before you invest abroad, in Keys to
Prosperity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Easterly, William. 2001a. The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Easterly, William. 2001b. Debt Relief. Foreign Policy (November/December): 20-26.
Easterly, William. 2002. The Cartel of Good Intentions. Foreign Policy, (July/August):
40-49.
Frankel, Jeffrey. 1994. Introduction, in Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed.: The Internationalization
of Equity Markets, (University of Chicago Press: Chicago and London), 231-71.
Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones. 1999. Why do some countries produce so much more
output per worker than others? Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 84-116.
Henry, Peter B. 2000a. Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging

30

market equity prices, Journal of Finance, 55, 529-64.
Henry, Peter B. 2000b. Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?
Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 301-34.
Henry, Peter B. 2002. Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market? Journal of
Finance, 57, 1617-48.
Jubilee2000. 1999. Hand-over of 17 million signatures to Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder
in Cologne. http://www.jubilee2000uk.org/jubilee2000/news/petition2306.html.
(June).
Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee and René M. Stulz. 2000. U.S. banks, crises, and
bailouts: From Mexico to LTCM. American Economic Review, 90 (2),28-31.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 108 (3): 551-575.
Kremer, Michael, and Seema Jayachandran. 2002. Odious Debt. Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA. Preliminary (April).
Krugman, Paul. 1988. Financing Versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang. Journal of
Development Economics 29 (November): 253-268.
Krugman, Paul. (1989). “Market-Based Debt Reduction Schemes.” In
Analytical Issues in Debt. edited by Jacob Frenkel, Michael Dooley, and
P. Wickham. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1997).
“Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52, pp. 1131-50.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1998).
“Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, pp. 1113-1155.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (2002)
“Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
Mallaby, Sebastian. 2000. “Pro Bono.” Washington Post. 25 September.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Ken Rogoff (1996). Foundations of International
Macroeconomics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
O’Neill, Paul. 2002. “Caring Greatly and Succeeding Greatly: Producing Results in
Africa,” Remarks at Georgetown University in Washington, DC. June 5 2002.
http://www.foreignpolicy.com/issue_julyaug_2002/oneill.html

31

Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-95.
Sachs, Jeffrey. 1989. “The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries.” in Debt
Stabilization and Development, edited by Guillermo A. Calvo, Ronald Findlay,
Pentti Kouri, and Jorge Braga de Macedo. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Harry Huizinga. 1987. “U.S. Commercial Banks and the Developing
Country Debt Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 555-606.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1997). “A Survey of Corporate Governance,”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 737-783
Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon (2002). “Investor Protection and Equity
Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
Stulz, René M., 1999a, International portfolio flows and security markets, in Martin
Feldstein, ed.: International Capital Flows (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).
Summers, Lawrence. 2000. “Moving Forward with Millennial Debt Relief,” Remarks at
Reception to Celebrate HIPC, House Banking Committee Room United States
Congress Washington, DC. February 1 2000.
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/ls363.htm.
Tesar, Linda L., 1999, The role of equity in international capital flows, in Martin
Feldstein, ed.: International Capital Flows (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).
Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner, 1998, The Internationalization of securities
markets since the 1987 crash, in Robert E. Litan and Anthony M. Santomero
Eds. Brookings Wharton Papers on Financial Services (Brookings Institution
Press, Washington).
Tesar, Linda L., and Ingrid M. Werner, 1995, U.S. equity investment in emerging
stock markets, World Bank Economic Review, 9, (4), 109-129.
The Vatican. 1998. Pope John Paul II’s statement on debt relief given in Rome, at Saint
Peter's, on 29 November 1998. Bull of Indiction of the Great Jubilee of the Year
2000 “Incarnationis Mysterium” (The Mystery of the Incarnation).
http://www.vatican.va/jubilee_2000/docs/documents/hf_jpii_doc_30111998_bolla-jubilee_en.html.
(November).
World Bank. 1994. Trends in Developing Economies. Washington: World Bank.

32

Williamson, John. 1994. The Political Economy of Policy Reform. Institute for
International Economics. Washington, DC.

33

Figure 1. Stock Prices Rise in Anticipation of Debt Relief
0.7

Cumulative Change in Real Stock Prices($)

0.6

0.5

0.4

Brady Countries
Control Group

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 1. Stock prices rise in anticipation of debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded abnormal percentage change. 0 is the
month in which the debt relief plan was announced. The solid line is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar return from 10
Brady countries with stock market data available on a constant and 9 country-specific dummies. The dashed line is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a
panel regression of the real dollar return from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

Figure 2. Stock Prices Rise in Anticipation of Debt Relief
0.7

Cumulative Change in Real Stock Prices (LCU)

0.6

0.5

0.4

Brady Countries
Control Group

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 2. Stock prices rise in anticipation of debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded abnormal percentage change. 0 is the
month in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real local
currency return from 10 Brady countries with stock market data available on a constant and 9 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the
cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real local currency return from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

35

Figure 3. The Stock Market and Brady Reformers vs Non-Reformers
0.8

Cumulative Change in Real Stock Prices

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4
Brady Reformers
Brady Non-Reformers
0.3

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1
-13 -12 -11 -10 -9

-8

-7

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Month Relative to Announcement

Figure 3. The stock market and Brady reformers versus non-reformers. The variable on the y-axis is the continuously compounded abnormal percentage
change. 0 is the month in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the
real dollar return from 7 reformer Brady countries with stock market data available (Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Poland, and Venezuela) on a
constant and 6 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the cumulative residuals from a panel regression of the real dollar return from 3
non-reformer Brady countries with stock market data available (Jordan, Nigeria, and Philippines) on a constant and 2 country-specific dummies.

36

Figure 4. GDP Growth Increases Following Debt Relief
0.035

Percentage Point Deviation From Trend Growth Rate

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015
Brady Countries
Control Group
0.01

0.005

0

-0.005

-0.01
-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Year Relative to Announcement

Figure 4. GDP growth increases following debt relief. The variable on the y-axis is the abnormal percentage deviation from the trend growth rate. 0 is the
year in which the debt relief plan was announced. The series in bold color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression of the real GDP growth rate from all
16 Brady countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies. The series in light color is a plot of the residuals from a panel regression of the real GDP
growth rate from 16 control group countries on a constant and 15 country-specific dummies.

37

Table I. Universe of Countries in the Sample

Brady Plan Countries: Date of
Announcement
Argentina: April 1992

Stock Market
Data Available?
Yes

Control Group
Countries
Chile

Stock Market Data
Available?
Yes

Brazil: August 1992

Yes

China

Yes

Ecuador: May 1994

Yes

Colombia

Yes

Jordan: June 1993

Yes

Czech Republic

Yes

Mexico: September 1989

Yes

Greece

Yes

Nigeria: March 1991

Yes

Hungary

Yes

Peru: October 1995

Yes

India

Yes

Philippines: August 1989

Yes

Indonesia

Yes

Poland: March 1994

Yes

Korea

Yes

Venezuela: June 1990

Yes

Malaysia

Yes

Bolivia: March 1993

No

Pakistan

Yes

Bulgaria: November 1993

No

South Africa

Yes

Costa Rica: November 1989

No

Sri Lanka

Yes

Dominican Republic: May 1993

No

Thailand

Yes

Panama: May 1995

No

Turkey

Yes

Uruguay: November 1990

No

Zimbabwe

Yes

Median growth

0.01
(0.02)

Median growth

0.03
(0.01)

Median inflation

0.27
(0.18)

Median inflation

0.11
(0.03)

The first column lists all the countries in the Treatment group, i.e., the countries that signed Brady deals. The next column
identifies the countries for which stock market data are available from the IFC Emerging Market Data Base or the Global
Financial Data Base. In contrast, the last two columns list all the countries in the Control group, i.e. the countries that did not
sign Brady deals and have had stock market data available as of 1994 from the IFC Emerging Market Data Base. The last two
rows compare the Treatment and Control groups in terms of their historical GDP per capita growth and inflation rates from
1980 to 1999. The standard deviation of each rate is given in parenthesis.

Table II. Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt Relief Announcements. The Control
Countries Do Not. Panel A: White-Corrected OLS Estimates
Twelve-Month Window
Nine-Month Window
Six-Month Window
Three-Month Window
(1a)
RightHand-Side
Variables

Brady

(1b)

(1c)

Brady>
Control Control?

(2a)

Brady

(2b)

(2c)

Brady>
Control Control?

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

(4a)

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

(4b)

(4c)

Brady>
Control Control?

CountrySpecific
Mean

.050***
(.014)

.004
(.004)

0.001

.050***
(.015)

.010**
(.005)

0.011

.048***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.041

.048*
(.026)

.009
(.007)

0.15

Constant
Mean

.049***
(.013)

.005
(.004)

0.001

.051***
(.015)

.009**
(.004)

0.005

.049***
(.016)

.013***
(.0045858)

0.022

.045*
(.025)

.006
(.007)

0.13

World

.047***
(.014)

.002
(.005)

0.002

.047***
(.016)

.009*
(.005)

0.023

.045***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.080

.049*
(.025)

.004
(.007)

0.09

US

.046***
(.013)

-.000
(.005)

0.001

.046***
(.016)

.007
(.005)

0.018

.043***
(.016)

.014***
(.005)

0.076

.048*
(026)

.004
(.007)

0.10

LDC

.046***
(.014)

-.008
(.006)

0.000

.043***
(.016)

.001
(.005)

0.011

.039**
(.016)

.005
(.005)

0.0480

.052**
(.024)

.010
(.007)

0.10

ALL

.047***
(.014)

-.007
(.006)

0.000

.044***
(.016)

.002
(.005)

0.011

.039**
(.016)

.005
(.005)

0.0451

.052**
(.025)

.009
(.007)

0.09

The estimation procedure used is Ordinary Least Squares. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the Treatment and
Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before December 1986 for
Turkey; before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador; and
before December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for
each month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the
months preceding Brady Plans. The column labeled ‘Twelve-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins twelve months prior
to the announcement of the Brady Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘Nine-month Window,’ ‘Six-Month
Window’ and ‘Three-Month Window.’ For each event window, six regression specifications are estimated. The first row presents estimates of Brady and Control using the
benchmark specification that allows for country-specific intercept terms. Row 2 presents estimates using an alternative specification that allows for only a single intercept
term. Row 3 presents estimates using the ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. Row 4 presents estimates
using the US stock return index instead of the World stock index. Row 5 presents estimates using the LDC stock return index instead. Finally, row 6 presents estimates that
use all three sets of indices simultaneously. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the
coefficient on Control. White-corrected standard errors are given in parenthesis. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10
percent levels, respectively.

Table II. Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt Relief Announcements. The Control
Countries Do Not. Panel B: FGLS Estimates
Twelve-Month Window
(1a)

Nine-Month Window

Six-Month Window

Three-Month Window

(1b)

(1c)

(2a)

(2b)

(2c)

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

(4a)

(4b)

(4c)

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

Brady

Control

Brady>
Control?

CountrySpecific
Mean

.041***
(.010)

.007
(.004)

0.003

.046***
(.011)

.012**
(.005)

0.005

.051***
(.013)

.015***
(.005)

0.01

.040*
(.019)

.014**
(.006)

0.20

Constant
Mean

.038***
(.010)

.008*
(.004)

0.003

.044***
(.011)

.011***
(.004)

0.005

.049***
(.013)

.015***
(.006)

0.01

.039**
(.019)

.014**
(.006)

0.21

World

.033***
(.011)

.003
(.005)

0.015

.039***
(.013)

.009*
(.005)

0.026

.045***
(.015)

.013***
(.005)

0.04

.042**
(.022)

.012**
(.006)

0.17

US

.032***
(.011)

.002
(.005)

0.013

.038***
(.013)

.008
(.005)

0.023

.045***
(.015)

.013***
(.005)

0.03

.042**
(.022)

.010*
(.006)

0.14

LDC

.034***
(.012)

-.005
(.005)

0.002

.037***
(.013)

.001
(.005)

0.010

.043***
(.015)

.005
(.005)

0.01

.043**
(.021)

.007
(.006)

0.11

ALL

.034***
(.012)

-.005
(.005)

0.002

.036***
(.013)

.001
(.005)

0.011

.043***
(.015)

.005
(.005)

0.02

.042**
(.022)

.006
(.006)

0.10

RightHand-Side
Variables

The estimation procedure is Feasible Generalized Least Squares. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the Treatment and
Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before December 1986 for Turkey;
before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador; and before
December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each
month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months
preceding Brady Plans. The column labeled ‘Twelve-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins twelve months prior to the
announcement of the Brady Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘Nine-month Window,’ ‘Six-Month Window’
and ‘Three-Month Window.’ For each event window, six regression specifications are estimated. The first row presents estimates of Brady and Control using the benchmark
specification that allows for country-specific intercept terms. Row 2 presents estimates using an alternative specification that allows for only a single intercept term. Row 3
presents estimates using the ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. Row 4 presents estimates using the US stock
return index instead of the World stock index. Row 5 presents estimates using the LDC stock return index instead. Finally, row 6 presents estimates that use all three sets of
indices simultaneously. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger than the coefficient on Control.
Standard errors are given in parenthesis. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

40

Table III. IMF Programs and Major Economic Reforms in Brady Countries
Stabilization (IMF
Country
Brady Plan
Program)
Trade Liberalization
Argentina
April 1992
March 1992 (EFF) April 1991

Privatization
February 1988

Capital Account
Liberalization
November 1989

Bolivia

March 1993

1985

1992

NA

Brazil

August 1992

January 1992 (SB)

April 1990

July 1990

March 1988

Bulgaria

November 1993

NA

NA

1991

NA

Costa Rica

November 1989

NA

1986

1988

NA

Dominican
Republic

May 1993

NA

Closed

1999

NA

Ecuador

May 1994

May 1994

January 1991

February 1993

January 1993

Jordan

June 1993

May 1994 (EFF)

1965

January 1995

January 1978

Mexico

September 1989

May 1989 (EFF)

July 1986

November 1988

May 1989

Nigeria

March 1991

January 1991 (SB)

Closed

July 1988

Closed

Panama

May 1995

NA

1990

NA

Peru

October 1995

March 1993 (EFF)

March 1991

March 1991

NA (Open Before 95)
Investibility index

Philippines

August 1989

May 1989 (EFF)

November 1988

June 1988

May 1986

Poland

March 1994

August 1994 (SB)

1990

1990*

1990

Uruguay

November 1990

1990

1990

NA

Venezuela

June 1990

May 1989**

April 1991

January 1990

June 1989 (EFF)

This table lists the announcement dates of major economic events for the countries in the Treatment group. The first column identifies these countries. The second
column lists the month and year of each country’s Brady Plan. These dates are obtained from Cline (1995), Lexis/Nexis, and various issues of the Economist Intelligence
Unit. The third column lists IMF plans that are announced shortly preceding or following Brady Plans. These dates are obtained from Henry (2002) and various issues of
the IMF Annual Reports. A Standby agreement with the IMF is noted as SB and an Extended Fund Facility agreement is noted as EFF. The next three columns list the
dates of the beginnings of major economic reforms. The trade liberalization dates are obtained from Sachs and Werner (1995). The privatization dates are obtained from
the Privatization Data Base maintained by the World Bank. The capital account liberalization dates are obtained from Henry (2000). *Poland switched to a market
economy in 1990, simultaneously setting up a stock market and opening up to foreign investment. **Venezuela reversed its trade liberalization reforms in 1993.

41

Table IV, After Controlling for Other Reforms, Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt
Relief Announcements. The Control Countries Do not. Panel A: White-Corrected OLS Estimates
World-Return Model
Twelve-Month
Window
.048***
(.012)

Nine-Month
Window
.049***
(.013)

Control

.003
(.005)

.008
(.005)

.012**
(.006)

P-Value of
Brady >
Control?

0.000

0.003

Privatize

.005
(.014)

Trade

Liberalize

Brady

Constant-Mean Return Model

Six-Month Three-Month
Window
Window
.047***
.054**
(.016)
(.023)

Twelve-Month
Window
.048***
(.012)

Nine-Month
Window
.048***
(.013)

Six-Month
Window
.046***
(.015)

Three-Month
Window
.053**
(.022)

.009
(.008)

.005
(.005)

.009**
(.005)

.013***
(.005)

.010
(.007)

0.03

0.07

0.000

0.004

0.040

0.070

.011
(.016)

.011
(.018)

.022
(.028)

.005
(.014)

.010
(.015)

.012
(.018)

.023
(.027)

-.013
(.016)

-.004
(.018)

-.006
(.022)

-.052
(.033)

-.011
(.016)

-.001
(.018)

-.002
(.021)

-.048
(.032)

.009
(.016)

.025
(.018)

.051**
(.021)

.094***
(.033)

.013
(.016)

.029
(.018)

.057***
(.021)

.101***
(.032)

The estimation procedure is Ordinary Least Squares; White-corrected standard errors are given in parenthesis. The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to
July 1999 for all the countries in the Treatment and Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia,
Malaysia, Pakistan; before December 1986 for Turkey; before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri
Lanka; before September 1993 for Ecuador; and before December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady
is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Four different event windows are utilized. The
column labeled ‘Twelve-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins twelve months prior to the announcement of the Brady
Plan and ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘Nine-month Window,’ ‘Six-Month Window’ and ‘Three-Month
Window.’ Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months preceding Brady Plans. Privatize, Trade, and
Liberalize are dummy variables that take on the value one during the event window preceding a privatization, trade liberalization and stock market liberalization respectively.
For each event window, two regression specifications are estimated. The World column presents estimates of Brady, Control, Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize using the
ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. The Constant Mean column presents estimates using the
specification that allows for only a single intercept term. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically larger
than the coefficient on Control. . The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table IV. After Controlling for Other Reforms, Brady Countries Experience a Significant Increase in Market Valuation Before Debt
Relief Announcements. The Control Countries Do Not. Panel B: FGLS Estimates
World-Return Model
Twelve-Month
Window

Nine-Month
Window

Six-Month
Window

Constant-Mean Return Model

Brady

.033***
(.011)

.039***
(.012)

.046***
(.014)

ThreeMonth
Window
.045**
(.021)

Control

.004
(.004)

.009**
(.004)

.0127***
(.004)

.012**
(.006)

.008*
(.004)

Brady >
Control?

0.012

0.014

0.022

0.130

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.206

Privatize

-.001
(.012)

-.002
(.014)

.002
(.016)

.002
(.024)

-.002
(.012)

-.003
(.013)

.001
(.016)

.002
(.023)

Trade

-.011
(.020)

-.001
(.022)

-.005
(.026)

-.068*
(.039)

-.005
(.020)

.006
(.023)

.002
(.027)

-.061
(.040)

Liberalize

.0138
(.020)

.021
(.022)

.040
(.026)

.078**
(.039)

.021
(.020)

.029
(.023)

.049*
(.027)

.089**
(.040)

Twelve-Month
Window

Nine-Month
Window

Six-Month
Window

.037***
(.010)

.042***
(.011)

.048***
(.013)

.039**
(.019)

.012***
(.004)

.015***
(.005)

.014**
(.006)

Three-Month
Window

The estimation procedure used is Feasible Generalized Least Squares. . The stock market data are monthly from December 1979 to July 1999 for all the countries in the
Treatment and Control groups. Stock market data are unavailable before December 1984 for Nigeria, Philippines, Venezuela, Columbia, Malaysia, Pakistan; before
December 1986 for Turkey; before December 1989 for Indonesia; before December 1992 for Peru, Poland, China, Hungary, South Africa, Sri Lanka; before September
1993 for Ecuador; and before December 1993 for the Czech Republic. The left-hand-side variable is real, dollar-denominated stock returns. Brady is a dummy variable
that takes on the value one for each month during a particular event window preceding a Brady plan. Four different event windows are utilized. The column labeled
‘Twelve-month Window’ presents estimates of Brady and Control using an event window that begins twelve months prior to the announcement of the Brady Plan and
ends with the announcement month. The analogous definition applies to the columns labeled ‘Nine-month Window,’ ‘Six-Month Window’ and ‘Three-Month Window.’
Control is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for each country in the control group during the months preceding Brady Plans. Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize
are dummy variables that take on the value one during the event window preceding a privatization, trade liberalization and stock market liberalization respectively. For
each event window, two regression specifications are estimated. The World column presents estimates of Brady, Control, Privatize, Trade, and Liberalize using the
ICAPM specification that introduces the World stock return index as an additional explanatory variable. The Constant Mean column presents estimates using the
specification that allows for only a single intercept term. The column labeled Brady>Control shows the p-value for a test that the coefficient on Brady is statistically
larger than the coefficient on Control. . The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels, respectively.

43

Table V. The Brady Plan Reverses the Sign of the Net Resource Transfer (Millions of US$) in the Brady Stock Market
Countries. Panel A: Group Medians
Year in Event
Brady Stock
Control Group
Brady Non-Stock
Highly-Indebted
Time
Market Countries
Market Countries
Poor Countries
-18
87
91
58
13
-17
10
143
69
19
-16
123
116
142
25
-15
382
104
87
25
-14
285
124
27
61
-13
495
220
152
65
-12
1371
100
129
53
-11
1063
347
155
78
-10
847
505
54
103
-9
297
648
237
151
-8
-43
594
100
134
-7
146
403
103
119
-6
-419
330
78
123
-5
-1679
529
87
119
-4
-833
189
37
118
-3
-228
84
-40
117
-2
-767
-71
49
143
-1
-578
-10
80
171
0
-283
187
58
202
1
-54
366
-46
223
2
2372
998
188
252
3
1216
1173
48
259
4
1124
2675
197
262
5
2267
2197
407
229
Net resource transfers are equal to net resource flows minus interest payments on long-term loans and foreign direct investment profits. The first column
lists the years in event time. The number ‘0’ represents the year in which its Brady Plan was announced. For Control group countries and Highly-Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC), 0 represents 1989. The next four columns show the progression of net resource transfers in event time to the following groups of
countries: the Control group, the Brady Stock market group, the Brady Non-Stock market group, and the HIPC countries. The Control group countries are
displayed in Table I. The Brady Stock market countries are the countries in the Treatment group with available stock market data as displayed in Table I.
The Brady Non-Stock market countries are the remaining countries of the Treatment group. The HIPC countries are displayed in Table VIII. The data on
NRT are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base.

44

Table V. The Net Resource Transfer (Millions of US$). Panel B: Individual Brady Stock Market Countries.
Year Event
Time
Argentina
Brazil
Ecuador
Jordan
Mexico
Nigeria
Peru
Philippines Poland
-18
-86
5586
10
466
100
-725
211
-42
NA

Venezuela
-535

-17

-568

3968

484

471

132

-519

-328

123

NA

-1036

-16

613

4618

382

490

1188

-468

-406

-20

NA

-1760

-15

-358

4572

285

547

1747

-640

-580

295

NA

-527

-14

495

6869

349

1342

2418

-411

-479

510

NA

-428

-13

3372

1858

704

1348

3112

1303

712

986

2346

1393

-12

1593

-844

-905

1272

3285

830

854

807

1500

1442

-11

4436

1867

-432

1055

2433

-1354

440

639

213

2700

-10

3231

-410

-207

997

1136

758

-84

547

-546

47

-9

-1197

-3614

-399

777

3043

1445

167

489

-324

-253

-8

-3454

-1074

28

687

7490

700

263

729

-317

-1475

-7

-1330

-6550

85

867

542

-1426

153

561

-1437

-923

-6

-2971

-7100

-63

745

-5658

-2290

203

865

-1067

-2550

-5

-2629

-7066

18

496

-8666

-514

243

72

-1152

-2486

-4

-1729

-7229

-251

808

-9452

95

-206

224

-202

-3856

-3

-1412

-8948

-354

853

-6443

-1180

228

-263

2753

-4276

-2

-2571

-3952

-377

410

-1485

1414

2155

-779

1163

-3483

-1

528

-496

231

-70

-7443

-1799

4460

-655

2180

-1927

0

2917

5026

67

-222

-7553

-1473

3723

-175

2176

-2283

1

11975

10913

144

39

5364

-2277

3946

51

6437

797

2

7794

3469

278

333

4798

351

2080

-272

4804

206

3
4

6122
13205

7217
18474

555
-169

70
610

1699
13114

631
-372

1618
2160

-844
2374

6169
7943

-1280
-1836

5

12793

24250

156

208

11235

-691

550

2293

8317

-1811

The net resource transfer (NRT) to individual Brady Stock market countries in event time. The Brady Stock market countries are the countries in the Treatment
group with available stock market data as displayed in Table V, Panel A. The data on NRT are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data
Base.

45

Table V. The Net Resource Transfer (Millions of US$). Panel C: Individual Non-Stock Market Brady Countries
Costa
Dominican
Bolivia
Bulgaria
Rica
Republic
Panama
Uruguay
-18
167
NA
42
58
168
11
-17

213

NA

45

69

417

-14

-16

300

NA

58

142

41

213

-15

214

NA

87

88

-174

-19

-14

151

NA

163

27

-140

21

-13

214

NA

152

267

119

66

-12

147

350

244

111

-59

99

-11

44

495

152

157

-126

390

-10

-112

374

110

-1

-269

395

-9

-94

740

234

240

-349

254

-8

-166

746

137

161

-224

63

-7

244

1277

49

-21

-42

156

-6

223

1026

-131

92

63

-254

-5

186

364

10

95

80

-264

-4

270

245

41

34

-44

-113

-3

199

-434

-76

64

-167

-5

-2

614

144

97

-35

1

-252

-1

492

100

61

-51

236

-165

0

349

108

36

-32

79

-396

1

454

441

-21

-129

-71

-164

2

853

-64

105

271

1509

103

3

912

-68

-90

-108

1320

165

4

1212

147

-104

163

852

232

5

1196

331

0

608

482

65

The net resource transfer (NRT) to Brady Non-Stock market countries in event time. The Brady Non-Stock market countries are the countries
in the Treatment group without available stock market data as displayed in Table V, Panel; B. The data on the NRT are obtained from the
World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base.

46

Table VI. The Stock Market Forecasts Future Changes in the Net Resource Transfer and GDP Growth
Cumulative Cumulative
Change in
Stock Market
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
Growth
the Net
Deviation
Deviation:
Deviation
Deviation:
Deviation:
Deviation:
Resource
Anticipating
Year [0, +2] Year [0, +5]
Year [+2]
Year [+1]
Year [0]
Transfer
Debt Relief
Argentina
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Brazil

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

Ecuador

+

+

+

+

+

+

-

Jordan

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

Mexico

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Nigeria

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Peru

-

No change
in sign

+

+

+

+

+

Philippines

+

+

+

+

-

+

+

Poland

+

No change
in sign*

+

+

+

+

+

Venezuela

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

This table presents the correlation between increases in market valuation before Brady Plan announcements and changes in net resource transfers and
GDP growth afterwards. The first column lists the Brady Stock market countries. The Brady Stock market countries are the countries in the Treatment
group with available stock market data as displayed in Table I. The second column identifies the countries that experienced abnormal stock market
returns over the 12 months preceding their Brady Plan announcements. The third column identifies the countries that experienced changes from
negative NRT to positive NRT in the year preceding or during the two years following the announcement. The fourth column identifies the countries
that experienced abnormal GDP growth in the year of the announcement. The fifth and sixth columns identify those that experienced abnormal
growth in the first and second year after the announcement. Finally, the seventh and eight columns identify the countries that experienced abnormal
cumulative GDP growth during the two and five years following the announcement of the Brady Plan. The + sign denotes positive identification of a
country. * Following the Brady Plan in Poland there is no change in the sign of NRT, but the level of NRT almost triples.

.

47

Table VII. The Composition of Net Resource Flows into HIPC, Brady, and Control Group Countries: 1970-1994.
1970-74
Millions
of US$

Percent of
Total

1975-79
Millions
of US$

Percent of
Total

1980-84
Millions
of US$

Percent
of Total

1985-89
Millions
of US$

Percent
of Total

1990-94
Millions
of US$

Percent
of Total

HIPC
Net Resource Flows

61

100.0

172

100.0

269

100.0

305

100.0

412

100.0

Public Debt

39

64.6

111

64.5

176

65.4

158

51.9

120

29.2

Private Debt

3

4.2

3

1.8

5

1.9

-1

-0.3

0

-0.1

FDI

4

5.9

12

7.0

11

4.0

14

4.4

50

12.2

PortfolioEquity

0

0.0

0

0.0

0

0.0

0

0.0

5

1.1

Grants

15

25.2

46

26.7

77

28.7

134

44.0

237

57.6

Brady
Net Resource Flows

530

100.0

1562

100.0

1938

100.0

722

100.0

2645

100.0

Public Debt

264

49.8

1045

66.9

1346

69.4

443

61.4

309

11.7

Private Debt

133

25.1

219

14.0

212

11.0

-177

-24.5

466

17.6

FDI

116

21.9

253

16.2

305

15.7

365

50.6

982

37.1

Portfolio Equity

0

0.0

0

0.0

2

0.1

6

0.9

708

26.8

Grants

17

3.3

46

2.9

74

3.8

83

11.6

180

6.8

Control Group
Net Resource Flows

356

100.0

825

100.0

1612

100.0

1693

100.0

4853

100.0

Public Debt

242

67.9

556

67.3

1055

65.4

1012

59.8

1278

26.3

Private Debt

42

11.8

104

12.6

236

14.6

62

3.7

736

15.2

FDI

35

9.9

91

11.0

206

12.8

443

26.2

1981

40.8

Portfolio Equity

0

0.0

0

0.0

3

0.2

47

2.8

665

13.7

Grants

37

10.4

75

9.0

113

7.0

129

7.6

193

4.0

This table presents data on the composition of net resource flows for different groups of countries from 1970 to 2000. The first column lists the components of net
resource flows. Net resource flows are the sum of net resource flows on public debt, private debt, foreign direct investment, portfolio equity, and official grants.
The following columns display the data as averaged over intervals of five years. The HIPC countries are displayed in Table VIII. The Brady and Control group
countries are displayed in Table I. The data on net resource flows and its components are obtained from World Bank’s Global Development Finance Data Base.

48

Table VIII. The Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs)
Angola

Cote d'Ivoire

Madagascar

Sierra Leone

Benin

Ethiopia

Malawi

Somalia

Bolivia

The Gambia

Mali

Sudan

Burkina Faso

Ghana

Mauritania

Tanzania

Burundi

Guinea

Mozambique

Togo

Cameroon

Guinea-Bissau

Myanmar

Uganda

Central African
Republic

Guyana

Nicaragua

Vietnam

Chad

Honduras

Niger

Yemen

Comoros

Kenya

Rwanda

Zambia

Democratic Republic of
Congo

Lao PDR

Sao Tome and Principe

Republic of Congo
Liberia
Senegal
Groupings of HIPCs under the enhanced HIPC Initiative: Status as of September 2002. Source:
http://www.worldbank.org/hipc/progress-to-date/HIPC_Grouping_Sept02.pdf

49

