                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TIME INCONSISTENCY AND FREE-RIDING IN A
                                  MONETARY UNION

                                               V. V. Chari
                                             Patrick J. Kehoe

                                          Working Paper 9370
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9370


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Time Inconsistency and Free-Riding in a Monetary Union
V. V. Chari and Patrick J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 9370
December 2002
JEL No. F3, F31, F33, F34, E4, E42, E58, E61, E63


                                           ABSTRACT

       We analyze the setting of monetary and nonmonetary policies in monetary unions. We show

that in these unions a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy leads to a novel type of free-

rider problem in the setting of nonmonetary policies, such as labor market policy, fiscal policy, and

bank regulation. The free-rider problem leads the union’s members to pursue lax nonmonetary

policies that induce the monetary authority to generate high inflation. The free-rider problem can

be mitigated by imposing constraints on the nonmonetary policies, like unionwide rules on labor

market policy, debt constraints on members’ fiscal policy, and unionwide regulation of banks. When

there is no time inconsistency problem, there is no free-rider problem, and constraints on

nonmonetary policies are unnecessary and possibly harmful.




V. V. Chari                                                   Patrick J. Kehoe
Department of Economics                                       Research Department
University of Minnesota                                       Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                         90 Hennepin Avenue
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                       Minneapolis, MN 55480
and NBER                                                      and University of Minnesota
chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us                                     and NBER
                                                              pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
     In the last decade, there has been growing interest in the design of monetary unions–

groups of political units (countries or states or provinces) that have a great deal of indepen-

dence in setting fiscal and other nonmonetary policies, but that share a central monetary

authority, which sets a single monetary policy for all the members of the union. In practice,

some monetary unions have worked poorly while others have worked well. Argentina is an

example of an unsuccessful one; the United States, a successful one; and the jury is still out

on the European Union. Why are some monetary unions successful and others not? Here

we develop a theory that answers this question.

     The time inconsistency problem in monetary policy is at the heart of our theory.

We argue that this monetary policy problem leads to a free-rider problem in the setting

of nonmonetary policies. Free-riding union members pursue ineﬃciently lax nonmonetary

policies that benefit them individually, but that induce the monetary authority to generate

high inflation. One way to eliminate both problems is to directly solve the time inconsistency

problem in monetary policy. As is well-known, this problem can be eliminated with either

commitment or reputational mechanisms. When either type of mechanism is in place, there

is no free-rider problem, so that solving the time inconsistency problem indirectly eliminates

the free-rider problem. In practice, of course, it is diﬃcult to change the degree of eﬀective

commitment, say, by developing a reputation. For our purposes, we will take as given whether

or not a monetary authority has a time inconsistency problem.

     More interestingly, solving the free-rider problem helps mitigate the time inconsistency

problem in monetary policy. The free-rider problem can be solved by imposing constraints

on nonmonetary policies, such as unionwide rules on labor market policies, debt constraints

on fiscal policy, and unionwide regulation of banks.

     We first make these points in a general theoretical setup. Our setup has governments

who set nonmonetary policies noncooperatively, competitive private agents and a benevolent

monetary authority that chooses inflation. The monetary authority’s optimal inflation rate
depends on the decisions of private agents and on the nonmonetary policies. Private agents

make their decisions anticipating the choice of the monetary authority. Governments choose

their nonmonetary policies anticipating the choices of both private agents and the monetary

authority.

     We show that the free-rider problem in our setup is quite diﬀerent from those in the

literature. In the standard free-rider problem the agents are directly linked because the

actions of each agent directly aﬀect the payoﬀs of other agents. We have no such direct links.

In our setup the nonmonetary policies of the governments aﬀect the common inflation rate

and thus indirectly aﬀect the payoﬀs of other governments. One might think that this indirect

link suﬃces to generate a free-rider problem. It does not because of an envelope argument:

the monetary authority chooses inflation optimally so that, at the margin, an incremental

change in inflation has no eﬀect on welfare. Thus, when a government is contemplating

a change in its nonmonetary policies away from the cooperative benchmark, the induced

eﬀects of its policies on the welfare of other countries is zero.

     In our setup forward-looking private agents are the source of the free-rider problem. A

change in government policy in some country makes the private agents in all the countries

predict a change in inflation, and this predicted change makes them change their actions.

Because each government cares about the decisions of its private agents, a change in gov-

ernment policy in any country aﬀects welfare in all countries. This indirect link results in a

free-rider problem. If private agents’ decisions do not depend on their forecasts of inflation

then this link is broken and there is no free-rider problem. Of course, if private agents’

decisions do not depend on their forecasts of inflation then there is no time inconsistency

problem to begin with.

     With commitment by the monetary authority, the setting of nonmonetary policies

does not induce changes in the inflation rate, and there is no free-rider problem. Thus, the

presence or absence of a free-rider problem in nonmonetary policies is intimately connected



                                                2
to the time inconsistency problem of monetary policy.

      After detailing this theory, we consider applications to three types of nonmonetary

policies: labor market policy, fiscal policy, and bank regulation.

      We first apply our theory to labor market policy. To do so, we modify the classic

model of time inconsistency in monetary policy (due to Kydland and Prescott (1977) and

Barro and Gordon (1983)). In our modification of this classic model, governments determine

the natural rate of unemployment by their setting of labor market policies. We show that

the free-rider problem leads governments to adopt policies that result in excessively high

unemployment and inflation.

      We then apply our theory to fiscal policy. We consider a simple dynamic model with

many countries united in a monetary union. Each country’s fiscal authority issues nominal

debt to outside risk-neutral lenders. After that, the union’s monetary authority decides on

the common inflation rate. The monetary authority balances inflation’s benefits (devalued

nominal debt) against its costs (lower output). The larger the debt the monetary authority

inherits, the higher it sets the inflation rate.

      The fiscal authorities balance the consumption-smoothing gains from issuing debt

against the induced costs of higher inflation on their own output. Each country’s fiscal

authority ignores the induced costs of inflation on output in other countries. Thus, relative

to a cooperative benchmark, each fiscal authority issues too much debt, which leads the

monetary authority to create too much inflation, which in turn leads to an ineﬃciently low

level of output for all members of the union.

      If there is some mechanism through which the monetary authority can eﬀectively com-

mit to its policy, then there is no free-rider problem. In practice, though, such commitment

is often not available, and monetary unions have typically chosen to attack the free-rider

problem directly. One way of doing so is to impose constraints on the amount of debt that

the union members can issue. In our example, appropriately chosen constraints solve the



                                                   3
free-rider problem.

     Finally, we apply our theory to bank regulation. We develop a simple dynamic bank-

ing model with many countries united in a monetary union. Each country’s government

regulates the riskiness of banks’ portfolios. When banks cannot fully pay oﬀ depositors,

the monetary authority prints money to pay the residual amount, thus increasing inflation.

Each government balances the costs of bank regulation against the induced costs of infla-

tion resulting from bank bailouts. In doing so, the governments ignore the induced costs of

inflation on other members of the union. These forces thus generate a free-rider problem in

which regulation of banks is lax, bank bailouts are too frequent, and the rate of inflation is

excessive, all compared to eﬃcient levels. If there is no mechanism available to solve the time

inconsistency problem directly, then the free-rider problem in this model can be mitigated

with mutually agreed upon constraints on bank regulation.

     Why are some monetary unions successful and others not? Our theory suggests that

monetary unions are likely to fail when there is a time inconsistency problem in monetary

policy and constraints on nonmonetary policies are either not present or not eﬀective.

     Argentina is an example of a monetary union which has a serious time inconsistency

problem with its monetary policy and which, regardless of its good intentions, is unable

to set eﬀective constraints on its members. Argentina’s provincial governments routinely

run budget deficits that end up being financed by the central bank. Nicolini et al. (2000)

demonstrate that Argentina’s monetary authority has routinely bailed out the provincial

governments when they have run into fiscal diﬃculties. Now bailouts are expected, which has

increased the provinces’ incentives to behave imprudently. Indeed, one rationalization of the

convertibility law which linked Argentina’s peso to the U.S. dollar is the hope of restraining

the financial profligacy of provincial governments. Jones et al. (2000) show some evidence

that provincial fiscal deficits fell after the imposition of convertibility, though the recent

collapse of the currency board suggests that the time inconsistency problems in monetary



                                              4
policy are still present. For related discussions of Argentina, see the work of Cooper and

Kempf (2001a and b) and Tommasi et al. (2001).

      The United States is an example of a successful monetary union. This union of states

appears to have solved the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy, so that there is

no free-rider problem.

      The success of the European Monetary Union is not yet clear. Our theory provides one

rationale for the fiscal policy restrictions in the treaty establishing this union (the Maastricht

Treaty) and in the recent Stability and Growth Pact among its members. One reading of

the Maastricht Treaty, notwithstanding the solemn expressions of intent of the primacy of

price stability, is that monetary policy is to be set sequentially by majority rule. As such,

the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy is potentially severe. In such a scenario,

our analysis shows that debt constraints are desirable. Our analysis is consistent with the

view that the framers of the Maastricht Treaty thought commitment to monetary policy was

extremely diﬃcult to achieve and therefore wisely included debt constraints as an integral

part of the treaty and the pact.

      An alternative reading of the Maastricht Treaty is that the primacy of the goal of

price stability and the independence of the central bank eﬀectively ensure commitment to

monetary policy and thereby solve the time inconsistency problem. Under this reading–

as our analysis with commitment indicates–debt constraints are unnecessary and possibly

harmful. (For a forceful argument that debt constraints are harmful, see Buiter et al.’s 1993

work.)

      Other monetary unions could be investigated. In fact, Von Hagen and Eichengreen

(1996) assemble data on fiscal policy restrictions in 49 countries. Interestingly, they find that

37 of these countries impose restrictions on the fiscal policies of their subcentral governments.

This finding suggests that, in practice, policymakers are concerned with fiscal profligacy of

the subcentral governments and have adopted measures to constrain such behavior.



                                                5
     Our research here is related to a literature on fiscal policy in monetary unions, including

Giovannini and Spaventa (1991), Sibert (1992), Beetsma and Uhlig (1999), Cooper and

Kempf (2001c), Dixit and Lambertini (2001), and Uhlig (2002). Those most closely related

to our work here are Cooper and Kempf’s and Uhlig’s work. Cooper and Kempf focus mostly

on the gains to monetary union with commitment by the monetary authority and show that

without commitment, the monetary union may be undesirable. Uhlig develops a reduced-

form model in which there is a free-rider problem in fiscal policy. This free-rider problem

ends up reducing welfare, but not raising the inflation rate.

     An extensive literature has discussed the gains from international cooperation in setting

fiscal policy. This literature shows that cooperation is desirable if a country’s fiscal policy

aﬀects world prices and real interest rates. (For details on this result, see the work of

Chari and Kehoe (1990) and Canzoneri and Diba (1991).) The kind of desirable cooperation

that this literature points to applies equally well to the relationship between, for example,

Germany and Canada as it does to that between Germany and Italy; it is not especially

related to countries being in a monetary union. Because the issues raised in this literature

are well-understood, we abstract from them here. We do so by considering models in which

the policies of the cooperating countries taken as a group do not aﬀect world prices and real

interest rates. In such models, there can be no gains to cooperation of this sort.


1. Theory
     We begin with a general setup of a monetary union which makes explicit the logic by

which a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy leads to a free-rider problem.

     Consider a world economy with N countries indexed i = 1, . . . , N united in a union,

with one monetary authority that acts for them all. Each country has a continuum of
                                                                                        R
private agents indexed j ∈ [0, 1], each of whom chooses an action xij . Let xi =            xij dj

denote the aggregate choice of actions by private agents in country i. The government of

country i chooses a nonmonetary policy τ i , and the monetary authority of the union chooses


                                              6
a common inflation rate for the union denoted π. The payoﬀs to private agents are

(1)    V (τ i , xij , xi , π).

The payoﬀ to the government of country i is the integral of the payoﬀs to the private agents

in that country,
       Z
(2)        V (τ i , xij , xi , π) dj

while the payoﬀ to the monetary authority is the sum of the payoﬀs to the governments:
       N Z
       X
(3)            V (τ i , xij , xi , π) dj.
       i=1

      Notice that we have assumed that the policies of individual governments do not directly

aﬀect the payoﬀs to other governments; thus, the only way governments in this economy

interact is through the eﬀect of their actions on the common inflation rate. We make this

assumption to abstract from standard nonmonetary policy linkages across countries, like

tariﬀs and taxes. These have been analyzed extensively in the literature and have no obvious

bearing on issues concerning a monetary union. (See, for example, the work of Chari and

Kehoe (1990).)

      Typically, a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy arises when the monetary

authority cannot eﬀectively commit to an inflation policy. We will show that without eﬀective

commitment in a monetary union, there is a free-rider problem, which leads noncooperative

outcomes to diﬀer from a benchmark outcome with cooperation. We show that no such

problem arises when the monetary authority can commit.

      We formalize the lack of commitment that drives the time inconsistency problem with

a no commitment game with the following timing. First, the governments choose τ i , then

private agents choose xij , and finally the monetary authority chooses π. We focus on an

equilibrium in which all private agents within a country choose the same actions, so that

xij = xi for all i and j.


                                              7
      A noncooperative equilibrium of this game is given by nonmonetary government policies

τ̄ = (τ 1 , . . . , τ N ), private agent decision rules xi (τ̄ ) that depend on government policies, and

a monetary policy function π(τ̄ , x̄) that depends on government policies τ̄ and the private

agents’ decisions x̄ = (x1 , . . . , xN ) such that (i) for all τ̄ , x̄, the policy π(τ , x̄) maximizes the

monetary authority’s payoﬀ; (ii) for each private agent ij, for all τ̄ , xi (τ̄ ) solves

(4)     max V (τ i , xij , xi (τ̄ ), π(τ̄ , x̄(τ̄ )))
         xij

where x̄(τ̄ ) =      (x1(τ̄ ), . . . , xN (τ̄ )); (iii) for each government i, given the policies of the other
governments i0 , the private agents’ decision rules xi , and the monetary authority’s policy

rule π, the policy τ i maximizes the payoﬀ to government i.

      A cooperative equilibrium of this game is defined similarly, with (iii) replaced by this:

(iii0 ) given the private agents’ decision rules xi and the monetary authority’s policy rule π,

the vector τ̄ maximizes the sum of the payoﬀs to the governments. (Notice that clauses (i),

(iii), and (iii0 ) require that the relevant policies be best responses, while clause (ii) has a

fixed-point problem built into it.)

      Throughout, we focus on symmetric equilibria, where in addition to all private agents

with a country choosing the same decision, all governments choose the same policy. We

characterize the equilibria by working backwards. Given government policies τ̄ and private

decisions x̄, the monetary authority chooses π to maximize (3). The resulting monetary

policy function π(τ̄ , x̄) satisfies the first-order condition
        N
        X
(5)            V4 (τ i , xi , xi , π) = 0
        i=1

which in a symmetric equilibrium is simply V4 = 0. (Here V4 denotes the derivative of V

with respect to its fourth argument. We use similar notation throughout.)

      Each private agent maximizes (1), taking as given the government policies τ̄ , other

private agents’ decisions x̄, and the monetary policy function π(τ̄ , x̄). The resulting best

response function Xi (τ i , xi , π(τ̄ , x̄)) satisfies the first-order condition

(6)     V2 (τ i , xij , xi , π) = 0.

                                                        8
Let x̄(τ̄ ) =    (x1(τ̄ ), . . . , xN (τ̄ )) denote the fixed point of the best response function, that is,

(7)     xi (τ̄ ) = Xi (τ i , xi (τ̄ ), π(τ̄ , x̄(τ̄ ))) for all i.

       In a noncooperative equilibrium, the government of country i maximizes V (τ i , xi (τ̄ ),

xi (τ̄ ), π(τ̄ )) where Π(τ̄ ) = π (τ̄ , x̄(τ̄ )) denotes the monetary policy function π(τ̄ , x̄) evaluated

at the private decision rules x̄(τ̄ ). Then the government’s first-order condition is

                               ∂xi       ∂Π
(8)     V1 + (V2 + V3 )             + V4      =0
                               ∂τ i      ∂τ i
                                        PN
where ∂Π/∂τ i = ∂π/∂τ i +                  j=1 (∂π/∂xj )(∂xj /∂τ i ).   Notice that ∂Π/∂τ i captures both the

direct eﬀect of changes in government policy τ i on inflation and the indirect eﬀects through

changes in private agents’ decisions.

       In a cooperative equilibrium, the governments jointly choose τ to maximize
        N
        X
              V (τ i , xi (τ̄ ), xi (τ̄ ), Π(τ̄ )).
        i=1

Taking the first-order conditions and then imposing symmetry gives
                                                     
                          ∂xi X ∂xj            ∂Π
(9)     V1 + (V2 + V3 )      +          + N V4      = 0.
                          ∂τ i j6=i ∂τ i        ∂τ i

       We can use these conditions to show the following.


       Proposition 1. (Free-riding without commitment) Suppose there is a unique cooper-

ative equilibrium with V3 6= 0 and ∂xj /∂τ i 6= 0. Then the noncooperative and cooperative

policies without commitment diﬀer, and the cooperative equilibrium has strictly higher wel-

fare than the noncooperative equilibrium. If either V3 = 0 or ∂xj /∂τ i = 0 in the cooperative

equilibrium, then the two equilibria coincide.


       Proof. Substituting the first-order conditions for the monetary authority and the pri-

vate agents into (8), we have that in a noncooperative equilibrium,

                    ∂xi
(10)    V1 + V3          = 0.
                    ∂τ i

                                                               9
Using similar substitutions, we have that in a cooperative equilibrium,
                              
                  ∂xi X ∂xj 
(11)    V1 + V3      +          = 0.
                  ∂τ i j6=i ∂τ i

Comparing (10) and (11), we see that the policies in the two equilibria are diﬀerent if and

only if both V3 6= 0 and ∂xj /∂τ i 6= 0 in the cooperative equilibrium. Since it is feasible

for the governments in a cooperative equilibrium to choose the noncooperative policies, it

follows from the uniqueness of the cooperative equilibrium that welfare is strictly higher in

the cooperative equilibrium whenever the two equilibria diﬀer. Q.E.D.


       From (7) it is easy to see that

        ∂xj        ∂Π/∂τ j
(12)         = Xjπ
        ∂τ i       1 − Xjx

where Xjx is the derivative of the fixed point map in (7) with respect to xj . Notice that

if private agents’ decisions do not depend on their predictions of inflation so that Xjπ = 0

or the inflation rate does not depend on the government policies so that ∂Π/∂τ j = 0 then

∂xj /∂τ i = 0 and there is no free rider problem.

       At a superficial level, the free-rider problem seems to arise solely because inflation

confers a common cost on the members of the union while an individual government cares

only about the eﬀect of inflation on its own payoﬀs. The source of the free-rider problem

is, however, subtler. For example, suppose that V3 = 0–say, because private agents take no

actions. Then the equilibria in the two regimes coincide even though individual governments

care only about the eﬀects of inflation on their own countries. In this example with V3 = 0,

the two equilibria coincide because of an envelope argument. In the cooperative equilibrium,

the monetary authority chooses inflation to balance the costs and benefits, so that at the

margin, an incremental change in inflation has no eﬀect on welfare. Starting at this outcome,

a noncooperative government realizes that at the margin the induced eﬀect of its policies on

welfare through their eﬀect on inflation is zero. In both the cooperative and noncooperative



                                              10
equilibria, therefore, a government’s policies at the margin aﬀect only that government’s

welfare. Hence, there is no free-rider problem.

      When V3 6= 0 and ∂xj /∂τ i 6= 0, however, there is a free-rider problem. Starting at the

cooperative outcome, if country i changes its policies, then the monetary authority responds

by changing the inflation rate. At the margin, if we neglect the induced eﬀects on private

decisions x, this change has no eﬀect on welfare. The key is, however, that the induced

change in the inflation rate also induces changes in private decisions x. It is through this

channel that the free-rider problem occurs. A change in the government policy τ i makes the

private agents in all the countries predict a change in inflation, and this predicted change

makes them change their actions. (Mechanically we can see this from equation (12) which

gives the change in private agent decisions in country j due to changes in government policy

in country i. For this change to be nonzero we need ∂Π/∂τ i 6= 0 and Xjπ 6= 0.) When V3 6= 0

this change in private decisions implies that a change in government policy in country i

induces a change in welfare in country j and thus leads to a free rider problem. Later we

will illustrate the detailed economic channels of the free-rider problem in our applications of

this theory to three specific types of nonmonetary policies.

      We now show that if there are no time inconsistency problems, then there are no free-

rider problems. There are no time inconsistency problems when there is some commitment or

reputational mechanism. For simplicity, here we simply assume that the monetary authority

can commit to its policies. A similar analysis would apply to the reputational equilibria that

support commitment in the repeated game version of the model.

      The timing in the commitment game is as follows. First the monetary authority chooses

π, then governments choose τ i , and finally private agents choose xij .

      A noncooperative equilibrium of this game is given by a monetary policy π, government

policy functions τ i (π), and private agent decision rules xi (π, τ̄ ) such that (i) for each private




                                                 11
agent ij, for all π and τ̄ , xi (π, τ̄ ) solves

(13)     max V (τ i , xij , xi (π, τ̄ ), π );
          xij



(ii) for each government i, for all π, given the policies of the other governments τ i0 (π) and

the private agent decision rules xi (π, τ̄ ), the policy τ i (π) maximizes the payoﬀ to government

i; and (iii) given the government policy functions τ i and the private agent decision rules xi ,

the policy π maximizes the monetary authority’s payoﬀ.

        A cooperative equilibrium of the commitment game is defined similarly, but with (ii)

replaced by this: (ii0 ) for all π, given the private agent decision rules xi (π, τ̄ ), the policy

τ i (π) maximizes the sum of the payoﬀs to the governments.

        We then have

        Proposition 2. (No free-riding with commitment) With commitment, the noncoop-

erative and the cooperative policies coincide and the welfare in the resulting equilibria is the

same.

        Proof. Consider private agent optimality. From (13) it follows that the first-order

condition for private agents in both equilibria is V2 = 0 and that xi (π, τ̄ ) depends only on π

and τ i for all i, so that for j 6= i,

         ∂xi
(14)          = 0.
         ∂τ j

In the noncooperative equilibrium, the governments choose τ i to maximize

         V (τ i , xi (π, τ̄ ), xi (π, τ̄ ), π ).

Using V2 = 0, we can write the first-order condition in a noncooperative equilibrium as

                      ∂xi
(15)     V1 + V3           = 0.
                      ∂τ i

Acting cooperatively, the governments choose τ i to maximize
         N
         X
                V (τ i , xi (π, τ̄ ), xi (π, τ̄ ), π ).
         i=1

                                                          12
Using V2 = 0 and (14), we see that the first-order condition for this problem reduces to (15).

Clearly, the noncooperative and cooperative solutions coincide. Thus, with commitment,

there is no free-rider problem. Q.E.D.


       The intuition for the diﬀering results in the environments with and without commit-

ment is as follows. In both environments, a government in a given country i does not care

directly about the government policies or the private agent choices in any other country j.

Without commitment, government policies in other countries induce changes in the common

inflation rate, and thus induce changes in private agent choices in country i. This linkage

leads policies in country i to depend on government policy choices in country j. This subtle

linkage leads to a free-rider problem. With commitment, the links among governments in

diﬀerent countries are broken, and there is no free-rider problem.

       In some of our applications, some of the private agents are not residents of any of the

countries. For example, in our application to fiscal policy, there are lenders who do not reside

in any of the countries. Propositions 1 and 2 generalize to such situations.

       Consider a variant of the environment described here in which the behavior of private
                                                                                   R
agent ij is summarized by a best response function Xi (τ i , π, xi ), where xi =       xij dj. In the

noncommitment game, the private agent decision rules are summarized by a fixed point of

the best response function, namely, a function xi (τ̄ ) that solves

        xi (τ̄ ) = Xi (τ i , π(τ̄ , x̄(τ̄ )), xi (τ̄ )).

Here an analog of Proposition 1 holds with one slight modification. The conditions under

which the noncooperative and cooperative policies without commitment diﬀer are

(16)    V2 + V3 6= 0 and ∂xj /∂τ j 6= 0.

Proposition 2 holds as stated.

       In our application to bank regulation, the monetary authority has essentially a zero-

one decision on whether to bail out the banks. This feature implies that, even though the

                                                           13
monetary authority is maximizing, it does not set V4 equal to zero. Inspecting (8) and (9),

we see that if V4 ∂Π/∂τ i is not equal to zero, then an analog of Proposition 1 typically applies.

Proposition 2 holds as stated.


2. Applications
       Now we apply this general theory to some particular examples of nonmonetary policies

which can lead to free-riding in monetary unions when monetary authorities cannot commit

to their policies.


2.1 Labor Market Policy

       First we apply our theory to a type of nonmonetary policy that governments of members

of a monetary union control: labor market policy. For this application, we use the classic

model of time inconsistency in monetary policy due to Kydland and Prescott (1977) and

Barro and Gordon (1983), in which ex post inflation reduces unemployment. We modify this

model to allow governments to set labor market policies which determine the natural rate

of unemployment. We show that the free-rider problem leads governments to adopt policies

that result in higher unemployment and inflation than would occur in an eﬃcient allocation.

       Consider the following modified version of Kydland and Prescott’s and Barro and

Gordon’s model. In this example, the natural rate of unemployment in country i, ū(τ i ), is

aﬀected by labor market policies in that country, denoted by τ i . For simplicity, let ū(τ i ) =

ū − τ i . The realized unemployment rate ui is determined by the natural unemployment rate

and the log of the real wage xi − π, which is the diﬀerence between the log of the nominal

wage and the log of the price level. Since initial prices are given, π is both the price level

and the inflation rate. Specifically,

(17)    ui = xi − π + ū(τ i ).

                                                                                          R
       Each private agent chooses a wage xij , and the wage in country i is given by xi = xij dj.



                                               14
The objective function of each private agent ij is

          1            a     b     c
(18)     − (xij − π)2 − u2i − π 2 − τ 2i
          2            2     2     2

where a, b, and c are constants. The first term in this objective function provides a target real

wage for the private agents, the second and the third terms reflect concerns over aggregate

unemployment and inflation, and the last term captures the cost of altering labor market

policies which aﬀect the natural rate of unemployment. Substituting for ui from (17) and

ū(τ i ) = ū − τ i gives private agents these payoﬀs:
                                   1            a                       b     c
(19)     V (τ i , xij , xi , π) = − (xij − π)2 − (xi − π + ū − τ i )2 − π 2 − τ 2i .
                                   2            2                       2     2
                                                 R
       The payoﬀ to government i is                  V (τ i , xij , xi , π) di, and the payoﬀ to the monetary au-

thority is the sum of the governments’ payoﬀs. These payoﬀ functions ensure that private

agents choose their wages to be the expected value of inflation and that the monetary au-

thority cares about the average rate of unemployment. (To see why this assumption matters,

see the work of Chari et al. (1989).) In much of the literature, the payoﬀs to the private

agents are given (implicitly) by the first term on the right side of (19) and the payoﬀs to the

monetary authority are given by the second and third terms. We choose to combine these

terms so that the governments and the monetary authority are benevolent.

       Equilibria of the no commitment and commitment games in this world are defined

exactly as in the theory section above. To show that there is a free-rider problem in the no

commitment game, we need show only that V3 6= 0 and ∂xi (τ̄ )/∂τ j 6= 0 in the cooperative

equilibrium. To do so, we first use the monetary authority’s first-order condition to derive
                                  P                     P
                        (1 + a)    xi + Naū − a            τi
(20)     π(τ̄ , x̄) =                                            .
                                  N(1 + a + b)
Next we note that the private agent’s first-order condition yields xi = π. Clearly, xi is the

same for all i, and we denote it by x. Then x(τ̄ ) solves the fixed-point problem x(τ̄ ) =

π (τ̄ , x̄(τ̄ )), where x̄(τ̄ ) =     (x (τ̄ ) , . . . , x(τ̄ )). Using (20), we have that
                        µ    P        ¶
                  a       τi
(21)     x(τ̄ ) =   ū −     .
                  b      N
                                                             15
Clearly, ∂xi (τ̄ )/∂τ j = −a/bN 6= 0 as long as a is nonzero. To calculate the value of V3 ,

we need to solve for the cooperative equilibrium policies. It is straightforward to use the

monetary authority’s first-order condition to show that the cooperative equilibrium policies

are given by τ C = [a + (a2 /b)ū]/[a + (a2 /b) + c]. Using (20) and (21), we obtain

                    acū
(22)    V3 =                   .
               a + (a2 /b) + c

If acū 6= 0, we have that V3 6= 0. From Proposition 1, the following proposition is immediate:


       Proposition 3. (Free-riding in labor market policies without commitment) In the

game with no commitment, the noncooperative and cooperative equilibria diﬀer if acū is

nonzero and the cooperative equilibrium has strictly higher welfare than the noncooperative

equilibrium. If acū = 0, the two equilibria coincide.

       If acū = 0, then there is no time inconsistency problem in monetary policy. This

condition is related to similar conditions in the literature following Kydland and Prescott

(1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983). In that literature, ū is a constant, and there is only one

country. A standard result in that literature is that there is no time inconsistency problem

if a = 0 or if ū = 0, that is, if the monetary authority does not have an incentive to reduce

unemployment below the natural rate. In our model in which the natural rate can be aﬀected

by labor market policies, if c = 0, then each government would simply set its policies so that

the natural rate is zero and there would be no time inconsistency problem in monetary policy.

Thus, Proposition 3 essentially says that whenever there is a time inconsistency problem in

monetary policy, there is a free-rider problem in labor market policy.

       It is easy to show that the equilibrium inflation rate under noncooperation is

                    acū/b
        πN =
               a + (a2 /bN ) + c

and the equilibrium inflation rate under cooperation is

                   acū/b
        πC =                   .
               a + (a2 /b) + c

                                              16
Clearly, the noncooperative level of inflation π N is greater than the corresponding cooperative

level π C . Notice that the noncooperative inflation rate rises monotonically with the number

of countries N. In this sense, the free-rider problem gets worse as the number of countries

gets larger.

      The free-rider problem can be eliminated by imposing constraints on the labor market

policies of member governments. The following corollary is immediate.


      Corollary. (Labor market policy constraints and the free-rider problem) In the game

without commitment, if each government is required to set its labor market policy τ i ≥ τ C ,

then the noncooperative equilibrium attains the cooperative benchmark.


      Clearly, Proposition 2 applies to this environment, and thus with commitment, there

is no free-rider problem. Under commitment, the cooperative level of inflation is zero.

      Notice that the constraints on labor market policy that eliminate the free-rider problem

in labor market policy also help mitigate the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy

because they lower inflation from π N to π C . They do not, however, eliminate the time

inconsistency problem since π C is still positive and thus π C is higher than the cooperative

level of inflation with commitment, namely zero.


2.2 Fiscal Policy

      Now we apply our theory to a second type of nonmonetary policy: fiscal policy. Each

of the many governments in a monetary union issues nominal debt to smooth consumption.

The monetary authority chooses a common inflation rate. This inflation reduces the real

return on debt and eﬀectively serves as a kind of partial default. We show that when the

monetary authority cannot eﬀectively commit to its monetary policy, there is a free-rider

problem: governments issue too much debt, inflation is too high, and output is too low

relative to a cooperative benchmark. This free-rider problem can be solved by imposing

constraints on the amount of debt that governments can issue. Such constraints lead to the


                                              17
benchmark levels of inflation and output.

       Consider a two-period model with N identical countries indexed i = 1, . . . , N that are

small in the world economy. The countries are united in a monetary union. In period 0, the

countries start with an identical price level p0 , which is given. Each country issues nominal

debt in period 0 to lenders who live outside of these countries. These foreign lenders are risk

neutral and have a discount factor of β. In period 1, the monetary authority determines the

unionwide monetary policy. We model monetary policy as the choice of the price level in

period 1, p1 . In each country, in period 0, output is a constant given by ω, while in period 1,

output y(π) is a decreasing and concave function of the common inflation rate from period 0

to period 1, denoted by π = p1 /p0 . We assume that y(π) satisfies the Inada conditions that

yπ (0) = 0 and yπ (∞) = −∞.

       We now set up the individual country government budget constraints and objective

functions. The budget constraints of the government in country i are

(23)    p0 ci0 = ω + qbi

(24)    p1 ci1 = p1 y − bi

where bi is nominal debt sold to foreign lenders at price q and ci0 and ci1 denote consumption

of the residents of country i in the two periods. The objective function of the country i

government is

        U(ci0 ) + βU (ci1 ).

The model starts with p0 given, so setting p0 = 1 is convenient. A government’s period 1

budget constraint is, then,

        ci1 = y(π) − bi /π.

We will assume that period 0 output, ω, is suﬃciently smaller than y(0), so that the govern-

ments have an incentive to borrow. The monetary authority’s objective function is the sum

of the objective functions of the governments.

                                              18
       The timing of the model in period 0 is that first the governments choose their debt

levels to foreign lenders bi , and then the price q of that debt is determined. In period 1,

the monetary authority chooses the common inflation rate π. We consider two equilibria: a

noncooperative equilibrium in which the governments simultaneously choose their debt levels

to maximize their own objective functions and a cooperative equilibrium in which the debt

levels are chosen to maximize the sum of the objective functions. This timing reflects the

idea that the monetary authority cannot commit to the policies it will follow. Specifically,

the monetary authority takes the debt levels b̄ = (b1 , . . . , bN ) as given and then chooses the

inflation rate optimally. When choosing their debt levels, the governments recognize that

their choices aﬀect future inflation by influencing the actions of the monetary authority.

       In both equilibria, we solve the model by starting at the end. In both regimes, the

problems of the monetary authority and the lenders are the same. Taking the debt levels as

given, the monetary authority chooses π to solve

              X
(25)    max
         π
                  U (y(π) − bi /π ).
              i

Let π(b̄) denote the resulting monetary policy function. Consider next the foreign lenders.

Since they are risk neutral, behave competitively, and have discount factor β, the debt price

function is given by

(26)    q(b̄) = β/π(b̄).

In the noncooperative equilibrium, the government of country i, taking other countries’ debt

levels as given, solves

(27)    max U (ω + q(b̄)bi ) + βU (y(π(b̄)) − bi /π(b̄)).
         bi


In the cooperative equilibrium, the vector of debt levels b̄ is chosen to solve

              Xh                                              i
(28)    max        U (ω + q(b̄)bi ) + βU (y(π(b̄)) − bi /π(b̄)) .
         b̄   i




                                                   19
       A noncooperative equilibrium is given by a vector of debt levels b̄ that solves (27), a

debt price function q that solves (26), and a monetary policy function π that solves (25). A

cooperative equilibrium is defined similarly except that the vector of debt levels b̄ solves (28).

       This fiscal policy environment is a special case of the general setup that we discussed

at the end of the theory section. To see this, let τ i = bi and xi = q. Then the payoﬀ to

government i is given by the integral over j of

        V (τ i , xij , xi , π) = U (ω + xi τ i ) + βU (y(π) − τ i /π ).

Notice that the payoﬀ does not depend on the action xij of an individual private agent.

The monetary policy function in this case π(τ̄ ) does not depend on private decisions x̄. The

private decision rule is given by xi (τ̄ ) = β/π(τ̄ ). The modified conditions (16) hold here.

Clearly, V2 + V3 = U 0 (ci0 )τ i 6= 0. It is easy to show that

        ∂xi    β ∂π
(29)         =− 2
        ∂τ j   π ∂τ j

is nonzero at the cooperative benchmark. We then have the following proposition.


       Proposition 4. (Free-riding in fiscal policies, without commitment) In the game with

no commitment, the noncooperative and cooperative equilibria diﬀer and the cooperative

equilibrium has strictly higher welfare than the noncooperative equilibrium.


       The natural presumption is that debt and inflation are higher in the noncooperative

equilibrium. It is possible to show that this presumption holds when y = ȳ − π α /σ with

σ > 1. For this example, we can show that when there is no commitment, if the countries

in the noncooperative regime are constrained to keep their debt at or below the cooperative

levels, then they will achieve the cooperative outcome. Note that the cooperative outcome

without commitment has positive inflation. (This follows since at zero inflation yπ (0) = 0 so

that at the margin there is a gain from inflating away some nominal debt with an increase

in inflation.) When there is commitment, the cooperative outcome has zero inflation. Since


                                                       20
the cooperative equilibrium without commitment has positive but lower inflation than the

noncooperative equilibrium without commitment, constraints on fiscal policy mitigate but

do not eliminate the time inconsistency problem in monetary policy.

     Applying Proposition 2 to this environment, we know that once a monetary policy has

been committed to, binding constraints on future debt issues can only reduce welfare.

     Propositions 2 and 4 imply that a time inconsistency problem in monetary policy is

at the heart of a free-rider problem in fiscal policy. They also imply that the question of

whether debt constraints are desirable is intimately connected to the extent to which the

monetary authority can commit to monetary policy. From Proposition 4 and the above

discussion, we know that as long as such commitment is not possible, appropriately chosen

debt constraints improve welfare while if such commitment is possible, debt constraints can

only reduce welfare.

     The economy with commitment is broadly similar to the economies studied in an

extensive literature that has discussed the gains from international cooperation in setting

fiscal policy. (See, for example, the work of Chari and Kehoe (1990) and Canzoneri and Diba

(1991).) As noted in the introduction, this literature shows that cooperation is desirable if a

country’s fiscal policy aﬀects world prices and real interest rates. In our model, there are no

gains to cooperation under commitment because we have assumed that the monetary union

is small in the world in the sense that the world interest rate is independent of the fiscal

policy decisions of the union’s members.

     Suppose, instead, we had considered a general equilibrium model with no outside

lenders, so that countries in the union constitute the entire world. Specifically, suppose

that each country chooses its spending level on a public good that benefits its own residents

and finances the spending with debt and distorting taxes. In such a formulation, even with

commitment by the monetary authority, the noncooperative and cooperative equilibria do

not coincide. This is because any country’s spending decision aﬀects the world interest rate



                                              21
and, hence, other countries’ welfare. Since these types of gains to cooperation are not related

to the formation of a monetary union, we have chosen to abstract from them.


2.3 Bank Regulation

     Now we apply our theory to a third type of nonmonetary policy: bank regulation.

Here the time inconsistency problem arises because the monetary authority cannot commit

to not bailing out insolvent banks. Government policy consists of determining the level of

regulation of banks. The free-rider problem leads to lax regulation of banks, frequent bank

bailouts, and a high rate of inflation. The general argument in Propositions 1 and 2, that

time inconsistency problems lead to free-rider problems, applies here, with the modifications

discussed at the end of the theory section.

     We assume that depositors in banks are fully insured, banks have limited liability,

and the monetary authority bails out the depositors in insolvent banks. Deposit insurance

together with limited liability creates an incentive for banks to take on excessive risk. We

assume that governments regulate banks to limit risk-taking. In this application, the free-

rider problem leads governments to do too little regulation and banks to take on too much

risk compared to what they would do in the eﬃcient allocation.

     The environment is as follows. The monetary union consists of N countries indexed

i = 1, ..., N. The aggregate state of the world economy is s ∈ {H, L}, where H denotes a

boom (or a high state) and L denotes a recession (or a low state). The probabilities of H

and L are µH and µL , respectively. Output is produced as follows. There are a large number

of projects in each country i, indexed by zi ∈ [0, 1/2]. A project of type z yields a return

R per unit of investment when it succeeds and 0 otherwise. The probability of success in a

boom is pH (z) = (1/2) + z, and the probability of success in a recession is pL (z) = (1/2) − z.

We will show that in each country i only one type of project–say, zi –will be chosen. Since

each country has a large number of projects, total output in country i in state s ∈ {H, L} is

ps (zi )R. Notice that when projects with a higher value of z are chosen, the distribution of


                                              22
output is a mean-preserving spread of the output when projects with a lower value of z are

chosen.

       This monetary union has many banks. Each bank can finance up to one unit of

investment. A bank in country i obtains funds from depositors who are paid an interest rate

ri . Banks have limited liability in that they must pay depositors only if bank receipts exceed

bank obligations. If bank receipts fall short of obligations, then banks pay zero, and the

monetary authority pays oﬀ the depositors by liquidating the bank’s assets and by printing

money to cover any shortfall. The government of country i = 1, . . . , N can do some costly

supervision at a level of τ i and prohibit banks from financing projects with z > τ i . This

supervision of bank activities is what will represent bank regulation in this world.

       We now describe optimal behavior by banks for a given inflation rate π and given

supervision levels τ̄ = (τ 1 , . . . , τ N ). A bank’s maximization problem is to choose which type

of project to fund. A bank in country i, taking the interest rate ri on its deposits and the

supervision level τ i as given, chooses z to maximize profits:

(30)    qHi max{pH (z)R − ri , 0} + qLi max{pL (z)R − ri , 0}

subject to z ≤ τ i . Here qHi and qLi are the prices in country i for one unit of consumption

in state H and L, respectively.

       For some given policies π, τ̄ , and state prices qsi , for i = 1, . . . , N, s = H, L, a compet-

itive banking equilibrium consists of portfolio rules zi (τ i ) and deposit rates ri (τ i ) such that

(i) zi (τ i ) solves (30) given ri (τ i ) and (ii) profits in (30) are zero. Then we have this:


       Lemma. In a competitive banking equilibrium, zi (τ i ) = τ i and ri = pH (zi (τ i ))R.


       Proof. Since profits are zero in equilibrium, each term in (30) is zero. We drop the

i subscript for simplicity. Since pH (z) ≥ pL (z), r = pH (z)R and pL (z)R − r ≤ 0. To see

that z = τ , suppose, by way of contradiction, that in equilibrium z < τ . Then increasing z

increases pH (z)R−r and, thus, increases the first term in (30). The second term is unchanged

                                                  23
since pL (z)R−r falls from a value of at most zero. Thus, increasing z increases profits, which

contradicts profit maximization. Q.E.D.


       We assume that the objective function for the consumers and the government of country

i is

         X
(31)          µs U (ysi , π s )
          s


where ysi denotes output in country i and π s denotes the common inflation rate across

countries in state s. We assume that consumers cannot share risk across countries, so that

each consumer simply consumes the output of country i. We also assume that the utility

function is increasing in output and decreasing in the inflation rate. Output in each country

i is given by the returns from the banks’ projects less the costs of supervising banks, e(τ i ),

which is increasing in τ i . Using the lemma, we know that all banks in a given country

choose projects of the same type zi , so that total output in country i is given by ys (zi , τ i ) =

ps (zi )R − e(τ i ).

       The monetary authority is required to print money to bail out any bank which cannot

pay oﬀ its depositors, namely, when ri < ps (zi )R. An inflation rate of π raises revenues

of πM, where M is the initial money stock that we normalize to 1. Thus, the monetary

authority must set π so that

                          X
(32)     π s (r̄, z̄) =       max{ri − ps (zi )R, 0}
                          i

where r̄ = (r1 , . . . , rN ) and z̄ = (z1 , . . . , zN ).

       A noncooperative equilibrium is given by a vector of bank supervision levels τ̄ that solve

                X
         max         µs U (ys (zi (τ̄ ), τ i ), π s (r̄(τ̄ ), z̄(τ̄ )))
                 s


along with a competitive banking equilibrium (r̄(τ̄ ), z̄(τ̄ )) and a monetary policy function

π that solves (32). A cooperative equilibrium is defined similarly except that the vector of

supervision levels τ̄ maximizes the sum of objective functions across countries.

                                                                   24
       The logic of the general setup discussed at the end of the theory section can be applied

to this bank regulation environment. To see how, let xi be the vector (xir , xiz ) = (ri , zi ) and

π be the vector (π L , π H ). To keep the notation simple, we let the monetary authority either

bail out all insolvent banks by setting π s = π s (r̄, z̄) or not bail out any insolvent bank by

setting π s = 0. We let the indicator variable d = 1 if there is a bailout and d = 0 if not.

Since banks within each country are identical, we need only consider a representative bank

for each country. Hence, there is no xij in payoﬀs. Then the payoﬀ to government i is given

by
                               X
          V (τ i , xi , π) =       µs U (ys (zi , τ i ), π s )) if either ri ≤ ps (zi )R or d = 1
                               s

and otherwise equals an arbitrarily large negative number, say −K. This payoﬀ has the

feature that the payoﬀ to the government coincides with the payoﬀ in (31) if either the

banks in that country are solvent or there is a bailout. The payoﬀ to the monetary authority
           P
is then      i   V (τ i , xi , π). Since the cost of not bailing out insolvent banks is arbitrarily large,

the monetary authority finds bailing out all insolvent banks optimal.

       Consider applying the extension of Proposition 1. Government i’s first-order condition

under noncooperation for τ i is
                  ∂V ∂ri ∂V ∂zi          ∂Π
(33)      Vτ +            +         + Vπ      = 0.
                  ∂ri ∂τ i ∂zi ∂τ i      ∂τ i
This is the analog of (8). The first-order condition for ri under cooperation is
                  ∂V ∂ri ∂V ∂zi           ∂Π
(34)      Vτ +            +         + NVπ      = 0.
                  ∂ri ∂τ i ∂zi ∂τ i       ∂τ i
This is the analog of (9) and uses the feature that here neither ri nor zi varies with τ j . Since

Vπ 6= 0 and ∂Π/∂τ i 6= 0, policies under cooperation and noncooperation diﬀer. We have

proven the following proposition:

       Proposition 5. (Free-riding in bank regulation without commitment) The noncooper-

ation and cooperation policies without commitment diﬀer and the cooperative equilibrium

has strictly higher welfare than the noncooperative equilibrium.

                                                            25
     The mechanism that leads to the free-rider problem here is as follows. When bank

supervision by a government slackens, its banks take on riskier portfolios, and in a recession,

the monetary authority must make larger bailouts. These larger bailouts lead to higher

inflation and lower welfare. In a noncooperative equilibrium, each government trades oﬀ the

gains from slacker supervision against the cost it bears from higher inflation. In particular,

each government ignores the costs on others of the higher inflation that its actions induce.

In a cooperative equilibrium, the gains from slacker supervision are traded oﬀ against the

costs that all bear from higher inflation. These tradeoﬀs lead to higher inflation and lower

welfare in the noncooperative equilibrium.

     One way to mitigate the free-rider problem with regard to this type of nonmonetary

policy is to have countries set a mutually agreed upon level of bank supervision. Here that

level is the cooperative level. Finally, Proposition 2 holds as stated for this environment, so

that when there is commitment by the monetary authority, there is no free-rider problem.


3. Conclusion
     We have argued that in the context of monetary unions, a time inconsistency prob-

lem in monetary policy leads to a novel type of free-rider problem in the setting of member

governments’ nonmonetary policies. The free-rider problem can be eliminated by setting con-

straints on the nonmonetary policies. Such constraints not only lead to better nonmonetary

policies; they also lead to better monetary policies.

     Our analysis also shows that the desirability of constraints on various nonmonetary

policies in monetary unions depends critically on the extent of commitment of the union’s

monetary authority. If that monetary authority can commit to its policies, constraints can

only impose costs. If the monetary authority cannot commit, then there is a free-rider

problem, and constraints may be desirable.




                                              26
                                        References


Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon. 1983. A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a

     Natural Rate Model. Journal of Political Economy 91 (4, August), 589—610.

Beetsma, Roel and Harald Uhlig. 1999. An Analysis of the Stability and Growth Pact.

     Economic Journal 109 (458, October), 546—71.

Buiter, Willem, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Nouriel Roubini. 1993. Excessive Deficits: Sense

     and Nonsense in the Treaty of Maastricht. Economic Policy: A European Forum 8

     (16, April), 57—100.

Canzoneri, Matthew B. and Behzad T. Diba. 1991. Fiscal Deficits, Financial Integration,

     and a Central Bank for Europe. Journal of the Japanese and International Economy

     5 (4, December), 381—403.

Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1990. International Coordination of Fiscal Policy in

     Limiting Economies. Journal of Political Economy 98 (3, June), 617—36.

Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Edward C. Prescott. 1989. Time Consistency and Policy.

     In Modern Business Cycle Theory, ed. Robert J. Barro, pp. 265—305. Cambridge,

     Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Cooper, Russell W. and Hubert Kempf. 2001a. Dollarization and the Conquest of Hyper-

     inflation in Divided Societies. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review

     25 (3, Summer), 3—12.

           . 2001b. On Dollarization. Manuscript, Boston University.

           . 2001c. Overturning Mundell: Fiscal Policy in a Monetary Union. Manuscript,

     Boston University.

Dixit, Avinash and Luisa Lambertini. 2001. Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Com-

     mitment versus Discretion in a Monetary Union. European Economic Review 45 (4-6,

     May), 977—87.

Giovannini, Alberto and Luigi Spaventa. 1991. Fiscal Rules in the European Monetary


                                            27
     Union: A No-Entry Clause. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper

     516, London, England.

Jones, Mark P., Pablo Sanguinetti, and Mariano Tommasi. 2000. Politics, Institutions,

     and Fiscal Performance in a Federal System: An Analysis of the Argentine Provinces.

     Journal of Development Economics 61 (2, April), 305—33.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1977. Rules Rather Than Discretion: The

     Inconsistency of Optimal Plans. Journal of Political Economy 85 (3, June), 473—91.

Nicolini, Juan Pablo, Josefina Posadas, Juan Sanguinetti, Pablo Sanguinetti, and Mariano

     Tommasi. 2000. Decentralization, Fiscal Discipline in Sub-National Governments, and

     the Bailout Problem: The Case of Argentina. Manuscript, Universidad Torcuato Di

     Tella, Buenos Aires.

Sibert, Anne. 1992. Government Finance in a Common Currency Area. Journal of Inter-

     national Money and Finance 11 (6, December), 567—78.

Tommasi, Mariano, Sebastian Saiegh, and Pablo Sanguinetti. 2001. Fiscal Federalism in

     Argentina: Policies, Politics, and Institutional Reform. Economia: Journal of the

     Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association 1 (2, Spring), 157—200.

Uhlig, Harald. 2002. One Money, But Many Fiscal Policies in Europe: What are the

     Consequences? Manuscript, Humboldt University, Berlin.

Von Hagen, Jurgen and Barry Eichengreen. 1996. Federalism, Fiscal Restraints, and Euro-

     pean Monetary Union. American Economic Review 86 (2, May) 134—38.




                                           28
