NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PPP STRIKES BACK: AGGREGATION AND
THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE
Jean Imbs
Haroon Mumtaz
Morten O. Ravn
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 9372
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9372
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

We thank Peter Clark, Mick Devereux, Charles Engel, Lutz Kilian, Roberto Rigobon, Barbara Rossi, Ron
Smith, Antonio Spilimbergo, Shang-Jin Wei, Charles Wyplosz, and seminar participants at ESSIM 2002,
Penn, NYU, Stanford, the IMF and the ESRC Money-Macro Finance conference in Warwick for helpful
comments. Parts of this paper were completed while Ravn was a visitor at the University of Pennsylvania,
and Imbs and Rey were visitors at the IMF. The authors are grateful to these institutions for their hospitality.
The paper is part of the project "Exchange Rates, International Relative Prices, and Macroeconomic Models",
funded by the ESRC (grant no.L138 25 1043), and of the RTN programme "The Analysis of International
Capital Markets: Understanding Europe's Role in the Global Economy", funded by the European Commission
(contract no. HPRN-CT-1999-00067). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate
Jean Imbs, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 9372
December 2002
JEL No. F36, F41, C43
ABSTRACT

We show the importance of a dynamic aggregation bias in accounting for the PPP puzzle.
We prove that established time series and panel methods substantially exaggerate the persistence
of real exchange rates because of heterogeneity in the dynamics of disaggregated relative prices.
When heterogeneity is properly taken into account, estimates of the real exchange rate half-life fall
dramatically, to little more than one year, or significantly below Rogoff's `consensus view' of three
to five years. We show that corrected estimates are consistent with plausible nominal rigidities, thus,
arguably, solving the PPP puzzle.

Jean Imbs
London School of Business
Regent’s Park
NW1 4SA
London, UK

Haroon Mumtaz
London School of Business
Regent’s Park
NW1 4SA
London, UK

Morten O. Ravn
London School of Business
Regent’s Park
NW1 4SA
London, UK

Hélène Rey
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hrey@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

The study of real exchange rates, de…ned as the international relative price of a basket
of goods expressed in a common currency, is perhaps the most intensely researched
area in international macroeconomics. The principle of absolute purchasing power
parity (PPP) states that real exchange rates should be constant and equal to one
or, expressed in relative terms, that changes in the real exchange rate should be
arbitraged away. Yet the consensus from the empirical literature appears to be that,
although real exchange rates may be stationary and tend to converge to parity level
in the long run, the rate at which this happens is very slow. The speed of mean
reversion is usually summarized by one statistic, the half life, or the time necessary
for half the e¤ect of a given shock to dissipate. Estimates of half-lives usually lay in
the ballpark of three to …ve years.1 Kilian and Zha (2002) conduct a survey among
international economists regarding their views on real exchange rates half-lives. The
survey responses are dispersed, but display a single peak around four years, which thus
emerges as the ‘consensus half-life’ in the economics profession. Evidence on the law
of one price (LOP) is hardly more encouraging, as it suggests persistent international
di¤erences in good prices as well.2
If the empirical evidence and international economists are right, these large estimates have three important consequences. Firstly, PPP is at best of little practical
relevance over horizons of concern to policymakers or practitioners, who are typically
interested in the short to medium run ‡uctuations of the economy. Secondly, economic
models based on the PPP assumption are unlikely to provide an adequate description
of the real world at any relatively short horizon. Thirdly, the slow convergence of
international prices towards parity makes it quantitatively di¢cult to ascribe the failure of PPP to temporary arbitrage impediments or sticky prices. This has spawned
a literature taking up the challenge of constructing calibrated macroeconomic models
with nominal rigidities able to replicate the observed persistence of the real exchange
rate.3
In this paper, we show how one simple fact accounts for the surprisingly low es1

See Rogo¤ (1996) or Froot and Rogo¤ (1995) for excellent surveys of the literature. The consensus view is based on panel data estimates, as in Frankel and Rose (1996), Oh (1996), Wu (1996) or
Lothian (1997), or on estimates using long spans of data, as in Frankel (1986, 1990), Mark (1995),
Lothian and Taylor (1996), Abuaf and Jorion (1990) or Glen (1992). Diebold, Husted, and Rush
(1991) look at the Gold Standard and …nd a similar result. The debate is not over however. A
few recent studies, emphasizing non-linearities argue that the true half life is in fact smaller than
this consensus estimate (Taylor, Peel and Sarno (2001), Taylor and Peel (2000) or Obstfeld and
Taylor (1997)); but some other recent studies argue that it could in fact be much bigger (MurrayPapell (2002c), Engel (2000)) or that the con…dence intervals are far too wide to tell (Murray-Papell
(2002a), Rossi (2001), Kilian and Zha (2002)). For an interesting recent study on long run PPP see
Coakley et al (2002).
2
Classic studies include Giovannini (1988), Isard (1977), Knetter (1989, 1993), and Richardson
(1978). Rogo¤ (1996) and Goldberg and Knetter (1997) o¤er recent excellent surveys of the PPP
and LOP literatures.
3
A few examples include Kollman (2001), Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002) and Bergin and
Feenstra (2001).

2

timates of the speed of reversion of the real exchange rate: the failure to account
for cross-sectoral heterogeneity in the dynamic properties of the typical price index
components. All existing estimates, whether based on panel data or pure time series
su¤er from a cross-sectional aggregation bias. The speed of reversion to parity depends in all likelihood on goods-speci…c characteristics, and thus is not homogenous
across sectors. 4 In fact, it is hard to think of reasons why clothes and vegetables, say,
should revert to parity at the same speed.5 We show how failure to allow for these
di¤erences induces a positive bias in aggregate half-lives estimates, and thus stress
the importance of correcting for heterogeneity when estimating real exchange rates
half-lives.6
We investigate the quantitative role of this bias using an international sectoral
price database issued by Eurostat. We …nd the bias to be substantial. As crosssectoral heterogeneity is allowed for, the real exchange rate revert to PPP dramatically
faster than estimated previously and, importantly, our estimate of the speed of mean
reversion is in line with what reasonable barriers to arbitrage or nominal rigidities
would imply. Our estimated median half life is 14 months with a con…dence interval
ranging from 5 to 24 months. This is far below standard estimates, and not due
to any speci…cities in our dataset, as we are able to reproduce the ‘consensus view’
when not correcting for heterogeneity.7 The intuition for this dramatic result is
straightforward. If the persistence of relative prices varies across sectors, but aggregate
estimations are calculated under the premise of a unique aggregate autoregressive
coe¢cient, the parameter heterogeneity gives rise to correlation between the regressors
and the residuals. We show this correlation to induce a substantial positive bias in
the estimate of the persistence of the process, and that the magnitude of this bias
increases with the degree of sectoral heterogeneity.8 Furthermore, we show that our
corrected estimates are in line with the real exchange rate persistence derived in a
model with plausible nominal rigidities, due to Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002).
Thus in a sense, there is no PPP puzzle.
Our results are robust. In particular, we consider two alternative explanations.
4

In our estimation, we let the speed of mean reversion be good and country speci…c but …nd that
the most important heterogeneity is really at the sectoral level.
5
There is increasing empirical support for heterogeneity in the dynamics of relative prices. See
for instance Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2002) or Campa and Goldberg (2002).
6
This aggregation bias was …rst pointed out by Robertson and Symons (1992) and further investigated and generalized by Pesaran and Smith (1995). But, to the best of our knowledge, it has
never been applied to exchange rates. Furthermore, we show the bias to be systematically positive
for positively correlated sectoral relative prices. For an interesting paper studying temporal aggregation issues, see Taylor (2001). We emphasize however that these two types of aggregation biases
(temporal and sectoral) are quite distinct conceptually and may well both be present at the same
time.
7
Our results are to some extent comparable to those in Parsley and Wei (1996), who examine the
rate of convergence of relative goods prices across U.S. cities and …nd faster mean-reversion than
in the aggregate. Their estimates are derived at the good level so they probably su¤er less of the
aggregation bias we document.
8
The positive sign of the bias actually requires relative sectoral prices to be positively autocorrelated, which we unambiguously observe.

3

First, measurement error could be larger in sectoral data, as it tends to be aggregated
away in price indices. This would induce an attenuation bias in the sectoral autoregressive parameters and hence could account for our …ndings. However, we run formal
tests for the presence of error-in-variables, and, for the few cases where it cannot be
rejected, use appropriate instrumenting for the variables measured with error. The
e¤ect on our estimates of the persistence of relative prices is negligible. Second, a
recent strand of literature contends that real exchange rates half-lives may be larger
than our -and other- estimates suggest. When the underlying data generating process is highly persistent, as is the case for real exchange rates, standard least squares
estimates of the persistence tend to be biased downwards, unless the sample is long.
This bias, in turn may translate into abnormally low half-life estimates. Based on this
insight, Murray and Papell (2002a) implement the correction suggested in Andrews
and Chen (1994) to real exchange rates. Their corrected con…dence intervals for the
real exchange rate half-life are so wide as to bring the whole ‘consensus view’ into
question.9 There are at least two reasons why our low estimates cannot be accounted
for by this negative bias. First, our sample is relatively long. Second, the next section provides standard unit-root tests suggestive that our price data is stationary.
Furthermore, the aggregation bias we document is of primary concern irrespective of
the Andrews-Chen attenuation bias. To further ascertain the relative magnitude of
the two types of biases, we provide Monte-Carlo evidence showing that the positive
aggregation bias largely dominates the negative one associated with high persistence.
Finally, our results relate interestingly to the existing evidence on the relationship
between goods tradeability and relative price persistence. Engel (1999) …nds that the
variability of the real exchange rate at all horizons is explained mostly by movements
in the relative prices of traded goods. This …nding is surprising since deviations from
the law-of-one-price are intuitively expected to be less persistent for traded goods,
more prone to arbitrage than non-traded ones. Our approach provides a natural explanation for this apparent anomaly. We …nd that the degree of sectoral heterogeneity
is higher among traded goods than among non-traded ones. The aggregation bias is
therefore more important for the traded good index. This accounts for the higher
degree of persistence observed in the relative price of traded goods, and hence for
its dominant role in explaining the variability of the real exchange rate, even at long
horizons.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The next section describes in
detail the econometric issue central to our results: the aggregation bias that plagues
dynamic panel and time series estimates, when there is sectoral heterogeneity. Section
3 reviews the data and performs basic tests. In sections 4 and 5, we present various
existing procedures to estimate half-lives, and reproduce standard results with our
data. We then test and allow for sectoral heterogeneity using a Random Coe¢cient
Model. Results change dramatically. Section 6 examines alternative explanations
9

The conclusion that there is not enough information in the aggregate data to pin down reliably
the value of the half-life is also consistent with results in Kilian and Zha (2002) obtained in a Bayesian
framework. More recently, Murray and Papell (2002b) have argued that Rogo¤ ’s consensus view
may be rehabilitated on the basis of real exchange rates panel evidence.

4

to our …ndings. In section 7 we conduct a detailed analysis of the links between
tradability and heterogeneity and relate our results to the literature on real exchange
rate variability across traded and non traded sectors. Section 8 concludes.

2

Aggregation Bias in Theory

In this section, we present a simple example to illustrate the main econometric issue
underlying the results of the paper. For expositional simplicity, we have relegated
the proofs to the appendix. Here, as in the appendix, we follow closely the work
of Pesaran and Smith (1995) on the inconsistency of the pooled estimators in the
context of heterogeneous dynamic panels. We discuss …rst the aggregation bias in the
context of a pooled panel estimator for sectoral relative prices and subsequently turn
to the case of the time series estimator for aggregate real exchange rates.
Assume that relative prices are generated by the following AR(1) processes:
qit = ®i + ¸iqit¡1 + " it
where i 2 [1; ::; N] indexes sectors and t 2 [1; ::; T ] indexes time. The slope coe¢cients
¸i are in the stable range (¡1; 1) and vary across sectors according to
¸i = ¸ + ´i
where f´i g, the sectoral speci…c component, is of mean zero and has a …nite variance.
The f"it g are i.i.d. distributed with constant variance ¾2. 10
This model will help answering two related questions: what happens when the
autoregressive processes in relative prices are estimated without allowing for parameter heterogeneity, and what happens through aggregation of relative sectoral prices
into the real exchange rate.

2.1

Inconsistency of the Pooled Estimator

The …rst case we examine relates to the panel estimator of the speed of adjustment
where one does not allow for heterogeneity in the autoregressive parameter. The
pooled regression, where a common slope is imposed for all sectors is given by
qit = ®i + ¸qit¡1 + À it
10

These assumptions are made for simplicity. As will become clearer, under extreme assumptions
on the disaggregated residual variances, it is possible for our aggregation bias to become negative.
In the estimation however, we let innovation variances vary across sectors. In results available upon
request, we also allow for non-zero innovation covariances. Since we repeatedly show the bias to be
positive, we conclude these simplifying assumptions are warranted by the data, and are not driving
our results.

5

with
À it = "it + ´ iqit¡1
When sector speci…c heterogeneity ´i is not accounted for, the error term À it includes
lagged relative prices, and is correlated with the regressor as a result. The pooled
estimator is therefore inconsistent. Standard instrumentation will not alleviate the
bias, since by de…nition any instruments must be highly correlated with qit¡1, but
then will unavoidably also be correlated with the error term.
In the presence of …xed e¤ects, i.e. group speci…c intercepts, it is standard to …rst
di¤erence the data. Here however, the set of regressors includes a lagged dependent
variable, which requires estimating ¸ with appropriate instrumenting of the lagged
dependent variable by its own lagged values, because of the induced correlation between qit¡1 and À it¡1 in …rst di¤erences.11 In the presence of parameter heterogeneity
however, this will still be inconsistent since any instrument 4qit¡k or qit¡k with k > 1
will be correlated with 4À it . In other words, one cannot …nd any instrument that is
both highly correlated with the regressors and orthogonal to the error terms.12
We show in Appendix A that the bias of the pooled estimator can be expressed
as follows:
³
´
´i
E 1¡¸
2
b̧ ¡ ¸ = ³ i ´
1
E 1¡¸
2
i

where b̧ denotes the probability limit of the …xed-e¤ects estimator of ¸. The bias is
zero in the absence of heterogeneity, and we prove in Appendix A that it is unambiguously positive for 0 < ¸i < 1, a very weak restriction in our application. It is
straightforward to show that the magnitude of the bias is increasing with the degree
of sectoral heterogeneity. Based on the pooled regression, one would therefore overestimate the half-life of the real exchange rate, and all the more so when the speeds
of mean reversion across goods are highly heterogeneous.

2.2

Inconsistency of the Aggregate Estimator

A standard technique to deal with heterogeneity is to aggregate the data, ie. in
our application, to examine real exchange rates rather than goods-level or sectorlevel relative prices. However, as shown by Pesaran and Smith (1995), the aggregate
estimates will also be biased because of sectoral heterogeneity. Assume that each
11

See Anderson and Hsiao (1982) for an IV procedure, and Arellano and Bond (1991) for a GMM
estimator.
12
These instrumental variables procedures will also result in substantial (possibly in…nite) autocorrelation in the error terms, since the residuals then embed heterogeneity itself, quite possibly
close to being time-invariant.

6

sector receives equal weight in the aggregate price index in all countries.13 The
aggregate real exchange rate is then given by:
N
1 X
qt =
qi;t
N i=1

If we estimate a simple AR(1), qt = ¸qt¡1 + et ; the error term is given by
N
1 X
e t = " i;t +
´ qi;t¡1
N i=1 i

P
where "i;t ´ N1 N
i=1 "it . Just as previously, the error term e t comprises the lagged dependent variable through unaccounted heterogeneity, resulting in inconsistency. The
positive bias we highlighted for the pooled estimator obtains identically for the aggregate estimator, with the same result on the real exchange rate persistence estimates.14
A simple case might be useful in gaining intuition for the result that the bias is
positive. Consider a simple case where the econometrician is examining aggregate
information on the average relative prices between two economies, each with two
sectors, 1 and 2, and she seeks to estimates the auto-regressive properties of the real
exchange rate xt . To rule out any composition e¤ects and for simplicity, assume the
expenditures are shared equally between the two sectors in the two countries, so that
2t
xt = x1t +x
. Assume further that, unbeknownst to the econometrician,
2
x1t = µ 1 x1t¡1 + e1t
x2t = µ 2 x2t¡1 + e2t
with E (e1t e2t ) = 0, E(eit eis ) = 0 for s 6= t, E(eit eit ) = ¾ 2 and E(ei) = 0.15 Assume
further some sectoral heterogeneity, for instance, without loss of generality, that µ 1 >
µ 2. Then we have
x1t¡1
x2t¡1
xt = µ 1
+ µ2
+ et
µ 2
¶ 2
µ ¡ µ2
µ ¡ µ2
=
µ+ 1
xt¡1 ¡ 1
x2t¡1 + et
2
2
1 3 This

assumption is irrelevant for the point that we wish to make. Applying any weighting
scheme will produce the same qualitative result. This is an important point because the bias that
we highlight will arise as a result of any aggregation of the data and is not due to di¤erences in
expenditure weights studied by Crucini et al. (2001), among others.
14
The bias will be potentially present in any aggregated data, and indeed quite possibly even at
the two-digit level. We note however that the extent of the bias increases with heterogeneity, which
might be more prevalent between sectors than, say, between …rms in the same activity. Careful
examination of this question requires data that to our knowledge do not exist.
15
These assumptions are inessential for the results. It is easy to see that the proof still holds
for non-zero cross-sectoral covariances and innovations variances that vary across sectors. In what
follows, we allow for sector-speci…c innovation variances. In results available upon request, we allow
for non-zero cross-sectoral covariances. The bias always remains positive and large.

7

¡
¢
2
2t
where µ = µ 1+µ
is the true persistence of the real exchange rate, and et = e1t +e
.
2
2
The simple OLS estimate of the autoregressive coe¢cient of the real exchange rate will
be given by b
µ = E (xt xt¡1) =¾2x, where ¾ 2x = E(xt xt ). However, since the numerator
is given by
µ
¶
µ 1 ¡ µ2
µ ¡ µ2 2
E (xt xt¡1) = µ +
¾2x ¡ 1
¾x 2
2
4
with ¾2x2 = E(x2t x2t ), the OLS estimate of the real exchange rate persistence will be
bµ = µ + µ 1 ¡ µ2
2

µ

¾2
1 ¡ x22
2¾ x

¶

Assuming that 0 < µi < 1 the assumption on sectoral heterogeneity implies ¾ 2x1 > ¾ 2x2 ,
which in turn results in 2¾2x > ¾2x2 , and bµ > µ. QED. It should be clear that the
argument generalizes to a continuum of sectors, no matter the expenditure weights
¾2
used in aggregating. To see this, de…ne ¢ = 1¡ 2¾x22 > 0. The OLS aggregate estimate
x
can be rewritten
1+¢
1¡¢
b
µ = µ1
+ µ2
2
2

OLS gives a larger weight to the more persistent component of the real exchange rate,
resulting in apparently large aggregate persistence. Also, the bias increases with the
discrepancy between µ 1 and µ 2, i.e. with the extent of sectoral heterogeneity in this
simple two-sector case. Appendix A generalizes both these results for a continuum of
sectors.

3

Data

Given the hypothesis of parameter heterogeneity at the disaggregate level, we study
relative prices of goods at the sectoral level. We use price data obtained from Eurostat,
the statistical agency of the European Union. We focus on the (non-harmonized)
price indices for consumption goods and services.16 The data are available at the
monthly frequency and cover at most the period 1960:1 to 2000:12. However, many
observations are missing before 1975 and after 1996, so we choose to focus on a
[1975,1996] sample. This leaves us with a maximum of 264 time series observations.
Eurostat reports two-digit sectoral price indices for nineteen goods categories and
thirteen countries. The good categories are a mixture of low and high unit costs goods
(e.g. bread and cereals versus vehicles), highly tradeable goods (e.g. clothing) and
goods commonly construed as non-tradeable in nature (public transport or hotels),
16

Eurostat also produces harmonized price indices but these are available only for short sample
periods seriously limiting any time-series approaches.

8

and goods for which there is wide variation in the degree of product di¤erentiation
(fuel versus sound and photographic equipment). We provide a detailed description
of our data in Appendix B. Our sample thus constitutes an interesting cross-section
with some variation along the dimensions commonly advanced to explain variations
in relative prices. The cross-sectional variation is key to our analysis since it allows
us to focus on the heterogeneity in the dynamics of relative prices.
Our real exchange rates are CPI-based and de…ned against the US dollar. Since the
purpose of our study is to investigate the e¤ects of aggregation, our sample of countries
and the time coverage are identical for the two levels of aggregation. Furthermore, our
measure of real exchange rates is based on the aggregation of the same exact sample
of goods for which we have disaggregated information. Thus we avoid composition
e¤ects.17
We tested for unit roots both for aggregate real exchange rates and for sectoral
real exchange rates. We used two panel data tests: Levin and Lin (1993) and Im,
Pesaran and Shin (1997). The Levin and Lin procedure (henceforth LL) tests the
hypothesis that all the cross-sectional units are stationary against the hypothesis
that they are all non-stationary. The Im, Pesaran and Shin test (henceforth IPS)
is more general in that it allows for some, but not all, of the series to be stationary
under the alternative hypothesis. 18 We report in Table 1 the results for these two
tests, which are among the most general unit root tests for panel data. The …rst
column reports the outcome of several unit root tests for the panel of aggregate real
exchange rates. The third column concerns the panel of sectoral real exchange rates.
In each case we report the IPS test and two variations of the LL test, allowing or not
for individual e¤ects. Each estimation is run with or without a trend term. Table
1 shows that the hypothesis of unit root in the real exchange rate can be rejected
in all cases at standard levels of con…dence. Like most of the literature, we …nd
unequivocal evidence in favor of stationarity both for aggregate real exchange rates
and for sectoral real exchange rates. 19 Having checked for stationarity, we will in the
remainder of the paper concentrate on the estimation of half-lives at the sectoral and
aggregate levels.20
17

We also used real exchange rate measures based on the International Financial Statistics
database released by the IMF. The results, based on standard CPI baskets, were almost identical.
1 8 Taylor and Sarno (1998) introduce a panel estimation that allows for heterogeneity in the regressors coe¢cients, as well as taking advantage in the possible correlation of the residuals. They
use Seemingly Unrelated Regressions techniques that require the time dimension T to exceed the
cross-section N in the panel. We cannot use this procedure given the large cross-sectional dimension
of our sectoral data.
19
Frankel and Rose (1996) rejects the unit root hypothesis in a panel of 150 countries over 45
years. So does Oh (1996) in a similar study. Wu (1996), studies monthly and quarterly data from
the IFS database and also rejects non-stationarity in a panel setting. Lothian (1997) focuses upon
the post Bretton-Woods period and rejects non-stationarity of the real exchange rate in a panel that
includes 23 OECD countries.
20
Stationarity is not crucial for the purpose of this paper. However, the estimations we have
described all implicitly assume stationary relative prices, which turns out to be supported by our
data.

9

The econometric approach in this paper is innovative for three reasons: …rstly,
we use monthly data, something still relatively infrequent in the literature, which
a¤ords us a particularly rich dynamic speci…cation. Secondly, we use two strictly
comparable samples which di¤er only by the level of aggregation of the data. Thirdly
and most importantly, we show that accounting for sectoral heterogeneity is very
important in pooled panel estimations as well as in time series estimation of the
aggregate real exchange rate. Thus, we relate the evidence on disaggregated relative
prices, concerned with the Law of One Price, to the aggregate literature, concerned
with Purchasing Power Parity. We make the simple point that an overlooked reason
for the reportedly slow mean reversion of aggregate real exchange rates is the failure
to account for cross-sectoral heterogeneity.

4

Econometric Methods

We …rst present estimation procedures widely used in the real exchange rate literature,
namely the …xed e¤ects, Anderson-Hsiao and Arellano-Bond estimators. We use
them to reproduce existing results with our data. From Section 2, we know none of
these estimators are appropriate when there is sectoral heterogeneity in the dynamic
parameters. We then present a random coe¢cient model (RCM) estimator that
allows for cross-sectoral heterogeneity. We …nd that the estimates of the speed of
real exchange rate reversion increase substantially, so much so that the PPP puzzle
e¤ectively disappears. All empirical results are presented in Section 5.

4.1

Fixed E¤ect Estimator

We use the following speci…cation to investigate the speed of mean reversion in relative
prices:
qi;j;t = ®i;j +

P
X

¸p qi;j;t¡p + " i;j;t

(1)

p=1

³
´
: Pi;j;t
where i (j) indexes sectors (countries), qi;j;t = ln ejPt i;US;t
, and e jt denotes the
nominal exchange rate between country j and the US at time t. We allow for the
possibility that the intercept be speci…c to each individual observation, as would for
instance be the case if market integration varied by country and/or by sector. But
note that the slope coe¢cient ¸p is imposed to be the same across the units of the
panel. From estimates of ¸p in equation (1), it is possible to derive the half-life of
mean reversion. For P = 1 these half-lives can be derived analytically but, in general,
we rely on the impulse response functions to compute the half-lives. 21
21

In the case of P = 1, the half-life is given by -ln 2= ln ® 1 .

10

The possible presence of …xed e¤ects (through ®i;j ) in equation (1) requires that
the speci…cation be estimated in …rst di¤erences. As is now well-known, the presence of a lagged dependent variable makes it necessary to use instrumental variables
when estimating equation (1) in …rst-di¤erences. The reason is the possibility that
qi;j;t¡p ¡ qi;j;t¡p¡1 is correlated with "i;j;t ¡ "i;j;t¡1, resulting in biased estimates of the
autoregressive coe¢cients. Anderson and Hsiao (1982) proposed to instrument the
di¤erenced lagged dependent variable with its lagged level to alleviate the bias. This
instrument is however often too weak, which is why Arellano and Bond (1991) introduced a GMM procedure using all available lags as instruments of the di¤erenced
lagged dependent variable.22 In Section 5, we report results corresponding to the
…xed e¤ects, Anderson-Hsiao and Arellano-Bond estimators.

4.2

Random Coe¢cients Model

Our next step is to explore the cross-sectoral heterogeneity of our panel, i.e. to allow
for the possibility that
qi;j;t = ®i;j +

P
X

¸i;j;p qi;j;t¡p + "i;j;t

(2)

p=1

with ¸i;j;p = ¸p + ´ 1i;j and ®i;j = ® + ´ 2i;j .23 In words, parameter heterogeneity enters
equation (2) through the inclusion of an individual-speci…c random component in the
intercept and regressors’ coe¢cients, as in the simple example of Section 2. Failure to
take proper care of coe¢cient heterogeneity in equation (2) results in estimates of the
autoregressive coe¢cients that are biased upwards. As argued by Pesaran and Smith
(1995), and developed in Section 2, if the coe¢cients ¸i;j;p are heterogenous, none of
the procedures described above will generate consistent estimates, particularly not
aggregate estimates of mean reversion, even under the appropriate instrumentation
of lagged dependent variables. Instead, Pesaran and Smith show that consistent
parameter estimates can be obtained via Generalized Least Squares estimation of
(2).
We can rewrite equation (2) as
qi;j;t = ® +

P
X

¸p qi;j;t¡p + »i;j;t

p=1

22

Goldberg and Verboven (2001) present results for an estimation similar to ours, but they focus
on the relative prices of automobiles only. Their equation (2) is di¤erent from our equation (1) in
that they include qi;j; t¡1 , a lagged level of the relative price, in the set of independent variables of
the di¤erenced version of (1). Our maintained assumption of stationarity enables us to specify (1)
in levels, eliminate …xed e¤ects through …rst di¤erencing, and correct for the bias implied by the
presence of lagged dependent variables.
23
This follows Hildreth and Houck (1968) and Swamy (1970,1971).

11

P
0
with »i;j;t = "i;j;t + ´1i;j Pp=1 qi;j;t¡p + ´2i;j ´ "i;j;t + Xi;j;t
´i;j . Consistent GLS estimates
of the coe¢cients of interest in equation (2) are given by an e¢cient weighted average
of the least squares sector-speci…c point estimates. To see this, rewrite the model as
qs = Zs Bs + vs
£
¤0
£
¤0
0
0
0
where qs = q0s;1 ; qs;2
; :::; qs;T
, Zs = 10; qs0 ; qs¡1
; q0s¡2::: . In the random coe¢cients
model, we assume
Bs = B + ´ s
E (´s ) = 0, E (´s ´0s ) = ¡
The random coe¢cient estimator of B is given by
X
s
b=
B
Ws BOLS
s

Ws =
Vs =

Ã
X

(¡ + Vs )¡1

s
2
¾s (Zs0 Zs )¡1

!¡1

(¡ + Vs )¡1

where BsOLS denotes the unit speci…c OLS estimate of the parameters. Furthermore,
s
bs can be derived from weighted average of B
b and B
bOLS
the estimate of B
:
bs = A s B
b + (I ¡ As ) BsOLS
B

where I is the identity matrix and As = [V s¡1 + ¡¡1] ¡¡1.24
In the presence of heterogeneity in the dynamics of the relative prices, estimators
that aggregate the data are biased and inconsistent. 25 This applies to pooled or
…xed e¤ects estimators on sectoral panel data, as well as to standard times series
methods used on aggregate real exchange rates. The only consistent estimate of
aggregate persistence is obtained from a weighted average of the sectoral persistence
parameters. This is exactly what the RCM estimator does and it does so e¢ciently
since the variance-covariance matrix is allowing for parameter heterogeneity. Any
other estimator averaging the persistence parameters would merely be consistent: the
simplest is the Mean Group Estimator, which performs an arithmetic averaging of
each sectoral persistence parameter to derive aggregate half-lives. It can be shown to
be unbiased, and asymptotically equivalent to the RCM estimator. 26
24

For details, see Lee and Gri¢ths (1979).
And the bias is equivalent to systematically assigning a larger weight to those components of
the aggregate series that are most persistent. The same reasoning applies to pooled data.
26
Our estimates for half-lives are actually even smaller when using a Mean Group Estimator, at
9 months only. These results are available upon request.
25

12

5

Aggregation Bias in Practice: PPP Strikes Back

In this section we investigate empirically the importance of the aggregation bias
by reporting the half lives obtained when we use standard methods (…xed e¤ects,
Anderson-Hsiao, Arellano-Bond) and when we use the RCM estimator controlling for
sectoral heterogeneity.

5.1

Results for Aggregate Real Exchange Rates

We estimate equation (1) using real exchange rates. Countries are indexed by j. This
exercise corresponds to standard estimates of real exchange rate persistence based on
panels of real exchange rates. The regressions take the form
qj;t = ®j +

P
X

¸p qj;t¡p + " j;t

(3)

p=1

We …rst use standard OLS estimates. We then allow for, and test for …xed e¤ects.
Finally, we present results for the Anderson-Hsiao and Arellano-Bond estimators.
The results are reported in Table 2. The …rst row is based on a standard pooled
OLS estimator. This leads to an estimate of the half-life in excess of 450 years,
with a con…dence interval ranging between almost four years and an in…nite upper
bound. As a large literature has forcefully argued, the homogeneity of all intercepts
in equation (3) is questionable. The next row presents therefore results for an OLS
estimator allowing for …xed e¤ects. The estimated half-lives drop tremendously. We
now …nd estimates that are in line with the consensus view: using the point estimate
in Table 2, the real exchange rate half-life is three years and three months, well into
Rogo¤’s (1996) ‘consensus range’. The 95 percent con…dence interval is relatively
wide, however, spanning a period from just above one year to just below …ve years.
It is clear that failure to take …xed e¤ects into account can seriously bias estimated
half-lives, which is also con…rmed by a standard Hausman test for the presence of
…xed e¤ects.27
The presence of …xed e¤ects requires that we …rst-di¤erence a model with lagged
dependent variables. To address the resulting endogeneity bias, we apply both the
Anderson-Hsiao and Arellano-Bond estimators. We select P in equation (3) following
the recommendation in Ng and Perron (1995). This amounts to applications of twosided 10 percent-level t-type tests for the signi…cance of the coe¢cient on the longest
lag, allowing for a maximum order of P = 36.28 We examine the impulse response
functions to evaluate the half-lives, and derive 95 percent con…dence intervals using
2 7 The

test also rejects the presence of random e¤ects.
For the Arellano-Bond estimator we use a shorter maximum lag length because long lag lengths
leads to delicate issues in …nding appropriate instruments.
28

13

a bootstrap procedure. The last two rows of Table 2 present the estimated half-lives
resulting from the Anderson-Hsiao and the Arellano-Bond estimators, respectively.
The results di¤er substantially. The Anderson-Hsiao estimate points to a half-life of
nine years, well above existing evidence, quite possibly because of weak instruments.
The Arellano-Bond estimate, however, is somewhat lower than simple OLS with …xed
e¤ects, at two years and three months. The corresponding 95 percent con…dence
interval ranges from fourteen months to almost four years, thus largely within the
consensus view. Finally, Table 2 reports the probability value of a test for parameter
homogeneity. We clearly fail to reject the hypothesis that autoregressive coe¢cients
are equal across countries, which suggests the meaningful heterogeneity in our data
occurs across sectors.
Interestingly, the half-life estimate implied by the Arellano-Bond estimator is very
similar to the …ndings in Lothian (1997), based on the post Bretton-Woods ‡oating
period. Lothian (1997) …nds a half-life of two years, based on an OLS …xed e¤ects
regression using annual data. Thus, our results are largely in line with previous
evidence. Our preferred estimate of real exchange rate persistence lays in the lower
end of the consensus view, with a half-life between two and three years.

5.2

Results for Sectoral Real Exchange Rates

We now use data disaggregated by sectors to check for the implications of sectoral
heterogeneity. We work with exactly the same panel of sectoral prices that compose
the aggregate CPI used in the above analysis, and estimate equation (2) using the
Random Coe¢cients Model. The Random Coe¢cient Model described in Section
4 generates both estimates that are speci…c to each heterogenous cross-section and
consistent “aggregate” estimates, as shown by Hildreth and Houck (1968).
We present our RCM half-lives in the …rst row of Table 3. The half-life estimates
drop dramatically, to somewhere between four months and two years, with a point
estimate of only fourteen months. Furthermore, coe¢cient homogeneity is resoundingly rejected in the lower panel of Table 3, con…rming that any estimation method
failing to control for parameter heterogeneity is inconsistent. It is important to recall
that this …nding also implies that the estimates of the half-lives based on the aggregate prices presented above will be inconsistent. In other words, given that we reject
parameter homogeneity at the disaggregate level, the study of real exchange rates
will not give an unbiased answer to the question of how persistent price di¤erences

14

are.29;30
For comparison purposes we report in the second row of Table 3 the estimates implied by a pooled OLS estimator. The half-life jumps to an absurdly high 172 years.
This demonstrates the importance of taking parameter heterogeneity into account
and quanti…es the inconsistency of the estimates that may arise from an assumption of coe¢cients homogeneity in a pooled sectoral data. Interestingly, allowing for
…xed e¤ects reduces this problem considerably, leading to a half-life estimate of two
years and three months. This large reduction occurs because country-sector speci…c
intercepts absorb part of the heterogeneity in our dataset. Nevertheless as the Hausman test in the lower panel of Table 3 indicates, it is not only intercepts that are
heterogenous in our data, but coe¢cients are as well.31
Figures 1 and 2 present Monte Carlo experiments describing the size of the bias for
the …rst autoregressive parameter across di¤erent speci…cations (RCM, OLS, Fixed effects and Anderson-Hsiao). Figures 1 implements the simulations using the estimates
obtained from our RCM model as the data generating process, whereas Figures 2a
and 2b implement a wide range of alternative data generating processes. Figure 1
focuses on the bias across estimation methods, while Figure 2 illustrates the magnitude of the aggregation bias along two dimensions: underlying persistence of the data
generating process, and underlying heterogeneity. For all estimation methods, except
the RCM, the bias is positive and quite large, for both data generating processes.
This large bias is induced because the aggregation bias is particularly prevalent in
dynamic estimations with lagged dependent variables. In particular, in the presence
of parameter heterogeneity, the Anderson-Hsiao or Arellano-Bond instrumenting procedures will not correct for the bias they are designed to alleviate. As a result, the
dynamic properties of the dependent variables are estimated incorrectly. Figure 2
29

The RCM estimates rely on the premise that sectoral relative prices are uncorrelated. This
assumption is potentially questionable. Unfortunately, the problem caused by rank de…ciency of
the variance-covariance matrix in large panels makes SURE-GLS di¢cult to implement with our
pooled and heterogeneous estimators. We investigate the impact of residual correlation in two ways.
First, we extend the Monte-Carlo experiments to allow for non-zero o¤-diagonal elements in the
correlation matrix of the residuals. Second, we apply the Correlated Common E¤ect estimator
(CCE) described in Pesaran (2002) to our RCM and pooled models. This method is not strictly
appropriate for dynamic models, but it does provide some indication on the e¤ect of unobserved
common factors in the residuals. In both cases, the bias continues to be positive and very large.
In particular, if the coe¢cients are restricted to be the same across cross-sections, the estimated
half-life from a pooled CCE is in excess of 200 months. In contrast, a CCE with heterogeneous
coe¢cients produces a half-life of seven months. These results are available upon request.
30
As a check, we also run our regressions country by country. The results were qualitatively similar
but the low number of cross-sections (17) did not allow us to estimate half-lives with satisfactory
precision.
31
The Table also presents results for the Anderson-Hsiao estimator on the disaggregated data.
The estimates are extremely high, at around 24 years. This probably happens as the instruments
are not only weak, but also strongly correlated with the residuals at all leads and lags, as the in…nite
con…dence interval suggests. The dimension of the matrix of instruments for the fully e¢cient
Arellano-Bond estimator is VERY large in our disaggregated dataset, and we could not implement
the estimation, even if only using a subset of instruments.

15

con…rms this bias is very large no matter the persistence properties of the underlying
process.
Our point estimate of a fourteen months half-life is well below other results in
the literature. Furthermore, it is important to notice that the con…dence interval of
our estimate does not include the ‘consensus view’ of three to …ve years. Our estimates break the consensus, but, rather surprisingly, at the lower end of its range.
Unlike previous estimates, a half-life of fourteen months may not be incompatible
with economic theory. For instance, Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002) investigate
whether a calibrated international business cycle model with nominal rigidities can
reproduce the persistence and volatility of the real exchange rate. In a model where
price stickiness is assumed to be one-year long, they …nd that the …rst-order autocorrelation of the HP-…ltered real exchange rate is 0.62 (with a standard deviation of
0.08). Even under alternative preferences speci…cations, further shocks, and alternative monetary policy rules, this estimate never exceeds 0.77. Chari et al. label the
inability of standard models to reproduce the observed persistence in real exchange
rates the persistence anomaly. Our estimates resolve this anomaly. We simulated
our estimated process and HP-…ltered the resulting series (since these authors HP…lter their model moments). We found an autoregressive coe¢cient of 0.636 (with
a standard deviation of 0.082). 32 Therefore, while sectoral heterogeneity is missing
from their theoretical exercise, the model proposed in Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
(2002) reproduces exactly the dynamics of the real exchange rate when it is properly
estimated. There is therefore a sense in which the PPP puzzle is no more.
Our explanation does not preclude the existence of other, di¤erent, aggregation
biases. For instance, the half-life is de…ned as the number of periods necessary for
half the initial e¤ect of a given shock to disappear. This may be misleading in the
presence of heterogeneity in the initial e¤ects of the shock. In particular, if some
sectoral relative prices rise while others decrease upon impact, but rise subsequently,
the initial change in the aggregate relative price will tend to be small. Aggregate
half-life is then bound to be large given the small size of the initial e¤ect, irrespective
of the persistence properties in the goods-speci…c relative prices. Secondly, temporal
aggregation biases may also be at play, as described in Taylor (2001). Sampling
data at low frequencies makes it impossible to identify a high-frequency adjustment
process. We believe that this particular problem is less important for our exercise
given our use of monthly data.33
32

Our RCM estimates correspond to monthly data, so we transformed the simulated data into
quarterly data by point-in-time sampling - just like the actual data. These data were then HP-…ltered
with a smoothing parameter of 1600 as in Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan (2002). We repeated this
1000 times for samples with 160 quarterly observations.
33
Several recent papers have also studied the impact of non linearities on the estimation of halflives. For instance, Michael, Nobay and Peel (1997), Taylor and Peel (2000), Taylor, Peel and Sarno
(2001), Kilian and Taylor (2003) and Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2002).

16

6

Robustness Checks

The results we obtained controlling for cross-sectoral heterogeneity are striking: our
estimated half-lives are dramatically smaller than any previous evidence. In this
section we investigate the robustness of our …ndings. We …rst assess the importance
of measurement error in sectoral data. We then turn to another (downward) bias,
recently emphasized in the empirical exchange rate literature.

6.1

Errors in Variables

There is a presumption that measurement error is more prevalent in sectoral data
than in the aggregate. Indeed, if errors are uncorrelated across sectors, they tend
to average away in the aggregate, and the resulting attenuating bias that may arise
from examining dis-aggregated data might explain the evidence documented above.34
We address the issue in a straightforward manner. In the absence of measurement
error, the OLS estimator ½OLS and an instrumental variable estimator ½T SLS are
both consistent, and the OLS estimator is e¢cient. However, in the presence of
measurement error, the OLS estimator is inconsistent. Therefore, plim (½OLS ¡½T SLS )
should be non zero in the presence of measurement errors. We perform a Hausman
test along those lines, but take into account parameter heterogeneity. In particular,
we carry out these tests at the sectoral level for each of the cross-sectional units.
Let qit¤ denote the observed value of the sectoral real exchange rate and qit its true
value. uit denotes measurement error. The model is given by
qit¤

=

P
X

¤
¸ i;p qit¡p
+ vit

p=1

P
where qit¤ = qit +uit and º it = ¡uit + Pp=1 ¸i;puit¡p+"it . The lag structure of the model
implies that fqit ; ::; qit¡P g are correlated with the error term º it: The appropriate
instruments for the TSLS estimate are therefore fqit¡P ¡1; :::; qit¡2P g. (Unreported)
Hausman tests indicate the null hypothesis that OLS is consistent is rejected only 14
times out of 222 sectors.35 This implies that the OLS estimator is inappropriate for
those 14 country-sectors only. We therefore re-estimated the RCM model replacing
the OLS with a GMM estimator for those 14 cross sections. The results we obtain
are reported in Table 4, and are virtually identical to those described in the previous
section. We conclude from this exercise that while errors-in-variables is a theoretically
possible explanation for our results, we …nd no evidence of this problem inducing our
results, and very little evidence of the presence of measurement errors36 .
34

Though we do not observe systematically lower half-lives at the sectoral level, thus casting doubt
on this alternative explanation right at the outset.
35
The P values are available from the authors upon request.
36
Charles Engel also analyzed this dataset. He suggested a number of corrections to the data,

17

6.2

Downward Bias in OLS for Highly Persistent Processes

For highly persistent autoregressive processes, it is well known that least squares
estimators may be biased downward so that the estimates of the persistence of the
process are pushed towards zero. Based on work by Andrews and Chen (1994),
Murray and Papell (2002a) propose an approximately bias corrected estimator of the
impulse response functions of real exchange rates. The obtained impulse response
functions lead Murray and Papell (2002a) to conclude that the con…dence intervals
for the half-lives are so wide that they are basically uninformative.37 Murray and
Papell (2002b) apply similar methods to a panel of real exchange rates, and …nd
that their best estimates of half-lives, after correcting for the bias, lie exactly in the
range of 3 to 5 years, i.e. no lower than Rogo¤’s ‘consensus view’ range. 38 Their
conclusion is that ‘panels do not help solve the purchasing power parity puzzle’.
Finally Murray and Papell (2002c) apply again the Andrews-Chen correction to the
dollar-sterling exchange rate, and argue previous estimates of a half-life around 6
years were misguided. Once corrected, their estimates range from 4.5 to 11 years
depending on the number of lags included, with con…dence intervals ranging from 3-5
years to in…nity. They conclude that the purchasing power parity puzzle is worse
than one thinks.
Thus, the potentially negative bias in the estimates of the half-lives due to high
persistence of the underlying data might be important in the present context, as it
could contribute to explaining our surprisingly low estimates. There are however at
least three reasons suggesting the bias is largely irrelevant in our data. First, our
panel is unusually large, both in the time and cross-sectional dimensions.39 Furthermore, based on Monte-Carlo simulations, Rossi (2001) shows the bias starts becoming
substantial for half-lives larger than 2 percent of the time dimension of the data. Using our preferred estimate of 14 months, this ratio is equal to 5.3 percent in our data,
but is much lower than this if we take into account the panel dimension.40 Second,
for the bias to be quantitatively important the autoregressive processes must be very
persistent. Once again, the average persistence at the sectoral level - for the reasons that we have discussed - is much lower than at the aggregate level. 41 Third
detailed at www.ssc.wisc.edu/~cengel/data/Eurostat/EuropeData.htm)).. We implemented all our
estimates using the data thus corrected, without any e¤ect on the conclusions. These results are
available upon request.
37
This was con…rmed by Rossi (2001), who provides an asymptotic approximation of the half-life
in a local-to-unity setting. Qualitatively similar results have also been obtained by Kilian and Zha
(2002) using a di¤erent methodology. See also Elliott and Stock (2001).
38
This is also the conclusion in Cashin and McDermott (2002). They use the same type of near
unit root correction method, but also allow for a moving average error structure. They show that
real exchange rates half-lives remain …rmly -and signi…cantly- within the Rogo¤ consensus range,
even after correcting for the bias.
39
We have up to 264 perio ds, and 222 country-sector cross-sectional observations. See Appendix
B for details.
40
The cross-sectoral dimension is almost certainly relevant in assessing the importance of the bias
in our data.
41
Section 2 showed how the presence of unit-roots in our sectoral data is resoundingly rejected

18

and perhaps most importantly, Figures 1 and 2 can be used to ascertain the relative
importance of the two biases. If the bias associated with high persistence of the data
was important in our data, we should expect our estimated autoregressive coe¢cients
to fall substantially as ½ increases. Although it does happen marginally, it is easy to
see on Figure 2 that the heterogeneity induced bias is overwhelmingly more important
quantitatively, as estimated autoregressive coe¢cients increase much faster with !, a
measure of sectoral heterogeneity, than they fall with ½, the true persistence.42

7

Heterogeneity, Tradability and Persistence

We now ask whether our results linking heterogeneity and persistence are related to
the literature seeking to explain deviations from PPP through di¤erent degrees of
failure of the Law of One Price (LOP) across goods. This literature has characterized
four main candidates for accounting for deviations from the LOP: (i) tradeability, as
imported goods almost always involve some non-zero trading costs, and thus are not
perfectly substitutable with domestic ones, (ii) the presence of (non-tradeable) local
costs embedded in the …nal goods prices, (iii) nominal rigidities and (iv) market power
in the production chain. Engel (1993, 1999) established that the observed volatility of
the real exchange rate can not be ascribed to the in‡uence of a non-traded sector, as an
exchange rate based on traded goods only reproduces almost identically the volatility
of the standard one. Similarly Rogers and Jenkins (1995) report that the persistence
of food prices (interpreted as traded goods) and all other good prices is roughly
the same. This has sparked research on alternative properties of the components
of aggregate prices indices, in the hope that understanding disaggregated deviations
from the LOP would shed light onto aggregate deviations from PPP.
Disaggregated studies can be decomposed in two important sub-categories: those
using price indices, and those, more recent, using price levels. The most prominent
contribution in the …rst group is Engel and Rogers (1996), who show the importance
of the border in explaining the second moments of relative goods prices. This has
typically been taken as evidence in favor of hypotheses (iii) and (iv) above. The second
group includes numerous recent empirical contributions attempting to account for the
…rst moments of relative goods prices, or deviations from absolute versions of PPP or
the LOP. For instance, Crucini, Telmer and Zachariadis (2001) use an (incomplete)
panel of 5,000 goods and services in Europe and show that violations of the LOP
by all standard panel tests. Furthermore, Imbs, Mumtaz, Ravn and Rey (2002) present a detailed
account of the cross-section of sectoral half-lives.
42
Directly performing the bias-correction on our data is not straightforward. The reason is that the
large cross-sectional dimension of our panel makes the computation very time intensive. In particular,
the bootstrap procedure required for the computation of the corrected estimates is exceedingly slow
for our panel RCM estimator. For example, 100 replications, each with 100 draws of the covariance
matrix, take about …ve days on a cutting-edge processor. Since a large number of replications is
crucial in assuring accuracy of the estimates, we chose instead to use Monte-Carlo simulations to
establish the magnitude of the Andrews-Chen issue in our data.

19

are relatively small and that the variations in relative prices across countries re‡ect
aspects of all four hypotheses above.43
The present paper provides a way of relating the evidence on good-speci…c deviations from LOP to the PPP puzzle, and its prevalence even amongst traded goods. In
particular, we bridge the gap between the literatures based on good-speci…c evidence
and the aggregate data, in showing the importance of cross-sectoral heterogeneity in
deviations from the LOP, and demonstrating how failing to account for this heterogeneity in aggregate series results in misleading estimates. Tables 5 and 6 present
results for traded and non-traded goods, respectively.44 In each table we list the outcomes of Hausman and Swami tests for parameter heterogeneity, as well as half-life
estimates. The results suggest that the degree of heterogeneity across traded-goods
is more important than across non-traded ones. Homogeneity is always rejected for
traded goods, while the Hausman test cannot reject the null hypothesis of homogeneity for non-traded goods. Half life estimates are consistent with this contrast, as the
aggregation bias is substantially more prevalent amongst traded goods. Actually, the
bias on …xed-e¤ects estimations amongst non-traded goods is almost non-existent,
such is the homogeneity of persistence properties amongst non-traded goods. The
bias for traded goods, however, is substantial, and actually larger than when all
goods were included in Table 3. A traded-good based real exchange rate is substantially more persistent than the standard aggregate, because it includes relative prices
with widely di¤erent persistence properties.
The dynamics of relative prices are more homogeneous amongst non-traded than
traded goods. While a real exchange rate based on non-traded goods only reverts
slowly to parity because of the nature of the goods included, a real exchange rate
based on traded goods only should not necessarily be expected to revert any faster
to parity, because parameter heterogeneity is a much more serious problem there. In
that sense, any quest seeking to establish rapid real exchange rate mean reversion, but
without accounting for sectoral heterogeneity, is associated with substantial di¢culty,
stranded between the rock of the intrinsically slow mean reversion of non-traded
goods, and the hard place of traded goods heterogeneity.45
This exact same phenomenon may explain why traded-good prices account for
most of the variability of real exchange rates, even at long horizons, as shown in
4 3 Parsley

and Wei (2002) use a slightly di¤erent dataset, based on goods prices in cities in the
US and Japan, to con…rm the overwhelming importance of borders in relative prices. A number of
papers develop case studies of particular goods’ international relative prices. for instance, Haskel and
Wolf (2001) and Hassink and Schettkat (2001) study prices of IKEA goods, Goldberg and Verboven
(2001) focus on car prices across European countries.
44
Following Engel (1999), the non-traded sectors include rents, leisure, public transport and hotels.
The distinction between traded and non traded is of course too stark. In practice, there is a
continuum of degrees of tradability and therefore what is labeled as non-traded is actually partly
traded and vice versa.
45
This is another way of interpreting non-linear estimation e¤orts, for instance by Kilian and Taylor
(2003) or Michael, Nobay and Peel (1997). Presumably, the leading reason why real exchange rate
adjustments may be non-linear is the presence of arbitrage costs, which in turn clearly are goodspeci…c.

20

Engel (1999). This result is a priori very surprising: di¤erences in traded-good prices
should be arbitraged away after a relatively small amount of time, whereas di¤erences
in non-traded good prices should be much more persistent. We have demonstrated,
however, that due to their heterogeneity, traded-good prices seem more persistent
than what they really are. They can hence appear to account for low frequency
movements of the real exchange rate. This casts a new light on Engel’s results. More
formally, let us denote by qj;t (resp. xj;t and n j;t ) the real exchange rate of country j at
date t based on all goods in the C P I (resp. traded-good prices and non-traded ones
only). Engel decomposes the variability of the real exchange rate in its traded and
non-traded components and studies their relative contributions at various horizons.
One of his measures of variability at an horizon of p months is the M SE (mean
squared error), de…ned as sum of the squared drift and of the variance of the change
in the real exchange rate: MSE (qj ) = var (qj;t ¡ qj;t¡p ) + mean (qj;t ¡ qj;t¡p)2 . He
…nds that the ratio
R=

MSE (xj )
M SE (xj) + MSE (n j)

is close to 1 even at horizons up to twenty years. We now show that if aggregation
biases are more serious for traded goods, as we found earlier, the ratio is naturally
biased towards 1. Since our data are stationary, the drift term is zero.
Let us suppose that traded-good prices are characterized by an AR(1):
xj;t = ½xj;t¡1 + " t
with var ("t ) = ¾ 2 and all f"t g uncorrelated. Similarly we assume that non-traded
goods prices are given by:
nj;t = ¹nj;t¡1 + et
with var (et ) = ¿ 2, all fetg are uncorrelated and f" t g and fet g are orthogonal. We
show in Appendix A (based on the asymptotics) that this representation implies the
following expression for Engel’s ratio
R=

1¡½2(p+1) 2
1¡½2 ¾
1¡½2(p+1) 2
1¡¹2(p+1) 2
1¡½2 ¾ +
1¡¹2 ¿

For long horizons (high p), R is increasing in ½, the degree of persistence amongst
traded goods, and decreasing in ¹, the degree of persistence amongst non-traded
goods. Since sectoral heterogeneity is more prevalent amongst traded goods than
amongst non-traded ones, ½ is biased upwards more than ¹. The ratio R will therefore
also be biased upwards, provided heterogeneity is su¢ciently high in the traded-good
sector. This will happen even if the “corrected measure” of the persistence parameters
(by which we mean the RC M estimates) imply lower persistence of traded good price

21

di¤erentials, compared to the non traded-good price di¤erentials, which seems to be
happening in Tables 5 and 6.46
By using standard …xed e¤ects estimates, we can calculate the M SE ratio. We
…nd that for long horizons, R is around 55 percent. By contrast, if we use our RCM
corrected estimates, R drops to 33 percent.47 When we correct for the aggregation
bias, we therefore …nd that traded-good prices still account for a sizable portion of
exchange rate variability at long horizons, but their importance does not match that
of the non-traded goods. 48 The apparent dominant role of traded goods in explaining
the variability of the real exchange rate, even at long horizons, can therefore be traced
back to the same aggregation bias that solves the PPP puzzle. In particular, it is
because traded goods prices have more heterogeneous dynamics than non-traded ones
that an exchange rate based on traded goods only will appear particularly persistent.
We show this translates as well into a high contribution of traded goods to the real
exchange rate volatility.

8

Summary and Conclusions

We present evidence that the standard methods of estimation used in the PPP literature largely overestimate the size of real exchange rates half-lives because they fail
to correct for parameter heterogeneity. Heterogeneity in the dynamics of relative sectoral prices is highly plausible theoretically. We prove its existence empirically. We
demonstrate that the magnitude of the aggregation bias is increasing in the degree of
heterogeneity, and show it is quantitatively large in a standard international sectoral
price database including most developed economies. We provide an answer to the
puzzling dominant role of traded goods in explaining high real exchange rate persistence and volatility. The dynamics of sectoral relative prices are more heterogenous
amongst traded than non-traded goods. Therefore the aggregation bias we document
is most prevalent amongst traded goods, where observed persistence and variability
are largest as a result, even at long horizons.
We expose our results to thorough robustness checks, including measurement error
and other attenuating biases prevalent in the literature on aggregate exchange rates
dynamics. Our conclusions withstand the tests. When the correct estimator is used,
which allows for parameter heterogeneity, exchange rates revert to parity at a much
46

Notice however that Tables 5 and 6 report the results of a autoregressive speci…cation of the
real exchange rate of order higher than one, while the reduced form in this section was obtained
using an AR(1) process. The results were similar however when we computed the ratio using our
estimated AR(5). We present the AR(1) case because the formulae are more transparent.
47
See Appendix A for more details.
48
In the non-corrected case, we do not quite reproduce the very high ratios (close to 1) obtained
by Engel. This may be due to i) the di¤erences between his samples and ours, ii) his country speci…c
approach when we use a panel methodology; iii) the inclusion of a drift term from which we abstract
since we base the results on the asymptotics and assume stationarity.

22

higher speed than previously reported in the literature. The aggregation bias we are
describing plagues any econometric method which aggregates heterogeneous sectoral
data, ranging from pooled panel estimators to simple OLS estimates of real exchange
rate persistence. Unbiased estimators of real exchange rates persistence must rely
on a proper account of sectoral heterogeneity. For instance, the Random Coe¢cient
Model we implement averages sector-speci…c persistence parameters using e¢cient
weights; it is therefore both consistent and e¢cient.
Our point estimate for exchange rates half lives is fourteen months, with a 95
percent con…dence interval ranging from four months to two years. This happens
in a perfectly standard dataset, which reproduces standard results when standard
estimation methods are implemented. Thus, we break the ‘consensus view’, at the
lower end of the range. Furthermore, the revision in the estimate of the persistence of
relative prices is su¢ciently big to reverse one of the largest puzzles in international
economics, the PPP puzzle. Our estimates are compatible with existing calibrated
models displaying plausible nominal rigidities. This suggests that parameter heterogeneity could be the answer to the famous PPP puzzle. The vast majority of the
economic mechanisms that could theoretically impede price adjustments operate at
the good or sectoral level. In this paper, we documented an important reason why
these theories should not be expected to prevail in the aggregate if heterogeneity is
not accounted for. Standard aggregate estimation methods imply a lot of persistence
in the real exchange rate, but we should not expect anything else.

23

9

Appendix A: Analytics

In this appendix, we derive the expression of the bias of the …xed e¤ect pooled estimator and show that this bias is positive and increasing with the degree of heterogeneity.
Notations and assumptions are the same as in Section 2.
The model we consider is:
qit = ®i + ¸qit¡1 + À it
with
À it = "it + ´ iqit¡1

9.1

Derivation of the Bias

Following Pesaran and Smith (1995), we derive the probability limits of the bias in
the …xed e¤ects estimator, by taking probability limits as T approaches in…nity and
subsequently letting N approach in…nity as well. De…ne b̧ the probability limit of
the …xed e¤ect estimator of ¸: Letting Wn denote the within-transformation matrix
operator, upper bars denote time averages, q denote the N T x1 vector of observations
qit and q¡1 denote the NT x1 vector of observations qit¡1; we have:
¡ 0
¢¡1 ¡ 0
¢
b̧ = q¡1
Wn q¡1
q¡1Wnq
Or

PN PT
b̧ = ¸ + i=1P i=1P(À it ¡ À i ) (qit¡1 ¡ qi;¡1 ) =N T
N
T
2
i=1
i=1 (qit¡1 ¡ qi;¡1) =NT

Now
plimT !+1

ÃP

= plimT !+1

T
i=1 (À it

ÃP

¡ À i ) (qit¡1 ¡ qi;¡1)
T

T
i=1 ("it

!

¡ "i) (qit¡1 ¡ qi;¡1 )
T

!

+ ´i plimT !+1

ÃP

T
i=1 (qit¡1

T

¡ qi;¡1 )2

The …rst term is zero, therefore
plimN!+1;T !+1

PN PT
i=1

i=1 (À it

¡ À i ) (qit¡1 ¡ qi;¡1)
= plimN !+1
NT

24

PN ³
i=1

¾2
1¡¸2i

N

´

´i

!

Hence, the bias is equal to:
b̧ ¡ ¸ =

9.2

E
E

³
³

´

´i ¾2
1¡¸2i

´=

¾2
1¡¸2i

E
E

³
³

´i
1¡¸2i
1
1¡¸2i

´
´

Sign and Magnitude of the Bias

³
´
´i
The denominator is always positive, therefore b̧ ¡ ¸ > 0 , E 1¡¸
> 0. Let f (´i )
2
i
denote the density function for the random
R 1¡¸variable ´i . We have ¸i 2 (0; 1) ()
´i 2 (¡¸; 1 ¡ ¸). By de…nition, E (´i ) = ¡¸ ´i f (´i) d´ i = 0. Thus,
E

µ

´i
1 ¡ ¸2i

¶

Z

0

´i
=
2 f (´i ) d´i +
¡¸ 1 ¡ (´i + ¸)

Z

1¡¸

0

´i
f (´ i) d´ i
1 ¡ (´i + ¸)2

For all ´i < 0; 1 ¡ (´i + ¸)2 > 1 ¡ ¸2; conversely for all ´i > 0; 1 ¡ (´i + ¸)2 < 1 ¡ ¸2.
Hence all the positive ´i have higher weights than the negative ones in the above
expression.
Since
in E (´ i) they have equal weights and since E (´i) = 0; it follows
³
´
´i
that E 1¡¸2 > 0. QED.
i

We note that the magnitude of the bias will be bigger when the asymmetry between the weights will be the larger, i.e. the bigger 1 ¡ (´i + ¸)2 compared to 1 ¡ ¸2
when ´i < 0 and the smaller 1 ¡ (´i + ¸)2 compared to 1 ¡ ¸2 when ´i > 0: This
asymmetry will be larger when f´ ig is more dispersed. Hence the magnitude of the
bias is increasing with the degree of sectoral heterogeneity.

9.3

Tradability and Heterogeneity
In this part, we derive the ratio R presented in Section 7 of the paper and
we compute its values using di¤erent estimates. Adopting the notations
de…ned in Section 7, we have:
xj;t = ½xj;t¡1 + " t
)
p

xj;t ¡ xj;t¡p = ¡(1 ¡ ½ )xj;t¡p +

25

p
X
k=0

½k "t¡k

)
var (xj;t ¡ xj;t¡p) = E
=

Ã p
X

k

½ "t¡k

k=0
½2(p+1)

1¡
1 ¡ ½2

!2

¾2

Thus, for large enough forecast horizons, the M SE is increasing in the
degree of persistence, ½. Similar calculations for non traded goods give:
var (nj;t ¡ nj;t¡p) =

1 ¡ ¹ 2(p+1) 2
¿
1 ¡ ¹2

Hence
R=

1¡½2(p+1) 2
1¡½2 ¾
2(p+1)
1¡½2(p+1) 2
¾ + 1¡¹
¿2
1¡½2
1¡¹2

which is equation (2) in Section 7 of the paper.
9.3.1

Values of R based on non-bias-corrected estimates

Our …xed-e¤ect estimates for an AR(1) non corrected for heterogeneity are the following: b
½ = 0:978805; ¹
b = 0:949748and b
¾2 = 0:00144687; b
¿ 2 = 0:00270299. We obtain
the following values for R at various horizons p in months:
P
R

9.3.2

6
12
24
60
0.386596 0.419738 0.470788 0.537256

100
0.552377

180
0.555547

240
0.555645

Values of R based on bias-corrected estimates

We compute the variance at the sectoral level and use the mean of these variances as
an estimate of the overall variance. Our RC M estimates for an AR(1) corrected for
heterogeneity are the following: b
½ = 0:957804; b
¹ = 0:957338 and ¾b2 = 0:0014399137;
2
¿ = 0:0029497499. We obtain the following values for R at various horizons p in
b
months:
P
6
12
24
60
100
180
240
R 0.328593 0.329056 0.3297 0.330328 0.330391 0.330394 0.330394

26

10

Appendix B: Data

Table B1
Good
Bread
Meat
Dairy
Fruits
Tobbaco
Drinks
Clothing
Footwear
Rents
Fuel
Furniture
Dom.App
Vehicles
Pub.Trans
Communic
Sound
Leisure
Books
Hotels

Belgium
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
77 1 - 96
77 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
75 1 - 96
80 1 - 94
80 1 - 94
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96

11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
11
3
10
10
11
11
11
11
11
11
11

Denmark
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
78 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
77 1 - 96 3
81 1 - 94 10
81 1 - 94 10
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9
81 1 - 96 9

Germany
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 94 10
80 1 - 94 10
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 96 3
80 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3
76 1 - 96 3

27

Greece
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
78 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
79 1 - 96
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
6
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Spain
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
78 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
80 1 - 96
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Table B1 Continued
Good
Bread
Meat
Dairy
Fruits
Tobacco
Drinks
Clothing
Footwear
Rents
Fuel
Furniture
Dom.App
Vehicles
Pub.Trans
Communic
Sound
Leisure
Books
Hotels

France
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
78 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
75 1 - 96
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Ireland
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
na
na
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96
89 1 - 96

Italy
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
78 1 - 94
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
75 1 - 95
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95
81 1 - 95

9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

9
9
9
9
9
9
9

12
12
12
12
1
12
12
12
12
12
9
9
12
12
12
12
12
12
12

Table B1 Continued
Good
Bread
Meat
Dairy
Fruits
Tobacco
Drinks
Clothing
Footwear
Rents
Fuel
Furniture
Dom.App
Vehicles
Pub.Trans
Communic
Sound
Leisure
Books
Hotels

Finland
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
na
na
na
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95
85 1 - 95

12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12

12
12
12
12
12
12
12

UK
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
78 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
75 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1

-

96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
94
94
96
96
96
96
96
96
96

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

28

US
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
78 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
75 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1
81 1

-

96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
96
94
94
96
96
96
96
96
96
96

10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10

Netherlands
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
78 1 - 96 10
79 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
75 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 94 10
81 1 - 94 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10
81 1 - 96 10

Portugal
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
78 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
na
77 1 - 96
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 94
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
na
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96
81 1 - 96

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
10
10
2
2
2
2
2
2

References
[1] Abuaf, Niso and Jorion, Philippe. “Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run.”
Journal of Finance, 1990, 45(1), pp. 155-74.
[2] Anderson, T.W and Hsiao, C. “Formulation and Estimation of Dynamic Models
using Panel Data.” Journal of Econometrics, 1982, 18, pp. 47-82.
[3] Andrews, Donald W.K. and Chen, Hong-Yuan. “Approximately MedianUnbiased Estimation of Autoregressive Models.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1994, Vol. 12 (2), pp. 187-204.
[4] Arellano, Manuel and Bond, Stephen. “Some Tests of Speci…cation for Panel
Data: Monte-Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Data”. Review
of Economic Studies, 1991, 58, pp. 277-297.
[5] Bergin, Paul R. and Feenstra, Robert C. “Pricing-to-Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real Exchange Rate Persistence.” Journal of International Economics, 2001, 54(2), pp. 333-59.
[6] Brown, B.W. and Newey, W.K. “GMM, E¢cient Bootstrapping and Improved
Inference”, mimeo Rice University, 2001.
[7] Campa, Jose and Goldberg, Linda. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import
Prices: A Macro or Micro Phenomenon?” NBER Working Paper 8934, 2002.
[8] Cashin P. and J. McDermott. “An Unbiased Appraisal of Purchasing Power
Parity”, mimeo IMF, 2002
[9] Chari, V.V, Kehoe, Patrick and McGrattan, Ellen. “Can Sticky Price Models
Generate Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?”, Review of Economic
Studies, forthcoming 2002.
[10] Coakley J. , R. Flood and M. Taylor. “Long Run Purchasing Power Parity: the
First Tests”, mimeo IMF, 2002.
[11] Crucini, Mario J., Telmer, Chris J. and Zachariadis, Marios. “Understanding
European Real Exchange Rates.” Mimeo Vanderbilt University, 2001.
[12] Diebold, Francis X., Husted, Steve and Rush, Mark. “Real Exchange Rates Under the Gold Standard.” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99(6), pp. 1252-71.
[13] Elliott, Graham, and Stock, James. “Con…dence Intervals for Autoregressive
Coe¢cients Near One.” Journal of Econometrics, 2001, 103, pp. 155-181.
[14] Engel, Charles. “Long-Run PPP May Not Hold After All.” Journal of International Economics, 2000, 51, pp.243-73.
[15] Engel, Charles. “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rates.” Journal of Political
Economy, 1999, 107(3), pp. 507-38.
29

[16] Engel, Charles and Rogers, John. “How Wide is the Border?”. American Economic Review, 1996, 86(5), pp. 1112-1125.
[17] Frankel, Je¤rey A. “International Capital Mobility and Crowding-Out in the
U.S. Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or Goods Markets?”
Rik W. Hafer (ed.): How Open is the U.S. Economy? Lexington: Lexington
Books, 1986.
[18] Frankel, Je¤rey A. “Zen and the Art of Modern Macroeconomics: A Commentary.” William S. Haraf and Thomas D. Willett (eds.): Monetary Policy for a
Volatile Global Economy. Washington D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research, 1990.
[19] Frankel, Je¤rey A. and Rose, Andrew K. “A Panel Project on Purchasing Power
Parity: Mean Reversion Within and Between Countries.” Journal of International Economics, 1996, 40, pp. 209-25.
[20] Froot, Kenneth and Rogo¤, Kenneth. “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Exchange Rates.” Handbook of International Economics, 1995. Eds. G. Grossman
and K. Rogo¤, Vol.3, pp 1647-1688, North-Holland, New York.
[21] Giovannini, Alberto. “Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices.” Journal of
International Economics, 1988, 24(1/2), pp. 45-68.
[22] Glen, Jack D. “Real Exchange Rates in the Short, Medium, and Long Run.”
Journal of International Economics, 1992, 33(1/2), pp. 147-66.
[23] Goldberg, Pinelopi K. and Knetter, Michael M. “Goods Prices and Exchange
Rates: What Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature, 1997, 35, pp.
1243-72.
[24] Goldberg, Pinelopi and Verboven, Frank. “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in
European Car Markets”. Review of Economic Studies, 2001, October, pp. 811848.
[25] Haskel, Jonathan and Wolf, Holger. “Why Does the Law of One Price Fail? A
Case Study.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 103, pp. 545-558.
[26] Hassink, Wolter and Schettkat, Ronald. “On Price Setting for Identical Products
in Market without Formal Trade Barriers”. IZA Discussion Paper No 315, 2001.
[27] Hildreth, Cli¤ord and Houck, James P. “Some Estimators for a Linear Model
with Random Coe¢cients.” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
1968, 63, pp. 584-95.
[28] Im, Kyung So, Pesaran, M. Hashem and Shin, Yongcheol “Testing for Unit
Roots in Heterogeneous Panels.” DAE Working Paper No. 9526, University of
Cambridge, 1997.

30

[29] Imbs, Jean, Mumtaz, Haroon, Ravn, Morten O. and Rey, Hélène. “NonLinearities and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2002, forthcoming.
[30] Isard, Peter. “How Far Can We Push the Law of One Price?” American Economic Review, 1977, 67(5), pp. 942-48.
[31] Kiefer, N.M., Vogelsang, T. J. and Bunzel, H. “Simple Robust Testing of Regression Hypotheses”, Econometrica, 2000, 68, pp. 695-714.
[32] Kilian, Lutz and Taylor, Mark. “Why is it so Di¢cult to Beat the Random
Walk Forecast of Exchange Rates?” Journal of International Economics, 2003,
forthcoming.
[33] Kilian, Lutz and Zha, Tao. “Quantifying the Uncertainty about the Half-Life of
Deviations from PPP.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2002, Vol. 17, 2, pp.
107-125.
[34] Knetter, Michael M. “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exporters.”
American Economic Review, 1989, 79(1), pp. 198-210.
[35] Knetter, Michael M. “International Comparisons of Pricing-to-Market Behavior.” American Economic Review, 1993, 83(3), pp. 473-86.
[36] Kollman, Robert “The Exchange Rate in a Dynamic-Optimizing Business Cycle Model with Nominal Rigidities: a Quantitative Investigation.” Journal of
International Economics, 2001, 55, pp. 243-62.
[37] Lee, L and Gri¢ths, W. “The Prior Likelihood and Best Linear Unbiased Prediction in Stochastic Coe¢cient Linear Models.” University of New England Working Papers in Econometrics and Applied Statistics No 1, 1979.
[38] Levin, Andrew and Lin, Chien-Fu. “Unit Root Tests in Heterogeneous Panels.”
UCSD Working Paper No. 93-56, 1993.
[39] Lothian, James R. “Multi-Country Evidence on the Behavior of Purchasing
Power Parity under the Current Float.” Journal of International Money and
Finance, 1997, 16(1), pp. 19-35.
[40] Lothian, James R. and Taylor, Mark P. “Real Exchange Rate Behavior: The Recent Float from the Perspective of the Past Two Centuries.” Journal of Political
Economy, 1996, 104(3), pp. 488-509.
[41] Mark, Nelson “Exchange Rate Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictability.” American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (1), pp. 201-218.
[42] Michael, Panos, Nobay, A. Robert and Peel, David A. “Transactions Costs and
Nonlinear Adjustment in Real Exchange Rates: An Empirical Investigation.”
Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105(4), pp. 862-79.
31

[43] Murray, Christian J. and Papell, David H. “The Purchasing Power Parity Persistence Paradigm.” Journal of International Economics, 2002a, 56, pp. 1-19.
[44] Murray, Christian J. and Papell, David H. “Do Panels Help Solve the Purchasing
Power Puzzle?” Mimeo University of Houston, 2002b.
[45] Murray, Christian J. and Papell, David H. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle
is Worse Than You Think: A Note on Long-Run Real Exchange Rate Behavior.”
Mimeo University of Houston, 2002c.
[46] Ng, Serena and Perron, Pierre. “Unit Root Tests in ARMA Models with DataDependent Methods for Selection of the Truncation Lag”. Journal of the American Statistics Association, 1995, 90, pp. 268-281.
[47] Nickell, Stephen. “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed E¤ects.” Econometrica,
1981, 49, pp. 1417-46.
[48] Oh, Keun-Yeob. “Purchasing Power Parity and Unit Root Tests Using Panel
Data.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 1996, 15(3), pp. 405-18.
[49] Obstfeld, Maurice, and Taylor, Alan M. “Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market
Arbitrage and Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited.” Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies, 1997, 11, pp. 441-79.
[50] Parsley, David and Wei, Shang-Jin. “Convergence to the Law of One Price without Trade Barriers or Currency Fluctuations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
(November), 1996, pp.1211-36.
[51] Parsley, David and Wei, Shang-Jin. “Explaining the Border E¤ect: The Role of
Exchange Rate Variability, Shipping Costs and Geography.” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming 2002.
[52] Pesaran, M. Hashem. “Estimation and Inference in Large Heterogeneous Panels
with Cross-Section Dependence.” University of Cambridge, 2002, Mimeo.
[53] Pesaran, M. Hashem and Smith, Ron. “Estimating Long-Run Relationships From
Dynamic Heterogeneous Panels.” Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68, pp. 79-113.
[54] Richardson, J. David. “Some Empirical Evidence on Commodity Arbitrage and
the Law of One Price.” Journal of International Economics, 1978, 8(2), pp. 34151.
[55] Robertson, D and Symons, J. “Some Strange Properties of Panel Data Estimators.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 7(2), pp. 175-189.
[56] Rogers, John and Jenkins, Michael. “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of Movements in Real Exchange Rates.” Journal of International Economics, May 1995,
38, pp. 339-60.

32

[57] Rogo¤, Kenneth S. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic
Literature, 1996, 34, pp. 647-68.
[58] Rossi, Barbara. “Con…dence Intervals for Half-life Deviations from Purchasing
Power Parity.” Mimeo Princeton University, 2001.
[59] Swamy, P. “Statistical Inference in Random Coe¢cient Regression Models.”
Springer-Verlag, 1971.
[60] Swamy, P. “E¢cient Inference in a Random Coe¢cient Regression Model.”
Econometrics, 1970, 38, pp.311-323.
[61] Taylor, Alan M. “Potential Pitfalls for the Purchasing-Power Parity Puzzle?
Sampling and Speci…cation Biases in Mean-Reversion Tests of the Law of One
Price.” Econometrica, 2001, 69, pp. 473–98.
[62] Taylor, Mark and Sarno, Lucio. “The Behavior of the Real Exchange Rate During
the Bretton Woods Period”. Journal of International Economics, 1998, 46, pp.
281-312.
[63] Taylor, Mark P. and Peel, David A. “Nonlinear Adjustment, Long-Run Equilibrium and Exchange Rate Fundamentals.” Journal of International Money and
Finance, 2000, 19, pp. 33-53.
[64] Taylor, Mark P., Peel, David A. and Sarno, Lucio. “Nonlinear Mean-Reversion
in Real Exchange Rates: Towards a Solution to the Purchasing Power Parity.”
International Economic Review, 2001, 42(4), pp. 1015-42.
[65] Wu, Yangru. “Are Real Exchange Rates Nonstationary: Evidence from a PanelData Test.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1996, 28(1), pp. 54-63.

33

Table 1: Unit Root Tests
Test

Trend ln

IPS ADF

no

IPS ADF

yes

LL

no

LL

yes

LL1

no

³

(P i ¤e i;us)
Pus

1:995
[0:023]
2:505
[0:006]
¡2:030
[0:021]
¡1:984
[0:024]
¡11:902
[0:000]

´

ei;us
¡2:397
[0:008]
0:334
[0:369]
¡1:800
[0:036]
¡1:773
[0:038]
¡8:092
[0:000]

ln

³

(Pij ¤ei;us)
Puj s

¡5:915
[0:000]
¡4:218
[0:000]
¡16:901
[0:000]
¡16:422
[0:000]
¡7:011
[0:000]

´

Notes: P-values are in the parenthesis. The lag length was chosen via a cross section
speci…c general to speci…c procedure. All test regressions include an intercept. IPS denotes
Im, Pesaran and Shin and LL stands for Levin and Lin. LL1 is Levin and Lin test that
includes individual e¤ects.

34

Table 2: Half Life Estimates using Aggregate Data
qj;t = ®j +

PP

Model
OLS
Fixed E¤ects
Anderson Hsiao
Arellano Bond

p=1 ¸p qj;t¡p

P
12
32
36
12

+ "j;t

PP

p=1 ¸p

0.9998
0.9733
0.9905
0.9689

Half Life
5589
39
108
27

Con…dence Interval
44,1
14,58
68,1
14,47

: ®j = 0
3.04 (0.0001)
H0 : E(®j ; X) = 0 34.33 (0.0006)
c
H0 : ¸j = ¸
111.38 (0.999)
d
H0 : ¸j = ¸
2.45 (0.1175)
a H0
b

Notes: The panel is based on aggregate relative prices indices for13 countries over the period
1975:1 - 1996:12. The choice of P is based on general to speci…c lag selection procedure with
a maximum lag of 36 for all models except Arellano and Bond where the maximum is 12.
For the GMM estimator …ve lags of the levels of relative prices were used as instruments.
The con…dence intervals for the half life estimates were estimated using non-parametric
bootstrap with 1500 bootstrap replications for all speci…cations except Arellano and Bond
where they were restricted to 500. Note that the bootstrap for the Arellano and Bond
estimator was carried out using the methods described in Brown and Newey (2001). “a” is a
test for …xed e¤ects,“b” is the Hausman test, “c” is a Swami test for coe¢cient homogeneity,
while “d” denotes a Hausman type test for homogeneity.

35

Table 3: Half Life Estimates using Disaggregate Data
qi;j;t = ®i +
Model
RCM
OLS
Fixed E¤ects
Anderson Hsiao
a H0

PP

p=1 ¸i;p

: ®i = 0
H0 : E(®i ; X) = 0
c
H0 : ¸i = ¸
d
H0 : ¸i = ¸
b

P
5
12
12
7

qi;j;t¡p + " i;j;t
PP

j=1 ¸j

0.9481
0.9996
0.9698
0.9974

Half Life
14
2063
27
281

Con…dence Interval
5,24
9,1
7,42
1,1

1.85 (0.000)
1196.32 (0.000)
2317.37 (0.000)
32.68 (0.000)

Notes: The estimates are based on a panel of relative prices for 19 goods from 13 countries
over the period 1975:1 - 1996:12. The lag length P was chosen via a general to speci…c
lag selection procedure with a maximum lag of 12 for all models. The con…dence intervals
for the half life estimates are based on 1500 bootstrap replications for all speci…cations.
“a” is a test for …xed e¤ects,“b” is the Hausman test, “c” is the Swami test for coe¢cient
homogeneity, while “d” is a Hausman type test for coe¢cient homogeneity.

36

Table 4: Errors in Variable in the Disaggregate Data
qit¤ =
Model
RCM1
RCM2

PP

P
5
5

p=1 ¸i;p

q¤it¡p + "it

¸j
Half Life Con…dence Interval
0.94476 13
4,21
0.94642 14
4,23

Notes: The RCM models are estimated using GMM for 14 cross sections where the Hausman
test indicates the inconsistency of OLS. RCM1 uses a covariance matrix constructed via
methods described in Kiefer Vogelsang and Bunzel (2000), while RCM2 uses a Newey West
covariance matrix with a Bartlett Kernel.

37

Table 5: Half Life Estimates (Tradeable Goods)
Pi;t =

PP

j=1 ¸j Pi;t¡i

+ "i;t
PP

Model
RCM
OLS
Fixed E¤ects
Anderson Hsiao

P
5
12
12
10

a H0

1.72 (0.000)
679.80 (0.000)
1665.81 (0.000)
49.36 (0.000)

: ®i = 0
H0 : E(®i ; X) = 0
c
H0 : ¸i = ¸
d
H0 : ¸i = ¸
b

j=1 ¸j

0.94964
0.99981
0.97532
0.99261

Half Life
15
2493
33
87

Con…dence Interval
4,24
10,1
8,54
3,1

Notes: The lag length P was chosen via a general to speci…c lag selection procedure with a
maximum lag of 12 for all models. The con…dence intervals for the half life estimates are
based on 1500 bootstrap replications for all speci…cations. “a” is a test for …xed e¤ects,“b”
is the Hausman test, “c” is the Swami test for coe¢cient homogeneity, while “d” is a
Hausman type test for coe¢cient homogeneity.

Table 6: Half Life Estimates (Non-Tradeable Goods)
Pi;t =

PP

j=1 ¸j Pi;t¡i

+ "i;t
PP

Model
RCM
OLS
Fixed E¤ects
Anderson-Hsiao

P
5
11
11
3

a

2.56 (0.000)
486.08 (0.000)
621.44 (0.000)
1.66 (0.197)

H0 : ®i = 0
: E(®i ; X) = 0
c
H0 : ¸i = ¸
d
H0 : ¸i = ¸
b H0

j=1 ¸j

0.94537
0.99962
0.95367
0.9566

Half Life
14
1688
18
14

Con…dence Interval
6,18
4,1
3,28
1,1

Notes: The lag length P was chosen via a general to speci…c lag selection procedure with a
maximum lag of 12 for all models. The con…dence intervals for the half life estimates are
based on 1500 bootstrap replications for all speci…cations. “a” is a test for …xed e¤ects,“b”
is the Hausman test, “c” is the Swami test for coe¢cient homogeneity, while “d” is a
Hausman type test for coe¢cient homogeneity.

38

Figure 1

Notes:
Data was generated from the following model: yi , t = α i +

5

∑λ
s =1

i ,s

yi ,s ,t −1 + ε i ,t

where λ i , s = λ s + η i , ε i ,t ~ N ( 0,1),α i ~ N (0,1), E (η i ) = 0, E (η i ) = 0.0075 . λ s was set equal to the
estimates obtained from the RCM model. For all estimators except “Aggregate Fixed Effects”, the exact
dimensions of our panel were used to generate the data. Aggregate Fixed effects uses 200 cross sections
with each time series equal to 100. The generated data is then averaged over some of the cross sections to
produce a dataset with N=10 and T=100. Fixed effects estimation is then carried out to estimate the
coefficients. This is meant to simulate panel estimation with aggregated data. The figure plots the
histogram of the sum of the coefficients obtained from 5000 replications and compares the distributions to
2

5

the true value of ∑ λ s represented by the dashed line.
s=1

Figure 2a

Notes:
Data was generated from the following model: yi ,t = α i + λ i yi , t −1 + ε i , t
where λ i = λ + η i , ε i , t ~ N ( 0,1), α i ~ N ( 0,1), E (η i ) = 0, E (η i ) = ϖ . The experiment was conducted for
2

7 values of λ = {0.2,0.35,0.50,0.65,0.8,0.95,0.999} and 30 values of ϖ ranging from 0.01 to 0.59 with
increments of 0.02. For all estimators except “Aggregate Fixed Effects”, the exact dimensions of our panel
were used to generate the data. Aggregate Fixed effects uses 200 cross sections with each time series equal
to 100. The generated data is then averaged over some of the cross sections to produce a dataset with N=10
and T=100. Fixed effects estimation is then carried out to estimate the coefficients. This is meant to
simulate panel estimation with aggregated data. The number of replications for each combination of λ
and ϖ was set equal to 100 implying that total replications equal 7*30*100=21000.

Figure 2b

Notes:
Data was generated from the following model: yi , t = α i +

5

∑λ
s =1

i ,s

yi ,s ,t −1 + ε i ,t

where λ i , s = λ s + η i , ε i ,t ~ N ( 0,1),α i ~ N (0,1), E (η i ) = 0, E (η i ) = ϖ . The experiment was conducted
2

for 9 values of λ such that

5

∑ λ ≅ {0.69,0.79 ,0.89,0.91,0.92.0.94,0.96 ,0.98,0.99}and 26 values of
s

s =1

ϖ ranging from 0.003 to 0.005 with increments of 0.0001. For all estimators except “Aggregate Fixed
Effects”, the exact dimensions of our panel were used to generate the data. Aggregate Fixed effects uses
200 cross sections with each time series equal to 100. The generated data is then averaged over some of the
cross sections to produce a dataset with N=10 and T=100. Fixed effects estimation is then carried out to
estimate the coefficients. This is meant to simulate panel estimation with aggregated data. The number of
replications for each combination of λ and ϖ was set equal to 100 implying that total replications equal
9*26*100=23400.

