                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               HIGH-FREQUENCY CONTAGION OF
                                  CURRENCY CRISES IN ASIA

                                             Takatoshi Ito
                                            Yuko Hashimoto

                                          Working Paper 9376
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9376


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




The authors are grateful for comments from Munehisa Kasuya (Bank of Japan), Eiji Ogawa (Hitotsubashi
University), Shin-ichi Fukuda (University of Tokyo), Jing-Lung Henry Lin (Academia Sinica, Taipei and
UCSD) and conference and seminar participants at The 8th International Convention of East Asian Economic
Association, 2002 International Conference Asian Crisis 4, 2001 Fall Annual Meeting of Japanese Economic
Association, 2001 Summer Tokei Kenkyu-kai Conference, Keio University, Institute of Economic Research
at Hitotsubashi University, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
High-Frequency Contagion of Currency Crises in Asia
Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto
NBER Working Paper No. 9376
December 2002
JEL No. F31, G12, G15


                                            ABSTRACT

       Using daily data during the period of Asian Currency Crises, this paper examines high-

frequency contagion effects among Asian six countries. By identifying the “origin” (of exchange

rate depreciation, or decline in stock prices) and the “affected” (currencies, or stock prices) in

spillover relationship, Indonesia and Korea are found to be the two main origin countries,

affecting exchange rates and stock prices of other countries. Evidence of high-frequency crisis

spillover from Thailand to other countries was weak at best. A positive relationship between

trade link indices and the contagion coefficients is found, implying that the bilateral trade

linkage is an important factor for currency market participants to expect which currency should

be affected within days of an original a shock in the exchange rate of a particular country.


Takatoshi Ito                                         Yuko Hashimoto
Research Center for Advanced                          Faculty of School and Media Governance
Science and Technology                                Keio University
University of Tokyo, Japan                            Japan
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku                               5322 Endoh, Fujisawa-city
Tokyo, 153-8904 Japan                                 Kanagawa, 252-8520 Japan
and NBER                                              yhashi@sfc.keio.ac.jp
ITOINTOKYO@aol.com
1. Introduction

     The collapse of de facto dollar peg of Thai Baht on July 2, 1997 has had devastating

financial and economic effects on most of neighboring countries in East Asia. In January 1998,

when the crisis was in its worst state, the cumulative depreciation rate since end-June 1997 was

about 50 percent for most of the currencies in the region. Among them, the value of the

Indonesia Rupiah had become one-sixth of the pre-crisis level. The degree of Contagion of

currency crises in Asia was remarkable.

     A sudden and huge capital outflow was one of the key reasons for the Asian currency crisis,

by causing depreciation of currencies, higher interest rates, and plummeting stock prices in

many countries in 1997-98.1 The Asian currency crisis, as a capital account crisis, was preceded

by the Mexican crisis, and followed by crises in Russia, Turkey, Brazil, and Argentina. However,

contagion in terms of currency crises in regions other than Asia was limited, in its scope and its

speed. In case of the Mexican Peso crash of 1994, several emerging stock markets in the region

fell as investors “ran for cover”: countries like Argentina and Brazil were expected to be next in

a series of currency crises. The support program for Argentina by IMF in March 1995 turned out

to be successful in managing the “tequila effect”. The global financial turmoil triggered by

Russia’s default in 1998 increased risk premium in many emerging markets, but few countries

suffered currency crises following Russia.2

     What was striking in case of Asia was (1) crises in several Asian countries occurred almost

contemporaneously in time, and (2) the most affected countries seemed to have shifted from one

country to another. Within a few days after the Thai baht floatation in early July 1997,

speculators attacked Malaysia, Philippines, and Indonesia. Hong Kong and Korea were attacked

somewhat later on. The Asian Crisis differs from other crises in its depth and width of contagion.


1
  See for example, Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1998a, b), Flood and Marion (1998), Radelet and Sachs
(1998), Yoshitomi and Ohno (1999), Ito (1997), Ito (2000), to name a few.
2
  Short-term interest rate soared from 59% as of June 1998 to 200% as of August 1998. Long Term
   Capital Management (LTCM) suffered a heavy loss due to a sharp increase in bond spread of
   developing countries and requested bail out package for the Federal Reserve Bank. In order to avoid
   further default and liquidity contraction in market, FRB cut interest rates three times during September
   - November 1998.



                                                                                                          2
     In this paper we examine high-frequency contagious effects among Asian six economies

(Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan and Thailand) for the period of Asian

Currency Crises.3 We use daily data to capture the day-to-day movements in the financial

market and identify “first victim” currency (stock price), based on the methodology of the high

frequency analysis in the finance theory.

     We attempt to answer the following two questions: first, given a large depreciation in the

first attacked country, to which extent the neighboring countries suffer? And second, which

country is most likely to be affected during turbulent times?

     Our paper is the first among papers in that the “origin” (of exchange rate depreciation, or

decline in stock prices) and the “affected” (currencies, or stock prices) are distinguished by

measuring the degree of depreciations. The “origin” is assumed to be the one that suffers the

most declines in its value. More specifically, we classify daily depreciation of each country into

two groups: a currency that showed the largest depreciation among six currencies as the “origin”

and others as the “affected”.

           In consideration of the difficulty of distinguishing the origin and the affected, based on

the time lag, because a currency crisis in one country simultaneously spills over to neighboring

countries, we presume the simultaneous (high-frequent) contagion as the spillover effect from

the most seriously attacked – and thereby the largest depreciated– country to others.

     We then investigate channels through which the crisis is transmitted across countries. In

examining the high frequency contagion, it is necessary to consider the markets’ perception

since a piece of new information may cause a sudden shift in expectations and confidence in the

market. Thus, we consider several factors such as news and macroeconomic fundamentals (trade

linkage) that investors would take into account for as the crisis transmission channel.

     In order to see whether our classification of origin and affect reflects the reality, we check

country-specific news of the date we refer to the country as origin from Bloomberg. Then, in the

3
 Hong Kong and Singapore are precluded from the survey because (1) Hong Kong adopted Currency
board system even after the onset of crisis and therefore continued to peg its currency to the US dollar, and
(2) the depreciation of Singaporean dollar was relatively small.



                                                                                                            3
benchmark regression, we set the origin as explanatory variable to estimate the degree of

spillover from a country with the largest depreciation to others: we call this the contagion

coefficient. We find evidence of high-frequency causality: a currency crisis appears to spillover

to other currencies.4

     The structure of the rest of the paper is as follows. In section 2, the existing literature on

currency crises and contagion is reviewed. Section 3 summaries exchange rates and stock prices

of the region during the crisis period. In section 4 the “origin” and the “affected” are defined. In

section 5 we present empirics and in section 6 we apply time series analysis. In section 7 we

study the relationship between high-frequency contagion and trade link channel. Section 8

concludes the paper.



2. Previous Studies on Currency Crises and Contagion

     There is a growing literature on the empirical evidence on currency crises and its

contagious effects. We have seen at least three important currency crises in the 1990s and many

papers have been written on these crises. Collins (1992) and Otker and Pazarbasiouglu (1997)

investigate the 1992-93 crises in the European Monetary System. The Tequila crisis is surveyed

in Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1996) and Ito (1997), among others. Corsetti, Pesenti and

Roubini (1998a, b), Radelet and Sachs (1998), Baing and Goldfajn (1999), and Berg and Pattillo

(1999) investigate the Asian crisis.

     What we have learned are, in general, two main interpretations of the causes of crises.

According to one view, currency crisis reflects economic conditions in countries—structural and

policy distortions, and weak fundamentals. As shown in Kaminsky, Lizondo and Reihnart

(1998), some macroeconomic variables show weakness during months, if not years, prior to a



4
  Some point out the possibility of the accumulated effect: that is, an affected country falls into a more
severe crisis than the origin country in the spillover process. If we see the Asian currency crisis as the
accumulated effect from the initially targeted country, then the Thai baht devaluation alone should be
interpreted as the Asian Currency Crisis. In our analysis, we do not take into account the accumulated
effect during the course of the Asian currency crisis. We detail the contagious phenomenon from various
points of views.



                                                                                                         4
crisis. In these cases, it may be necessary to impose strict macroeconomic conditionality on

these countries in order to avoid further crises. If one believes that a crisis happens due to weak

fundamentals, crises in several countries in one region may be regarded as independent crises

that happen to occur simultaneously. The simultaneity may be due to common global shocks,

such as the global interest rate hike as well as sheer coincidence.

     Another view focuses on sudden shifts in market expectations and confidence --- caused

mainly by investors’ panic and herd behavior--- regardless of macroeconomic performance. In a

financial market where participants share access to much of the same information, a piece of

new information (e.g., a small attack on a currency) can provide a signal that lead to a revision of

expectations (an information cascade) in the market. The market’s perception may be interpreted

by currency traders in other markets as an eventual occurrence of a crisis in the near future.5

This effect could lead to a capital outflow from the market and could result in an attack on

currency despite of sound macroeconomic fundamentals. In this case, countries that face

difficulties in managing reserves and capital outflows should be rescued with financial

assistance from the international community without any conditionality.6 If investors’ sentiment

plays a big role, contagion may be a result of a shift in investors; view on neighboring countries

when one country goes into a crisis.

     In addition to these literatures, there is a lot of literature on contagion in currency crises.

There are at least four channels through which instability in financial markets might be

transmitted across countries.

     First, trade links can be a channel for contagion. This channel suggests that currency crises

will spread contagiously among countries that trade disproportionately with one another. The

devaluation in a country boosts up its competitiveness at least temporarily, in the presence of

nominal rigidities. Then its trade partners are at a competitive disadvantage. Deterioration in



5
  Agenor and Aizenman (1998) investigate currency crisis based on the imperfect credit market.
6 The IMF's new precautionary facility Contingent Credit Lines (CCL), approved by the IMF Executive
Board in 1999, was designed to assist countries with strong economic policies and sound financial systems
that are seeking to resist contagion from disturbances in global capital markets.



                                                                                                        5
terms of trade will also worsen their economic performances in the mid- and long- run. Those

most-adversely-affected countries are likely to be attacked next. Glick and Rose (1998) find the

correlation between the spread of crisis and trade links.

     Second, a channel through common creditors may explain spillovers of a crisis. The

common creditor hypothesis is based on the lending institutions’ tendency to ensure the

immediate liquidity. When financial institutions face a default in one country, they tend to

withdraw capitals not only from the country but also from other countries so that they will avoid

further decline in their asset values. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) provide related analysis.

     Third, sudden changes in assessment of emerging market countries among investors and

lending agencies may cause the contagion. The Wake-up call hypothesis states that investors

change the risk assessment to other countries in the wake of one crisis and become pessimistic

toward investment or even rush the recovery of credit. Macroeconomic or financial similarities

are often trigger re-assessment. A crisis may spread from the initial crisis country to another if

the other has similar economic conditions, such as the Current Account to GDP ratio, the

Foreign Reserves to short-term borrowings ratio, and so on. Sachs, Tornell and Velasco (1995)

put on contagion in this light.7



     It should also be noted that the concept of “contagion” varies from author to author.

     For one case, we can think of a currency crisis as being contagious if it spreads from

the initial crisis country to another. 8 Masson (1999a) argues based on multiple

equilibria model that crisis contagion can be referred as an equilibrium switch under

some economic fundamental conditions.9 The alternative view is that the contagion


7
  Literature based on Macroeconomic fundamentals, see Collins (1992), Flood and Marion (1994),
Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1994, 1996), Otker and Pazarbasioglu (1997), to name a few. Kaminsky,
Lizondo and Reinhart (1998) is an excellent survey on empirical literatures. Berg and Pattillo (1999)
argue the crises predictability.
8
  Masson (1999 b) classifies the causes of currency crisis into three: (１) common cause (monsoon effect),
(2) fundamentals (spillover effect), and (3) trigger of first and hard hit country (sentiment jump).
9
  Flood and Marion (2000) focus currency crisis based on models of multiple equilibria. Jeanne and
Masson (2000) apply the Markov Switching model. Obstfeld (1996) incorporates unemployment rate to
the multiple equilibria model.



                                                                                                        6
effect is thought of as an increase in the probability of a speculative attack on the

domestic currency. See Eichengree, Rose and Wyplosz (1996), for example, for this

view.

     As is well known, it is difficult to distinguish empirically between common shocks and

contagion, especially in the middle of crisis. In both explanations above, the actual occurrence

(or an increase in probability) of crises depends on the existence of a (not necessarily successful)

speculative attack elsewhere in the world.

     In this paper, we measure the contagion coefficient as the ratio of depreciation of currency (or a

decline in stock prices) of one country to that of the initial crisis country. In order to see if large

movements of exchange rates are caused by the common shocks that simultaneously affected several

countries or a crisis and its contagion in the region, we check the news release relevant to the date of

large depreciation from Bloomberg. We find that Asian exchange rate movements during the crisis

period were highly sensitive to crisis-related statements, such as the financial systems, bankruptcies,

and political instability of a country where the currency depreciated most.

     Our objective in this paper advances these viewpoints to analyze intra-day spillover effect

from the first affected country, namely the high frequency contagion. We do not judge why the

original crisis happened either by bad fundamentals (first generation model) or by a

self-fulfilling attack (second generation model). Instead, the size of contagious effect from

“ground zero” to other countries is measured, given the incidence of the initial attack. To

anticipate a result, it is found that a high-frequency contagion phenomenon can be explained by

the trade linkage within Asia. See, Glick and Rose (1999) and Eichengreen, Wyploz and Rose

(1996).

     One of the most significant weaknesses of earlier literatures on contagion is the absence of

distinguishing the origin and affected in causality relationship. In the financial market, investors

are likely to respond to an attack by withdrawing capital not only from the first attacked country,

but also from neighboring countries within a few days, if not hours. In this respect, using

monthly or quarterly data, even weekly data, on which many previous analyses based, may limit




                                                                                                       7
analytical capability of crisis correlations among countries during a crisis period.

     Our measure of contagion permits us to identify systemically important countries. Namely,

whose contagion effects are significant and sizable can be found.




3. Exchange Rate and Stock Price during the crisis period

     The daily data of the nominal exchange rate (vis-a-vis US dollar) and stock prices of

Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan and Thailand are used. 10 The sample period

begins at January 3, 1997 for the exchange rate and January 3, 1994 for stock prices and ends at

July 7, 1999 for both series. Both the exchange rate and stock prices data are obtained from

Datastream.

                         Figure 1-1（exchange rate, June 30 1997=100）

     Figure 1-1 shows the exchange rates of six currencies against US dollar from June

30, 1997 to July 7, 1999. They are normalized at 100 on June 30, 1997. The behavior of

exchange rates through the crisis period varied considerably across the countries. In

Thailand, after an initial sharp depreciation due to the floatation of the baht on July 2,

1997, there were a series of smaller, but still substantial depreciation over a prolonged

period, culminating in 17 percent depreciations by the end of August. The pressures

were eased in September in response to measures to prevent further depreciation. We

can see that a large depreciation in Thai baht initially had a substantial impact on

Philippines peso and Indonesia rupiah.

     In contrast, Indonesia’s exchange rate depreciated fairly steadily starting in July 1997.

Pressure on the Indonesia rupiah was intensified in late September due to increased problems in

the financial market, but complicated by the political sector. With the rupiah falling further

against the U.S. dollar by early October, IMF-supported programs for Indonesia were



10
  Stock price indices are: Jakarta Composite Index (ID), Korea South Composite Index (KR), Composite
Index (ML), Composite Index (PH), Weighted Index (TW), Bangkok Book Club (TH).



                                                                                                   8
announced on October 31, 1997. Then, Indonesia rupiah recovered temporarily in response to

the program. 11 The limited recovery in the next few weeks was reversed by large further

depreciation starting in late 1997 to mid 1998.

     Korea avoided substantial depreciation until October 1997, with the exchange rate

remaining broadly stable in July-October 1997. However, as Korean banks began to face

difficulties in rolling over their short-term foreign liabilities, the exchange rate fell precipitously

during late November- end December 1997.

                                        Figure 1-2, stock prices

     Figure 1-2 plots stock price indices of 6 countries from January 3, 1994 to July 7, 1999,

with January 3, 1994=100. It is obvious from this figure that the stock market paints a different

picture from the exchange rate market. Stock prices of Thailand peaked in 1994. On the other

hand, stock prices of Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, and Taiwan continued to increase or had been

stable until late 1996.

     Stock prices of Korea, Malaysia and Philippines began to fall in December 1996. In

Indonesia, stock prices even increased through mid-1997, but fell sharply in the aftermath of the

Thai crisis. Stock prices of Taiwan also fell by some extent, but its level in mid 1997 still

exceeded the 1994 price level. In October 1997, stock prices of Korea and Malaysia dropped

significantly.12 The declines in stock prices continued until September 1998, then headed for

recovery except Thailand and Malaysia.



4. Definitions of “origin” and “affected”

     In the midst of the crises, many currencies depreciated at the same time. For instance, a

large depreciation of the Thai baht seemed to have made a substantial impact on Philippines peso


11
    On November 5, 1997, the IMF’s Executive Board and Indonesia approved a three-year Stand-By
Arrangement equivalent to $10 billion. Additional financing commitments included $8 billion form the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, and pledges from interested countries amounting to some
$18 billion as a second line of defense.
12
   In October 1997, Hong Kong dollar was targeted of speculative attack and the Currency Board system
raised interest rate that resulted in a decline in stock prices. So, several measures to shore up the stock
market, including public funds injection, were taken.



                                                                                                          9
and Indonesia rupiah and then it made a feedback to the Thai baht. In order to analyze

statistically the size and the direction of spillover effect, we differentiate the “ground zero

(origin)” from the “affected” countries.

        In order to sharpen our analysis, we use the daily data. The problem of using a low

frequency data (semi-annual, quarterly, and monthly), on which many previous literature are

based, is that it smoothes out a lot of shorter duration interactions between the markets. Low

frequency data makes it difficult to capture small but important events in the sample period. The

feedback movements explained above would be grossed over by the use of monthly or quarterly

data.

        We first construct an indicator that distinguishes the “origin” from others that are referred

to as “affected”. To sketch the idea briefly, we first show the weekly (Friday to Friday) origin. It

is calculated based on the weekly change in the exchange rate. Weekly origin of a crisis is a

currency that depreciated most in the week with its depreciation exceeding 4%. This cut off

number is ad hoc.

        Table1-1 plots weekly origin of exchange rate depreciation, from July 1997 to January

1998.

                                          Table 1-1, weekly origin

        One problem using weekly change as origin is that weekly origin depends on the choice of

the day of the week. Think of a currency that depreciates 3 percent from Thursday to Friday and

then again 2 percent from Friday to Monday. Using the definition of 4-percent-cut-off

depreciation starting on Friday does not pick this currency as origin; while, Monday-to-Monday

origin does.



        Now, a new way of defining origin is developed.

        First, daily percentage change of the exchange rate (stock price) is written as:



                  DR(t,j) = R(t, j) - R(t-1, j),




                                                                                                   10
where R(t,j) is log of nominal exchange rate (country j) with respect to the US dollar at date t.

We next compute the weighted cumulative change, DRR(t,j), as the weighted cumulative change

with the declining weights of past DRs 13:



                DRR(t,j) = 0.5DR(t,j)+0.25DR(t-1,j)+0.125DR(t-2,j)

                                       +0.0625DR(t-3,j)+0.0625DR(t-4,j).



     The rationale for our measurement of origin based on DRR, not on DR, is as follow. It is

often observed that a large depreciation (decline in stock price) followed by a large recovery in

order to correct the overshooting. For example, both currency A and B were heavily hit to

depreciate 11 and 10 percent respectively. Next day, currency A showed a recovery of 8 percent,

while currency B did only 2 percent. It would be appropriate to interpret that currency B was

more severely targeted. DR-based-origin, however, counts A as ground zero. We are likely to

misjudge the severity of crisis should we see only the daily percentage change of depreciation.

Using DRR, country B will be identified as a crisis country.

     Our declining weight formula is also intended to avoid lingering effects of large changes of

days ago. A crisis is not judged as severe when the rate of depreciation (decline in stock price) is

large, but one-time-only. If we assume the equal weights, then, a very large depreciation of 5

days ago would influence the selection of the current origin of a crisis.



     Our “origin” measure, DOR, is defined as follows:

     DOR(t,0) = largest DRR at each t and also whose depreciation rate exceeds 2%.14




13
   The weights are arbitrarily chosen. The optimal weight (coefficient) may be computed from running
VAR, but this method would not be plausible for East Asian countries since they pegged their currencies
to US dollar prior to 1997.
14
   The threshold of 2% is arbitral.



                                                                                                     11
     Table1-2 and Table 1-3 summarize the DOR(t,0) of exchange rates and stock prices,

respectively.

          Table 1-2; Daily origin of exchange rate, Table 1-3; daily origin of Stock price

     Table 1-2 lists the origins determined by DOR for the exchange rate depreciation from July

1997 to July 1999. The table makes it possible to pin down the crisis date in each country. For

instance, July 1997 for Thailand, August-September 1997 for Indonesia, October 1997- January

1998 for Korea, and after January 1998 for Indonesia. With the economy back on the growth

path in most of Asian countries after April 1999, the number of plots of origin declined. Our

measure of origin is consistent with academic references as to the beginning of the crisis period:

number of different measures gives a starting date of July 1997 for Thailand, August 1997 for

Indonesia, and November 1997 for Korea.

     Table 1-3 plots the origin of stock price declines. The stock price in the region was at its

peak in early 1990s and then went downward by 1997 in most of countries. Since late 1994,

stock prices began to fall in Thailand and fell by almost one third. The decline continued in

Thailand in early 1997. In Indonesia, stock prices increased through mid-1997, but fell

dramatically in the aftermath of the Thai crisis. In Korea, the decline of stock prices was

temporarily interrupted in the first half of 1997 but continued in the second half in the wake of

the banking sector crisis. As the contagion of exchange rate depreciation spread in the region,

the downward pressure of stock prices was further intensified in Malaysia, Korea, and Indonesia.

Since July 1998, stock price decline originated mainly from Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines.

The rate of decline and the frequency of large decline have been moderated since December

1998. The tremors in the stock market occurred even before the currency crisis and lingered on

long after the currency started to strengthen.

     In wake of financial crisis, market sentiment tends to be more volatile in general. Investors

become more sensitive to bad news announcements and events. The news works as a signal to

investors. A publicly available signal provides investors common information that may induce

them to behave uniformly. The so-called herd behavior may result.




                                                                                                12
       Table 2 lists news release, relevant to the timing and date of exchange rate origin in Table

1-2, collected from Bloomberg. Before the July 1997 crisis, exchange rates in most of the East

Asian countries did not respond to news because of the de facto peg to the US dollar. Therefore

we check if the behavior of exchange rate began to reflect the news release after the floatation.

                               Table2, exchange rate, daily origin-News

       For early stage of crisis, news was relatively straightforward and was categorized to

crisis-related statement; such as authorities’ announcement on exchange rate regime, foreign

reserves and IMF support package. In late 1997 and early 1998, news relevant to large

movements of the exchange rates became related to the vulnerability of financial and economic

systems, bankruptcies, and political instability. A case can be seen that concerns on the banking

system in Korea intensified the devaluation pressure at this stage. It is also argued that exchange

rate movement was highly sensitive to news related to political instability in Indonesia.



5. Matrices of Cumulative Contagion

       In order to make the idea of high-frequency contagion more concrete, a new measure of

crisis spillover is proposed, namely the contagion coefficient. This is the ratio of depreciation

rate of origin to that of affected country. This contagion coefficient measures high-frequent

spreading of financial crisis from the origin (first attacked country) to other affected countries.

       The contagion coefficient is defined as:



     CC(t,i)= DRR(t,i)／ DOR(t,0)，



where i≠0. Table 3-1 reports CC(t,i) for exchange rate and Table 3-2 to Table 3-4 report CC(t,i)

for stock price. Sample period starts on July 1 1997 and ends on July 7 1999.15



15
   The sample period includes when Malaysia began to peg its currency to US dollar starting at September
1, 1998. The daily percentage change in exchange rate is close to zero and so is the DRR in Malaysia after
September 1998. Therefore, Malaysia is virtually excluded from “origin” for this period. Thus, we do not
need to explicitly impose structural change of Malaysia on regression models in the following section.



                                                                                                        13
     A negative sign of CC indicates the opposite movements of exchange rate (stock price) between

origin and affected countries: in the case of exchange rate, a devaluation of the origin country leads to

an appreciation of affected countries. On the other hand, a positive sign of CC indicates that the

direction of exchange rate (stock price) movements between the origin country and affected countries

are the same. That is, a devaluation of origin country leads to a devaluation of affected countries:

namely contagion.

     “t-stat (t-statistics)” in Table 3-1-Table 3-4 is the significance for testing the null hypothesis

of CC equals zero.16 The null hypothesis implies there exists no significant high-frequency

contagion from origin to affected.

                                 Table3-1 plot of CC (exchange rate), Figure 2-1

     Table 3-1 shows CC(t,i) for the exchange rate. As shown in Table 1-2, the frequency of

crisis (the origin) drastically decreases after June 1998, implying that exchange rates had

become stabilized or back on a recovery track by the summer 1998. Most of crisis (large

depreciation) after July 1998 were from Indonesia. Therefore, we divide the sample period into

four in the case of Indonesia. Specifically, for origin of Indonesia, we calculate CC(t,i) for the

two sub-sample periods, crisis period (1997/7/1-12/31, 1998/1/1-6/30) and recovery period

(1998/7/1-1999/7/7), in addition to the worst-state period (1997/10/1-1997/12/31).

     In the case of exchange rates, there are 87 instances that are regarded as the crisis origin in

terms of our definition. Of those, 60 instances are of Indonesia, 14 instances of Korea, and 7

instances of Thailand, and 6 others.

     The significance of estimated coefficients varies according to sample periods and countries.

The contagion coefficients originating from Thailand and from Philippines are, in many cases,

negative. Shortly after the onset of currency crisis, two hard-hit currencies, the Thai baht and

Philippines peso, continued the devaluation while other currencies were not severely affected

and remained their value to US dollar. Thus, the contagion coefficients from these countries to



16
  Calculation is as follows: Stat = (x^-x0)/(square root of variance / square root of NOB), where
x^:average; x0:(Null)=0 and x0 is the ratio of DOR/DRR (CC).



                                                                                                       14
others are not significantly different from zero.

     The sign of coefficients of affected countries, when the origin is either Indonesia or Korea,

is positive and significantly different from zero. That is, the large depreciation of Indonesian and

Korean currencies tended to induce simultaneous depreciation in other currencies. That is, we

find evidence of significant high-frequency contagion originating from Indonesia to Malaysia,

Indonesia to Thailand, Korea to Malaysia, Korea to Thailand, and Korea to Indonesia.

     Our high-frequency data shows that the contagion coefficients of Indonesia as the origin

are positive and significant for all but Korea over the period from July to December 1997. Also,

the Korean won as an origin does no t affect the Indonesian Rupiah. Contrary to the conventional

wisdom that the depreciation of Indonesian Rupiah won contagiously spilled over to Korean

won and vice versa, the finding provides evidence that the collapse of Indonesian rupiah did not

cause the depreciation of Korean won. As shown in Table 2 (news release), exchange rate

movement was highly sensitive to news related to political instability in Indonesia: the concerns

on the political instability intensified the devaluation pressure. The effect of Rupiah depreciation,

or political instability, affected neighboring countries, but not Korea. After June 17, 1998, the

result is reversed: the contagion coefficient of Indonesia is significantly positive only in Korea

and insignificantly different from zero or significantly negative in other countries.

    Figure 2-1 shows the significance of exchange rate contagion coefficient graphically. As

seen from the figure, depreciation of Indonesia and Korea has high-frequency contagion effects

on currencies in the region, while we do not find evidence of significant spillover effect from

Thailand to other countries.



              Table 3-2～3-4, plot of CC (stock price), Figure 2-2, Figure 2-3

     Table 3-2 - Table 3-4 presents CC(t,i) of stock prices. Table3-2 shows CC for whole sample

period and Table3-3 and Table3-4 present results for pre-crisis and post-crisis periods,

respectively. The instances as origin as a whole dramatically increase for post-crisis, but the

situation depends on pairs of countries. Figure 2-2 and 2-3 show the significance of stock price




                                                                                                  15
contagion coefficient before and after the crisis, respectively.

     For Indonesia, there are 2 instances as the origin for the pre-crisis period, and 28 instances

for the post-crisis period. For Korea, 3 instances for the pre-crisis and 44 for the post-crisis; for

Malaysia, 4 for the pre-crisis and 25 for the post-crisis. For these 3 countries, the number of

instances regarded as origin dramatically increased after the onset of crisis.

     On the other hand, for the Philippines and Thailand, the number of instances before and

after the crisis does not show marked difference. For the Philippines, there are 12 instances for

the pre-crisis period and 15 instances for the post-crisis period. For Thailand, 17 for the

pre-crisis and 16 for the post-crisis. In contrast to other countries, Taiwan is the only country

whose instances as origin surprisingly decreased from 16 for the pre-crisis period to 6 for the

post-crisis period.

    The contagion coefficients of ASEAN countries as the origin for the post-crisis period turn

to be significantly positive, and the magnitude of contagion coefficients become larger. A case

for Korea as the origin, the contagion coefficients for the pre-crisis period are negative, while

they become positive and significantly different from zero for the post-crisis period.

     In sum, high frequency contagion of stock prices has been intensified with some exceptions

in Taiwan, after the currency crisis occurred in Thailand in July 1997.



6. Regression Results

6.1. Exchange Rates

     In the previous section we find high-frequency contagion in both exchange rates and stock

prices among the Asian countries. The stock price high-frequency contagion becomes

intensified after the crisis.

     In this section, we present some formal econometric results to show statistically to what

extent the depreciation of exchange rate (decline of stock prices) of first attacked country,

namely origin, affects others.




                                                                                                   16
     The Dynamic OLS (DOLS) method with the following specification is used:17



       affected(t,i) = const + a1*origin(t, 0)

                               +b1*dorigin(t+1, 0) + b2*dorigin(t, 0) +b3*dorigin(t-1, 0) + e,



where i≠0. Here, affect(t,i) is DRR and origin(t,0) is DOR defined in section 4 above, and

dorigin(t,0) = DOR(t,0)-DOR(t-1,0).

     The Dynamic OLS method provides efficient estimator if the regressor is cointegrated or

endogenous. By including the current change as well as the past and future changes of the

regressor in the regression, we are able to maintain the strict exogeneity of the regressor, the

origin (DOR). The order of leads and lags of changes of regressor, dorigin, is arbitrary: we set

the order of both leads and lags being equal to 1 in the analysis below. Standard errors for a

point estimate of a1 is recalculated based on the DOLS residuals and then adjusted to the sample

period of recalculated the augmented cointegrating regression.18

     For purposes of comparison, 2 types of estimation are conducted. (1) The regressor,

origin(t,j), includes all instances of being the “origin”. That is, we do not distinguish the first

crisis “country”. We call this regressor “pooled origin”. And (2) country specific origin(t,j).

That is, a regression is conducted on origin according to the country. We call this

“country-specific origin”.

     The expected sign of a point estimate of a1 is positive if there exists high-frequency

contagion. Estimation results are summarized in Table 4-1.

                                       Table4-1 DOLS exchange rate

     Table 4-1 shows the estimation results for exchange rate for the period from July 1 1997 to

July 7 1999. The first row of the table shows the regression results estimated with the pooled



17
   We do not include the interest rate differentials in the estimation. For the very short period of time,
especially in the phase of crisis, investors do not take account of interest rate parity, but only nominal price
(exchange rate, stock price). Thus, interest rate differentials are expected to be insignificant.
18
   See Hayashi (2000) for details.



                                                                                                              17
origin. The second and the third rows of the table show the estimation results with

country-specific origins, Indonesia and Korea, respectively.19

     Estimation results show that estimated coefficients a1 in Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and

Thailand with the pooled origin are positive and significantly different from zero. The sign of

estimated coefficient is, however, negative in Indonesia. The result for Indonesia can be

interpreted as that the Indonesian rupiah behaved differently from others, namely no contagion

in general. For example, most of the currencies in East Asia are back on recovery track around

April 1998, while Indonesia rupiah continued to decline.

     Estimated coefficients in Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand are significantly

different from zero and the point estimates range from 0.12 to 0.19. In contrast, the estimated

coefficient is not significant in Taiwan: that is, Taiwan did not suffer the high-frequency

contagion of crisis from the first-hit country. This finding is consistent with the fact that Taiwan

is one of the least hit countries in 1997.

     Next, estimation results on country-specific origin are examined. A case of Indonesia as

origin, contagion coefficients in Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan and Thailand are positive and

significantly different from zero. In contrast, contagion coefficient in Korea is significantly

negative. Indonesia rupiah severely depreciated following the Korea won in early 1998. The

movement of Korean won was opposite to that of Indonesia: when Indonesia was hard hit,

Korean won was on the recovery track. Therefore, the coefficient of Korea on rupiah is likely to

be negative.

     There seems a significant high frequency contagion in Indonesia and Malaysia in case of

Korea as the origin. The estimated coefficient in Indonesia is 0.68 and significantly different

from zero. The estimated coefficient in Philippines is 0.24 but insignificant, and in Thailand,

significantly negative.

     Two important findings emerge from the estimation results. First, there exists



19
  DOLS regressions include leads and lags in both OLS and residual regressions and therefore, reduce
degree of freedom. Thus, Thai origin is precluded from the regression.



                                                                                                   18
high-frequency contagion among East Asian countries. Our contagion coefficients are positive

and statistically significant in most country pairs of the origin and the affected. Second,

contagion effects originating from Indonesia and from Korea are significant in many countries.20



6.2. Stock Prices

        Table 5-1 to Table 5-7 presents the estimation results for stock prices. We run

regressions for three sample periods: whole sample period (January 1994-July 1999), pre-crisis

(January 1994-June 1997), and post-crisis period (July 1997-July 1999). Due to the degree of

freedom problem, regressions for the pre-crisis period for Indonesia, Korea and Malaysia as the

origin are excluded. The regression estimates on Taiwan as the origin is not shown for the

post-crisis period for the same reason.

                                 Table5-1～Table5-7 Stock Price DOLS

     Regression results of contagion coefficients estimated on pooled origin are shown in Table

5-1. Contagion effects are significant with positive coefficients in all countries for the whole

sample period. The estimated coefficient is significantly negative in Korea for both pre- and

post- crisis periods. However, the magnitude of coefficient becomes smaller for post crisis

period. In contrast to the results that showed the intensified contagious effects for post crisis

period in most countries, the magnitude of estimated coefficient in Taiwan declined sharply after

the crisis. Taiwan was less influenced from high-frequency stock price contagion after the crisis.

     Table 5-2 to 5-7 presents regression results estimated with the country-specific origin.

     Table5-2 shows the results with the Indonesia origin. The estimated coefficients are

significantly positive in both Malaysia and the Philippines.

     Table5-3 is the case of Korea as the origin. All estimated coefficients, except Thailand, are

significantly negative. The magnitude of estimated coefficients for the post-crisis period

becomes larger (in negative) in Indonesia and Malaysia. These are consistent with the fact that

20
   Baig and Goldfajin (1999), for instance, use VAR to analyze impulse response among Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand and conclude that the impulse shock of Indonesia has significant
effect on other countries. Our findings are consistent with these results.



                                                                                                    19
Korean stock price index declined sharply in late 1997 while stock prices in other countries

remained stable.

        Table5-4 reports the estimation results on Malaysia as the origin. Most of the estimates are

significantly negative, but positive and significant only in Thailand.

        The results of Philippines as the origin are summarized in Table 5-5. The estimated

coefficients in Indonesia, Korea and Malaysia are significantly positive for both pre- and post-

crisis periods. The sign of coefficients turn to be positive (but insignificant) in Thailand for the

post-crisis period.

        Table5-6 presents the results of Taiwan as the origin. The coefficients are all significant.

        The estimation results of Thailand as the origin are shown in Table 5-7. The sign of

coefficients turn to be positive (insignificant) in Indonesia and negative in Taiwan (significant)

and in Malaysia (insignificant), after the crisis.

        In sum, the regression results estimated on the pooled origin and on the country-specific

origin do not show marked differences. The sign and significance of estimated coefficients vary

from country to country depending on origin by individual countries. The estimation results with

the pooled origin, however, clearly show the existence of high-frequency contagion in the stock

market, especially after the crisis. This finding is consistent with a view that the change in the

exchange rate regimes among the Asian countries influenced the relationship between capital

markets performances, and investors started to treat the region as a whole.21



7. Contagion and Trade Link Channel

        In this section we explore for possible channels of high-frequency contagion. Why crises

spread and why they tend to be regional are, as briefly mentioned in Section 2, explained in the

literature by macroeconomic similarities, the existence of common creditor, and a trade linkage.

        In financial market, investors pull their capital out of countries in the same region of the



21
     Malliaropulos (1998), for example, reports negative relationship between the return of stock prices and
     the change in exchange rates.



                                                                                                          20
first-hit country. Investors’ perception of which countries will be affected next depends on

several factors including macroeconomic fundamentals and financial vulnerability. From the

perspective of most empirical crisis models, however, it is hard to understand why crises tend to

spread in the same region, at least at an early stage of crisis. As shown in Glick and Rose (1999),

performances of macroeconomic fundamentals are not necessarily similar among crises

countries.

     Another transmission channel, the Common Creditor hypothesis, emphasize the role of

bank lending. Lenders tend to withdraw capital not only from the first-hit country but also from

others in order to avoid further losses. Figure 3-1 reports the bank liabilities in Asian six

countries at the end of June 1997.22 The figure reveals that the Asian countries, most notably

Indonesia, Korea and Thailand, relied on international bank credit. The common creditor

hypothesis can be examined whether capital withdrawal by financial institutions, whose loan

ratio to these countries are as high as that in the first-hit country, will induce depreciation. The

common creditor index is calculated as

          CCI(i,0,k) ≡ Li0*Lik

The loan ratio, Li0 (Lik), is the bank lending from country i (Japan, US, Europe) to country 0 (or k)

(Asia, and 0≠k) divided by the total loan lending to the world from country i. For example, Li0 is the

ratio of Japan’s lending to Thailand (i=Japan and 0=Thailand) to Japan’s total lending to the world.

The loan ratio Lik is the ratio of Japan’s lending to Malaysia. (i=Japan and k=Malaysia). The common

creditor hypothesis states that the higher the loan ratio to the origin and other countries, the larger the

withdrawal of capital from other countries. According to the hypothesis, a positive relationship

between the common creditor index, CCI(i,0,k) and contagion coefficient CC(i,k).

     Figure 3-2 plots the contagion coefficients (CC) and the Common creditor index (CCI). The

CC is measured on the vertical axis and the CCI is measured on the horizontal axis. The

devaluation spillover from Thailand to Indonesia, from Korea to Thailand and to Indonesia, and,



22
  Bank for International Settlement (BIS), Consolidated International Claims of Reporting Banks on
Individual Countries, by Nationality of Reporting Banks, BIS Quarterly Review, June 2002.



                                                                                                         21
from Indonesia to Thailand, seems to be supported by the existence of common creditors. For

other pairs, however, it is difficult to find a strong relationship between common creditor index

and contagion. The correlation coefficient, in total, is –0.14. Therefore, it is difficult to interpret

the results as a supportive evidence for the Common Creditor hypothesis.

                                            Figure 3-1, 3-2

        Depreciation of the first-hit country gains price competitiveness at least in the short run.

Then, countries that have trading relationship with this country lose competitiveness. They are

therefore more likely to allow depreciation to maintain competitiveness.

        In practice, it takes some time until current trade balance deterioration will be reflected in

GDP and other economic data so that depreciation is justified by fundamentals. However,

investors predict the future depreciations of trading partners at the onset of a currency crisis in

one country. Investors are likely to sell currencies of trading partners in anticipation of

depreciation in the near future, so that depreciation happens even before the actual trading

channel runs its course. Hence, theory predicts a slow process, but expectation moves events

faster. That is, investors based on expectation of deterioration of trading balances of the

neighboring economies in the future sells the currency immediately, resulting in high frequency

contagion. This is the trade link channel through which the devaluation (or depreciation) of the

first-hit currency contemporaneously spills over to other currencies in the region.

        For many Asian countries, a large portion of their goods is exported to the United States,

Japan, EU, and Intra Asia.23 It is tempting to believe that some direct and indirect trade linkages

due to bilateral and third-market competition were instrumental in repeated rounds of

competitive devaluation. There is a large volume of studies on contagion and trade link

(Eichengreen and Rose (1999), Glick and Rose (1999), Forbes (2000), Kaminsky and Reinhart

(2000) to name a few), and they support the evidence of relationship between the contagion and

trade links.

        In the following, we investigate evidence of the relationship between the high-frequency

23
     Export share within Asia varies between countries and ranges from 25% to 45%.



                                                                                                     22
contagion and trade link channel using three measures; competitive effect, income effect, and

cheap import effect.



7.1 Competitive Effect

     There are three different types of explanations why contagion spreads via the trade channel

in geographic proximity. The first explanation relies on the competitive effect analyzed by

Gerlach and Smets (1995), and Corsetti, Pesenti, Roubini and Tille (2000). Devaluation of a

first-hit country makes export prices of its trading competitors relatively more expensive. Then,

market participants may expect declining trade balance in competitors due to weakened price

competitiveness, and are likely to withdraw capital out of these countries.

     For analysis, we provide two indices, export share and Direct Trade Linkage Index (DTLI).

                                                    Table６

     Table 6 presents the export share in intra-Asia trade for each of 5 countries (Indonesia,

Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand) for 1996-1999.24 The export share of country m is

the ratio of export from country m to country n divided by the total export of country m. The

relationship between contagion coefficient (CC) and the export share is expected to be positive.

If the export share of the origin to affected countries is large, the price competitiveness of the

origin affects those countries adversely. As a result, affected countries are more likely to suffer

the crisis contagion from the first-hit country.

     In order to look at the competitive effect more carefully, we employ another index, Direct

Trade Linkage Index (DTLI), similar to that used in Glick and Rose (1999).25



          DTLI 0i = 1- (xi0 - x0i) / (xi0 + x0i).




24
  IMF, Direction of Trade (2000).
25
  Although this index is similar to that in Glick and Rose (1999), the calculation is different from theirs.
They focus on the absolute difference of export share between countries 0 and i, while our calculation
incorporates the difference of export and import size, and direction of trade between the two countries.



                                                                                                          23
        Here, xmn denotes bilateral exports from country m to n. Subscript o and i indicate home

country and its direction of trade, respectively. Thus, x0i measures exports from home country to

other country i, while xi0 can be interpreted as imports of home country from other country. Then,

(xi0 - x0i) denotes the net import of home country from country i, and (xi0 + x0i) denotes the

aggregate trade of home country.

        The index DTLI 0i is higher than 1 if exports from country o to country i is greater than

imports of o from i. The index lies between 0 and 1 if imports exceed exports. The index is close

to 1 if the bilateral trade between countries o and i are almost equal.

        For example, when the bilateral trade balance from countries o to i is positive, then the

depreciation (or devaluation) of country o accelerates the export of country o and, in contrast,

depresses the export of country i to country o. Then, country i may suffer the disadvantage of

price competition. Thus, contagion coefficient (CC) is expected to be positively related to DTLI

0i   for DTLI 0i >1. On the other hand, when exports from country i to country o exceeds imports of

country i from country o, for DTLI 0i <1, it is assumed that the price disadvantage of country i

resulting from the depreciation of country o is less severe. So, CC may be small and/or negative.

Therefore, the positive correlation coefficient between DTLI and CC is expected as a whole. The

expected relationship between DTLI and CC is summarized below.



                   country 0 (origin)        country i      country i : price            CC

                                                             competitiveness

     DTLI 0i >1     export surplus      excess of import       great loss              positive

     DTLI 0i ≈ 1       balance                balance       small loss-no change       positive

     DTLI 0i <1     excess of import       export surplus       no change          small or negative



                                 Table 7       Figure 3-3, Figure 3-4

        Table 7 summarizes DTLI0i. Figure 3-3 plots the contagion coefficients (CC) and the export

share, and figure 3-4 plots the CC and DTLI 0i. The CCs are measured on the vertical axis in both




                                                                                                  24
figures. The export share and DTLI are measured on the horizontal axis in figure 3-3 and figure

3-4, respectively.

       As shown in figure 3-3 and figure 3-4, there exists a positive relationship between CC and

export share, and between CC and DTLI. The correlation coefficient of each figure is 0.329 and

0.258, respectively.



7.2 Income Effect

        The second measure to relate the trade links to crisis contagion is the income effect.26

Imports of crisis country decline due to the downturn of economic activities and therefore the

income level decreases. Then, its trading partners also suffer negative macroeconomic effects

because of reduction in exports to the first-hit country. Countries with large export share to the

first-hit country suffer from a negative income effect of the crisis country and, therefore, are

likely to experience depreciation as well.

                                         Table8 Figure 3-5

        Table8 reports the income effect index. The index is represented by the export (from

“affected” to “origin”) to GDP ratio, exporti0 / GDPi, where i and o denote the affected country

and the origin country, respectively. Figure 3-5 plots the index on the horizontal axis and the

Contagion Coefficient on the vertical axis. There is a positive relationship between the income

effect and the contagion. This correlation coefficient is 0.357. This result implies that countries

with large export share to origin country are likely to suffer currency crisis.



7.3 Cheaper Import Effect (bilateral trade effect, supply effect)

        The third measure of trade channel is the Cheaper Import Effect (also called either bilateral

trade effect or supply effect). Depreciation of the first-hit currency drives export prices down,

which is equivalent to the decline in import price in its trading partners. With nominal income

and other conditions held constant in a trading partner country, a decline in its import price raises

26
     See for example, Forbes (2000).



                                                                                                   25
disposable income and, therefore, improves welfare of the country. It is also expected that the

terms of trade in trade partner countries improve because the import price from the origin

country decreases while the export price of these countries remains constant for the short-run.

     In this case, in contrast to other two trade channel effects above, depreciation of the first-hit

country may have positive effect on its trading partners. As shown in Corsetti, Pesenti, Roubini

and Tille (2000) and Forbes (2000), speculative pressures may not be transmitted to trading

partners through the trading channel if the import price effect in trading partner countries

dominates over the two previous measures.

                                        Table9 Figure 3-6

     Table 9 presents the Cheaper Import Effect. The index is calculated as the import from the

origin country divided by GDP. The larger the index, the larger the import from the origin

country. The contagion coefficient (CC) and the index are expected to be negatively correlated

because the large devaluation in the origin country may improve its trading partners’ welfare in

terms of the decline of import price, and therefore trading partners are less likely to suffer crisis.

  Figure 3-6 plots the CC and the index. It is obvious from the figure that the index has

positively related to CC. The correlation coefficient is 0.384. This result means that the cheaper

import effect does not work as to improve welfare of affected countries. Rather, the negative

effect of depreciation in the origin country, especially the effect from weakened price

competition, has been dominant across international trade.

     All of the tests above have a consistent account. The correlation coefficients between trade

link index and contagion coefficient are summarized in Table 10. As seen in this table, various

measures support our high-frequency contagion and trade link channel.

                                              Table 10



8. Concluding remarks

     Using the daily data for the period of Asian Currency Crises, this paper examines

high-frequency contagion among Asian six countries.




                                                                                                    26
    By distinguishing the origin and affected countries in the causality relationship, we find

evidence of statistically significant high-frequency contagion among Asian countries in both the

exchange rate and the stock prices. The depreciation of Indonesia and of Korea has been found to

have a significant high-frequency contagion effect on other currencies. We also find that the

spillover effect in stock markets has been intensified after the crisis in most of the Asian

countries.

     Surprisingly, our high-frequency spillover effect is tied to the international trade channel. There

is a positive relationship between the trade link indices and our contagion index. This implies that the

bilateral trade linkage is an important variable in transmitting financial pressures across international

borders.



  References
(1) Agenor, Pierre-Richard and Joshua Aizenman (1998) “Contagion and Volatility with
Imperfect Credit Markets,” IMF Staff Papers Vol. 45, No.2, 207-235.
(2) Baig, Taimur and Ilan Goldfajn (1999) “Financila Market Contagion in the Asian Crisis,”
IMF Staff Papers Vol. 46, No.2, 167-195.
(3) Berg, Andrew and Catherine Pattillo (1999) “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A test,” IMF
Staff Papers Vol.46, No.2, 107-138.
(4) Collins, Susan (1992) “The Expected timing of EMS realignments: 1979-83,” NBER
Working Paper No. 4068.
(5) Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1998a) “What Caused the Asian
Currency and Financial Crisis? Part I: A Macroeconomic Overview,” NBER Working Paper No.
6833.
(6) Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1998b) “What Caused the Asian
Currency and Financial Crisis? Part II: The Policy Debate,” NBER Working Paper No. 6834.
(7) Corsetti Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, Nouriel Roubini and Gerdric Tille (2000) “Competitive
Devaluations: Toward a Welfare-Based Approach,” Journal of International Economics 51,
217-241.
(8) Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1994) “Speculative Attacks on
pegged exchange rates: an empirical exploration with special reference to the European
monetary system,” NBER Working Paper No. 4898.
(9) Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1996) “Contagious Currency
Crises: First Tests,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 98(4), 463-484.
(10) Flood, Robert and Nancy Marion (1994) “The size and timing of devaluations in




                                                                                                       27
capital-controlled developing economies,” NBER Working Paper No. 4957.
(11) Flood, Robert and Nancy Marion (1998) “Perspectives on the Recent Currency Crisis
literature,” NBER Working Paper No. 6738.
(12) Flood, Robert and Nancy Marion (2000) “Self-Fulfilling risk predictions: an application to
speculative attacks,” Journal of International Economics 50, 245-268.
(13) Forbes, Kristin (2000) “The Asian Flu and Russian Virus: Firm-Level Evidence on How
Crises are Transmitted Internationally,” NBER Working Paper No. 7807.
(14) Gerlach, Stefan and Frank Smets (1995) “Contagious Speculative Attacks,” European
Journal of Political Economy 11, 45-63.
(15) Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (1999) “Contagion and trade Why are currency crises
regional?,” Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 603-617.
(16) Hayashi, Fumio (2000) Econometrics, Princeton University Press.
(17)Ito, Takatoshi, 1997, Capital flow and Emergin market, Lessons from Mxico crisis (Sihon
ido to sinkou sijou- Mexico crisis no kyoukun), Keizai kenkyu 48(4), 289-305, in Japanese.
(18) Ito, Takatoshi (2000) “Capital Flows to East Asia,” in Sebastian Edwards (eds.), Capital
Flows and the Emerging Economics: Theory, Evidence, and Controversies, University of
Chicago Press.
(19) Kaminsky, Graciela, Saul Lizondo and Carmen M. Reinhart (1998) “Leading Indicators of
Currency Crises,” IMF Staff Papers Vol.45, No.1, 1-48.
(20) Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen M. Reinhart (2000) “On crises, contagion, and
confusion,” Journal of International Economics Vol. 51, No. 1, 145-168.
(21) Masson, Paul (1999a) “Contagion: macroeconomic models with multiple equilibria,”
Journal of International Money and Finance 18, 587-602.
(22) Masson, Paul (1999b) “Contagion: monsoonal effects, spillovers and jumps between
multiple equilibria,” in Agenor, P.R., M. Miller, D.Vines and A. Weber (eds.), The Asian
Financial Crisis: Causes, Contagion and Consequences, Cambridge University Press.
(23) Obstfeld, Maurice (1996) “Models of Currency crises with self-fulfilling features,”
European Economic Review 40, 1037-1047.
(24) Otker, Inci and Ceyla Pazarbasioglu, 1997, Speculative attacks and macroeconomic
fundamentals: evidence from some European Currencies, European Economic Review 4,
847-860.
(25) Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs (1998) “The Onset of the East Asian Financial Crisis,”
NBER Working Paper No. 6680.
(26) Sachs, Jefrrey, Aaron Tornell and Andres Velasco (1996) “Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets: The Lessons from 1995,” NBER Working Paper, No. 5576.
(27) Yoshitomi, Masaru and Kenichi Ohno (1999) “Capital-Account Crisis and Credit
Contraction: The New Nature of Crisis Requires New Policy Responses,” ADBI Working Paper
No.2.




                                                                                             28
                      Figure 1-1: Asia Exchange Rates
                            June 30, 1997 = 100
120


100
                                                                ID
                                                                KR
 80
                                                                MY

 60                                                             PH
                                                                TW
 40                                                             TH


 20


  0
       1
      16
       1
      15
       1
      16
       1
      16
       3
      17
       1
      16
       1
      16
       2
      16
       2
      16
       1
      16
       1
      18
       1
      16
       1
      16
       3
      17
       1
      16
       1
      16
       2
      16
       1
      16
       1
      15
       1
      15
       1
      16
       1
      16
       3
      14
       1
      16
       17
      7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

          1997                  1998                    1999




                                                                     29
                                                     Figure 1-2: Asia Stock Price Index
                                                           January 3, 1994 = 100
180

160

140

120                                                                                                                                              ID

100                                                                                                                                              KR

80                                                                                                                                               MY

60                                                                                                                                               PH

40                                                                                                                                               TW

20                                                                                                                                               TH

 0
      1
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      1
      1
      1
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      2
      1
      3
      3
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2
      2
      1
      1
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2
      1
      1
      1
      1
      1
      3
      1
      1
      2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

                 1994                 1995                     1996                     1997            1998        1998            1999




                                                                                                                                                 30
Figure 2-1
Exchange Rate Contagion Coefficient      1%           , 5%          , 10%

              ID                  TW



      KR                               TH




               ML              PH

Figure 2-2
Stock Price Contagion Coefficient (before Crisis) 1%          , 5%           , 10%

              ID                  TW



      KR                               TH




               ML                PH



Figure 2-3
Stock Price Contagion Coefficient (after Crisis) 1%          , 5%           , 10%

              ID                  TW



      KR                               TH




               ML                PH




                                                                                     31
                                         Figure 3-1
                    International Bank Lending to Asia (millions of USD)
                                         1997-Q2
                                                                            US
80000
                                                                            UK
70000                                                                       Sweden
60000                                                                       Spain
                                                                            Netherlands
50000
                                                                            Japan
40000
                                                                            Italy
30000                                                                       Germany

20000                                                                       France
                                                                            Finland
10000
                                                                            Canada
    0                                                                       Belgium
        Indonesia




                    Malaysia




                                             Korea




                                                      Taiwan




                                                                 Thailand
                               Philippines




                                                                            Austria




                                                                                          32
                                                          Figure 3-2
                                                                                            idkr   idmy
                                        Common Creditor Index and Contagion coefficient
                                                                                            idph   idth
                              0.9                                                           krid   krmy
                              0.8                                                           krph   krth
contagion coefficient (CC)
                              0.7                                                           myid   mykr
                              0.6                                                           myph   myth
                              0.5                                                           phid   phkr
                              0.4                                                           phmy   phth
                              0.3                                                           thid   thkr
                              0.2                                                           thmy   thph
                              0.1                                                           idtw   krtw
                                0                                                           mytw   phtw
                             -0.1                                                           thtw   twid
                             -0.2                                                           twkr   twmy
                                    0   0.02   0.04    0.06   0.08    0.1     0.12   0.14   twph   twth

                                               Common Creditor Index (CCI)




                                                                                                          33
                                                          Figure 3-3                     idkr
                                            Export share and Contagion coefficient       idmy
                                                                                         idph
                                                                                         idth
                             0.5
                                                                                         krid
                             0.4                                                         krmy
contagion coefficient (CC)



                                                                                         krph
                             0.3                                                         krth
                                                                                         myid
                             0.2                                                         mykr
                                                                                         myph
                             0.1                                                         myth
                                                                                         phid
                               0
                                                                                         phkr
                             -0.1                                                        phmy
                                                                                         phth
                             -0.2                                                        thid
                                    0   1     2        3        4       5        6   7   thkr
                                                                                         thmy
                                                      export share
                                                                                         thph




                                                                                                34
                                                      Figure 3-4                     idkr
                                       Trade linkage and Contagion coefficient       idmy
                                                                                     idph
                            0.5                                                      idth
                                                                                     krid
                            0.4                                                      krmy
Contagion coefficient (CC




                                                                                     krph
                            0.3                                                      krth
                                                                                     myid
                            0.2                                                      mykr
                                                                                     myph
                            0.1                                                      myth
                                                                                     phid
                              0                                                      phkr
                                                                                     phmy
                            -0.1                                                     phth
                                                                                     thid
                            -0.2                                                     thkr
                                   0                       1                     2   thmy
                                                                                     thph
                                               Direct trade linkage index




                                                                                            35
                                                                                           idkr
                                                         Figure 3-5                        idmy
                                          Income effect and Contagion coefficient          idph
                                                                                           idth
                             0.5                                                           krid
                                                                                           krmy
                             0.4                                                           krph
contagion coefficient (CC)




                                                                                           krth
                             0.3
                                                                                           myid
                                                                                           mykr
                             0.2
                                                                                           myph
                             0.1                                                           myth
                                                                                           phid
                               0                                                           phkr
                                                                                           phmy
                             -0.1                                                          phth
                                                                                           thid
                             -0.2                                                          thkr
                                    0   0.05       0.1         0.15        0.2      0.25   thmy
                                                                                           thph
                                                    imcome effect




                                                                                                  36
                                                            Figure 3-6                            idkr
                                           Cheap import effect and Contagion coefficient          idmy
                                                                                                  idph
                             0.5                                                                  idth
                                                                                                  krid
                             0.4                                                                  krmy
contagion coefficient (CC)




                                                                                                  krph
                             0.3                                                                  krth
                                                                                                  myid
                             0.2                                                                  mykr
                                                                                                  myph
                             0.1                                                                  myth
                                                                                                  phid
                               0
                                                                                                  phkr
                                                                                                  phmy
                             -0.1
                                                                                                  phth
                                                                                                  thid
                             -0.2
                                                                                                  thkr
                                    0   0.05    0.1      0.15     0.2       0.25   0.3     0.35
                                                                                                  thmy
                                                      cheap import effect                         thph




                                                                                                         37
Table 1-1
Weekly Origin (Friday to Friday change), July 1997-January 19
                                  devaluation
Week                    Origin      rate(%)
July-1                      TH     -10.11
July-2                      PH      -7.95
July-4                      TH      -5.75
August-3                    ID     -10.13
August-4                    TH      -4.52
August-5                    ID      -7.51
September-1                 TH      -9.40
September-3                 PH      -4.81
October-1                   ID     -13.84
October-5                   TH      -5.99
November-2                  TH      -4.94
November-3                  KR      -4.85
November-4                  KR      -8.13
December-1                  ID      -7.76
December-2                  ID     -32.93
January-1                   KR     -17.63
January-2                   ID     -18.32
January-4                   ID     -57.18
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: Datastream




                                                                38
Table 1-2
Daily Origin of Exchange Rate, July 1997-March 1999
                                 devaluation                             devaluation                             devaluation
                        Origin      rate(%)                     Origin     rate(%)                      Origin     rate(%)
 1997      7      2       TH       -3.40     1997     12   11    KR         -8.02      1998   3    6     ID         -4.24
 1997      7      3       TH       -2.22     1997     12   12    ID        -10.97      1998   3    9     ID         -2.40
 1997      7      4       TH       -2.06     1997     12   15    ID         -6.72      1998   4    16    ID         -2.23
 1997      7     14       PH       -5.30     1997     12   16    TH         -3.66      1998   4    21    PH         -2.49
 1997      7     21       ID       -2.83     1997     12   22    KR        -10.12      1998   5    6     ID         -6.12
 1997      7     23       TH       -2.06     1997     12   23    KR        -10.12      1998    5    7    ID         -4.99
 1997      8     15       ID       -2.99     1997     12   24    ID         -4.32      1998    5   13    ID        -10.37
 1997      8     18       ID       -3.23     1997     12   25    ID         -2.34      1998    5   14    ID         -3.24
 1997      8     27       ID       -2.93     1997     12   31    KR         -3.96      1998    5   19    ID        -12.50
 1997      8     28       ID       -3.19     1998      1    2    ID        -14.38      1998    5   28    ID         -5.17
 1997      9      2       ID       -2.39     1998      1    5    ID        -13.08      1998    6   10    ID         -5.08
 1997      9      3       TH       -2.81     1998      1    6    ID        -11.93      1998    6   11    ID         -4.66
 1997      9      4       TH       -3.74     1998      1    7    ID         -7.57      1998    6   12    ID         -4.02
 1997      9     18       PH       -2.06     1998      1    8    ID        -18.31      1998    6   15    ID         -4.48
 1997      9     29       ID       -2.38     1998      1   12    TH         -2.39      1998    6   16    ID         -4.32
 1997      9     30       ID       -2.33     1998      1   16    ID         -4.01      1998    6   17    ID         -6.82
 1997     10      1       ID       -3.19     1998      1   19    ID         -7.87      1998    6   29    MY         -2.01
 1997     10      3       ID       -4.32     1998      1   20    ID         -4.72      1998   8    6     KR         -3.21
 1997     10      6       ID       -2.56     1998      1   21    ID        -11.10      1998    8   11    ID         -2.27
 1997     10     20       TW       -2.45     1998      1   22    ID        -12.87      1998    9    8    ID         -3.44
 1997     11     20       KR       -5.52     1998      1   23    ID        -12.77      1998    9    9    ID         -2.22
 1997     11     25       KR       -2.24     1998      1   26    ID         -3.85      1998   10   27    ID         -2.08
 1997     11     28       KR       -2.92     1998      2   12    MY         -3.04      1998   11   2     ID         -2.74
 1997     12      1       KR       -2.21     1998      2   13    ID         -9.30      1998   11    3    ID         -4.26
 1997     12      2       KR       -2.82     1998      2   16    ID         -3.99      1998   11    4    ID         -3.98
 1997     12      3       TH       -3.66     1998      2   17    KR         -2.17      1998   12   15    ID         -2.29
 1997     12      8       KR       -5.39     1998     2    23    ID         -2.62      1998   1    13    ID         -3.84
 1997     12        9       KR     -6.88     1998     3    4     ID         -3.31      1999   1    14    ID         -2.08
 1997     12       10       KR     -6.73     1998     3    5     ID         -6.84      1999   3    11    ID         -2.17
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: Datastream




                                                                                                                      39
Table 1-3
Daily Origin of Stock Price, January 1994-June 1999
                                  devaluation                            devaluation                           devaluation
                          origin     rate(%)                    origin     rate(%)                    origin     rate(%)
 1994      1      11       ml         -3.38    1997   8    29     id        -4.75    1998   5    6      id        -3.26
 1994      1      12        ml      -5.07     1997    9    2     tw        -2.46    1998    5    11    kr         -2.10
 1994      1      13        ml      -4.25     1997    9    3     ml        -3.42    1998    5    12    kr         -2.52
 1994      1      14        tw      -2.39     1997    9    4     ml        -2.92    1998    5    13    id         -3.24
 1994      1      18        th      -2.15     1997    9    12    id        -2.11    1998    5    14    th         -2.18
 1994      1      20        th      -2.18     1997    9    18    ml        -2.17    1998    5    18    id         -2.38
 1994      1      25        ml      -2.64     1997    9    22    ml        -2.32    1998    5    20    th         -2.59
 1994      2      7         th      -3.86     1997    9    23    kr        -2.00    1998    5    25    kr         -3.73
 1994      2      14        tw      -2.22     1997    10    3    id        -2.26    1998    5    26    kr         -4.84
 1994      2      28        tw      -2.47     1997    10    8    kr        -2.04    1998    5    29    th         -2.01
 1994      3      1         ph      -2.75     1997    10   16    kr        -2.56    1998    6     1    tw         -2.66
 1994      3      2         ph      -2.42     1997    10   17    tw        -2.11    1998    6     2    th         -3.00
 1994      3      4         ph      -2.39     1997    10   20    tw        -4.36    1998    6    11    ph         -2.52
 1994      3      9         ph      -2.61     1997    10   24    ml        -2.59    1998    6    12    kr         -4.31
 1994      3      22        id      -2.02     1997    10   27    kr        -4.46    1998    6    15    kr         -4.55
 1994     10      6         tw      -2.85     1997    10   29    th        -3.54    1998    6    16    kr         -3.78
 1994     10      11        tw      -4.27     1997    10   30    kr        -3.17    1998    7    10    ml         -2.97
 1994     11      1         tw      -3.17     1997    10   31    kr        -3.11    1998    7    13    ml         -2.38
 1994     11      23        th      -3.43     1997    11    7    kr        -2.31    1998    7    22    ml         -2.07
 1995      1      12        th      -2.12     1997    11   11    id        -2.29    1998    7    23    kr         -2.39
 1995      1      13        ph      -3.19     1997    11   17    kr        -2.23    1998    7    29    ml         -2.84
 1995      1      23        th      -2.89     1997    11   18    ml        -3.90    1998    8     4    ph         -2.13
 1995      2      27        ph      -2.08     1997    11   19    ml        -3.44    1998    8     5    id         -3.06
 1995      4      17        tw      -2.31     1997    11   20    ml        -7.23    1998    8     6    id         -2.42
 1995      7      19        tw      -2.53     1997    11   21    id        -2.27    1998    8    10    ml         -2.47
 1995      7      20        tw      -2.62     1997    11   24    kr        -4.85    1998    8    11    ml         -3.92
 1995      8      9         tw      -2.26     1997    11   25    kr        -3.59    1998    8    12    ph         -3.85
 1995      8      11        tw      -2.74     1997    11   26    ml        -2.88    1998    8    13    ml         -2.72
 1995     11      20        ph      -2.04     1997    11   28    kr        -3.63    1998    8    17    ml         -2.45
 1995     12      14        kr      -2.12     1997    12   1     kr        -3.82    1998    8    18    kr         -2.08
 1995     12      18        kr      -2.32     1997    12   2     kr        -3.91    1998    8    21    ml         -2.43
 1996      1      5         tw      -3.43     1997    12   9     kr        -3.00    1998    8    24    id         -3.31
 1996      1      29        tw      -2.70     1997    12   12    kr        -5.24    1998    8    25    id         -2.02
 1996      5      20        tw      -2.39     1997    12   15    id        -6.21    1998    8    27    ml         -2.01
 1996      7      29        id      -2.31     1997    12   16    ml        -2.68    1998    8    28    ph         -3.75
 1996     10      4         th      -2.05     1997    12   23    kr        -4.23    1998    9    10    ph         -3.17
 1996     10      8         th      -4.19     1997    12   24    kr        -4.26    1998    9    11    ph         -2.24
 1996     10      28        ph      -2.63     1997    12   25    kr        -2.29    1998    9    15    id         -4.88
 1997      1      7         kr      -2.24     1998    1    5     ml        -2.86    1998    9    17    id         -2.28
 1997      2      4         th      -3.43     1998    1    6     ml        -3.44    1998    9    18    id         -3.56
 1997      2      14        th      -2.15     1998    1    8     ph        -3.96    1998    9    21    id         -4.75
 1997      3      4         th      -2.28     1998    1    9     ph        -6.21    1998    9    22    ph         -2.22
 1997      3      7         th      -4.56     1998    1    22    ph        -3.08    1998    10    2    tw         -2.64
 1997      3      24        tw      -2.41     1998    2    5     th        -2.19    1998    10   27    kr         -2.30
 1997      4       8        ph      -2.24     1998    2    11    id        -3.41    1998    11    9    ph         -2.30
 1997      4       29       ph      -2.62     1998    2    12    id        -6.18    1998    11   10    ph         -3.26
 1997      4       30       ph      -2.49     1998    2    13    id        -2.60    1998    11   11    th         -3.62
 1997      5       15        th     -2.54     1998    2    16    kr        -3.77    1998    11   13    th         -2.69
 1997      5       16        th     -2.46     1998    2    17    kr        -2.49    1998    11   25    id         -2.96
 1997      5       19       ph      -2.08     1998    3     5    kr        -2.66    1998    12    3    th         -2.82
 1997      7       9        ph      -2.56     1998    3     6    kr        -2.55    1998    12    4    th         -2.18
 1997      7       10       ph      -2.74     1998    3     9    kr        -2.86    1998    12   17    kr         -2.66
 1997      8       5        ml      -2.55     1998    3    30    kr        -2.21    1999     1    5    tw         -2.13
 1997      8       7         id     -2.16     1998    4     1    kr        -2.00    1999    1    26    th         -2.37
 1997      8       15        id     -2.76     1998    4     2    kr        -2.49    1999    2     8    ml         -3.78
 1997      8       18        id     -2.74     1998    4     3    kr        -3.50    1999    2     9    kr         -2.45
 1997      8       20        id     -2.09     1998    4    16    ml        -2.07    1999     2   10    th         -2.07
 1997      8       22        id     -2.18     1998    4    23    kr        -2.43    1999     2   19    kr         -2.02
 1997      8       25        id     -3.81     1998    4    29    id        -2.35    1999     5   13    kr         -2.73
 1997      8       26        th     -3.99     1998    5     1    id        -2.12    1999    5    17    kr         -2.32
 1997      8       27        th     -2.33     1998    5     4    kr        -3.20    1999    5    26    th         -2.59
 1997      8       28       ph      -5.40     1998    5     5    id        -2.00
Notes : Authors' calculation.




                                                                                                                             40
Table 2
News and Events (Daily Origin of Exchange Rate) July 1997-June 1999
                       Origin      News
 1997     7     2       TH      Devaluing baht.
 1997     7      3      TH     Thai credit agency downgrades most ratings on devaluation. IMF welcomes Thai baht float.
 1997     7      4      TH     Thai central bank sets baht-dollar reference rate at 28.189.
 1997     7     14      PH     Philippine bankers group lifts volatility band on peso trading.
 1997     7     21      ID     Indonesian Minister of Finance says Indonesia won't change Rupiah's managed float.
 1997     7     23      TH     Thai finance minister says no need for financial aid from Japan and IMF.
 1997     8     15      ID     Indonesian central bank called an emergency meeting with country's largest banks.
 1997     8     18      ID     Bank Indonesia raises SBI interest rate.
 1997     8     27      ID     Many indonesian not making new loans because fear of high interest rate.
 1997     8     28      ID     Suharto worried high interest rates hurt economy.
 1997     9     2       ID     Inflation rate rises to 5.7%, eight-month high.
 1997     9     3       TH     Tahi won't seek increase in IMF package.
 1997     9     4       TH     Thai finance minister syas Government won't intervene in market.
 1997     9     18      PH     The EYCO group of companies, Appliance Maker, to stop debt payments.
 1997     9     29      ID     S&P degrades Malaysia, and will degrade Indonesia.
 1997    10     1       ID     Tradeand industry minister said Rupiah decline won't boost exports.
 1997    10     3       ID     Bank Indonesia to provide Swaps facilities for exporters.
 1997    10     6       ID     Suharto calls emergency meeting with top economic ministers.
 1997    10     20      TW     Taiwan authority won't support Taiwaniese dollar.
 1997    11     20      KR     South Korean finance minister to resign due to a failure in the passage of financial reform bills.
 1997    11     25      KR     Korea asks IMF for standby credit, Finance minister says.
 1997    11     28      KR     Korean Oct. CA deficit widened to $680.6 mln from $498.4 mln.
 1997    12     1       KR     Korea and IMF at odds over bailout.
 1997    12     2       KR     Korean stocks fell for a ninth day as the abrupt closure of 9 merchant banks.
 1997    12     3       ID     Indonesia may be headed for double-digit inflation this year.
 1997    12     9       KR     Korea may shut down 2 commercial banks as part of IMF bailout.
 1997    12     16      TH     Thai currency reserves may be halved.
 1997    12     22      KR     Korean Crisis deepens as Moody's Cuts rating.
 1997     12    23      KR     Korea debt payment's delay mulled by foreign banks.
 1997     12    24      ID     Indonesia's foreign debt payment may reach 323 trillion rupiah.
 1997     12    31      KR     Korea's Total external debt estimated at $156.9 bln, up $41 bln.
 1998      1    2       ID     Indonesian State Banks to Merge.
 1998      1    5       ID     Indonesia to increase generic Drug prices 15% in April.
 1998      1    6       ID     Indonesia's December inflation seen rising 2% from November.
 1998      1    7       ID     Indonesia sees inflation of 9% in fiscal 1998-1999.
 1998      1    8       ID     US official Rubin says Indonesia must do more to meet IMF goals.
 1998      1    12      TH     Thai Govt to brief Creditors of closed 56 insolvent finance firms .
 1998      1    16      ID     Suharto's promises to revise the budget fail to impress.
 1998      1    19      ID     Indonesia reserves fall 8.2% to $20.38 bln in month to Jan.15.
 1998      1    20      ID     Bank International INdonesia's credit rating may be cut by S&P.
 1998      1    21      ID     Indonesia state ratings company cut ratings on 17 companies.
 1998      1    23      ID     Indonesia's Budget Plan for 1998 revised.
 1998      1    26      ID     Moody's raises specter of indonesia corporate debt moratorium.
Source: Bloomberg




                                                                                                                               41
Table 2(continued)
News and Events (Daily Origin) July 1997-June, 1999
                       Origin      News
 1998     2     12      MY      Foreign reserve in January down.
 1998     2     13      ID      Rubin Concerned Over Pegging Rupiah to Dollar.
 1998     2     16      ID      Camdessus Says It's Too Soon for Indonesian Currency Peg.
 1998     2     17       KR     Korea accepts Labor Law revisions.
 1998     3      4       ID     GS prospects the Pegging Rupiah to Dollar.
 1998     3      5       ID     IMF Officials Say Indonesia Aid Payment Likely to Be Postponed.
 1998     3      6       ID     Indonesia's Finance Minister Warns of Consequences if IMF Aid Withheld.
 1998     3      9       ID     IMF Says Indonesia Won't Receive Next Loan Before April.
 1998     4     16      ID      Indonesia's Suharto Pledges to Adhere to Reforms.
 1998     4     21      PH      Philippines Polls Tainted By Fears of Fraud.
 1998     5      6      ID      Indonesian Fuel Prices to Rise Tomorrow.
 1998     5      7      ID      Palm Oil Rises to Record High on Weak Ringgit, Likely Shortage.
 1998     5     13      ID      Students burn effigies of President Suharto in the capital and surging prices trigger riots.
 1998     5     14      ID      Thousands Protest Indonesia University Killings, a second day of violence in Jakarta.
 1998     5     19      ID      House of Representatives calls for the resignation of President Suharto.
 1998     5     28      ID      President Suharto and IMF did not reach agreement on conditions for IMF support.
 1998     6     10      ID      IMF official arrive in Jakarta for review of economic targets under the IMF loan disbursement plan.
 1998     6     11      ID       Indonesian Banks Cut Deposit Rates Yesterday.
 1998     6     12      ID      Indonesian Army Parliamentary Seats to Be Cut.
 1998     6     16      ID      IMF Sees Indonesian Deficit of More Than 4% of GDP.
 1998     6     17      ID      Indonesian Banks' Bad Loans Surged to 25% at End April.
 1998     6     29      MY      Malaysia Plans New Ways to Plug Ringgit Outflow.
 1998     8      6      KR      Korea's Big Five Cheabols need debt payment amount to 28billion of USD.
 1998     8     11      ID      Indonesia Refutes Report That it Failed to Make Debt Paymen.
 1998     9      8      ID      Students descended on House of Representatives calling for resignation of President B.J. Habibie.
 1998     9      9      ID      Indonesian Military Breaks Up Student Protest With Tear Gas.
 1998    10     27      ID      Indonesia Mulling Return to Currency Band System.
 1998    11      2      ID      Indonesia August Trade Surplus Narrows to $1.85 Billion.
 1998    11      3       ID     Indonesian Companies Unlikely to Get Large Debt Write-offs.
 1998    11      4       ID     Indonesian Panel Says Security Agents Linked to Riots in May.
 1998    12     15       ID     Indonesia Sees Tourism Revenues about half of targeting.
 1999     1     13       ID     Indonesia Unveils Law to Narrow Central Bank's Role.
 1999      3    11       ID     Indonesia Mulls Merger Of five of the largest private banks.
Source: Bloomberg




                                                                                                                              42
Table 3-1     CC(t,i) of Exchange Rate
1997:1-1999:7
   Origin                                 Affected
   (nob)      Indonesia       Korea      Malaysia Philippines      Taiwan      Thailand
ID (July-Dec 1997) (16)        0.056      0.290*** 0.193**            0.012     0.303***
     t-stat                    1.138        4.685        2.858        1.155       6.349
ID (Oct-Dec 1997) (8)          0.094       0.256*        0.249*       0.036*    0.332***
     t-stat                    1.025        2.079        1.868        1.873       3.508
ID (Jan-June 1998) (32)       0.061**     0.121** 0.090*** 0.023** 0.069***
     t-stat                    2.119        2.576        3.244        2.083       2.938
ID (after July 1998) (12)     0.063*        0.004        -0.079       -0.023      0.038
     t-stat                    2.158        0.178        -1.527       -1.330      0.945
   KR(14)         0.193                    0.124**      0.066**       0.016     0.215***
     t-stat       1.067                     2.643        2.283        0.795       3.593
    ML(2)         0.012        0.181                     0.233       0.041**      0.418
     t-stat       0.024        1.032                     1.552        5.490       2.388
    PH(3)        -0.089        -0.027       0.186                     -0.006      0.173
     t-stat      -0.598        -0.535       1.083                     -0.480      1.609
    TH(7)         0.183        -0.322       0.064        0.085        0.057
     t-stat       1.241        -1.080       0.396        0.461        1.329
    TW(1)         0.286        0.218        0.770        0.047                    0.552
     t-stat          -            -           -             -                       -
Note: Values tabulated are Contagion coefficients and t-statistics, calculated under
the null hypothesis of cc equals zero; there exists no significant high frequency contagion
from the origin to affected country.
***, ** and * indicate significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                                                              43
Table 3-2   CC(t,i) of Stock Price
Full sample(1994:1-1999:7)
  Origin                                Affected
   (nob)     Indonesia   Korea         Malaysia Philippines      Taiwan      Thailand
   ID(30)                   0.170** 0.276***           0.078        0.066      0.187***
    t-stat                   2.526        3.790        0.687        1.473        2.813
  KR(47)        0.011                   0.215*** 0.114**            0.031      0.286***
    t-stat      0.192                     3.731        2.378        0.781        6.181
  ML(29)      0.227***       0.049                   0.276*** 0.139*** 0.153**
    t-stat      2.929        0.472                     3.752        2.943        2.118
  PH(27)      0.266**        0.171       0.188*                     0.076       -0.067
    t-stat      2.543        1.503        2.009                     1.310       -0.490
  TW(22)        0.074        0.086        0.112       0.124*                    0.153*
    t-stat      1.001        0.874        1.273        1.901                     1.885
  TH(33)      0.132**        0.027        0.062      0.205***       0.044
    t-stat      2.204        0.340        0.645        2.850        0.736
Note: Values tabulated are Contagion coefficients and t-statistics, calculated under
the null hypothesis of cc equals zero; there exists no significant high frequency contagion
from the origin to affected country.
***, ** and * indicate significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                                                              44
Table 3-3 CC(t,i) of Stock Price
Before Crises (1994:1-1997:6)
  Origin                               Affected
  (nob)      Indonesia    Korea        Malaysia Philippines      Taiwan      Thailand
  ID(2)                   0.409***      0.302       0.556**       -0.100       0.182
   stat                    40.146       1.678        6.543        -0.995       0.685
  KR(3)       -0.068                    -0.104      -0.086*       -0.283       0.127
   stat       -0.343                    -0.790       -2.549       -2.196       1.275
 ML(4)       0.265**        -0.123                  0.359*        0.318        0.254
   stat        3.680        -0.532                   2.628        1.974        1.280
 PH(12)      0.251***       0.095      0.188**                    0.122       0.261**
   stat        4.123         0.440      2.321                     1.178        2.813
 TW(16)        0.013        0.140       -0.025       0.074                     0.136
   stat        0.289         1.288      -0.267       1.291                     1.439
 TH(17)      0.155**        0.028      0.226**       0.122        0.040
    stat        2.267        0.341        2.535        1.137        0.532
Note: Values tabulated are Contagion coefficients and t-statistics, calculated under
the null hypothesis of cc equals zero; there exists no significant high frequency contagion
from the origin to affected country.
***, ** and * indicate significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                                                              45
Table 3-4 CC(t,i) of Stock Price
After Crises (1997:7-1999:7)
  Origin                               Affected
   (nob)      Indonesia   Korea        Malaysia Philippines      Taiwan      Thailand
 ID(28)                    0.153**     0.274***       0.044       0.077      0.187**
  stat                      2.152        3.534        0.367       1.660        2.676
 KR(44)        0.017                   0.237***     0.128**       0.053      0.297***
  stat         0.271                     3.963        2.525       1.313        6.094
 ML(25)      0.222**        0.076                   0.263***     0.111**      0.136*
  stat         2.469         0.642                    3.165       2.326        1.738
 PH(15)      0.278***      0.232**     0.187**                    0.039       -0.329*
  stat         5.127         2.352      2.301                     0.434        -1.948
 TW(6)         0.238        -0.058      0.478         0.256                    0.199
  stat         1.605        -0.409      1.263         1.901                    1.263
 TH(16)        0.109        0.026       -0.113      0.293***      0.049
    stat        1.060        0.185       -0.689        3.144        0.502
Note: Values tabulated are Contagion coefficients and t-statistics, calculated under
the null hypothesis of cc equals zero; there exists no significant high frequency contagion
from the origin to affected country.
***, ** and * indicate significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                                                              46
Table 4 Results of Dynamic OLS: Exchange Rate
                           Panel A: all(pooled) origin
                                      Affected countries
                Indonesia   Korea      Malaysia Philippines    Taiwan     Thailand
coefficient        -0.274     0.120        0.155      0.198       0.079      0.144
replaced s.e        0.010     0.016        0.011      0.010       0.589      0.009
replaced t        -26.669     7.452       13.963     18.840       0.133     16.138

                              Panel B: Indonesia origin
                                    Affected countries
                Indonesia   Korea    Malaysia Philippines      Taiwan   Thailand
coefficient                  -0.113       0.028        0.044      0.020     0.017
replaced s.e.                 0.063       0.016        0.015      0.002     0.010
replaced t                   -1.790       1.745        2.994      9.923     1.635

                                Panel C: Korea origin
                                    Affected countries
                Indonesia   Korea     Malaysia Philippines     Taiwan   Thailand
coefficient         0.675                 0.250       0.236      -0.027    -1.443
replaced s.e        0.326                 0.046       0.363       0.499     0.227
replaced t          2.075                 5.471       0.650      -0.055    -6.365




                                                                                     47
Table 5-1 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                       Panel A: all(pooled) origin, full sample
                                      Affected countries
               Indonesia   Korea       Malaysia Philippines       Taiwan    Thailand
coefficient        0.493     -0.053        0.650       0.425        0.076      0.253
replaced s.e       0.009      0.011        0.008       0.007        0.003      0.010
replaced t        57.505     -4.881       80.386      63.582       22.379     24.698

                   Panel B: all(pooled) origin, pre-crisis period
                                   Affected countries
             Indonesia   Korea       Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      0.065      -0.209       -0.164       0.535        0.314    -0.119
replaced s.e     0.011       0.012        0.012       0.023        0.017     0.025
replaced t       6.039    -18.192      -13.920       23.532       18.246    -4.850

                   Panel C: all(pooled) origin, post-crisis period
                                    Affected countries
             Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      0.525      -0.058        0.685        0.387       0.025     0.271
replaced s.e     0.019       0.025        0.016        0.010       0.004     0.015
replaced t      27.510      -2.277       42.209      40.076        5.604   17.767




                                                                                       48
Table 5-2 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                          Panel A: Indonesia origin, full sample
                                       Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan     Thailand
coefficient                     -0.041      1.713         0.680  -0.339    -0.502
replaced s.e.                   0.041        0.117       0.539         0.184       0.652
replaced t                     -1.006       14.617       1.261        -1.848      -0.770

                       Panel B: Indonesia origin, pre-crisis period
                                        Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea       Malaysia Philippines     Taiwan       Thailand
coefficient
replaced s.e.
replaced t

                     Panel C: Indonesia origin, post-crisis period
                                     Affected countries
              Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient                    0.043       1.782        0.758      -0.386    -0.624
replaced s.e.                  0.041       0.117        0.539       0.183     0.650
replaced t                     1.041       15.229       1.407       -2.106        -0.959
Note: Estimation for pre-crisis period is excluded due to the lack of d.f.




                                                                                           49
Table 5-3 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                           Panel A: Korea origin, full sample
                                     Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea     Malaysia Philippines         Taiwan   Thailand
coefficient         -0.244                -0.831        -4.317        -0.229     1.656
replaced s.e        0.681                    0.121       0.611         0.117      0.776
replaced t         -0.359                   -6.849      -7.067        -1.946      2.135

                         Panel B: Korea origin, pre-crisis period
                                       Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines        Taiwan     Thailand
coefficient
replaced s.e.
replaced t

                      Panel C: Korea origin, post-crisis period
                                   Affected countries
             Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan       Thailand
coefficient      -0.244                  -0.831       -4.317    -0.229     1.656
replaced s.e      0.681                   0.121        0.611     0.117     0.776
replaced t      -0.359                     -6.849      -7.067       -1.946        2.135
Note: Estimation for pre-crisis period is excluded due to the lack of d.f.




                                                                                          50
Table 5-4 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                          Panel A: Malaysia origin, full sample
                                      Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea     Malaysia Philippines Taiwan            Thailand
coefficient        -1.629      -0.422                   -0.291       -0.726      1.046
replaced s.e        0.986       0.193                    0.817        0.136      0.600
replaced t         -1.652      -2.180                   -0.356       -5.354      1.743

                       Panel B: Malaysia origin, pre-crisis period
                                        Affected countries
                Indonesia    Korea       Malaysia Philippines    Taiwan       Thailand
coefficient
replaced s.e.
replaced t

                     Panel C: Malaysia origin, post-crisis period
                                      Affected countries
             Indonesia     Korea       Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      -0.951       -0.365                   -1.779       -1.248     1.264
replaced s.e      0.966        0.227                    0.634        0.155     0.734
replaced t       -0.985       -1.606                   -2.804       -8.075     1.722
Note: Estimation for pre-crisis period is excluded due to the lack of d.f.




                                                                                         51
Table 5-5 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                        Panel A: Philippines origin, full sample
                                      Affected countries
               Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan            Thailand
coefficient        0.474       0.660       1.734                      0.545      0.136
replaced s.e       1.115       0.079       0.225                      0.141      0.845
replaced t         0.425       8.344       7.712                      3.853      0.161

                     Panel B: Philippines origin, pre-crisis period
                                    Affected countries
             Indonesia      Korea    Malaysia Philippines        Taiwan   Thailand
coefficient      5.298        2.373      4.152                      0.060    -3.358
replaced s.e     2.818        0.033      1.920                      0.325   11.466
replaced t       1.880       72.174      2.163                      0.184    -0.293

                   Panel C: Philippines origin, post-crisis period
                                    Affected countries
             Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      0.847       0.561        2.292                    0.695     0.165
replaced s.e     0.230       0.258        0.294                    0.498     0.950
replaced t       3.680       2.174        7.808                    1.397     0.173




                                                                                         52
Table 5-6 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                         Panel A: Taiwan origin, full sample
                                    Affected countries
               Indonesia   Korea      Malaysia Philippines        Taiwan      Thailand
coefficient        7.701      -0.073        0.958       -0.570                   2.802
replaced s.e       1.585       0.024        0.088        0.435                   1.269
replaced t         4.859      -2.982       10.829       -1.309                   2.207

                     Panel B: Taiwan origin, pre-crisis period
                                   Affected countries
             Indonesia   Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan               Thailand
coefficient     12.597       1.273       2.630       -4.544                       8.136
replaced s.e     0.344       0.042       0.093        0.598                       2.882
replaced t      36.589     30.346      28.214        -7.601                       2.823

                       Panel C: Taiwan origin, post-crisis period
                                     Affected countries
               Indonesia    Korea     Malaysia Philippines Taiwan             Thailand
coefficient
replaced s.e.
replaced t
Note: Estimation for post-crisis period is excluded due to the lack of d.f.




                                                                                          53
Table 5-7 Results of Dynamic OLS: Stock Price
                         Panel A: Thailand origin, full sample
                                     Affected countries
               Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Taiwan      Thailand
coefficient       -0.638     0.839      1.873        0.940      1.313
replaced s.e       0.726     0.041      0.099        0.589      0.145
replaced t        -0.878    20.354     18.881        1.595      9.073

                     Panel B: Thailand origin, post-crisis period
                                    Affected countries
             Indonesia     Korea     Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      -3.063       1.294       2.508       -0.954       0.991
replaced s.e      1.764       0.083       0.471        0.367       0.058
replaced t       -1.736     15.528        5.323       -2.598      17.207

                    Panel C: Thailand origin, post-crisis period
                                   Affected countries
             Indonesia    Korea     Malaysia Philippines Taiwan         Thailand
coefficient      0.054       0.567      -0.044       -2.513      -1.246
replaced s.e     2.794       0.126       0.150        0.878       0.425
replaced t       0.019       4.489      -0.294       -2.863      -2.929




                                                                                    54
Table 6
Export share as a percent of total exports in millions of US dollars.
1996-1999 average
 Country                         Destination of Exports
             Indonesia      Korea      Malaysia Philippines Thailand
Indonesia                 6.442       2.707       1.437       1.805
Korea         3.457                   2.950       1.927       1.501
Malaysia       1.487         2.868                1.443       3.541
Philippines    0.525         2.031     3.466                  2.930
Thailand       1.958         1.641     3.775      1.365
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: IMF, Direction of Trade (2000).




                                                                        55
Table 7
Direct Trade Linkage Index
1996-1999 average
 Country                Countries export to and import from
             Indonesia    Korea      Malaysia Philippines Thailand
Indonesia                 1.090       1.070     1.668      0.906
Korea         0.910                   1.278     1.647      0.714
Malaysia       0.930         0.722              1.095      1.132
Philippines    0.332         0.353     0.905               1.007
Thailand       1.094         0.634     0.868    0.993
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: IMF, Direction of Trade (2000).




                                                                     56
Table 8
Imcome Effect (GDP share, %)
1996-1999 average
  Origin                            Affected countries
            Indonesia Korea         Malaysia Philippines Thailand
Indonesia                  0.06342    0.00014    0.01970  0.08137
Korea         0.20849                 0.00026    0.07765  0.06625
Malaysia      0.09224      0.09426               0.13227  0.15453
Philippines 0.04789        0.06429    0.00013             0.05745
Thailand      0.06157      0.04659    0.00032    0.10137
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: IMF, Direction of Trade (2000).




                                                                    57
Table 9
Cheap Import effect
1996-1999 average
  Origin                            Countries import from
            Indonesia Korea         Malaysia Philippines Thailand
Indonesia                  0.08861    0.00018    0.09567  0.06970
Korea         0.1434                  0.00043    0.29620  0.14523
Malaysia      0.0597       0.06680               0.12437  0.20178
Philippines 0.0066         0.01926    0.00014             0.04733
Thailand      0.0683       0.02510    0.00030    0.10302
Notes : Authors' calculation.
Data source: IMF, Direction of Trade (2000).




                                                                    58
Table 10
Correlation Coefficients between Trade Link Index and Contagion coefficient
Trade Index
Export Share              0.329
DTLI                      0.258
Income Effect             0.357
Cheap Import Effect       0.384




                                                                              59
