                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE RISE OF EUROPE: ATLANTIC TRADE, INSTITUTIONAL
                          CHANGE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                           Daron Acemoglu
                                            Simon Johnson
                                           James Robinson

                                         Working Paper 9378
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9378


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We thank Thomas Becker and Rui Pedro Esteves for outstanding research assistance and Josh Angrist, Abhijit
Banerjee, Dora Costa, Jan de Vries, Stanley Engerman, Philip Hoffman, Peter Lindert, Sebastían Mazzuca,
Joel Mokyr, Larry Neal, Steve Pincus, Christina Romer, David Romer, Andrei Shleifer, Alan Taylor, Hans-
Joachim Voth, and seminar participants at Berkeley, the Canadian Institute of Advanced Research, Chicago
Business School and Political Science, George Mason University, Harvard Business School, the Harvard
Economic History Seminar, the London School of Economics, MIT, the National Bureau of Economic
Research economic history, inequality and economic growth groups, New York University and Princeton for
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 9378
December 2002
JEL No. O10, F10, P10, N13


                                           ABSTRACT



        This paper documents that the Rise of (Western) Europe between 1500 and 1850 is largely
accounted for by the growth of European nations with access to the Atlantic, and especially by those
nations that engaged in colonialism and long distance oceanic trade. Moreover, Atlantic ports grew
much faster than other West European cities, including Mediterranean ports.

         Atlantic trade and colonialism affected Europe both directly, and indirectly by inducing
institutional changes. In particular, the growth of New World, African, and Asian trade after 1500
strengthened new segments of the commercial bourgeoisie, and enabled these groups to demand,
obtain, and sustain changes in institutions to protect their property rights.

        Furthermore, the most significant institutional changes and consequently the most substantial
economic gains occurred in nations where existing institutions placed some checks on the monarchy
and particularly limited its control of overseas trading activities, thus enabling new merchants in
these countries to benefit from Atlantic trade. Therefore, the Rise of Europe was largely the result
of capitalist development driven by the interaction of late medieval institutions and the economic
opportunities offered by “Atlantic trade.”



Daron Acemoglu                 Simon Johnson                         James Robinson
Department of Economics        Sloan School of Management            Department of Economics
MIT                            MIT                                   and Political Science
50 Memorial Drive              50 Memorial Drive, E52-562            University of California,
Cambridge, MA 02142            Cambridge, MA 02142                   Berkeley
and NBER                       and NBER                              Berkeley, CA 94720
daron@mit.edu                  sjohnson@mit.edu
      “[C]ommerce and manufactures gradually introduced order and good government,
and with them, liberty and security of individuals, among the inhabitants of the country,
who had before lived almost in a continual state of war with their neighbours, and of
servile dependency upon their superiors. This, though it has been least observed, is by
far the most important of all of their eﬀects.” (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations,
Book III, Chapter IV).
      “The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the
rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets, the colonization of America,
trade with the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and commodities gener-
ally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and
thereby, to the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid develop-
ment”. (Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, 1992, pp. 3-4).

                                     1    Introduction

The world we live in–both our material standards of living and our society–was shaped
by the process of rapid economic growth that started in the 19th century and in Europe,
particularly in Western Europe. An explanation for West European economic growth
must therefore be part of any unified theory of long-run growth. The origins of this rapid
economic growth and the associated Industrial Revolution are generally considered to lie
in the economic, political and social developments of Western Europe over the preceding
centuries, most often starting in the 16th century. In fact, between 1500 and 1800,
Western Europe experienced a historically unprecedented period of sustained growth,
perhaps the “First Great Divergence,” making this area substantially richer than Asia
and Eastern Europe by the beginning of the 19th century.1 There is little agreement,
however, on why the process of capitalist growth took place in Western Europe and why
it started in the 16th century.
      This paper presents an important fact on the origins of the First Great Divergence:
almost all the diﬀerential growth of Western Europe during the 16th, 17th, 18th and early
19th centuries is accounted for by the diﬀerential growth of Atlantic traders–nations
  1
    See, among others, North and Thomas (1973), Brenner (1977), Jones (1981), Cipolla (1981), Hall
(1985), Mann (1986), Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986), Bairoch (1988), Mokyr (1990) and Maddison
(2001).



                                                1
directly involved in trade and colonialism with the New World and Asia, i.e., Britain,
France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain.2 This pattern, at least in part, reflects
the direct eﬀects of “Atlantic trade” between Europe and America, Africa and Asia.
In addition, we present evidence suggesting that Atlantic trade also aﬀected European
growth by inducing major institutional changes among Atlantic nations, and perhaps
even in the rest of Europe (see Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, in progress). Profits
from Atlantic trade and colonialism strengthened new merchant groups, and opened
the way for changes in political institutions, which constrained expropriation by the
monarchy and other established groups, encouraged commerce and production for the
market, and enabled the emergence of new organizational forms and technologies.
       Furthermore, we document the presence of an important interaction between initial
(pre-1500) institutions and access to the Atlantic: the major institutional changes and
the more rapid economic growth took place in societies with relatively non-absolutist
initial institutions, in particular in Britain and the Netherlands, which allowed new
groups of merchants, rather than monarchies, to benefit from Atlantic trade. Countries
where the monarchy was highly absolutist and monopolized overseas trade, such as Spain
and Portugal, experienced only limited gains from Atlantic trade, while areas lacking
easy access to the Atlantic, such as Venice and Genoa, did not experience any direct or
indirect benefits of Atlantic trade.
       Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the central fact of this paper using two proxies for income
per capita: urbanization rates and Maddison’s (2001) estimates of GDP per capita (see
Section 2.1 for data sources and definitions). Figure 1 Panel A shows that urbanization
in Western Europe grew significantly faster than in Eastern Europe after 1500.3 While
average urbanization (weighted by population) in 1500 was 10.7 percent in Western
Europe, it was 4.0 percent in Eastern Europe and 11.5 percent in Asia (reflecting the
relatively high level of urbanization in India and China). In the subsequent centuries,
   2
      Throughout the paper, Atlantic trade means trade with the New World as well as trade with Asia
via the Atlantic, and includes colonialism- and slavery-related activities as well as trade. Atlantic trade
opportunities became available only during the late 15th century, thanks to the discovery of the New
World and the passage to Asia around the Cape of Good Hope. These discoveries, in turn, resulted
from a series of innovations in ship technology, primarily pioneered by the Portuguese, that changed
the rigging and hull design of ships and developed knowledge of oceanic navigation (see, e.g., Gardiner,
2000).
    3
      For the purposes of this paper, Western Europe is taken to be all the countries west of the Elbe,
i.e., Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Eastern Europe is all European countries to the
east of the Elbe, including Russia and excluding Turkey. All averages are weighted by population, using
numbers from McEvedy and Jones (1978).


                                                    2
there was considerable divergence. While urbanization in Western Europe grew by
almost a factor of 2.5, there was a substantially slower increase in Eastern Europe, and
either stagnation or decline in Asia (though the information on Asia is generally less
reliable).
       Panel B of Figure 1 shows that these diﬀerential trends are due in large part to the
growth of Atlantic traders. The rest of Western Europe had a relatively high average
urbanization rate of 10 percent in 1300 (and 11.4 percent in 1500), but grew at approx-
imately the same rate as Eastern Europe from 1500 to 1850, by a factor of less than 2,
to reach 17.0 percent in 1850. In contrast, Atlantic traders started with a lower average
urbanization rate of 8.0 percent in 1300 (and only 10.1 percent in 1500), which almost
tripled in the subsequent 550 years to reach 24.5 percent in 1850, overtaking average
urbanization in the non-Atlantic parts of Western Europe between 1600 and 1700 (see
also Table 1).
       Figure 2 Panels A and B show the same pattern using Maddison’s estimates of GDP
per capita. While GDP per capita rose by a factor of almost 2 among Atlantic traders
between 1500 and 1820, in the rest of Western Europe it grew at approximately the
same rate as in Eastern Europe, just under 30 percent.
       The patterns depicted in Figures 1 and 2 do not reflect the fact that more successful
nations engaged in Atlantic trade. There is no diﬀerential growth by Atlantic traders
before the opening of Atlantic sea routes, and below we show similar results using a
measure of access to the Atlantic–ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area–rather than
the distinction between Atlantic traders and non-traders. Nor do the results reflect some
post-1500 advantage of all coastal nations: Atlantic ports grew much faster than other
European cities, while Mediterranean ports grew at similar rates to inland cities.
       The evidence suggests that the growth of Atlantic traders played a central role in
the growth of Western Europe. In fact, the Rise of Europe between 1500 and 1850
is largely the Rise of Atlantic Europe, and is quite diﬀerent in nature from pre-1500
European growth. This pattern weighs against theories that emphasize the continuity
between pre-1500 and post-1500 European growth and link the Rise of Europe to certain
distinctive European characteristics, such as culture, religion, geography or features
of the European state system.4 Instead, this pattern at first appears consistent with
   4
    See, e.g., Weber (1905), White (1962), Jones (1981), Hall (1985), Mann (1986), Diamond (1997)
and Landes (1998). Notice, however, that the interaction between these characteristics and Atlantic
trade could have been important. In fact, our hypothesis emphasizes the interaction between Atlantic
trade and pre-existing institutions.


                                                 3
theories that emphasize the importance of profits made in Atlantic trade, colonialism and
slavery.5 However, other evidence suggests that overseas trade and the associated profits
were not large enough to be directly responsible for the process of growth in Europe.
Engerman (1972) and O’Brien (1982) demonstrate that the contribution of profits from
slavery and trade with the rest of the world to European capital accumulation is modest.
O’Brien (1982, p. 2) writes that trade with these regions “... could in no way be classified
as decisive for economic growth of Western Europe”. So on the basis of available evidence
it appears that Atlantic trade could not have driven European growth solely through its
direct impact on profits or resources.
       We advance the hypothesis that West European growth during this period reflects
the combination of growth opportunities oﬀered by the Atlantic and the emergence of
economic institutions providing secure property rights to a broad cross-section of society
and allowing free entry into profitable businesses. These economic institutions, in turn,
resulted from the development of political institutions constraining the power of the
monarchy and other established groups allied with the monarchy. We refer to this cluster
of political and economic institutions as “capitalist institutions”. We further argue that
capitalist institutions needed the nascent bourgeoisie to gain strength and that Atlantic
trade contributed to economic change indirectly by enriching segments of the bourgeoisie
and inducing institutional change. Hence, our answer to the question of “why in Europe”
and “why beginning in the 16th century” emphasizes the eﬀect of international trade
on institutional development. From 1500, and especially from 1600, onwards, the rise
in Atlantic trade strengthened new commercial interests and enabled them to demand
and obtain the institutional changes necessary for capitalist growth.6 Although profits
from Atlantic trade were small relative to GDP, they were still substantial, and most
likely much larger than previous trading profits. For example, Figure 3 shows that by
the end of the 17th century, the volume of Atlantic trade was much larger than that of
long-distance Mediterranean trade.7 The recipients of these profits became very rich by
   5
     For example, Williams (1944), Frank (1978), Wallerstein (1974-1980), Blaut (1993), Pomeranz
(2000).
   6
     The argument that Atlantic trade strengthened European commercial interests does not imply that
without Atlantic trade, the European bourgeoisie would not have eventually secured the development
of capitalist institutions. We are therefore not suggesting a mono-causal explanation for the Rise of
Europe, but rather suggesting that Atlantic trade played a major role.
   7
     See the Appendix for the construction of the Atlantic trade and Mediterranean trade measures. The
Mediterranean trade measure excludes short haul coastal trade and trade by the British and Dutch;
these countries also engaged in Mediterranean trade as they built their naval power and trading empires
after 1600. Supporting our comparison between Atlantic trade and Mediterranean trade is the contrast



                                                  4
the standards of 17th- and 18th-century Europe, and typically politically and socially
very powerful. We argue below that they also played an important role in the emergence
of British and Dutch capitalist institutions. Consistent with this, we document a strong
empirical relationship between Atlantic trade and institutional change.
    In our hypothesis, a key link is the strengthening of merchants as a result of the
profits from Atlantic trade. Initial institutions constraining monarchies and allowing
relatively free entry into overseas trading activities are necessary for merchants and new
groups to profit from Atlantic trade, and to induce institutional change. Therefore, our
hypothesis predicts an important interaction between initial institutions and Atlantic
trade. The data are consistent with this prediction. In Britain and the Netherlands, new
groups of merchants benefited from Atlantic trade and played a major role in inducing
institutional change, unleashing a much larger economic potential from the rest of the
society. In contrast, in Spain and Portugal, the monarchy and loyal groups with royal
trading monopolies were the major beneficiaries of early profits from Atlantic trade and
plunder because the monarchy was both strong and in tight control of the monopoly of
trade.
    At this level, our hypothesis on the origins of the Rise of Europe and our explana-
tion for the new fact we document in the first part of the paper are speculative, and
much more work is needed to compare our hypothesis to alternatives. Nevertheless, the
main facts in this paper, the importance of the growth of Atlantic traders in the early
development of European nations and the presence of a significant interaction between
Atlantic trade and initial institutions, are important for understanding the Rise of Eu-
rope, and future theories need to address these patterns, even if they disagree with our
interpretation.
    The patterns of West European growth we document in this paper are consistent
with the emphasis of a number of historians, including, among others, Cipolla (1965),
Davis (1973a), de Vries (1984), Bairoch (1988), Braudel (1992), and de Vries and van
der Woude (1997). Nevertheless, we are unaware of any other studies documenting the
quantitative importance played by Atlantic traders and Atlantic ports, or showing that
the diﬀerential growth of Western Europe is largely accounted for by the growth of
Atlantic traders.
between Dutch profits from Baltic and Asian trades. The Baltic trade is widely recognized to have been
important for the Dutch in the 16th century, but de Vries and van der Woude (1997) estimate that the
annual profits of the Dutch East India Company alone between 1630 and 1670 were more than twice
the total annual profits from Baltic trade between 1590 and 1599 (pp. 373 and 447).


                                                  5
       On the theoretical side, our interpretation is one where institutional change, even
when socially beneficial, will be resisted by some social groups because it will reduce their
economic rents, and because groups that gain from the process of institutional change
cannot commit to compensate the losers. Accordingly, the process of institutional change
involves significant conflict between diﬀerent groups, in particular the rulers, the elite,
and groups receiving privileges from the rulers on the one side, and the citizens at large
or new groups, such as the nascent European bourgeoisie, on the other (see North, 1981,
Olson, 1982, Krusell and Rios-Rull, 1996, Parente and Prescott, 2000, Acemoglu and
Robinson, 2000b, 2002, Rajan and Zingales, 2000). Rogowski (1989) is also related,
since he links political coalitions to factor prices, which are in turn determined by the
patterns of trade, though he does not focus on how trade might lead to the emergence
of capitalist institutions by strengthening the bourgeoisie. Our approach could also
be viewed as a “marriage” between the emphasis placed by Marxist historians on the
rise of the bourgeoisie and the development of the world economy (e.g., among others,
Williams, 1944, Gunder Frank, 1978, Wallerstein, 1974-1980, and Hobsbawm, 1999)
and the emphasis on the development of capitalist institutions and secure property
rights in Western Europe by North and Thomas (1973), North (1981) and De Long and
Shleifer (1993). We agree with North and Thomas (1973, p. 1) who argue that “the
development of an eﬃcient organization in Western Europe accounts for the rise of the
West”. Distinct from these approaches, however, we oﬀer an explanation based on the
interaction between Atlantic trade and the development of capitalist institutions for why
strong private property rights emerged in Western Europe, especially in Britain and the
Netherlands, and starting in the 16th century.8
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents the key fact of the
paper, and shows that the pattern seen in Figure 1 and 2 is robust. Section 3 develops our
   8
    North and Thomas, following Postan (1975), emphasize the importance of demographic factors,
particularly the Black Death, in the transition from feudalism to capitalism. Yet population declines
had occurred before the 14th century, and as Brenner (1977) emphasizes, population collapse in Eastern
Europe led to a reintensification of feudalism rather than to capitalism. Moreover, even if one accepts
the demographic view, since the general trends in population were similar in much of Europe, it would
not explain why more capitalistic institutions emerged in Atlantic nations, and especially in Britain
and the Netherlands, and not in other places in Europe.
  North and Thomas also suggest that Britain and the Netherlands were the first to escape from the
“Malthusian trap” because of historical diﬀerences in political institutions, such as the strength of the
British parliament. Like them, we too emphasize diﬀerences in initial political institutions. However,
our results suggest that these in themselves were insuﬃcient to account for diﬀerences in subsequent
development. Instead, it was the interaction between initial institutions and Atlantic trade that was
crucial for the Rise of Western Europe.



                                                   6
hypothesis for the Rise of Europe and the role played by Atlantic trade in this process. In
this section, we also provide historical evidence supporting our interpretation. In Section
4, we introduce quantitative measures of European institutions for the period between
1300 and 1850, and show that their evolution is closely linked to Atlantic trade. Section
5 documents our second main empirical finding that there is an important interaction
between initial institutions and Atlantic trade. Section 6 concludes. The Data Appendix
gives details about the construction of all the variables that are used in the paper and
various data sources.

                   2    Atlantic Trade and the Rise of Europe

We now present evidence showing that the takeoﬀ of Western Europe after 1500 is largely
accounted for by rapid growth among Atlantic traders and nations with easy access to
the Atlantic. We also present evidence on city growth, documenting the important role
played by Atlantic ports in the urban expansion of Western Europe.

2.1    Data

We use three data series to measure prosperity. First, we construct estimates of urban-
ization based on the urban population numbers of Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988).
This is a comprehensive dataset with information on all 2,200 European cities which
had, at some time between 800 and 1800, 5,000 or more inhabitants. These data begin
in 800, and there are estimates for every 100 years until 1700, then for every 50 years
through 1850. However, Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988) emphasize that estimates
before 1300 are rough and less reliable (and they skip the year 1100 due to lack of
information). We use these data as our measure of urban population and divide by
the population estimates of McEvedy and Jones (1978) to calculate urbanization. We
also use estimates of urbanization rates for Asia from the quantitative and qualitative
assessments of Bairoch (1988).
      Bairoch (1988, Ch. 1) and de Vries (1976, p. 164) argue that only areas with high
agricultural productivity and a developed transportation network could support large ur-
ban populations. In addition, in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) we presented
evidence that both in the time-series and the cross-section there is a close association
between urbanization and income per capita before as well as after industrialization. We
therefore take urbanization as a proxy for GDP per capita.


                                            7
       Second, we use estimates of GDP per capita from Maddison (2001). These estimates
start in 1500, and are available for 1600, 1700, 1820 and then more frequently. Note that
these estimates are no more than educated guesses, especially before 1820. We therefore
think of these GDP data as a check on our results using urbanization data.
       Third, we use the European city-level data from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988).
Again, we use their data beginning in 1300 to investigate which urban centers were
driving demographic and economic growth, and also to contrast the growth of Atlantic
ports to other European ports and to inland cities. We also construct measures of
non-Atlantic urban population to investigate the indirect eﬀects of the Atlantic trade
on other economic activities and urban expansion in non-Atlantic areas. More detailed
discussion of data sources is given in the Appendix (see Appendix Table 1 for variable
definitions and Appendix Table 2 for the key data.)
       Table 1 gives the estimates of urbanization and income per capita at various dates.
The first column is for the whole sample and is unweighted. The second column is
weighted by population in the corresponding year, giving a better sense of the aggregate
changes. The remaining columns give weighted means for Atlantic traders (nations di-
rectly involved in Atlantic trade and colonialism, i.e., Britain, France, the Netherlands,
Portugal and Spain), and for non-Atlantic West European countries (Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland), for East-
ern European countries and for the Asian countries in our sample.9 These numbers
confirm the patterns shown in Figures 1 and 2. In the regression analysis, we will report
both weighted and unweighted results. The bottom third of the table also gives our
estimates of constraint on the executive, which we will use to measure institutions. This
variable is described in greater detail and used in Section 4.

2.2     Economic Growth in Europe

We start with data on cross-country diﬀerences in economic development. Our main
measure of economic prosperity is the urbanization rate in the country. Figures 1A and
1B above show the evolution of urbanization rates in Western and Eastern Europe, and
   9
     We take current countries as the unit of observation. Of course, these do not always correspond to
the independent polities at the time. For example, during the period of investigation, Italy was not a
single nation, but consisted of many city-states. If we had data on each Italian city-state, their average
would show the same pattern as our single Italy observation (presuming that our data for the aggregate
of Italy are accurate), but because of the larger number of observations, the standard errors would be
smaller. The analysis of city-level growth in Section 2.4 below is informative on diﬀerential growth
across historical political boundaries.


                                                    8
contrast the behavior of Atlantic traders–nations directly involved in Atlantic trade
and colonialism–vs. non-Atlantic traders. We first look at Atlantic traders since the
main beneficiaries of the opportunities oﬀered by the Atlantic should be those countries
that engaged in Atlantic trade and colonialism. However, whether or not a country is
an Atlantic trader is clearly endogenous. For this reason, we also present results using
a measure of access to the Atlantic, which is a country-level geographic characteristic.
   We can test the idea that West European growth after 1500 was due primarily to
growth in countries involved in Atlantic trade or with a high potential for Atlantic trade
more formally using regressions of the following form:

                             X                           X
         ujt = dt + δj +             αt · W Ej · dt +            βt · P ATj · dt + Xjt0 · γ + εjt ,   (1)
                            t≥1600                      t≥1500

where ujt is urbanization (percent of the population living in urban areas) in country j
at time t, and W Ej is a dummy indicating whether the country is in Western Europe,
the dt ’s denote year eﬀects and the δj ’s denote country eﬀects, Xjt is a vector of other
covariates, and εjt is a disturbance term. In addition, P ATj is an indicator for Atlantic
trader (Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain) or a measure of the po-
tential for Atlantic trade (in both cases, a time-invariant characteristic of the country).
               P
The notation     t≥1500   stands for a full set of interactions after 1500. Since our focus is on
the rise of Western Europe as a whole, our basic regressions are weighted by population
in each year, but we also report unweighted regressions for completeness.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 only include the interaction terms between the Western
                                                 P
Europe dummy and the post-1600 dates,              t≥1600    αt · W Ej · dt , capturing the diﬀerential
growth of Western European countries relative to Eastern Europe. The top row reports
the p-value from the F-test of the joint significance of these interactions. Column 1
includes data only for 1300-1850, while column 2 extends the sample back to 1000. Con-
sistent with Figure 1A, both specifications show significantly faster growth in Western
Europe than in Eastern Europe. For example, the point estimates (not shown in the
table to save space) indicate that in the specification of column 1, West European urban-
ization grew by 6.9 percentage points relative to East European urbanization between
1500 and 1850.
   Column 3 allows diﬀerential growth for countries engaged in Atlantic trade, as cap-
                    P
tured by the term     t≥1500   βt ·P ATj ·dt (we include 1500 to enable a “specification check”
on the timing of the eﬀects). We start with P ATj as a dummy for being an Atlantic


                                                   9
trader. Significant (and positive) estimates of βt ’s imply that Atlantic traders grew faster
in the post-1600 era. The estimates confirm the pattern seen in Figure 1B, and show
large eﬀects from the interaction between the post-1600 dates and the Atlantic trader
dummy (these eﬀects become statistically significant after 1750; in columns 8-10, the
eﬀects are statistically significant starting in 1700). For example, the estimate for 1850,
β1850 = 0.085, implies that urbanization among Atlantic traders grew approximately by
8.5 percent more than in other Western and Eastern European nations. Notice also that
the estimate of β1500 in this column, which measures the diﬀerential growth of Atlantic
traders between 1300-1400 and 1500, is insignificant and small. This is reassuring; since
Atlantic trade was very small before 1500, this finding shows that there is no diﬀerential
growth for Atlantic traders before Atlantic trade actually became important.
       Consistent with the patterns shown in Figure 1B, the inclusion of the Atlantic trade
interactions explains almost the entire diﬀerential growth of West European nations
                                       P
relative to Eastern Europe. The          t≥1600   αt · W Ej · dt terms are no longer statistically
significant, and the point estimates (not shown in the table) imply that West European
urbanization grew only by 2.9 percentage points relative to Eastern Europe between
1300-1500 and 1850 as opposed to 6.9 percentage points in column 1.
       Column 4 reports similar results for the 1000-1850 period. Here the interaction
between the West European dummy and the post-1500 dates is significant at the 10
percent level, which reflects the lower level of East European urbanization in the base
period, which is now 1000-1400. Column 5 reports unweighted results. Here the West-
ern Europe interaction terms with post-1600 dates are even less significant. Column
6 includes Asian countries. This has little eﬀect on the estimates of the diﬀerential
growth of Atlantic traders, but now West European countries are growing faster relative
to the control group, which includes Asian countries (see Figure 1A).10 Finally, Column
7 excludes Britain from the sample. This is useful since Britain is the fastest growing
country over this period, and it is of interest to know whether the results simply reflect
British growth. The estimates in column 7 are about half the size of those in the other
columns, but they show the same pattern.
       An important concern with the results reported so far is that who became an Atlantic
  10
    O’Rourke and Williamson (2002) argue that as China withdrew from world trade, this freed up
Asian supply for export to Europe, contributing to European growth. Galor and Mountford (2002)
argue that international trade has played an important role in the divergence between Europe and Asia
by inducing European economies to specialize in the production of skill-intensive goods with greater
technological progress, while Asian economies specialized in labor-intensive goods. See also Lucas
(1988).


                                                   10
trader was endogenously determined. It may be that only countries with high growth
potential–or those that were going to grow anyway–engaged in substantial Atlantic
trade and colonial activity. For example, Belgium, Ireland, Denmark, Germany and
Norway also had access to the Atlantic, either directly or via the North Sea. But they
did not take part in long distance oceanic trade. It may therefore be preferable to
use a measure of potential access to the Atlantic as our time-invariant P ATj variable.
In columns 8, 9 and 10, we use the measure of Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio.11 The
reasoning is that Atlantic trade can potentially play a more important role in the growth
of countries with more Atlantic coastline relative to their size. In constructing the
Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio, we give positive Atlantic coastline-to-area numbers for
Denmark, Germany and Norway. We choose this coding since it is less favorable to our
hypothesis–these three countries did not engage in much Atlantic trade and did not
grow rapidly until the 19th century.
       The results using the coastline-to-area measure for P ATj are similar to those using
the Atlantic trader dummy. For example, in column 8, the interactions between the
West European dummy and post-1600 dates are significant only at the 9 percent level,
and much smaller than those in column 1. The point estimates imply that West Euro-
pean urbanization grew only by an additional 2.7 percentage points over East European
urbanization, from 1500 to 1850, as opposed to 6.9 percentage points in column 1.
       On the other hand, the diﬀerential growth related to the Atlantic, now captured
by the interactions with the Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio, is still strong; the point
estimates for the β’s are significant starting in 1700, and quantitatively large. For
example, the coeﬃcient β1850 = 5.05 indicates approximately 6.5 percentage points more
urbanization growth in the Netherlands than in Italy between 1300-1400 and 1850 (the
Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio for the Netherlands is 0.013 and for Italy it is 0). This
explains over half of the diﬀerential 12 percentage point actual urbanization growth
between Italy and the Netherlands between these two dates.12 Other specifications
  11
     Alternatively, we could use the Atlantic coastline-to-area measure as an instrument for the Atlantic
trader dummy. The results we report can be thought of as the reduced form for this IV strategy (a
univariate regression of the Atlantic trader dummy on the coastline-to area measure in our sample has
an R2 of 0.30). However, it is more plausible to think that, even conditional on being an Atlantic
trader, a country with greater Atlantic coastline will also trade and grow more than another with less
coastline. So we prefer to focus on the regressions here, rather than IV regressions.
  Information on the length of coastline and the land area of particular countries is taken from In-
tegrated Coastline Management (on the web at http://icm.noaa.gov/country/ICM-pro.html), which
reports a standardized measure. We use only Atlantic coastline, i.e., omitting any coast in the Mediter-
ranean or the Baltic. Details are provided in the Appendix.
  12
     Notice that the fit of the models with the Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio is somewhat better than

                                                   11
using the Atlantic coastline-to-area measure in columns 9 and 10 give similar results.
Finally, column 11 uses another measure for P ATj , average fraction of the population
living in Atlantic ports, which again proxies for the importance of Atlantic ports relative
to the size of the country. The results are once more similar.
    The results reported in Panel A of Table 2 are from estimating equation (1), which
allows for an arbitrary pattern of diﬀerential growth in Atlantic traders. One might
conjecture that the diﬀerential growth of Atlantic traders should be related to the volume
of Atlantic trade. For this reason, in Panel B we report results from estimating a
“structured” model of the form:
                               X
           uit = dt + δj +            αt · W Ej · dt + β · P ATj · ln ATt + Xjt0 · γ + εjt ,        (2)
                             t≥1600

where ATt denotes our estimate of the aggregate volume of European Atlantic trade,
shown in Figure 3 above. The construction of this variable is explained in the Ap-
pendix, where we also provide alternative measures. Appendix Table 3 shows regres-
sion estimates using the main alternative measure based on the work by O’Rourke and
Williamson (2002), with very similar results to those reported here. Note that the model
in equation (2) is more restrictive than that in (1), since we are forcing the pattern of
βt ’s in (1) to be the same as that of ln ATt . In all columns, the estimate of β, the
coeﬃcient on the interaction term between the log volume of Atlantic trade and poten-
tial for Atlantic trade at the country level, is highly significant, while the interaction
terms between Western Europe and post-1600 dates are again insignificant. Notably,
the R2 of this more restrictive regression is close to the R2 of the flexible specifications
reported in Panel A. Using the Atlantic trader dummy in column 3, the R2 is 0.89 with
the flexible specification and 0.88 with the structured specification, while using the At-
lantic coastline-to-area ratio (column 8), the two R2 ’s are 0.94 and 0.92 respectively.
These results suggest that that the interaction between potential for Atlantic trade and
post-1600 dates is likely capturing the importance of Atlantic trade, not some other
parallel process. Finally, Appendix Table 4 reports estimates from a model similar to
(2), except that we use the interaction between P ATj and estimates of (log) Atlantic
trade by country j.13 The results are very similar to those reported in Table 2.
those with the Atlantic trader dummy. The former measure includes Belgium, Germany and Denmark,
which did not grow very rapidly over this time period, as potential Atlantic traders, but also gives
greater potential for trade to Britain and the Netherlands, which have relatively high coastline-to-area
ratios.
  13
     More formally, we use P ATj · max {0, ln ATjt } where ATjt is our estimate of Atlantic trade under-
taken by country j at time t. The max operator avoids the “log of 0” problem.

                                                   12
   Table 3 provides regression evidence illustrating the same pattern using estimates
of GDP per capita from Maddison (2001). In the top panel, we report estimates from
flexible models of the following form:
                              X                           X
                                                                                     0
       log yjt = dt + δj +            αt · W Ej · dt +            βt · P ATj · dt + Xjt · γ + εjt ,   (3)
                             t≥1600                      t≥1600

where yjt is income per capita in country j at time t. As before, W Ej is a dummy
indicating whether the country is in Western Europe, the dt ’s denote year eﬀects and
the δj ’s denote country eﬀects, Xjt is a vector of other covariates, and εjt is a disturbance
term. In addition, P ATj is again either a dummy for Atlantic trader or the Atlantic
coastline-to-area ratio. Maddison (2001) reports GDP per capita for 1500, 1600, 1700,
1820 and 1870. We take 1500 as the base year, and add interactions between our
measure of potential for Atlantic trade, P ATj , and the post-1600 dates to capture the
importance of Atlantic trade for the country (so we cannot conduct a specification test
for pre-existing trends using the interaction between P ATj and 1500). Output numbers
for 1870 are already heavily influenced by diﬀerential industrialization experiences of
various countries, so our baseline specification stops in 1820. For completeness, we also
report regressions that extend the sample to 1870.
   Parallel to our results in Table 2, West European countries grow faster after 1500,
though this pattern is somewhat less pronounced, especially when we limit the sample
to 1500-1820. The interactions between the Atlantic trader dummy and the post-1600
dates are typically significant starting either in 1600 or 1700 and quantitatively large.
For example, the estimate of β1820 = 0.27 in column 3 indicates that Atlantic traders
grew, on average, 31 percent (≈0.27 log points) more than non-Atlantic trader West Eu-
ropean nations between 1500 and 1820. Columns 4-7 report similar results to those in
Table 2. The pattern is the same when the sample is extended to 1870, with unweighted
regressions, when Britain is excluded from the sample, and when Asian countries are in-
cluded. Columns 8-11 report similar results using the Atlantic coastline-to-area measure
and the fraction of the population living in Atlantic ports.
   Panel B of the Table 3 reports structured models similar to (2) where instead of flexi-
ble interactions between time dummies and P ATj , we include the structured interaction
term, β · P ATj · ln ATt . Thus the estimating equation is now:
                               X
        log yjt = dt + δj +            αt · W Ej · dt + β · P ATj · ln ATt + Xjt0 · γ + εjt .         (4)
                              t≥1600




                                                  13
This more restrictive specification again shows that the diﬀerential growth of Western
Europe after 1600 is closely linked to the rise of Atlantic traders.
       Overall both Table 2 and Table 3 show the same pattern: when the eﬀect of Atlantic
trade is not taken into account, the estimates of αt ’s are significant, positive and large–
Western Europe is growing faster than Eastern Europe. Once Atlantic trade interactions
are included, αt ’s are either no longer significant or are, at the very least, reduced
substantially, while the eﬀect of Atlantic trade is very strong. We interpret this as
evidence that the diﬀerential growth of Western Europe over this time period is driven
by growth in countries that were engaged in Atlantic trade. Also noteworthy is that
the more restrictive specifications (2) and (4) give essentially identical results and very
similar R2 ’s to the flexible specifications, lending further support to the notion that these
interactions are linked to Atlantic trade.14

2.3     Other Determinants of Economic Performance

The models in Tables 2 and 3 do not control for other potential determinants of economic
performance. To check the robustness of our results, Table 4 adds covariates to our basic
regressions, including interactions between country religion and time, the incidence of
wars, interactions between Roman heritage and time, and interactions between latitude
and time. The overall patterns are not aﬀected. To save space, Table 4 only reports the
structured specifications of equations (2) and (4).
       Weber (1905) and Landes (1998) argue that religion is an important determinant of
economic and social development. To assess the importance of religion, we allow Protes-
tant countries to grow at a rates diﬀerent than non-Protestant countries by interacting a
dummy for being a majority Protestant country in 1600 with year dummies from 1600.15
The p-values from the joint significance test reported in columns 1 of Panels A and C
  14
      It is also worth noting that our findings are consistent with Allen’s (1998) numbers on the real
wages of building craftsmen and laborers in a range of European cities. He finds that between 1500
and 1750, real wages fell in most cities, but remained roughly constant in London, Amsterdam and
Antwerp.
   15
      We use the historical encyclopedia of Langer (1972) as the basis for coding our religion variables
(checking for more updated information in Stearns, 2001). The following countries were majority Protes-
tant in 1600: Britain, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland. Germany was largely Protestant, but the balance between Protestant and Catholic re-
mained unclear until the end of the 1600s. The specification reported in our regression tables codes
Germany as Protestant in 1600, but we have also tried coding Germany as Catholic. We have also
tried a more complete alternative specification in which religion is coded directly as Catholic, Muslim,
Orthodox or Protestant, with essentially identical results.



                                                  14
show that when the dependent variable is the urbanization rate, these interactions are
either marginally significant or insignificant. In contrast, when the dependent variable
is log GDP per capita and we use the Atlantic trader dummy for our potential Atlantic
trade measure (Panel B), there is a significant eﬀect from these religion×year interac-
tions. Nevertheless, this has little impact on the pattern of diﬀerential growth between
Western and Eastern Europe, or between Atlantic and non-Atlantic trader. Moreover,
the quantitative eﬀects of Protestantism on economic growth are considerably smaller
than those of Atlantic trade. The point estimates (not reported) imply that Protestant
countries experienced 4.5 percentage points greater urbanization growth between 1500
and 1850, and 30 percent more GDP growth between 1500 and 1820. The corresponding
numbers for Atlantic traders in the flexible specifications including the Protestant times
post-1600 interactions are 8.4 percentage points more urbanization and 41 percent more
GDP growth.
       Following the work by Hintze (1970) and Tilly (1990), many political scientists view
war as an important factor in the process of state building and subsequent economic
development. The basic idea is that countries that fight many wars will develop an
eﬀective state apparatus and bureaucracy, and this will facilitate economic development.
Incidence of wars might also proxy for the importance of inter-state competition, which
many historians, including Jones (1981), Mann (1986 and 1993), Hall (1985), and Mokyr
(1990), have emphasized. To assess the importance of wars, in columns 2 and 6 we
include a variable which is the average number of years with war during the previous
period (a century or half century).16 We find that this variable itself is insignificant in
the urbanization regressions and has no eﬀect on the patterns documented so far.
       A number of historians including, Jones (1981) and Landes (1998), see the roots
of Western European growth in the Roman Empire (see also Anderson, 1974a), and
perhaps in the culture of Ancient Greece. To investigate whether Roman heritage is
important for the Rise of Europe, we created a dummy that indicates whether a country
was part of the Roman Empire.17 We then interacted this variable with dates from 1600
  16
     Kohn (1999) documents European wars from about 1000AD. He lists the dates of each war,
together with a brief explanation of participants, duration and intensity. We exclude purely civil wars
and colonial wars that took place outside of Europe. We calculate the average number of years of
war in a time interval before each date in our dataset: for the preceding 100 years through 1700 and
for the preceding 50 years for 1750, 1800, and 1850. We have experimented with alternative codings
(e.g., dropping “minor” wars), but our main results are not aﬀected. Kohn (1999) does not appear to
provide reliable information on the wars of Finland and Greece during this period, so we drop these
countries from regressions involving the “wars per year” variable.
  17
     Coded from Langer (1972). Any country that was ever part of the Roman empire receives a value of


                                                  15
to see whether there is diﬀerential growth depending on the extent of Roman heritage
(columns 3 and 7). These interactions are typically insignificant, and do not aﬀect the
patterns reported in the previous tables. The only exception is when we use log GDP
per capita as the dependent variable and the Atlantic trader dummy for P ATj . But
in this case, the results indicate that countries with Roman heritage grew more rapidly
between 1400 and 1600, and significantly slower thereafter.
      Finally, in columns 4 and 8 we add interactions between distance from the equator
(measured as the absolute value of the latitude of the nation’s capital) and dates from
1600 to see whether the move of economic activity away from Southern Europe towards
Northern Europe can explain the rise of Atlantic nations. Once again the addition
of these variables does not aﬀect the importance of Atlantic trade, and the latitude
interactions are typically insignificant (except in Panel B where, as before, the point
estimates do not indicate that countries with higher latitudes grew faster over the whole
time period).

2.4    Urban Expansion and Atlantic Ports

We next turn to the analysis of data on the population of individual cities compiled by
Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988). This analysis is useful for four distinct reasons. First,
it will act as a check on our findings from county-level data. Second, since a number
of the countries we are treating as single observations in our cross-country analysis
previously consisted of distinct polities, city-level analysis provides an opportunity to
capture this type of within “country” variation. Third, it will show that Atlantic ports
played an important role in the urban and economic expansion of Atlantic traders and
nations, substantiating that the patterns documented in Tables 2, 3 and 4 are related
to Atlantic trade. Finally, by exploiting the diﬀerential growth patterns of Atlantic and
Mediterranean ports, we document that the post-1500 developments in Western Europe
are related to Atlantic trade, not simply to the growth of overall trade.
      Figure 4 shows that the urban expansion of Western Europe was driven by cities that
were Atlantic ports. Figure 5 depicts the behavior of Atlantic ports and Mediterranean
ports, and shows that Mediterranean ports over this time period grew at similar rates
one; other countries receive a value of zero. The following countries had a “Roman Heritage” according
to this source: Belgium, Britain, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, and Switzerland. In
our base case we do not include Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Yugoslavia, as these countries arguably had
their Roman traditions eradicated by a long period of Ottoman rule. Including this set of countries
weakens the “Roman Heritage” eﬀect further.



                                                 16
to inland West European cities, while Atlantic ports grew much faster.18
       The rest of this subsection documents these results using regression analysis. Table
5 estimates models of the following form:
                                  X                           X
           log Uit = dt + δi +            αt · W Ei · dt +            βt · APi · dt + Xit0 · γ + εit ,   (5)
                                 t≥1600                      t≥1500

where Uit is urban population in city i at time t, W Ei is a dummy indicating whether the
city is in Western Europe, and APi is a dummy indicating whether the city is an Atlantic
port, or in our alternative specification, whether it is a potential Atlantic port.19 The
dt ’s denote year eﬀects and the δi ’s denote city eﬀects, Xit is a vector of other covariates,
and εit is a disturbance term. The Atlantic port times 1500 interaction is again included
to allow a specification test on the timing of the rise of Atlantic ports. The sample for
all regressions in Table 5 is the balanced panel of cities for which we have observations
in each date.20 We report regressions weighted by population as well as unweighted
regressions. We start with data from the Bairoch et al. data set, so exclude data from
Asian cities; we then add data for 10 Asian cities for the whole period from Chandler
(1987).
       In column 1, APi is a dummy for Atlantic port. The interaction terms between the
Atlantic-port dummy and the post-1500 dates, i.e., the APi · dt terms, are positive and
statistically and economically very significant. For example, the coeﬃcient of 0.79 on the
interaction between the Atlantic-port dummy and the 1800 dummy implies that Atlantic
ports grew approximately 120 percent (≈0.79 log points) relative to other cities between
1300-1400 and 1800. Notably, there appears little diﬀerential growth of Atlantic ports
before 1600, once again supporting the notion that the growth of these ports is related
to the emergence of trading and colonial opportunities via the Atlantic.
       In the bottom panel, we report results from a structured specification of the eﬀect
  18
      Both figures use only the cities in our balanced sample, and are unweighted.
  19
      See the Appendix for exact definition and list of Atlantic ports in our panel. In Figures 4 and
5, we use the definition of actual Atlantic port. Belgian, Irish, and German potential Atlantic towns,
for example Hamburg and Bremen, which were not involved in Atlantic trade, are not counted as as
Atlantic ports. In the regression analysis, we also report results with a dummy for “potential Atlantic
port”. The distinction between Atlantic port and potential Atlantic port parallels the use of Atlantic
trader dummy and our measure of access to the Atlantic in Table 2, 3 and 4.
   20
       The focus on a balanced panel of cities avoids problems of “composition bias”, which would result
from the fact that cities enter the data set only once they exceed a certain threshold (typically 5,000
people). For example, if an area is growing rapidly, many cities will also grow in population and exceed
the relevant threshold, but the addition of many cities with population around 5,000 will reduce the
average population of the cities in this area. We look at a larger sample of cities in Table 7 below.



                                                     17
of Atlantic trade and estimate:
                                    X
             log Uit = dt + δi +            αt · W Ei · dt + β · APi · ln ATt + Xit0 · γ + εit               (6)
                                   t≥1600

where recall that ATt is total volume of Atlantic trade. Once again, the estimate of β
is highly significant, and the R2 of this more restrictive regression is almost the same as
the regression reported in the top panel. Column 2 reports a similar regression, but now
observations are not weighted. The results are similar, but quantitatively smaller, since
large Atlantic ports such as London and Amsterdam are not getting bigger weights.
       Columns 3 and 4 report weighted and unweighted estimates from similar models,
with a dummy for potential Atlantic port, that is, any city that is in our balanced panel
that could have been used as a port for Atlantic trade. The results are similar to those
in columns 1 and 2.21
       Column 5 drops London and Amsterdam to show that the results are not driven
by these two major cities. The coeﬃcients on Atlantic port times year interactions are
approximately halved from 1700 onwards, but they remain significant. Column 6 adds
a full set of country times year interactions to show the diﬀerential growth of Atlantic
ports relative to other cities in the same country. The coeﬃcients on Atlantic port times
year interactions after 1700 are again about half those of column 1, but still highly
statistically significant. Column 7 adds Asian cities from Chandler (1987), so now West
European cities are being compared to both East European and Asian cities. The results
are similar, but also show the diﬀerential growth of all West European cities relative to
Asian cities.22
       Is there something special about ports, or is it Atlantic ports that are behaving
diﬀerently after 1500? To answer this question, column 8 estimates the regression:
                        X                           X                          X
 log Uit = dt + δi +            αt · W Ei · dt +            βt · APi · dt +            βtM · MEi · dt + εit , (7)
                       t≥1600                      t≥1500                     t≥1500
  21
     Note that some of the coeﬃcients on potential Atlantic port are higher than the corresponding
coeﬃcients on Atlantic port. This for of two reasons: first, to allow for the specification test discussed
in the text, these regressions use 1300-1400 as the base period, and there was rapid growth in a few
potential, but not actual, Atlantic ports from 1400 to 1500. Cumulative growth between 1500 and
any date is always higher for Atlantic ports than for potential Atlantic ports. Second, some of the
potential Atlantic ports flourished as a result of secondary trade from the Atlantic. Edinburgh is a
prime example, growing from 18,000 inhabitants in 1500 to 83,000 inhabitants in 1800. In fact, to be
on the conservative side, we coded Edinburgh as a potential Atlantic port, even though it had some
involvement in Atlantic trade (partly through the associated port of Leith).
  22
     In these specifications, we do not include interactions between an Asian city dummy and the post-
1500 dates so the comparison group is all East European and Asian cities. Including such interactions
has no eﬀect on the results.

                                                      18
where MEi is a dummy for Mediterranean port, allowing the Mediterranean ports to
also grow at diﬀerential rates. The estimates in column 8 confirm the patterns shown
in Figure 5: there is no diﬀerential growth of Mediterranean ports, but a very strong
Atlantic port eﬀect.
      Table 6 parallels Table 4 and adds the same covariates at the city level when available.
The results are essentially the same as in Table 4, and none of these variables appear to
be significant or aﬀect the pattern that we have documented so far. The only noteworthy
diﬀerence from Table 4 is that the interaction terms between distance from the equator
and post-1600 years are now also significant, especially after 1700, though they do not
aﬀect the diﬀerential pattern of growth by Atlantic ports. The significance of these
interactions presumably reflects the shift of urban populations away from Portuguese
and Spanish cities to British and Dutch ports. Recall, however, that these interactions
between time and distance from the equator were not significant (or had the wrong sign)
in the cross-country regressions.
      All the estimates shown so far use a balanced panel of cities. As discussed in footnote
20, this avoids potential “composition biases” due to the addition of smaller cities in
later dates. On the other hand, it is important to know whether the importance of
Atlantic ports for Western European growth holds in a larger sample of cities. In Table
7, we look at a larger set of cities between four dates 1300, 1500, 1700 and 1800. The
sample is larger than the one used in Tables 5 and 6, since, in those tables the criterion
for inclusion was no missing observations at any date between 1300 and 1850. In all
columns, the same pattern emerges: there is no diﬀerential growth of Atlantic ports
between 1300 and 1500, but significantly faster growth between 1500 and 1700, and also
between 1500 and 1800. Moreover, as in Tables 6 and 7, allowing diﬀerential growth for
Atlantic ports explains all of the faster growth of Western Europe relative to Eastern
Europe between 1500 and 1700. When Asian cities are included, the Western European
eﬀect between 1500 and 1800 is significant even after controlling for Atlantic ports,
capturing the fact that Western European cities are growing considerably faster than
Asian cities, which now form the comparison group together with East European cities.

2.5     Non-Atlantic Urban Growth in Western Europe

Was the urban and economic expansion of Atlantic nations driven solely by growth in
Atlantic ports? The answer is yes in some cases, and no in others–and this variation is
interesting in its own right, and for the hypothesis we develop below.

                                              19
      Figure 6 shows the expansion of Iberian (Spanish and Portuguese) Atlantic ports,
other Iberian cities, and West European inland cities. The figure shows that almost
all of the diﬀerential growth of Spain and Portugal comes from Atlantic ports. In fact,
non-Atlantic parts of Spain and Portugal grew slower than West European inland cities.
This pattern contrasts with that shown in Figure 7: there is steady growth in non-
Atlantic parts of Britain and the Netherlands (notice that the non-Atlantic British and
Dutch line starts below the Western European line and overtakes it by 1850). It is also
worth noting that the growth in British non-Atlantic population starts after the growth
spurt of British Atlantic ports (though this cannot be seen in the figure, which combines
British and Dutch data). So whatever process was responsible for British and Dutch,
but not Portuguese and Spanish growth, appears to be more than the direct eﬀect of
growth of Atlantic trade.
      Table 8 documents similar patterns using regression analysis. The models that are
estimated are similar to (1) and (2), except that the dependent variable is now non-
Atlantic urbanization, that is, total urban population in non-Atlantic ports divided
by total population. We think of this as a proxy for economic activities that are not
directly related to Atlantic trade. Since there were activities in Atlantic ports not
related to Atlantic trade, for example in London, this measure is an understatement of
these activities, while it will be an overestimate to the extent that some of the non-
Atlantic-port activities were driven by Atlantic trade. The specifications are identical
to those reported in Tables 2 and 3. They show that there is faster growth in non-
Atlantic urbanization (non-Atlantic-related economic activity) among nations trading
in the Atlantic or those with greater potential for Atlantic trade. A comparison of
the results in Panel A with those in Table 3 shows that the takeoﬀ in these activities
postdates the growth of Atlantic ports and overall urbanization.

2.6    Interpretation

The evidence presented so far shows an important relationship between the potential for
Atlantic trade and post-1500 economic development. This evidence suggests that the
opportunities to trade in the Atlantic and via the Atlantic, and the associated profits
from colonialism and slavery, played an important role in the Rise of Europe. Almost
the entire diﬀerential growth of Western Europe over Eastern Europe (but notably not
over Asia) is accounted for by the growth of nations directly involved in Atlantic trade
or of those with easy access to the Atlantic. This suggests that any theory of the Rise

                                           20
of Europe needs to take into account the role of Atlantic trade.
       Theories linking the Rise of (Western) Europe to the continuation of pre-1500 trends
driven by certain distinctive characteristics of European nations or cultures, such as
Roman/Ancient Greek heritage (Landes 1998, and Jones 1981), religion (Landes 1998,
and Weber 1993), do not provide a complete explanation.23 We will also show in Section
5 that there is no evidence in support of the view that some pre-1500 institutional
features can explain the post-1500 developed by themselves.
       This brings us to theories linking European growth directly to profits from Atlantic
trade or colonialism, in particular to those emphasizing the importance of the transfer of
resources from the New World, or at the very least, the contribution of profits from this
trade to capital accumulation in Europe. This thesis was first put forward by Williams
(1944), and has been developed by dependency theorists such as Gunder Frank (1978)
and world-system theorists such as Wallerstein (1974-1980).
       The fact that there was a large amount of trade after the discovery of the New World
and the Atlantic routes to Asia suggests that there were at least some inframarginal rents
from Atlantic trade. So it is undoubtedly true that trade with these areas contributed to
European growth. The question is whether it was the decisive factor. Here, quantitative
analyses by economic historians, including, among others, Engerman (1972), Engerman
and O’Brien (1981), O’Brien (1982), and Bairoch (1993, chapter 5), show that the
volume of trade and the profits generated by trade appear to be too small to account
for much of European growth directly.
       For example, O’Brien (1982) calculates that, under assumptions favorable to the
importance of international trade, total profits from British trade with less developed
regions of the world during the late 18th century were approximately $5.6 million, while
total gross investment during the same period stood at $10.3 million. The same numbers
during the early 19th century were, respectively, $15.9 million and $34.3 million. During
this period, the aggregate savings rate was between 12 and 14 percent, so if we assume
that this savings rate also applies to profits from trade, the contribution of profits from
trade to aggregate capital accumulation would be between 5.5 and 7.5 percent. Even
assuming considerably higher savings rates, the contribution would remain relatively
  23
    As an additional piece of evidence against theories emphasizing distinctive characteristics of Euro-
pean nations, the regression results in Tables 4 and 6 oﬀer no evidence that any of these characteristics
played a major role in the Rise of Europe (i.e., none of these variables are consistently significant or
ever change the overall pattern of rapid Atlantic growth combined with comparable growth between
Eastern Europe and non-Atlantic Western Europe).



                                                   21
small.
       Atlantic trade may have also played an important direct role by inducing a reallo-
cation of resources within Europe, even if profits from trading were small (as would be
the case in a competitive economy). This direct channel is also unlikely to be the whole
story, since the volume of trade was small relative to the size of European economies.
For example, Bairoch (1993) calculates that commodity trade between Western Europe
and the rest of the world amounted to less than 4 percent of the GNP of Western Europe
before 1800.24
       In view of these numbers and other assessments by economic historians, it appears
unlikely that the role of Atlantic trade in the Rise of Europe was primarily through the
direct eﬀect of increased international trade. This inclines us towards a view in which
the Rise of Europe reflects a major social transformation induced by Atlantic trade
and colonialism. In this context, the fact that not only Atlantic ports but also other
areas in some of the countries engaged in Atlantic trade prospered during the critical
periods of European growth and Atlantic trade expansion is relevant. These patterns
are suggestive of some indirect process of social change unleashed by Atlantic trade and
colonial activity. In the next section, we outline a theory along these lines.

                                       3   Our Hypothesis

Our hypothesis is that “Atlantic trade”, i.e., the opening of the sea routes to the New
World, Africa, and Asia and the building of colonial empires, contributed to the process
of West European growth between 1500 and 1850 through its direct economic eﬀects, as
well as indirectly by inducing fundamental institutional changes. Atlantic trade enriched
and strengthened new groups of merchants. Via this channel, it contributed to the emer-
gence of capitalist institutions, i.e., economic and political institutions friendly to capital,
as these merchants demanded and obtained checks on royal power, secure property rights
and access to the lucrative commercial opportunities under royal monopoly.25 Our hy-
  24
     Alternatively, Atlantic trade and the profits it generated may have been important because they
created major externalities on other sectors, or because there were crucial non-convexities in the pro-
duction possibilities frontier of European economies at the time. For example, in a model with multiple
steady states with diﬀerent growth rates, a small change may switch the economy from the basin of
attraction of one steady state to that of the other (e.g., see, Zilibotti, 1995, or Ciccone and Matsuyama,
1999).
  25
     An additional channel via which Atlantic trade may have contributed to institutional change may
be the desire of the monarchy to secure the property rights of merchants in order to encourage long-
term investments in long distance trade. Although our reading of the relevant history makes us believe
that the greater contribution of Atlantic trade to the development of capitalist institutions was by


                                                   22
pothesis also implies that the tendency for capitalist institutions to emerge should have
been much stronger in initially non-absolutist societies than in countries with absolutist
regimes and monarchy-controlled trade monopolies, because in these latter countries
Atlantic trade did not strengthen new merchant groups.
      If correct, our hypothesis explains not only the link between Atlantic trade and the
Rise of (Western) Europe, but also why it was Britain and the Netherlands, and not
Spain and Portugal, that experienced the emergence of capitalist institutions and rapid
pre-industrial economic growth. In this section, we spell out this hypothesis in more
detail and provide historical evidence to support our interpretation.

3.1    The Argument

Our main hypothesis is that the Rise of Europe is due to the direct and indirect ef-
fects of Atlantic trade, with the indirect eﬀects working through institutional change
demanded, obtained and sustained by new merchant groups enriched by Atlantic trade.
This hypothesis can be broken into 4 subhypotheses:

   1. Capitalist institutions are essential for the incentives to undertake investments and
        for sustained economic growth, such as the one experienced by Western Europe
        during the “First Great Divergence”.

   2. Capitalist institutions are favored by commercial interests, especially new groups
        that do not receive trading privileges from the state, but are typically not welcome
        by the monarchy, rulers and elites.

   3. Institutions favored by economically and politically powerful groups are more likely
        to prevail.

   4. Atlantic trade and colonial activity generated substantial growth opportunities,
        which enriched and strengthened commercial interests, including new groups with-
        out ties to the monarchy.

      Together these four subhypotheses yield our main hypothesis: Atlantic trade gener-
ated growth opportunities and provided substantial profits for a segment of the bour-
geoisie in Western Europe, and this group could demand and obtain significant insti-
tutional reforms protecting their property rights. With their newly gained property
strengthening the bourgeoisie in its fight against the monarchy, the relative roles of the two mechanisms
in West European institutional changes is not essential for our overall story.

                                                   23
rights, the bourgeoisie of West European nations took advantage of the growth opportu-
nities oﬀered by Atlantic trade, invested more, traded more, and fueled the First Great
Divergence.
       Notice the importance of the fourth subhypothesis–if new commercial groups did
not profit from the opportunities oﬀered by Atlantic trade and colonialism, the chain of
reasoning would not work. This observation qualifies and refines our hypothesis: major
institutional changes are less likely in societies where the monarchy was initially strong
and controlled the monopoly of trans-oceanic trade, ensuring that the major beneficiaries
from Atlantic profits were the monarchy and groups allied with the monarchy. Therefore,
we expect an important interaction between initial institutions and the response of a
society to the opportunities presented by Atlantic trade.
       We next spell out these subhypotheses in more detail and provide some historical
evidence in support of each subhypothesis, with special emphasis on the fourth subhy-
pothesis.


       3.1.1 The emergence of capitalist institutions was essential for Western European
          growth

Capitalist institutions, in particular, the political institutions constraining the power of
the monarchy, protected the property rights of commercial and industrial capitalists,
enabled the entry of new groups into lucrative businesses,26 and reduced the hold of
landed aristocracy on rural labor, potentially increasing the supply of labor to commerce
and industrial sectors.
       At some level the notion that capitalist growth requires enforcement of property
rights is obvious, even to the level of being tautological. Jones quotes the 19th-century
historian William Cunningham to forcefully emphasize this point: “A man will not
risk what he has in trade, except for the prospect of very large gains, if he is likely
to be robbed by pirates, or to be oppressed by the government if he is successful in
business” (1981, p. 85). North emphasizes the same point in formulating his theory
of European growth: “The most convincing explanation for the Industrial Revolution
as an acceleration the rate of innovation is... a combination of better specified and
enforced property rights and increasingly eﬃcient and expanding markets... [directing]...
  26
    In this context, we might view British and Dutch financial system innovations, which facilitated
the entry of new investors into long-distance trade, as a component of capitalist economic institutions.
See the discussion in Neal (2000).



                                                  24
resources into new channels.” (1981, p. 166). North and Thomas (1973, p. 155-6)
similarly state: “By 1700 the institutional framework of England provided a hospitable
environment for growth ... perhaps most important, the supremacy of parliament and
the embedding of property rights in the common law put political power in the hands
of men anxious to exploit the new economic opportunities and provided the essential
framework for a judicial system to protect and encourage productive economic activity.”
   Marxist historians, in particular, Dobb (1946), Brenner (1977) and Hobsbawm (1999),
also link European growth to the emergence of the capitalist regime, though they do not
use the term “institutions” in the sense that North and we do. Similar arguments were
subsequently developed in greater detail in the British case initially by Engels (1892),
and subsequently by Hill (1969) and Brenner (1973, 1993), as well as non-Marxist histo-
rians such as Tawney (1941a,b), Moore (1966), Stone (1972), and Pincus (1998, 2002).
These scholars all argue that the evolution of political institutions can be explained by
social conflict, itself in part resulting from economic change. These changes gave rise
to new groups with commercial or capitalistic interests, the “gentry” and the “bour-
geoisie,” who fought to change institutions to remove the threat of arbitrary taxation
and state predation, and to secure their property rights and the profits from commerce.
Hill (1969, p. 13), for example, writes “movements in population and prices were roughly
similar all over Europe during this period [1530-1780] but the Netherlands and England
were unique in having successful political revolutions which led to greater commercial
influence over governments.” It was this commercial influence that enabled British and
Dutch growth.
   Additional empirical evidence that “capitalist” institutions are essential for the ex-
ploitation of growth opportunities is presented in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2002). We showed that societies with good institutions were the ones to take advan-
tage of the opportunity to industrialize in the nineteenth century, while countries with
institutions that did not constrain rulers and elites failed to industrialize.


   3.1.2 Capitalist institutions are typically not welcome by the whole society

Although capitalist institutions increase total output and economic growth, they often
harm the economic interests of the monarchy, landed interests and other established
groups allied with the monarchy. In particular, limitations on the taxation power of the
state reduce the rents of the Crown and other groups within the nobility. Similarly, the


                                             25
weakening of feudal labor relations and the migration of labor from rural to urban areas
typically hurt the economic interests of the landed aristocracy (unless they can some-
how successfully transition into commercial agriculture or other commercial businesses).
Moreover, with the rise of the bourgeoisie to political power, many of the policies that
protect the economic interests of landed groups are discontinued (the repeal of the Corn
Laws in 1846 in Britain is a salient example of this).
   Despite the fact that capitalist institutions increase total surplus in the society, it is
often impossible for the emerging commercial and industrial interests to compensate the
monarchy and other established groups that are being harmed by the resulting economic
and social changes (see, e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson, 2002b). The main reason for this
is that the groups that will gain from institutional change cannot commit to compensate
the losers. More specifically, institutions curtailing the power of the monarchy not only
provide secure property rights to the commercial and industrial interests, but also reduce
the rents of the monarchy and groups allied with it. In addition, as the bourgeoisie
gains economic power, it will also gain political power. Both factors imply that after
the development of capitalist institutions, there will be limited redistribution away from
the winners, the bourgeoisie, to compensate the losers, the Crown and various segments
of the landed interests.
   Because the monarchy and the landed aristocracy expect to lose from the emergence
of capitalist institutions, they will often oppose it. The classic account of the rise of
capitalist institutions in England by Barrington Moore expresses this as follows (1966,
p. 21): “Both the capitalist principle and that of parliamentary democracy are directly
antithetical to the ones they superseded and in large measure overcame during the Civil
War...” Moore goes on to argue that the emergence of capitalist institutions in England
happened against the wishes of the landed interests (1966, chapter 1). This account
also receives support from other historians. For example, Hill (1961) writes of the 17th-
century landed aristocracy: “in general the oﬃcial attitude to industrial advance was
hostile, or at best indiﬀerent. It was suspicious of social change and social mobility,
of the rapid enrichment of capitalists, afraid of the fluctuations of the market and of
unemployment, of vagabondage, and social unrest ....the Elizabethan Codes aimed at
stabilizing the existing class structure, the location of industry and the flow of labor
supply by granting privileges and by putting hindrances in the way of mobility and the
freedom of contract.”



                                            26
       3.1.3 Institutions favored by powerful groups are more likely to prevail

History is full of examples where powerful groups are able to impose their institutional
choices on the rest of the society.27 In the context of the emergence of capitalist in-
stitutions, it is clear that the nascent bourgeoisie wants these institutions, while the
monarchy and groups allied with it typically oppose them. As a result, there will be
frequent conflicts over the control of political power and the state, and on how to reform
institutions. In his history of Europe in the 18th century, Rude describes the situation
as follows (1972, p. 175): “It was inevitable ... that tensions should arise and demands
be voiced for an extension of authority by one or other of the principal contenders and
for a share in government by those who had been hitherto excluded”.
       Therefore, the evolution of institutions typically reflects the relative power of various
groups in the society: when the bourgeoisie becomes more powerful, the emergence of
capitalist institutions becomes more likely. Again Barrington Moore argues that: “...in
England the chief carriers of what was eventually to be a modern and secular society
were... men of commerce in both the countryside and the towns” (1966, p. 13). And
capitalist institutions emerged because capitalist groups were powerful enough during
certain periods. In North’s words “control of the state was, for a brief period of time, in
the hands of groups whose self-interest promoted the growth of market forms of resource
allocation” (1981, p. 180).28
  27
      The emergence of democratic institutions in Western Europe during the 19th century is a salient
example. In most instances, democratization occurred when groups excluded from political power
were strong and wanted to change the prevailing institutions so that they could share power in the
future (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2000a). Another example is the introduction of proportional
representation into Western European countries which, Rokkan (1970) argued, was due to conservative
parties attempting to undermine the electoral strength of socialists. A final interesting example is the
Napoleon’s imposition of the “Napoleonic” legal codes in France and the territories he occupied to
increase his control of judges and the administration of justice.
   28
      An interesting question, which falls beyond the scope of our inquiry, is why the new groups that
gained strength attempted to set up institutions restricting the power of the monarchy and securing
broad-based property rights rather than replacing the monarchy with their own oligarchy or a regime
that simply enforced their own rights. We conjecture that this may have been because the coalition
against the monarchy had to be broad-based, including commercial farmers, overseas merchants and
merchants involved in domestic trade. Given the heterogeneity of this coalition, limiting the expropri-
ation powers of the monarchy may have been a lowest common denominator. Though plausible, this
is only a conjecture, and future research on this question might reveal diﬀerent underlying reasons for
this outcome.




                                                  27
       3.1.4 Atlantic trade strengthened the nascent bourgeoisie

The political power of the nascent bourgeoisie reflected, to a large extent, its economic
power. As the commercial interests became richer they could demand and obtain re-
forms. This was both because other groups in the society needed their economic coop-
eration, and also because their economic power often bought them military power, or at
least the power to undertake social unrest and mount threats to the regime. Examples
of the bourgeoisie using its economic power to disrupt the system–in fact, to disrupt it
quite violently–include the English Civil War in the 1640’s and the social unrest leading
up to the 1832 Reform Act in England, the Dutch rebellion against the Spanish Empire
beginning in 1572, and perhaps, the 1789 Revolution in France.
       With the surge in Atlantic trade, the economic power of commercial and industrial
interests grew considerably. Even though O’Brien’s (1982) estimates imply that the
contribution of profits from international trade to capital accumulation was modest, the
size of these profits were very large–about 5.5 to 7.5 percent of GDP. Perhaps more
significantly, these profits were concentrated in the hands of a relatively small section of
the bourgeoisie.
       Many historians also emphasize the role of merchants, and especially of merchants
engaged in Atlantic trade, in the transformation of British and Dutch institutions (see
Brenner, 1973, 1993, Stone, 1972, Pincus, 1998, 2002, on Britain; and Israel, 1989,1995,
de Vries and van der Woude, Ch 11, on the Netherlands).29
       In the next subsection, we provide more detailed historical evidence from the British
and Dutch cases that Atlantic trade indeed strengthened the commercial bourgeoisie
in these countries, and via this channel, played an important role in the emergence of
capitalist institutions. We focus on Britain and the Netherlands, since according to
our hypothesis, the beneficial institutional changes should take place in societies where
new merchants are the main beneficiaries of the profits from trade, and not in relatively
absolutist countries such as Spain and Portugal.30
  29
     It is also useful to note at this point that we are not arguing that international trade will create
a tendency towards better institutions. International trade may strengthen groups that favor the
status quo, or non-capitalist institutions. Over the same period, trade with Western Europe may have
strengthened the landed aristocracy in Eastern Europe, or even led to the emergence of highly absolutist
and extractive institutions there, for example with the second serfdom (Brenner, 1977). Similarly, trade
with Europe was almost undoubtedly important for the power of sugar planters in the Caribbean, who
maintained highly extractive institutions based on slavery and forced labor (e.g., Williams, 1944).
  30
     In this context, France can be viewed as an intermediate case. Early Atlantic activity enriched
some merchant groups, in particular, the protestant Huguenots. The monarchy soon clashed with and



                                                   28
3.2    Atlantic Trade and the Bourgeoisie

      3.2.1 The British case

In the British case, the period under the rule of Charles I witnessed intense conflict
between the Crown and other social groups on the extent of the powers of the monar-
chy, the security of private property, and the extent of royal monopoly in the trading
activities. Charles I dissolved his third parliament in 1629 and attempted to rule with-
out parliament, raising taxes in an unconstitutional way and using the Star Chamber
to manipulate legal decisions in his favor. Charles’s reign slowly disintegrated into the
Civil War in 1642. The Civil War and the Glorious Revolution of 1688, where James II
was deposed and replaced by William of Orange and a parliamentary regime, are seen as
two milestones towards the emergence of British political institutions constraining the
monarchy, though the emphasis placed on each varies from historian to historian. For
example, North and Weingast (1989), following Macaulay (1849), and Trevelyan (1938),
emphasize the importance of the Glorious Revolution. Yet the struggle for these insti-
tutions may be dated back to the reign of Elizabeth I, for example when the Commons
obstructed the creation of monopolies and the sale of titles, and they were established
initially by the Long Parliament in 1641 where Charles I made many critical concessions.
After the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660, the parliament kept most of what it had
won until the struggle with James II.
      For our purposes, the relative importance of the Civil War and the Glorious Rev-
olution in the development of capitalist institutions is secondary. What is important
is that both of these major changes came as a result of political conflict between the
monarchy and (new) bourgeois interests demanding protection for their property and
commerce.31 Merchants who benefitted from Crown monopolies had complex positions,
defeated the Huguenots, first with the siege of La Rochelle by Louis XIII and then, the outlawing of the
Protestant church by Louis XIV (see, e.g., Scoville, 1960, and Valone, 1994). The monarchy then kept
much of overseas trading activity under its monopoly, especially under Colbert (see, e.g., Davis, 1973a,
pp. 222-224, and Doyle, 1974, pp. 210-211). Nevertheless, certain strong French bourgeois elements
developed, and arguably, forced institutional change before, during and after the French Revolution
(see Lefebvre, 1947, and Doyle, 1988, for the debate on the origins of the French Revolution).
   31
      Other prominent interpretations of the English Civil War have emphasized various factors apart
from those we stress here. Russell (1990) emphasizes the idea that the Civil War was a plot by the
traditional aristocracy to regain power it had lost under the Tudors. Many, for example, Morrill (1993),
stress the role of religious diﬀerences in determining who supported which side, and more recent work
by Manning (1996) stresses more general class conflict. Nevertheless, although there are doubtless
elements of truth in most of these approaches, the general role of mercantile interests seems undeniable
(see Richardson, 1998, for a balanced overview of the debate).



                                                  29
but the evidence is relatively uncontroversial that the majority of the merchants, and
even many of those with royal monopolies, supported the Parliament.32 For example, de-
tailed analyses of the initial members of the Long Parliament in 1640 indeed show that
a significant majority of merchants supported the Parliamentarian cause (see Keeler,
1954, and Brunton and Pennington, 1954). The latter authors, for example, document
that of the 552 members of the Long Parliament, 50-70 were “members whose wealth
came chiefly from trade” (Brunton and Pennington, 1954 p. 54).33 The members of
the Commons from the City of London (the main center of mercantile activity), as well
as many non-London commercial constituencies, such as Southampton, Newcastle and
Liverpool, supported the Parliament against the King.34 Sacks (p. 230-247) shows that
in Bristol trading, commercial and industrial interests outside of the local monopolis-
tic trading company, the Merchant Adventures, were Parliamentarians. Brunton and
Pennington (1954, p. 62) also note “in the country as a whole there was probably a
prepondernace of Parliamentarian feeling among merchants.”35
       More recent historical analyses tend to support the view that mercantile interests
were Parliamentarian and they played an important role in the political conflict. Brenner
(1993, p. 316) states: “The political activities and alignments of London’s merchant
community both expressed and helped determine the character of City and national
conflict in the period leading up to the outbreak of Civil War. From November 1640,
London politics and national politics became ever more inexorably intertwined, and
overseas merchants played key roles at both levels.” Moreover, the support of City of
London for the Parliament was in fact critical because of the resources and manpower
  32
      Pearl’s seminal study (1961) argued that there were political divisions between groups such as the
Merchant Adventurers who benefited from monopolies granted by the Crown and new merchants, who
did not. Ashton (1979, 1996), on the other hand, argued that even merchants who enjoyed monopolies,
tended to oppose the Crown by the Civil War. Ashton argues (1996, p. 3) “the majority of the City
fathers, far from being the natural supporters of Stuart absolutism at the end of the period of Charles
I’s personal rule in the late 1630’s, were as alienated from royal policies as were the vast majority of
the political nation.”
   33
      This in itself shows the great social mobility of the age since in 1584 mercantile interests were
practically unrepresented in the House of Commons (see Neale, 1949).
   34
      See Brunton and Pennington (1954, especially p. 60). The two MP’s for Bristol, Humphrey Hooke
and Richard Long were Royalists, but this reflected the intra-merchant conflict emerging from the
granting of monopoly trading rights (see Pearl, 1961, and Sacks, 1991).
   35
      There are some other regularities about who sided with whom in the Civil War which are consistent
with our thesis. Brunton and Pennington (1954, p. 178) note the existence of “the predominantly
Royalist North and West and the predominantly Parliamentarian South and East.” The South and
East were the most prosperous, commercial and modern areas of the country. See Hughes (1998) for a
general discussion of this issue and Broxap (1972) for the intra-Lancashire pattern.



                                                  30
it made available. In his seminal book Stone (1972, p. 144) writes: “... other important
merchant elements can now be identified, men interested especially in the American
trades, in New England colonization, and in breaking the monopoly of the East India and
Levant Companies. They were new men in new fields of entrepreneurial endeavor who
chafed at the political and economic stranglehold of the older established monopolistic
oligarchies. These men were important members of the group of radicals who seized
control of London at a critical moment in 1641, and so swung the power and influence
of the city decisively on the side of Parliament.”
   The economic policies after 1649 and the final triumph of the Parliament are consis-
tent with the rising power of merchants. Most significant were the Navigation Acts of
1651 and 1660 which restricted trade in British colonies to British ships and merchants
(see Farnell, 1964, Cooper, 1972, and Guaci, 2001). One immediate implication was
that British merchants could capture the lucrative slave trade from the Dutch, since
the Navigation Acts banned the Dutch from supplying slaves to the British West Indian
colonies. Holmes (1993, p. 64) refers to the African slave trade as “manifestly a child of
the Navigation Act, which illegalised the activities of the Dutch slavers who had hitherto
supplied the labour needs of the British planters.”
   A similar argument which emphasizes the critical role of mercantile interests in the
Glorious Revolution of 1688 has recently been developed by Pincus (1998, 2001, 2002).
He notes that James II favored the East India Company and granted various monopoly
privileges, alienating the merchant class. Thus, “no wonder the merchant community
poured money into William of Orange’s coﬀers in 1688.” (Pincus, 2002, p. 32-33). He
concludes (p. 34) “England’s merchant community actively supported William’s plan for
invasion, and provided a key financial prop to the regime in the critical early months.”
   The Glorious Revolution led to a whole series of policies which initiated the financial
revolution, particularly the founding of the Bank of England and, with the exception of
the East India Company, the wholesale demise of monopoly charters (see Carruthers,
1996). Guaci (2001, p. 218), for example, describes this process of increasing free entry
into trading activities as follows: “Parliament was used to attack monopolies, and the
great onslaughts against the London overseas trading companies accounted for nearly
a third of all petitions considered there. This colossal wave of anti-company sentiment
demonstrated that Parlaiment, and not the Crown, was regarded as the national arbiter
on commerce, and its enhanced post-Revolutionary authority was sought as a weapon
to undermine the royal authority of the company charters.”


                                           31
   3.2.2 The Dutch case

Turning to the Dutch case, it would be a fair characterization to view the history of
the Netherlands during the 16th and early 17th centuries as the history of the struggle
between merchants, especially the wealthy and politically powerful Regents, and the
Habsburg monarchy. While the monarchy tried to increase its tax revenues from the
Netherlands, the merchants tried to minimize taxes and fought for security of property
and for independence from Spain.
   An early milestone was the granting of the Grand Privilege of 1477 which gave
the States General of the Burgundian Netherlands the right to gather on their own
initiative and curbed the right of the ruler to raise taxes. However, by 1493 Maximilian of
Habsburg reversed the privileges. After 1552, war with France increased the Habsburgs’
fiscal needs and led them to impose a large tax burden on Netherlands. In 1556 when
Charles V abdicated in favor of his son Philip II, the Netherlands rejected his first set
of fiscal demands, only grudgingly paying up in 1558 under their own terms.
   Growing fiscal and religious resentment in 1572 led to a series of uprisings against
the Habsburgs, mostly orchestrated by commercial interests (see Israel, 1995). De Vries
and van der Woude (1997, p. 369) argue that “urban economic interests ultimately
believed it advantageous to escape the Habsburg imperial framework”. In the case
of Amsterdam, de Vries and van der Woude (1997, p. 365) note: “the ruling faction
instinctively chose the cautious path of loyalty to Catholicism and the Habsburg regime...
Their opponents included most of the city’s international merchants.....[I]n 1578 a new
Amsterdam city council threw the city’s lot in with the Prince of Orange... among the
merchants returning from... exile were [those whose families] and several generations of
their decendents would long dominate the city.”
   Not only did commercial interests wish to escape the Habsburg regime, but they
were becoming rich enough to turn their wishes into action. Israel (1995, pp. 241-
242) describes this as follows: “From 1590, there was a dramatic improvement in the
Republic’s economic circumstances. Commerce and shipping expanded enormously, as
did the towns. As a result, the financial power of the states rapidly grew, and it was
possible to improve the army vastly, both qualitatively, and quantitatively, within a
short space of time. The army increased from 20,000 men in 1588 to 32,000 by 1595,
and its artillery, methods of transportation, and training were transformed” (see also
Israel, 1989, Chapter 3). By 1629, the Dutch were able to field an army of 77,000 men,


                                            32
50% larger than the Spanish army of Flanders (Israel, 1995, p. 507).
       After the Dutch revolt, it was the wealthy, predominantly Protestant merchants, the
Regents, that dominated the city and state politics.36 De Vries and van der Woude
(1997, p. 587) in their analysis of the relationship between soico-economic position and
political influence note the that the richest people consisted of those “6 to 8% of urban
households with incomes in excess of 1,000 guilders per year. This was the grote burgerij
from whom was drawn the political and commercial leadership of the country. Here
we find, first and foremost, the merchants.”37 In fact, the Dutch Revolt also served
to weaken the position of Dutch nobles in the two largest states, Zeeland and Holland.
Again quoting de Vries and van der Woude (1997, pp. 507-508): “Many nobles ... were
... excluded from the political system when the new Republican order triumphed... Only
the Prince of Orange remained as a qualified representative of the noble order, and three
attempts by other nobles (in 1615, 1616 and 1651) to be restored to their ancient rights
were torpedoed by the cities in Zeeland. These cities, indeed, were the great winners of
this process.”
       Full independence for the Dutch Republic was not secure until the war against the
Habsburgs was completed with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. In this process, the
role of merchants was central. Dutch bankers and trading companies financed the inde-
pendence war and dictated policy. Adams (1994, p. 329) quotes Elias in arguing that
“The leading edge of commercial expansion shifted to the colonial and rich trades, and
the merchants engaged in colonial trades, proclaiming the need for the states to help
merchants secure wider opportunities in the Indies, swept into power in Amsterdam in
1601”. De Vries and van der Woude (1997, p. 366) note that it was “the traditional
pillars of the maritime economy ... that supported and strengthened the young Republic
in its hour of need.”

                   4   Atlantic Trade and Institutional Change

We now attempt to substantiate our hypothesis further by providing empirical evidence
on the link between the emergence of capitalist institutions and conflict between diﬀerent
  36
     The strength and interests of the Dutch merchants can also be seen in the following episode.
Following Spain’s oﬀer to recognize Dutch independence if they withdrew from the East and the West
Indies, the Dutch responded that “too many prominent personages in the Republic were involved in
the East India Company for it to be disbanded” (Israel, 1995, p. 9).
  37
     For example, de Vries and van der Woude (1997, p. 587) show how merchants dominated the
governments of Leiden and Rotterdam.



                                               33
social groups, and on the role of Atlantic trade in institutional change.

4.1    Measuring Institutions

A prerequisite for this exercise is a measure of capitalist institutions. Ideally, we would
like to measure the essential ingredients of our definition of capitalist (political and
economic) institutions, which included both political and economic elements: the degree
of constraints on the monarchy (or equivalently the degree of absolutism) and other
established groups; the security of property rights for a broad cross-section of society;
and the extent of free entry into lucrative businesses. Unfortunately, no such measure
exists for the period that we are analyzing. So as a first step, we attempted to create
a measure of political institutions for European countries between 1300 and 1850. We
started with the definition of “constraint on the executive” from Gurr’s Polity data set,
which gives a score between 1 to 7 for every (independent) country starting in 1800.
This is a useful concept since it measures limitations on the arbitrary use of power by
the executive (for the relevant time period, the monarchy), and is presumably correlated
with the security of property rights of merchants and the control over the monopoly of
overseas trade by the monarchy.
      We follow the Polity IV coding handbook in using the following criteria for coding
“constraint on the executive” (Marshall and Jaggers, 2000). A value of 1 means “there
are no regular limitations on the executive’s actions,” 3 means “there are some real but
limited restraints on the executive,” 5 means “the executive has more eﬀective authority
than any accountability group, but is subject to substantial constraints by them,” and
7 means “accountabilty groups have eﬀective authority equal to or greater than the
executive in most activity.” Scores of 2, 4, and 6 are used for intermediate values.
      The measure of constraint on the executive is not ideal for our purposes, however,
since during European history a number of significant constraints on monarchs were
imposed by the nobles, and did not necessarily serve to protect the rights of the bour-
geoisie. For example, in much of the 1500-1750 period, Poland had a highly constrained
executive. But there was relatively little protection for urban merchants–most of the
rights rested with the nobility.
      For this reason, we modified the definition of constraint on the executive to create
an alternative measure, which we refer to as “protection for capital”. The coding of
this measure depends on the formal rights given to urban merchants, particularly their
protection in the event of a dispute with the nobility or monarch. A code of 1 indicates

                                             34
that these merchants have no eﬀective protection against arbitary confiscation by the
ruler (e.g., as was the case in most absolutist regimes). A code of 3 indicates that
there are some city charters that give some rights to merchants, for example to be
tried in courts run by their peers. A code of 5 indicates that the merchants and the
“middle classes” have eﬀective parliamentary representation. A code of 7 indicates
that the government is formed by and largely influenced or controlled by merchants
and middle classes. Other codes indicate intermediate values. In practice, our view
of the appropriate coding was based on our assessment of constraint on the executive,
adjusted by available evidence on legal protections for merchants. We believe that the
protection of capital is a better proxy for capitalist institutions, while the constraint on
the executive measure makes comparison with Polity IV data set easier.
       For 1800 and 1850, we use the Polity coding for constraint on the executive, where
available. For earlier periods, we coded these measures ourselves, as well as asking an
able research assistant to code them independently from the same sources (and without
knowing our hypothesis). The main source for this exercise was Langer (1972), a classic
historical encylopedia, written with a focus on constitutional events. We supplemented
this work with the more recent edition by Stearns (2001). The Appendix gives our
coding and describes the procedure in more detail.38 More generally, while there may
be disagreement about the precise values used in particular years, the general level
of constraint on the executive does not appear to be controversial. For example, the
absolutist regimes of France and Spain clearly had much less constraint on the executive
than did the Netherlands after independence or England after the Civil War. Details on
our coding strategy and the full series and some reasonable alternatives are given in the
Appendix.39
       Other evidence, both on the the extent of absolutism and on the control of overseas
trading activity by the monarchy, also supports our coding based on formal constraints.
Davis (1973b, p. 210) contrasts the constraints on the monarchy in England with Spain
and France, and writes: “the financial check held back the crown from costly expenditure
  38
     We have also checked our results using the three codings of institutions in De Long and Shleifer
(1993). While their measures of institutions are somewhat diﬀerent, for example awarding a much
“better” score to feudal systems than does coding based on the Polity criteria, the overall results using
their codes are the same. Essentially, in their coding as in ours, republics have more protection for capital
than absolutist regimes. This point is both critical to our empirical analysis and fairly uncontroversial.
  39
     One of the major issues is how to code Ireland. For much of the period, Ireland was under British
control, so one possibility would be to assign Ireland British institutions. An alternative would be to
give them lower scores, since they were “a colony” of Britain. Our results are robust to both alternatives.



                                                     35
in wartime; the vast and ruinous outpouring of treasure which Philip II or Louis XIV were
able to continue over long periods was not matched by any English monarch until the
responsibility for war became largely a parliamentary one after the Revolution of 1688.”
Elsewhere, he emphasizes the high degree of absolute control by the monarchy in Spain
as follows: [in Castile] “the king ruled subject only to weak constitutional restraints. In
the first decades of the sixteenth century the crown had reduced the pretensions of the
Castilian nobility and towns, so that the representative body, the Cortes, could obstruct
but not in the last resort prevent royal tax raising.” (Davis, 1973a, p. 66).40
       Historians also emphasize the diﬀerences in the organization of trade between Britain
and Spain, in particular, the role played by monopoly companies, and how these diﬀer-
ences determined who the main beneficiaries of the gains from overseas activities were.
Davis shows that in Britain “most trade was carried on by individuals and small part-
nerships, and not by the Company of Merchant Adventurers, the Levant Company....or
others of their kind” (Davis, 1973b, p. 41). At least by 1600 there was quite free entry
into the the British merchant class (Lang, 1974). In contrast, in Spain and Portugal,
overseas activities were monopolies tightly controlled by their monarchies. Cameron
(1993, p. 127) describes the situation as follows: “The spice trade in the East Indies
of the Portuguese Empire was a crown monopoly; the Portuguese navy doubled as a
merchant fleet, and all spices had to be sold through the Casa da India (India House)
in Lisbon ... no commerce existed between Portugal and the East except that organized
and controlled by the state” (see also Boxer, 1985, and Hamilton, 1948). In Spain, sim-
ilarly, colonial trade was a monopoly of the Crown of Castille, which they delegated to
the Casa de Contratación (House of Trade) in Seville. This merchants guild was closely
monitored by the government (Parry, 1966, Ch 2).41
  40
     The modern literature, in particular, Thompson (1994) and Graves (2001), suggests that the extent
of Spanish absolutism has been overemphasized by scholars such as North and Thomas (1973), and
points out important diﬀerences between Castile, and other parts of Iberia such as Aragon and Catalo-
nia. Nevertheless, it is certainly true that the Spanish Crown was able to create trade monopolies and
raise taxes in ways that the Tudor and Stuart monarchies were unable to do and much evidence still
supports the claim of North and Thomas (1973, p. 128) that: “The price of domestic peace and secure
property rights [...brought by Ferdinand and Isabella]... was loss of liberty in the Cortes, the grant to
the Crown of the sole power to set taxes”.
  41
     Why were Spain and Portugal more absolutist than Britain and the Netherlands? These questions
are beyond the scope of our study, but there are some obvious conjectures. Pre-1500 developments in
Britain, including the balance of power between the Crown and the nobles, for example as encapsulated
by the Magna Carta of 1215, placed a number of restrictions on the monarchy, even on those with
absolutist tendencies such as Henry VII or Henry VIII. In the context of the Netherlands, it has
been argued that the political system was more “participatory” because these areas were faced with
collective action problems due to their low elevation above sea level, which necessitated a high degree of


                                                   36
      Finally, we also looked at whether each major institutional change happened amidst
significant social conflict. Most of the major changes towards capitalist institutions in
Europe between 1300 and 1850 were driven by significant social and political conflict:
the Dutch revolt, the Civil War in England, and the French Revolution. Through 1800,
almost all institutional changes happened amidst significant conflict, and according to
our interpretation, because of significant conflict. In other words, this reading of the
historical evidence is consistent with the view that capitalist institutions were not given
by the monarchy and landed aristocracy, they were demanded and taken by new segments
of the bourgeoisie.

4.2      Explaining European Institutional Changes

Figure 8 plots average institutions, using the above measure of constraint on executive
and with population as weights as before, in Atlantic traders and non-Atlantic traders.
It depicts much more marked improvement in the institutions of Atlantic traders. Table
9 shows the same pattern using regression analysis (see Appendix Table 5 for results with
the alternative coding of constraint on executive). It estimates models of the following
form
                              X                           X
           Ijt = dt + δj +            αt · W Ej · dt +            βt · P ATj · dt + Xjt0 · γ + εjt ,   (8)
                             t≥1600                      t≥1500


where Ijt is our measure of institutions in country j at time t (constraint on the executive
in the first part and protection for capital in the second part) and as before, W Ej is
a dummy indicating whether the country is in Western Europe, the dt ’s denote year
eﬀects and the δj ’s denote country eﬀects, Xjt is a vector of other covariates, and εjt is
a disturbance term. This equation is identical to (1), except for the dependent variable.
P ATj is either a dummy for Atlantic trader or the Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio. The
interactions between P ATj and the post-1600 dates capture the importance of Atlantic
trade for institutional changes (and the 1500 interaction again allows a specification
test).
cooperation in towns and some amount of urban autonomy. In addition, the quality of the land and soil
was relatively poor, and this appears to have discouraged the formation of strong feudalistic structures
(see de Vries and van der Woude, 1997, see also Anderson, 1974b, and Ertman, 1997).
  In the Spanish case, the war against the Moors and the struggle over law and order until late in
the 15th century appear to have strengthened the central state. Moreover, there was a crucial civil
war between Charles V and Nobles at the beginning of the 16th century. In 1538 Charles expelled the
Nobles from the parliament (the Cortes) leaving only the representatives of the towns (Graves, 2001, p.
72-73). This victory of Charles V strengthened the Crown and reduced the power of the Cortes further.


                                                    37
       Significant estimates of αt ’s imply that there was a diﬀerential evolution of institu-
tions in Western Europe after 1500. This can be seen in column 1. When we include the
interaction terms with Atlantic trade, i.e., the P ATj · dt ’s terms, this leads to significant
estimates of βt ’s, indicating that there is a close connection between Atlantic trade and
the development of capitalist institutions. For example, the estimate of β1850 = 2.96 in
column 2 indicates that the average score of the constraint on the executive increased
by 2.96 points more among Atlantic traders between 1300-1400 and 1850 (for a sense
of the scale, note that the improvement in British institutions between 1600 and 1750
is 3). Again, notably, β1500 is insignificant (in fact, here it is negative), showing that
there were no diﬀerential pre-existing trends between Atlantic traders and other Western
European nations.
       The inclusion of interaction terms with Atlantic trade weakens the diﬀerential im-
provement in West European institutions relative to East European institutions, and
there is no longer a statistically significant diﬀerential improvement institutions in West
Europe in column 2. However, the diﬀerential West European eﬀects continue to be
significant in the structured specification of column 3, and when we use the coastline-
to-area ratio measure in column 8.
       Other columns in these tables use the same controls and time interactions as in Table
4. Although the F-statistics show that many of these time interactions are significant,
being Protestant, having more wars, having a Roman heritage or being further north do
not appear to have led to greater institutional change after 1500 (for example, institu-
tions in Protestant countries improved more rapidly until 1750, and significantly slower
thereafter).42 Overall, these results suggest that there were greater strides towards bet-
ter institutions in nations engaged in Atlantic trade, or those with a greater potential
to engage in Atlantic trade, more or less around the time of the surge in Atlantic trade.

                          5   The Role of Initial Institutions

As emphasized in Section 3, our hypothesis also suggests that Atlantic trade should
have induced more rapid institutional and economic development when new merchants,
  42
    In our base estimates, we measure institutions in Northern Italy and we ascribe “Italian” GDP per
capita and urbanization to Northern Italy. Adding Southern Italy would strengthen our results. This
region was relatively rich in 1500 (though slightly less so than Northern Italy), with somewhat weaker
constraint on the executive. Over the next 300 years it did not participate actively in Atlantic trade,
stagnated in economic terms and did not improve its institutions, so adding this country to our data
would be equivalent to adding another country like Austria–it would increase our ability to distinguish
between Atlantic and non-Atlantic Western Europe.


                                                  38
the groups in favor of institutional change, benefited substantially from Atlantic trade.
However, as discussed above, the Spanish, Portuguese and to some extent French monar-
chies were quite powerful at the turn of the 15th century and during the early stages of
the 16th century, and managed to tightly control overseas activities, granting monop-
olies to groups loyal to themselves, and new groups benefited relatively little from the
opportunities oﬀered by Atlantic trade (see, e.g., Davis, 1973a, Cameron, 1993, Parry,
1966, Davis, 1973a, Doyle, 1974). As a result, in all three countries, the monarchy
and groups allied with the monarchy became the major beneficiaries of the profits from
trade and plunder from the New World and Asia via the Atlantic. So our hypothesis
implies a weaker tendency towards beneficial institutional change in countries where in-
stitutions placed little checks on the monarchy and allowed the monarchy to control the
monopoly of trade. Armed with a quantitative measure of institutions, we now turn to
investigating this aspect of our hypothesis.

5.1    Econometric Evidence

We would like to establish that it was predominantly societies with less absolutist ini-
tial institutions and those with relatively free entry into trading activities that took
advantage of the opportunities oﬀered by Atlantic trade. Since we have no quantitative
measures of the organization of trade (the degree of monarchy-controlled monopoly in
overseas trade), we are going to proxy both of these characteristics with our constraint
on the executive variable. This is reasonable since sales of trading privileges were one of
the major fiscal tools of relatively absolutist monarchies (see North, 1981). Therefore,
we will look for diﬀerential responses of societies with diﬀerent scores of initial constraint
on executive to the opportunity to engage in Atlantic trade and colonialism.
      We will also take this opportunity to test against a related hypothesis which is
nonetheless quite diﬀerent from ours: this alternative hypothesis is that post-1500 devel-
opments simply reflect divergence between societies that had very diﬀerent institutions
at the turn of the 15th century (see North and Thomas, 1973). This diﬀers from our
hypothesis which emphasizes the interaction between initial institutions and Atlantic
trade.
      To investigate these ideas, we estimate models of the following form:
                 X                                        X
ujt = dt +δj +          αt ·W Ej ·dt +β·ln ATt ·P ATj +        γt ·Ij,1415 ·dt +η·ln ATt ·P ATj ·Ij,1415 +εjt ,
               t≥1600                                 t≥1500
                                                                                                       (9)

                                                 39
where, as before, ujt is the urbanization rate, ln ATt is our measure of Atlantic trade,
P ATj is again either a dummy for Atlantic trader or the Atlantic coastline-to-area ratio,
and Ij,1415 is country j’s “initial institutions,” the average of its institutions (constraint
on the executive) in 1400 and 1500. We choose the average of these two dates to capture
the long-term institutional diﬀerences in the pre-1500 period. The γt · Ij,1415 · dt terms
allow any diﬀerential economic trends simply related to diﬀerences in initial institutions,
which would apply with no access to the Atlantic. Significant coeﬃcients on these
interaction terms would imply that at least part of the post-1500 developments in Europe
reflect divergent paths taken by countries with diﬀerent initial institutions, independent
of the eﬀects of Atlantic trade. The table reports the p-value from a joint significance
test for all of these interaction terms. The ln ATt · P ATj term, on the other hand,
measures the eﬀect of Atlantic trade for a given level of institutions. In the table, this
term is evaluated at the lowest score of institutions, i.e., for Ij,1415 = 1, so the coeﬃcient
on this term measures the contribution of Atlantic trade and access to the Atlantic to
the growth of a society with the worst possible initial institutions.
   The variable ln ATt · P ATj · Ij,1415 tests the hypothesis of interest. A significant coef-
ficient η implies that there were divergent paths taken by countries with diﬀerent initial
institutions, but this divergence relates significantly to whether they took advantage of
the opportunities presented by Atlantic trade.
   We report the results in Tables 10A and 10B, where the first table uses the definition
of Atlantic trader for P ATj , while the second uses the coastline-to-area ratio measure.
Panel A in both tables presents estimates from equation (9), while Panel B presents
estimates from a similar equation with log income per capita as the dependent vari-
able and Panel C shows regressions with institutions as the left-hand side variables, to
document the role of the interaction between initial institutions and Atlantic trade for
the development of capitalist institutions. To save space, we only report results using
the constraint on the executive measure of institutions. Results with the protection for
capital are similar.
   The results in all three panels are similar. The interaction between the aggregate
measure of Atlantic trade and potential for Atlantic trade, ln ATt · P ATj , is generally
significant by itself, and also when entered against the γt · Ij,1415 · dt terms. This shows
that the ability to take advantage of Atlantic trade was of major importance for post-
1500 developments. When we add the triple interaction ln ATt · P ATj · Ij,1415 , this term



                                             40
is typically the only significant term.43 The coeﬃcients on this triple interaction term
implies that urbanization in an Atlantic trader with constraint on the executive equal
to 3, like the Netherlands, grew by 15.7 percentage points more than urbanization in an
Atlantic trader country with the worst initial institutions, 1 (0.021 × 2 × 3.74 ≈ 0.157).
       The results in Tables 10A and 10B imply that the patterns reported so far are ex-
plained almost exclusively by societies with initial institutions constraining rulers taking
advantage of the opportunities presented by Atlantic trade. In some sense, this is not
surprising given the historical patterns. The “winners” of pre-modern Europe were
Britain and the Netherlands, the two countries that started with relatively good initial
institutions. Although Spain and Portugal took advantage of the resources transferred
from the New World during the 16th century, they neither developed capitalist insti-
tutions to support economic growth nor experienced sustained economic development.
This evidence, as well as our historical reading discussed below, suggest that these diﬀer-
ential patterns are closely related to the fact that they started around 1500 with strong
absolutist regimes that controlled overseas activity and became the main beneficiaries
of the gains from trade and plunder. Italy, or more accurately the Italian city-states,
which started with relatively non-absolutist institutions around 1500, did not experience
further economic development either. The evidence in Table 10A and 10B explains these
patterns by the fact that Spain and Portugal started the era of pre-modern economic
development with relatively absolutist institutions and monarchy-controlled organiza-
tion of trade, while Italy did not have as easy access to the Atlantic as Britain and
the Netherlands. Britain and the Netherlands were the winners because they had both
relatively good institutions to start with and easy access to the Atlantic.

5.2     Historical Perspective and Discussion

The empirical results presented so far, especially those in Tables 10A and 10B, paint a
picture in which societies with relatively good initial institutions circa 1500 and with easy
access to the Atlantic developed rapidly in the centuries after 1500, and this development
was in large part driven by commercial growth under relatively capitalist institutions. In
  43
     With the interaction term between institutions and potential for Atlantic trade, ln ATt ·P ATj ·Ij,1415 ,
is included, ln ATt · P ATj has typically a negative, and sometimes significant, coeﬃcient reinforcing the
conclusion that nations with absolutist institutions did not benefit much, or even at all, from the
opportunity to trade in the Atlantic. In addition, in three specifications in Table 10A and one in Table
10B, the initial institutions and post-1600 interactions are jointly significant, but the coeﬃcients (not
shown in the tables) are negative in Table 10A and only initially positive in Table 10B.



                                                     41
the meantime, societies with highly absolutist institutions and those without easy access
to the Atlantic failed to develop such capitalist institutions and did not experience similar
economic development. Is the historical evidence also consistent with this hypothesis?
   Our reading of the relevant history suggests that the answer is yes. Consistent with
our interpretation here, the initial diﬀerences in the organization of trade discussed
in Section 4.1 had a major eﬀect on who benefited from trade, and the subsequent
political development of the countries. While Britain progressed down the path leading
to capitalist institutions, the state became more absolutist in Spain and Portugal.
   These diﬀerent institutional paths of Britain and Spain appear to have led to di-
vergent economic outcomes. Secure property rights in Britain encouraged commerce,
industry and production for the market, while the Spanish economy crumbled under
high taxes and insecure property rights. For example, the most common argument in
the literature is that the Spanish decline resulted from a succession of kings bankrupt-
ing the country with high taxes and irresponsible fiscal policy (e.g., Kamen, 1965, and
Kennedy, 1987). The classic work of Earl Hamilton (1938, p. 175) also develops the
same argument. He writes: “The unbearable burden of taxation at the end of the six-
teenth century and throughout the seventeenth was an important factor in the decline
of Spain.”
   What about Italy? Italian urbanization grew between 1500 and 1600, but largely
stagnated between 1600 and 1850, and according to Maddison (2001), Italian GDP was
approximately stagnant between 1500 and 1820. Our hypothesis suggests that Italy did
not develop as rapidly as Britain and the Netherlands because Italian city-states did not
take part in Atlantic trade and colonialism. This most likely reflects lack of easy access
to the Atlantic. Although to sail from Venice or Genoa to the Atlantic was not much
harder than to sail from London or Amsterdam, it involved passage through the Straits
of Gibraltar, which is 36 miles long and narrows down to 8 miles in width between Point
Marroqui in Spain and Point Cires in Morocco, making such a passage diﬃcult and
dangerous when the Straits are controlled by the a rival strong naval power. The Straits
were controlled first by the Spaniards and then subsequently by the British. Given the
fact that the 16th and 17th centuries are predominantly characterized by incessant wars
between Britain, the Netherlands, Spain, Portugal and France for the control of the
Atlantic, this situation must have made it highly impractical for the Venetians and the
Genoese to venture into the Atlantic relative to the ease with which the British or Dutch



                                             42
could engage in trading and pirating activities in the Atlantic.44
       As a result, Italian city-states failed to benefit both from the direct and indirect
eﬀects of Atlantic trade, and in fact, part of the growth of Atlantic trade was replacing
Italian Mediterranean trade, creating a negative impact on Italy. In the words of Cipolla
(1970, p. 210) “the development of Atlantic trade routes progressively and irreversibly
eliminated the Italians from the international trade in spices and tropical products”.45
He also estimates that the value of goods imported and exported from Genoa in 1700
was 1/3 of what it had been in 1600 (p. 199), and states that “the economic prosperity of
Italy was fundamentally dependent on massive exports of manufactured articles (above
all textiles), and on a huge volume of invisible exports such as banking and shipping
services. The entire economic structure of the country depended on being able to sell
abroad a large proportion of the goods it manufactured and of the services it could
provide” (p. 202). In addition, during this period, the guilds may have started playing
a negative role and Italian states pursued many growth-stifling policies, in particular
imposing high rates of taxes. For example, Cipolla (1952, p. 207) writes: “The pressure
of taxation in Italian states seems to have been too high, and badly conceived.” This
is somewhat similar to high taxes in Spain and Portugal stifling growth.46 Overall,
therefore, it appears that Italian city-states stagnated for a combination of reasons, most
importantly, because of the lack of access to the growth opportunities in the Atlantic,
because they lost a large part of their export markets, and also because of a range of
  44
     This is not to deny that other factors, for example existing Venetian and Genovese investments
in Mediterranean trade, may have reduced Italian interest in the Atlantic, either through a social
opportunity cost argument, or reminiscent of Olson (1982), because of existing vested interests who did
not want a switch from the Mediterranean to other trading routes. Nevertheless, it seems clear that
Italian city-states did not have easy access to the Atlantic at the turn of the 15th century.
  45
     Lane (1940) shows evidence that the Mediterranean Spice Trade fell after 1500, but then recovered
through 1600. That Venice and other parts of Italy experienced a declining share of Asian trade after
that date is not controversial.
  46
     Interestingly, Italian institutions not only failed to improve after the 15th century, but they may
have actually deteriorated. This might reflect fluctuations due to idiosyncratic factors, or the fact
that Italian merchants became weaker as they lost their export markets. It also possible that Italian
institutions in 1500 were not as good as our numbers and most historians suggest, because they were
highly oligarchic, giving the control of the states to established groups. (Or perhaps, quasi-capitalist
institutions require new groups to gain economic power and prevent established groups from becoming
too entrenched, which did not happen in Italian city-states in the post-1500 era). Currently, we cannot
distinguish between these various views. However, what seems clear is that there were important
political failures in Italian city-states. For example, Cipolla (1970) and Braudel (1992) suggest that
the guilds stopped innovation in Italy, in particular they forbade the production of exactly the type of
lower quality goods that were taking their markets. In contrast, Rapp (1976) argues that the failure
did not originate in the guilds, but in the state. He documents that the guilds attempted to reform,
but this was prevented by the state.


                                                  43
policies stifling growth.

                                    6   Conclusion

This paper documented a distinctive and interesting pattern in the process of European
growth: during the critical period of European development, between 1500 and 1850,
the growth of Atlantic nations and Atlantic ports accounts for most of the diﬀerential
growth of Western Europe relative to other regions. In other words, the Rise of Europe
between 1500 and 1850 was largely the rise of nations engaged in Atlantic trade and
colonialism, and the rise of Atlantic ports. This fact has important consequences for
theories of European growth. In particular, it appears that successful theories must
give a prominent role to “Atlantic trade”, and deemphasize the continuation of pre-1500
trends and permanent European characteristics, such as religion, Roman heritage or
European culture. Instead, the interaction between these factors and the opportunity
to trade in the Atlantic appears to have been crucial for the Rise of Europe.
   We suggested that Atlantic trade contributed to European growth through an in-
direct institutional channel as well as its more obvious direct eﬀects. Our hypothesis
is that Atlantic trade generated large profits for a segment of the bourgeoisie in West-
ern Europe, and this group could demand, obtain and sustain significant institutional
reforms protecting their property rights. With their newly gained property rights, the
bourgeoisie of Western European nations invested more, traded more and spurred eco-
nomic growth. Our reading of European history is consistent with this interpretation,
and we provided empirical evidence to further support this point of view.
   The theory of European growth that emerges from this paper is quite diﬀerent from
many existing views. While it emphasizes the importance of property rights and in-
stitutions as in the work by North (1981), North and Thomas (1973) and De Long
and Shleifer (1993), it sees the roots of these institutions not in Roman heritage or pre-
1500 developments, but in the strengthening of the bourgeoisie, especially new merchant
groups, in the post-1500 period, most likely as a result of the profits from Atlantic trade
and colonialism.
   Our analysis stopped before West European industrialization, focusing instead on the
economic and political developments between the 16th and 19th centuries. This period
of the “First Great Divergence” likely laid the seeds of the Industrial Revolution and
European industrialization as well as of modern capitalism. We did not try to analyze
why some successful Atlantic nations, like the Dutch, did not industrialize, while Britain

                                            44
and non-Atlantic nations such as Germany did. We suspect that the answer is related
to inter-state competition and “defensive modernization” responses of certain European
nations, but this is a topic for another paper (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, in
progress).
   At this point, we also must stress that the process of early modern European growth
is undoubtedly multi-faceted. Any account of the history of a large and heterogeneous
continent in terms of a few factors will be at best simplistic and at worst misleading.
We are aware that many important aspects of the social and economic development
of Western Europe are left out. It is nonetheless our hope that these hypotheses are
plausible and will encourage high quality research on these topics.




                                           45
                                  7     References

  Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “The
Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American
Economic Review, December, Volume 91, Number 5, 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002) “Reversal
of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of ther Modern World Income
Distribution,” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (in progress)
“Inter-State Competition, Defensive Modernization and Industrialization in Europe” in
progress.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000a) “Why Did the West Extend
the Franchise? Democracy, Inequality and Growth in Historical Perspective,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 115, 1167-1199.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000b) “Political Losers as a
Barrier to Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 90, 126-130.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2002) “Economic Backwardness
in Political Perspective,” NBER Working Paper #8831.
   Adams, Julia (1996) “Trading States, Trading Places: The Role of Patrimonialism
in Early Modern Dutch Development,” Comparative Studies in Society and History, 35,
319-355.
   Allen Robert C. (1998) “The Great Divergence: Wages and Prices in Europe
from the Middle Ages to the First World War,” Discussion Paper 98-12, Department of
Economics, University of British Columbia, August.
   Anderson, Perry (1974a) Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism, London; NLB
Press.
   Anderson, Perry (1974b) Lineages of the Absolutist State, London; NLB Press.
   Ashton, Robert (1979) The City and the Court, New York; Cambridge University
Press.
   Ashton, Robert (1996) “Insurgency, Counter-Insurgency and Inaction: Three
Phases in the Role of the City in the Great Rebellion,” in Stephen Porter ed. London
and the Civil War, New Tork; St. Martin’s Press.
   Bairoch, Paul (1988) Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of His-
tory to the Present, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.


                                          46
   Bairoch, Paul (1995) Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes, Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago.
   Bairoch, Paul, Jean Batou and Pierre Chèvre (1988) La Population des villes
Europeenees de 800 a 1850: Banque de Données et Analyse Sommaire des Résultats,
Centre d’histoire économique Internationale de l’Uni. de Genève, Libraire Droz, Geneva.
   Blaut, James M. (1993) The Colonizer’s Model of the World: Geographical Dif-
fusionism and Eurocentric History, New York; Guilford Press.
   Boxer, Charles R. (1985) Portuguese Conquest and Commerce in Southern Asia,
1500-1750, London, Variorum Reprints.
   Broxap, Ernest (1972) The Great Civil War in Lancashire 1641-1651, Manchester;
University of Manchester Press.
   Braudel, Fernand (1992) Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century; Volume
III The Perspective of the World, Berkeley; University of California Press.
   Brenner, Robert (1973) “The Civial War Politics of London’s Merchant Commu-
nity, Past and Present, 58, 53-107.
   Brenner, Robert (1977) “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development
in Preindustrial Europe” Past and Present, No. 70, February.
   Brenner, Robert (1993) Merchants and Revolution: Commercial Change, Politi-
cal Conflict, and London’s Overseas Traders, 1550-1653, Princeton; Princeton University
Press.
   Brunton, Douglas and D.H. Pennington (1954) Members of the Long Parlia-
ment, London; Allen and Unwin.
   Butel, Paul (1997) Histoire de l’Atlantique, Perrin, Paris.
   Cameron, Rondo (1993) A Concise Economic History of the World, New York;
Oxford University Press.
   Carlos, Ann, Yongmin Chen, and Ron Smith (2002), “Purchasing Strate-
gies: The Case of the Royal African Company 1672-1699,” unpublished manuscript,
University of Colorado and Birkbeck College, September.
   Carruthers, Bruce G. (1996) City of Capital: Politics and Markets in the English
Financial Revolution, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Chandler, Tertius (1987) Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical
Census, St. David’s University Press, Lewiston, N.Y.
   Ciccone, Antonio and Matsuyama, Kiminori (1999) “Eﬃciency and Equilib-
rium with Dynamic Increasing Aggregate Returns Due to Demand Complementarities”


                                           47
Econometrica vol 67, n3, 499-525.
    Cipolla, Carlo M. (1952) “The Decline of Italy: The Case of a Fully Matured
Economy,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 5, 178-187.
    Cipolla, Carlo M. (1965) Guns, Sails, and Empires: Technological Innovation and
the Early Phases of European Expansion, 1400-1700, Minerva Press, location unspeci-
fied.
    Cipolla, Carlo M. (1970) “The Economic Decline of Italy,” in Carlo M. Cipolla
ed. The Economic Decline of Empires, New York; Barnes and Noble.
    Cipolla, Carlo M. (1981) Before the Industrial Revolution: European Society and
Economy, 1000-1700, New York; W.W. Norton & Co.
    Cooper, J.P. (1972) “Social and Economic Policies under the Commonwealth,”
in G.E. Aylmer ed. The Interregnum: The Quest for Settlement 1646-1660, London;
Macmillan.
    Curtin, Philip (1984) Cross-Cultural Trade in World History, Cambridge.
    Davis, Ralph (1956) “Merchant Shipping the Economy of the Late Seventeenth
Century,” The Economic History Review, New Series, Volume 9, Issue 1, 59-73.
    Davis, Ralph (1962) The Rise of the English Shipping Industry in the Seventeenth
and Eighteenth Centuries, Macmillan, London.
    Davis, Ralph (1973a) The Rise of the Atlantic Economies, Ithaca; Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
    Davis, Ralph (1973b) English Overseas Trade 1500-1700, Macmillan; London.
    De Long, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer (1993) “Princes and Merchants:
European City Growth before the Industrial Revolution, Journal of Law and Economics,
36, October, 671-702.
    de Vries, Jan (1976) The Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis, 1600-1750,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
    de Vries, Jan (1984) European Urbanization, 1500-1800, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
    de Vries, Jan (2001) “Connecting Europe and Asia: A Quantitative Analysis of
the Cape Route Trade, 1497-1795,” forthcoming in Dennis Flynn, Arturo Giraldez, and
Richard von Glahn, editors, Monetary History in Global Perspective, London, Ashgate
Publishers.
    de Vries, Jan and Ad van der Woude (1997) The First Modern Economy:
Success, Failure, and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815, New York; Cam-


                                         48
bridge University Press.
   Diamond, Jared M. (1997) Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies,
W.W. Norton & Co., New York NY.
   DK Publishing (1997) World Atlas, New York and London.
   Dobb, Maurice H. (1946) Studies in the Development of Capitalism, London;
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
   Doyle, William (1974) The Parlement of Bordeaux and the End of the Old Regime,
1771-1790, London: Ernest Benn.
   Doyle, William (1988) Origins of the French Revolution, Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
   Eltis, David and Stanley L. Engerman (2000) “The Importance of Slavery and
the Slave Trade to Industrializing Britian,” Journal of Economic History, 60, 123-144.
   Eltis, David, Stephen D. Behrendt, David Richardson, and Herbert S.
Klein (1999). “The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade: A Database on CD-Rom,” compiled
at the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute at Harvard, Cambridge University Press.
   Engels, Freidrich (1892) [1945] Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, New York;
International Publishers.
   Engerman, Stanley L. (1972) “The Slave Trade and British Capital Fomration in
the Eighteenth Century: A Comment on the Williams Thesis,” Business History Review,
46, 430-443.
   Engerman, Stanley L. and O’Brien, Patrick K. (1991) “Export and the
growth of the British economy from the Glorious Revolution to the Peace of Amiens”, in
Solow, Barbara L. ed. Slavery and the Rise of the Atlantic System, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
   Ertman, Thomas (1997) Birth of the Leviathan: Building States and Regimes in
Medieval and Early Modern Europe, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Farnell, J.E. (1964) The Navigation Act of 1651, the First Dutch War, and the
London Merchant Community, Economic History Review, New Series, 16, 439-545.
   Frank, Andre Gunder (1978) Dependent Accumulation and Underdevelopment,
Macmillan, London.
   Galor, Oded and Andrew Mountford (2002) “Why Are a Third of People
Indian and Chinese? Trade, Industrialization and Demographic Transition” Brown Uni-
versity mimeo.



                                          49
   Gardiner, Robert (2000) Cogs, Caravels and Galleons: The Sailing Ship 1000-
1650, Chartwell Books, Edison, New Jersey.
   Graves, Michael A.R. (2001) The Parliaments of Early Modern Europe, New
York; Longman.
   Guaci, Perry (2001) The Politics of Trade: The Overseas Merchant in State and
Society, 1660-1720, New York; Oxford University Press.
   Gurr, Ted Robert (1997) “Polity II: Political Structures and Regime Change,
1800-1986,” Unpublished paper, University of Colorado, Boulder.
   Hall, John A. (1985) Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the
Rise of the West, Oxford; Blackwell.
   Hamilton, Earl J. (1938) “Revisions in Economic History. VIII.- The Decline of
Spain,” Economic History Review, 8, 168-179.
   Hamilton, Earl J. (1948) “The Role of Monopoly in the Overseas Expansion and
Colonial Trade of Europe before 1800,” American Economic Review, Volume 38, Issue
2, May, 33-53.
   Hespanha, Antonio Manuel (1994), “Cities and the State in Portugal,”in Charles
Tilly and Wim P. Blockmans, editors, Cities and the Rise of States in Europe, A.D. 1000
to 1800, Westview Press, Boulder.
   Hill, Christopher (1961) [1980] The Century of Revolution, 1603-1714, New
York; W.W. Norton & Co.
   Hill, Christopher (1969) From Reformation to Industrial Revolution 1530-1780,
Baltimore; Penguin Books.
   Hintze, Otto (1970) [1906] “Military Organization and the Organization of the
State.” In Felix Gilbert (ed.). The Historical Essays of Otto Hintze, New York: Oxford
University Press.
   Hobsbawm, Eric J. (1999) Industry and Empire: From 1750 to the Present Day,
New York; The New Press.
   Holmes, Geoﬀery (1993) The Making of a Great Power: Late Stuart and early
Georgian Britain, New York; Longman.
   Hughes, Ann (1998) The Causes of the English Civial War, Second Edition, New
York; St. Martin’s Press.
   Inikori, J.E. (1981) “Market Structure and the Profits of the British African Trade
in the Late Eighteenth Century,” The Journal of Economic History, Volume 41, Issue 4,
December, 745-776.


                                          50
   Inikori, J.E. (1983) “Market Structure and the Profits of the British African Trade
in the Late Eighteenth Century: A Rejoinder,” The Journal of Economic History, Volume
43, Issue 3, September, 723-728.
   Inikori, J.E. (1985) “Market Structure and Profits: A Further Rejoinder,” The
Journal of Economic History, Volume 45, Issue 3, September, 708-711.
   Israel, Jonathan I. (1989) Dutch Primacy in World Trade, 1585-1740, Oxford;
The Clarendon Press.
   Israel, Jonathan I. (1995) The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness and Fall
1477-1806, New York; Oxford University Press.
   Jones, Eric L. (1981) The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and
Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, Cambridge University Press, New York.
   Kamen, Henry (1964) “The Decline of Castile: The Last Crisis,” The Economic
History Review, New Series, Volume 17, Issue 1 (1964), 63-76.
   Kamen, Henry (1965) Confiscations in the Economy of the Spanish Inquisition,
The Economic History Review, New Series, Volume 18, Issue 3, 511-525.
   Keeler, Mary (1954) The Long Parliament, 1640-1641; A Biographical Study of
its Members, Philadelphia; American Philosophical Society.
   Kennedy, Paul M. (1987) The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic
Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000, Random House, New York.
   Kohn, George Childs (1999) Dictionary of Wars, Revised Edition, Checkmark
Books (an imprint of Facts on File, Inc.), New York.
   Krusell, Per and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull (1996) ”Vested Interests in a Theory
of Stagnation and Growth,” Review of Economic Studies, 63, 301-330.
   Landes, David S. (1998) The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some Are So
Rich and Some So Poor, W.W. Norton & Co., New York.
   Lane, Frederic Chapin (1934), Venetian Ships and Shipbuilding of the Renais-
sance, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
   Lane, Frederic Chapin (1940) “The Mediterranean Spice Trade: Further Evi-
dence of its Revival in the Sixteenth Century,” The American Historical Review, Volume
45, Issue 3, April, 581-590.
   Lane, Frederic Chapin (1944), Andrea Barbarigo: Merchant of Venice, 1418-
1449, The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
   Lane, Frederic C. (1973) Venice: A Maritime Republic, Baltimore; Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore


                                         51
   Lang, R. G. (1974) “Social Origins and Social Aspirations of Jacobean London
Merchants,” The Economic History Review, New Series, Volume 27, Issue 1, February,
28-47.
   Langer, William L. (1972) An Encylopedia of World History, Fifth Edition,
Houghton Miﬄin Company, Boston.
   Lefebvre, G. (1947) The Coming of the French Revolution, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
   Leunig, Tim (1998) “New Answers to Old Questions: Transport Costs and the
Slow Adoption of Ring Spinning in Lancashire,” University of Oxford, Discussion Papers
in Economic and Social History, Number 22, February.
   Lucas, Robert E. (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 22, 3-42.
   McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1978) Atlas of World Population History,
Facts on File, New York.
   Maddison, Angus (2001) The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective, Develop-
ment Centre of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, OECD,
Paris.
   Mann, Michael (1986) and (1993) The Sources of Social Power (Two Volumes),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
   Manning, Brian (1996) Aristocrats, Plebeians, and Revolution in England, 1640-
1660, Pluto Press; New Haven.
   Marshall, Monty G. and Keith Jaggers (2000) “Polity IV Project, Political
Regime Characteristics and Transitions 1800-1999, Dataset Users Manual,” Center for
International Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland.
   Marx, Karl and Frederick Engels [1848] (1998) The Communist Manifesto,
Mass Market Paperback, New York.
   Mokyr, Joel (1990) The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic
Progress, Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford.
   Moore, Barrington Jr. (1966) Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy:
Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World, Boston; Beacon Press.
   Morgan, Kenneth (2000) Slavery, Atlantic Trade and the British Economy, 1660-
1800, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Morrill, John S. (1993) The Nature of the English Revolution, Longman; New
York.


                                         52
   Neal, Larry (2000) “How It All Began: The Monetary and Financial Architecture
of Europe during the first global capital markets, 1648 to 1815,” Financial History
Review, 7:2, 117-140.
   Neale John E. (1949) The Elizabathen House of Commons, London; Jonathan
Cape.
   North, Douglass C. (1968) “Sources of Productivity in Ocean Shipping, 1600-
1850,” Journal of Political Economy, Volume 76, Issue 5, Sept.-Oct. 953-970.
   North, Douglass C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, New
York; W.W. Norton & Co.
   North, Douglass C. (1990) Institutions, Institutional change, and Economic Per-
formance, Cambridge University Press, New York.
   North, Douglass C. and Robert P. Thomas (1973) The Rise of the Western
World: A New Economic History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
   North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast (1989) “Constitutions and Com-
mitment: Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century
England, Journal of Economic History, 49, 803-832.
   O’Brien, Patrick K. (1982) “European Economic Development: The Contirubu-
tion of the Periphery,” Economic History Review, 2nd ser., 35, 1-18.
   O’Brien, Patrick K., Trevor Griﬃths, and Philip Hunt (1982) “Political
Components of the Industrial Revolution: Parliament and the English Cotton Textile
Industry, 1660-1774,” The Economic History Review, New Series, Volume 44, Issue 3
(August), 395-423.
   Olson, Mancur (1982) The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagfla-
tion, and Economic Rigidities, Yale University Press, New Haven and London.
   Olson, Mancur (2000) Power and Prosperity : Outgrowing Communist and Cap-
italist Dictatorships, Basic Books, New York.
   O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeﬀrey G. Williamson (2001) “After Columbus:
Explaining the Global Trade Boom 1500-1800,” Journal of Economic History, volume
62, March.
   Pacey, Arnold (1991), Technology in World Civilization, MIT Press, Cambridge.
   Parente Stephen and Edward C. Prescott (1999) “Monopoly Rights as Bar-
riers to Riches,” American Economic Review, 89, 1216-1233.
   Parry, J.H. (1966) The Spanish Seaborne Empire, Berkeley; University of Califor-
nia Press.


                                          53
   Pearl, Valerie (1961) London and the Outbreak of the Puritan Revolution; City
Government and National Politics, 1625-43, London; Oxford University Press.
   Phillips, Carla Rahn (1990), “The growth and composition of trade in the Iberian
empires, 1450-1750,” in The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-Distance Trade in the
Early Modern World, 1350-1750, edited by James D. Tracy, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
   Pincus, Steven (1998) “Neither Machiavellian Moment nor Possessive Individu-
alism: Commercial Society an the Defenders of the English Commonwealth,” American
Historical Review, 103, 705-736.
   Pincus, Steven (2001) “From Holy Cause to Economic Interest: The Study of
Population and the Invention of the State,” in Alan Houston and Steven Pincus eds. A
Nation Transformed: England after the Restoration, New York; Cambridge University
Press.
   Pincus, Steven (2002) “Civic Republicanism and Political Economy in an Age of
Revolution: Law, Politics, and Economics in the Revolution of 1688-89,” Unpublished,
Department of History, University of Chicago.
   Pomeranz, Kenneth (2000) The Great Divergence: Europe, China, and the Mak-
ing of the Modern World Economy, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
   Postan, M.M. (1975) The medieval economy and society : an economic history of
Britain in the Middle Ages, Harmondsworth [Eng.] : Penguin.
   Rajan, Raghuram G. and Zingales, Luigi (2000) “The Tyranny of Inequality”
Journal of Public Economics vol 76, n3 521-58.
   Rapp, Richard T. (1975) “The Unmaking of the Mediterranean Trade Hegemony:
International Trade Rivalry and the Commercial Revolution,” Journal of Economic His-
tory, 35, 499-525.
   Rapp, Richard T. (1976) Industry and Economic Decline in Seventeenth-Century
Venice, Cambridge MA; Harvard University Press.
   Richardson, R.C. (1998) The Debate on the English Revolution, 3rd Edition,
Manchester; University of Manchester Press.
   Rogowski, Ronald (1989) Commerce and Coalitions: How Trade aﬀects Domestic
Political Alignments, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Rokkan, Stein (1970) Citizens, Elections, Parties; Approaches to the Comparative
Study of the Processes of Development, New York; McKay.



                                          54
   Rosenberg, Nathan and L.E. Birdzell Jr. (1986) How the West Grew Rich:
The Economic Transformation of the Industrial World, New York; Basic Books.
   Royal Geographic Society (1997) Oxford Atlas of Exploration, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
   Rudé, George (1972) Europe in the Eighteenth Century: Aristocracy and the
Bourgeois Challenge, Cambridge MA; Harvard University Press.
   Russell, Conrad (1990) The Causes of the English Civil War, New York; Oxford
University Press.
   Sacks, David H. (1991) The Widening Gate: Bristol and the Atlantic Economy,
1450-1700, Berkeley; University of California Press.
   Scoville, Warren C. (1960) The Persecution of Huguenots and Franch Economic
Development, 1680-1720, Berkeley: University of California Press.
   Showers, Victor (1979) World Facts and Figures, Wiley, New York.
   Smith, Adam [1776] (1999) The Wealth of Nations (Two Volumes), Penguin
Classics, London.
   Stearns, Peter N. (2001) The Encylopedia of World History, Sixth Edition,
Houghton Miﬄin Company, Boston.
   Steensgaard, N. (1974), The Asian Trade Revolution of the Seventeenth Century,
Chicago, 1974.
   Stone, Lawrence (1972) The Causes of the English Revoluition, 1529-1642, New
York; Routledge.
   Sutherland, L.S. (1947) “The East India Company in Eighteenth-Century Poli-
tics,” The Economic History Review, Volume 17, Issue 1, 15-26.
   Tawney, R.H. (1941a) “The Rise of the Gentry, 1558-1640,” Economic History
Review, 11, 1-38.
   Tawney, R.H. (1941b) “Harrington’s Interpretation of his Age,” Proceedings of
the British Academy, 27.
   Tilly, Charles (1990) Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990-1990, Cam-
bridge MA; Basil Blackwell.
   Thompson, I.A.A. (1994) “Castile: Absolutism, Constitutionalism and Liberty,”
in Philip T. Hoﬀman and Kathryn Norberg eds. Fiscal Crisis, Liberty and Representative
Government, Stanford; Stanford University Press.
   Tracy, James D. 1990, “Introduction,” in The Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-
Distance Trade in the Early Modern World, 1350-1750, edited by James D. Tracy, Cam-


                                          55
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
   Trevelyan, George M. (1938) The English Revolution, 1688-1689, London; T.
Butterworth Ltd.
   United Nations (UN) (1969) Growth of the World’s Urban and Rural Population,
1920-2000, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Population Studies, No. 44, New
York.
   Valone, James S. (1994) Huguenot Politics, 1601-1622, Lewiston: The Edwin
Mellen Press.
   Van der Wee, Herman (1990), “Structural changes in European long-distance
trade, and particularly in the re-export trade from south to north, 1350-1750,” in The
Rise of Merchant Empires: Long-Distance Trade in the Early Modern World, 1350-1750,
edited by James D. Tracy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
   Wallerstein, Immanuel M. (1974-1980) The Modern World-System, 3 Volumes,
Academic Press, New York.
   Weber, Max (1993) [1905] The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,
Routledge, London.
   White, Lynn, Jr. (1962) Medieval Technology and Social Change, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, London.
   Williams, Eric E. (1944) Capitalism and Slavery, University of North Carolina
Press, Chapel Hill.
   Wilson, Charles (1984), England’s Apprenticeship 1603-1763, Longman, London,
Second Edition.
   World Bank (1999) World Development Indicators, CD-Rom and Book, Washing-
ton DC.
   World Coal Institute (2000) Coal — Power for Progress, on the web at http://www.wci-
coal.com/pfp.htm, March.
   Zilibotti, Fabrizio (1995) “A Rostovian Model of Endogenous Growth and Un-
derdevelopment Traps” European Economic Review vol 39, n8, 1569-1602.




                                         56
                        8    Appendix (Not for Publication)
8.1    Country-level Urbanization Data
Our baseline data on European urban population are from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre
(1988). Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre start in 800 AD (although their data are more
reliable from 1300 AD) and include all cities in Eastern and Western Europe that crossed
a threshold of 5,000 inhabitants at any time between 800 and 1800 (p. ix). We also use
Bairoch (1988) for his qualitative assessment of country-level data, for his interpretation
of some city-level information, and for urbanization estimates in India and China.47
We convert these urban population estimates to urbanization estimates using the total
population numbers in McEvedy and Jones (1978).
     We have checked Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre’s estimates where possible against the
data in de Vries (1984). De Vries’s data, unfortunately, only start in 1500 AD and
primarily cover Western Europe. For Western Europe, De Vries includes all cities with at
least 10,000 inhabitants during 1500-1800. As a result, de Vries’ urbanization estimates
are generally lower, but the pattern over time, in particular the growth of Atlantic ports,
is very similar. For example, de Vries (1984, p. 39) agrees that the level of urbanization
in 1500 was very low in the British Isles (2%) and low throughout northern Europe
(3.3%) with the exception of the Low Countries (18.5%, with 21.1% in Belgium and
15.8% in the Netherlands). Urbanization was 6.1% in Spain and 12.4% for the whole of
Italy (ranging from 11.4% in Central Italy to 15.1% in Northern Italy in 1550). This
pattern is quite consistent with the numbers in Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre.
     Irrespective of the precise definition of countries or the urbanization series we use,
the available estimates support our main finding: the timing of urbanization increases
during this period is closely correlated with increases in Atlantic trade. Bairoch (pp. 178-
179, 1988) points out that “new patterns of trade centering on the Atlantic” aﬀected
urbanization. Using a threshold of 5,000 inhabitants, the biggest change was in the
Netherlands, where urbanization rose from 8-12% in 1300 to 20-26% in 1500 and 38-49%
in 1700 (the highest in Europe at that time). De Vries (1984, Table 3.7, p. 39), using
a threshold of 10,000 inhabitants, shows a similar surge in urban percentage of total
population: Portuguese urbanization jumped from 3% in 1500 to 11.5% in 1550 and
14.1% in 1600, Spanish urbanization rose from 6.1% in 1500 to 11.4% in 1600, Dutch
urbanization was 15.8% in 1500 and 33.6% in 1700, and urbanization in England and
Wales rose from 5.8% in 1600 to 16.7% in 1750. In contrast, urbanization changed
little over this period in countries not connected closely to Atlantic trade: German
urbanization was 3.2% in 1500 and only 5.5% in 1800, Swiss urbanization was 1.5% in
1500 and 3.7% in 1800, and Polish urbanization was still only 1% in 1750.
  47
    Bairoch (1988) was originally published in 1985 in French. The English edition reflects some
revisions made through February 1988. Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988) provide in large part the
data on Europe that underlies much of the analysis in Bairoch (1988). These two sources should be
seen as highly complementary.




                                               57
8.2    City-level Data
We use city-level data in two ways. First, we use all cities for which Bairoch, Batou and
Chèvre provide information in particular pairs of years. Second, we construct a balanced
panel that contains only cities for which we have urban population data (from Bairoch,
Batou and Chèvre) in 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, and 1850. The balanced
panel therefore includes only cities that have been in existence (and for which there are
archival data) for a relatively long period of time. Overall, we have 193 European cities
in the balanced panel. We also add data on 11 Asian cities from Chandler (1987) for
robustness checks.
    There are 13 Atlantic ports in our balanced panel. This list comprises almost all the
cities that became major Atlantic ports through 1850. In Britain we have Plymouth,
London, Bristol, and Glasgow. In the Netherlands we have Amsterdam, Dordrecht, and
Middleburg. The Netherlands is a diﬃcult country to code as most of the cities were
on rivers or canals with easy access to the sea. We base our coding on whether a city
is mentioned as a port in de Vries and van der Woude (1997). We have also tried an
alternative coding which classifies all Dutch cities connected by water to the coast as
ports. In France we have Rouen and Bordeaux, in Spain we have Seville and Santander,
and in Portugal we have Porto and Lisbon.
    There are also 8 “potential” Atlantic ports in our data, i.e., ports that could have be-
come involved in Atlantic trade given their geographical location, but for various reasons
were not. These are King’s Lynn, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Aberdeen, and Edinburgh in
Britain, Dublin in Ireland, Antwerp in Belgium, and Hamburg and Bremen in Germany.
    In our broader sample of cities, we have data on other cities that were involved in
Atlantic trade, but which do not make it into our balanced panel. This supports our
conclusions. For example, Nantes became an important French slave-trading city, but
does not make it into our balanced panel as we are missing data for 1400 (Bairoch,
Batou and Chèvre, p.28). This city started with a population of 8,000 in 1300, reached
40,000 in 1700 and 77,000 in 1800, a pattern of growth that is quite similar to that in
Bristol (a major British slave-trade port that is in our balanced panel.) Rotterdam, for
which we do not have data before 1500, rose from 5,000 inhabitants in 1500 to 51,000
in 1700. Liverpool, for which we also do not have data before 1500, rose from 6,000
inhabitants in 1700 to 83,000 in 1800 and 376,000 inhabitants in 1850. Cádiz, for which
we are missing data for 1400, rose from 2,000 inhabitants in 1300 to 40,000 in 1700 and
70,000 in 1800.48
  48
     The Spanish crown initially required that most Atlantic trade be run through Seville. However,
Seville’s port became partially blocked by a sandbar in 1718, and Cádiz became the oﬃcial center for
Spanish New World trade. From 1600 to 1700, Seville’s population fell from 135,000 to 72,000 and
Cádiz’s population rose from 5,000 to 40,000. In the eighteenth century, Cádiz accounted for 75% of
Spanish trade with America (see http://www.andalucia.com/cities/cadiz/history.htm). After Spain lost
its colonies at the start of the nineteenth century, Cadiz’s population declined.




                                                 58
8.3   Coding of Institutions
The Polity dataset (now in version IV) codes various “institutionalized authority” char-
acteristics of political regimes (Marshall and Jaggers, 2000). We use the Polity coding
rules to assign a value of constraint on the executive before 1800 (the details are in the
main text).
    Where Polity IV provides a code for a country after 1800, we use that information.
The earliest information in the Polity dataset is as follows (with the first year for which
this code appears): 7 in the United Kingdom (in 1800), 1 in the Netherlands (in 1815,
rising to 3 in 1840, 5 in 1848 and 6 in 1849), 5 in Belgium (in 1831, rising to 7 in 1853),
1 in France (in 1800, rising to 3 in 1814, 5 in 1830 and arriving, after some volatility, at
7 in 1877), 7 in Switzerland (in 1848), 1 in Spain (in 1800, rising to 3 in 1820, falling
back to 1 in 1823, rising again to 5 in 1837, but falling steadily though 1867 and only
reaching 7 in 1876), 1 in Portugal (in 1800, rising to 3 in 1834), 1 in German states (in
1800, rising to 3 only after 1848), 1 in Austria (in 1800, rising to 3 after 1860), 1 in
all Italian states (rising to 3 only with unification in 1861), 1 in Serbia (in 1830), 1 in
Greece (in 1827), 1 in Sweden (in 1800, rising to 3 in 1812), 3 in Norway (in 1814), 1 in
Denmark (in 1800, rising to 5 after 1848) and 1 in Russia (in 1800). In general, we use
a 40-year window around a date, e.g., we code 1800 as the average of 1780, 1790, 1800,
1810 and 1820. This avoids distortion due to a few unusual years.
    The principle we follow, using Langer (1972), is to look for formal rules that con-
strain the executive in a way that matches the Polity criteria. If a monarch acted in a
constrained way, e.g., imposing low taxes, but only because he or she chose to do so, this
does not amount to a strong constraint on the executive. At the same time, however,
we also look for evidence that formal rules were actually implemented.
    Again we have to be careful when the political units that existed between 1500 and
1800 are not those that existed after 1800 (e.g., when the country entered the Polity
dataset). To some extent therefore we have to map institutions at the level of political
entities in 1500, e.g., the Duchy of Burgundy or the Hapsburg empire, into modern
countries. For the most part this is not too diﬃcult–Langer (1972) reports institutional
developments at the level of modern countries, although we have to supplement his
information on the Netherlands with the more detailed account in Israel (1995).
    The main issues are with regards to Germany and Italy. Germany was comprised
of many states during this period, but with only minor diﬀerences in institutions–all
of them were run in a fairly autocratic fashion. With the exception of a few cities, we
have not found evidence of strong constraint on the executive or protection for capital
through 1800 anywhere in the modern borders of Germany.
    Italy is more diﬃcult because we know that institutions through 1500 at least were
relatively pro-capital in the North and probably less so in the Papal States and in the
Kingdom of Naples. Of course, there was arguably also significant variation within
Northern Italy, for example between Venice, Milan, Genoa and Florence. We use an
average measure of institutions, with Southern, Central and Northern Italy having equal
weights. Within Northern Italy we assign equal weights to Venice, Milan, Florence and
Genoa.
    The only other coding of institutions before 1800 that we have found is from De Long

                                            59
and Shleifer (1993). The main diﬀerence in coding between following the Polity rules and
using De Long and Shleifer (1993) is that the Polity coding rules imply feudal regimes
had a weak constraint on the executive. De Long and Shleifer (1993) code regimes as
either Free or Prince, and according to this scheme feudal regimes are “Free”. Thus
the move to absolutism in France after 1650 and Austria after 1500 (and by conquest,
in Belgium and Italy) is a movement from Free to Prince, i.e., an equal and opposite
move to that experienced by Britain when it moves from Prince to Free after 1650.49
In contrast, the Polity rules imply that the constraint on the executive in France before
1500 was not as high as, for example, in Britain in 1700, so the move to absolutism
is a lower “step down” in terms of institutional quality. Nevertheless, the Polity rules
applied to Langer (1972) produce the same qualitative conclusion as that of De Long
and Shleifer (1993) for the period after 1500.
    We also use an alternative coding of the protection for capital. We did this inde-
pendently, using Langer to adjust constraint on the executive, so that a protection only
counts if it is for “capital” (i.e., urban-based merchants of some kind) not for the nobil-
ity. In this view, early feudal regimes are almost as bad as absolutism almost everywhere
and Poland, for example, never has good institutions.
    Precise codings of this nature will always be controversial. But the qualitative rank-
ing of institutions does not seem to be in doubt. The main points that emerge from our
assessment are:
    1. Institutions were roughly similar around 1500, with “better” institutions in the
Low Countries, Northern Italy and Britain. In terms of the protection of capital, for
example, Northern Italy was ahead of England and Spain in 1500 (a score of 3 vs. 2 for
England and 1 for Spain).50 The only other places with a score of 3 in 1500 are Belgium
and the Netherlands.
    2. Institutions became worse from 1500 to 1750 in countries that experienced abso-
lutist regimes (e.g., France, Austria, Italy, Germany and to some extent Spain). This
seems quite uncontroversial — parliaments ceased to meet in general, religious (trading)
minorities such as the Huguenots and Jews were mistreated and eventually expelled. In
all these “absolutist” countries, constraint on the executive fell from an initial score of 2
or 3 to a score of 1. Institutions improved in France from the end of the eighteenth cen-
tury, although the French Revolution was associated with considerable political volatility.
    3. Institutions “improved”, with stronger constraint on the executive and more pro-
tection of capital, from 1500 to 1700 in Britain and the Netherlands. In the Netherlands
  49
     De Long and Shleifer also code Tilly (1990) and use a scheme proposed by Putnam. All variants
of their codings produce similar results for our analysis.
  50
     According to Langer (1972), the Cortes (parliament) had some significant powers in Castille around
1400 in Spain. However, this did not last, in part because the monarch gained access to large cash
revenues in the form of gold and silver from the New World. The Inquisition also played an important
part in undermining property rights (Kamen, 1965). Catalonia had relatively good initial institutions
but was undermined by the Castilian monarchy (and of course does not have direct access to the
Atlantic). In contrast, city charters and customary rights provided considerable constraint on the
executive in the Low Countries, primarily by limiting the ability of the sovereign to tax. The constraint
on the executive was probably higher in the Netherlands, but not by much in 1400: we assign a score
of 3 to the Netherlands and a score of 2 to Spain.



                                                   60
the key event was the struggle for independence, as discussed in the text. The inde-
pendent Netherlands was probably the place between 1600 and 1750 with the strongest
protection for the rights of capital–there was a nominal head of state, but the real
power was at the level of cities and regional assemblies (see Israel, 1995). Through 1850
institutions continued to improve in Britain, particularly with the steady strengthening
of Parliament, but not in the Netherlands. According to the Polity data, Britain reached
a score of 7 by 1800 (the highest possible measure of constraint on the executive) while
the Netherlands, after a period of Napoleonic rule, reached only a 3 by 1840.

8.4     Estimates of Trade Levels
       8.4.1 Units of Measurement
We measure the number of annual average voyages-equivalent, where one “voyage-
equivalent” is defined to be the round-trip of a ship with a deadweight tonnage (i.e.,
carrying capacity without overloading) of 400 tons. Deadweight tonnage was a standard
measure in the age of sail (see Lane, 1934, p .246).51
   While 400 tons is larger than European ships in medieval times, it is smaller than
many of the long-distance sailing ships in use by 1600. Venetian merchant galleys had
a carrying capacity of 110-115 metric tons in 1318-20, 170 metric tons in 1420 and 280
metric tons in 1549-59 (Maddison, 2001, Table 2-2, p. 54.) Portuguese Atlantic trade
ships averaged about 400 tons in early 1500s, rising to 600 tons in mid-1500s, and by
1600 had some carracks of 1000-1500 tons; subsequently, however, long-distance trading
ships became smaller (Phillips, 1990, de Vries, 2002).

       8.4.2 Mediterranean Trade
To construct a series for Mediterranean trade comparable with our estimates of At-
lantic trade, we measure the trans-Mediterranean trade between Western Europe in the
Mediterranean (particularly Italy and Spain) and the Levant broadly defined (in partic-
ular, Constantinople, Syria, and Egypt). Thus we are not counting local coastal trade
between Italian ports or within the Adriatic. We are also not counting trade between
Britain or the Netherlands and the Levant.
    The best quantitative evidence on trans-Mediterranean trade in this period is for
Venice. From the second quarter of the fifteenth century (van der Wee 1990, p.20), Venice
was “leading commercial and financial center of Europe”. Catalonian and Valencian
ports also had a strong position in Mediterranean trade in the 15th century, and Genoa
was also strong at least until 1500. But Venice held Mediterranean trade supremacy
from the sack of Constantinople in 1208 at least until 1700.
  51
    While there are diﬀerences in the measure of “tons” used by various sources, these are not large
enough to aﬀect our analysis. A long ton (the standard British measure) is a unit of mass in the
avoirdupois system of units equal to 2240 pound-masses or 20 long hundredweights. A long ton weighs
1016 kg, while a short ton (the standard U.S. measure) is 2000 lb (907 kg). A metric tonne is 1000 kg.
The Spanish tonelada is equal to approximately 2000 English pounds (i.e., a short ton). The English
ton, derived from the wine tonneau of Bordeaux, was one tenth larger (what mariners still call today a
”long ton”). One English ton equaled four large barrels, or hogsheads.


                                                 61
    The Venetian merchant marine comprised two very diﬀerent kinds of ships: galleys
and cogs. Galleys were large and regarded as good defensive and oﬀensive naval vessels.
They were often preferred for the most valuable cargoes. Cogs varied in size, but the
largest were bigger than the ships used in the early Atlantic trade. These large cogs were
strong in defense, but could not eﬀectively attack galleys before ship-mounted cannon
became viable.
    At the time of Doge Mocenigo (1420-1450), 45 state galleys sailed each year: 3 to
Romania and the Tana (Romania is here a geographical term which at the time included
Greece, with particularly important trade on the Peloponnesian peninsula; Tana is in
the Black Sea at the mouth of the Don); 4 to Flanders and England; 3 to Alexandria; 4
to Beyrut (sic) and 2 to Aigues Mortes (near Marseilles) in France (Lane, 1934, p. 253).
Two or three private galleys sailed with pilgrims each year to Jaﬀa.52 Lane (1934, pp.
253-4) writes, “Of other private galleys I have found no mention.”
    In the first half of the fifteenth century, there were two voyages a year from Venice
to Syria (organized by the state). For the eight years of most frequent records, there
were an average of 5.75 cogs per year (1420s and 1430s) with total capacity of 4966
botte (the conversion is to multiply by 2/3 to get tons, i.e. 3,311 tons, so the cogs had
a carrying capacity of 575 tons each). In the early 1400s there were in the Venetian
merchant marine at least 6 ships of 1000 botte or over (Lane, 1934, p. 256).
    According to Lane (1944, p. 257) there were about 15-16 ships (i.e., cogs) per year
sailing to Syria/Cyprus and to Constantinople in both 1448 and 1558.53 The total
number botte was only slightly higher in 1558 (15,000, i.e., about 10,000 tons or 25
voyage-equivalents using our measure of 400 tons per voyage)
    Our estimate of 40 Mediterranean voyages per year in 1400 and 50 in 1500. More
recent research on trade levels within the Mediterranean after 1500 confirms this overall
pattern. Initial trade levels were quite low. “In the mid-fourteenth century, just after
the arrival of the Black Death, Venice sent an average of one ship to the Levant every
two years. By the end of the fifteenth century an annual average of five to seven galleys
made the trip. In the mid-fifteenth century Venetians also sent a dozen “round ships”
a year to Syria” (Phillips, 1990, p. 37). Table 2.1 (Phillips, 1990, p. 40) gives ships per
year for Venice as 7.5 in 1391-1400 and 6.1 in 1441-50. Genoa sent 6 ships of all types
to the Levant in the late 1360s (p. 38). Catalonia, “whose trade ran far behind that of
Venice and Genoa”, sent 2 ships per year to the Levant in the end of the 1300s and 5-6
during the 1420s, and 4.5 ships per year in 1450s and 1460s. The level of Mediterranean
trade remained roughly constant from 1500 to 1700 (Phillips, 1990).
    After the Portuguese expansion into Indian Ocean, there was some initial fall in
the spice trade through the eastern Mediterranean. But as Tracy (1990, p. 8) points
out, despite repeated attempts, the Portuguese did not capture Aden, so they could not
control Bab el Mandeb (the 14 mile wide strait that connects the Indian Ocean with the
Red Sea). Thus they were not able to fully control flow of pepper and fine spices. The
  52
     These were not quick voyages, with usually one round trip per year. The voyage to England took
a year.
  53
     At around this time, Venice also had about 300 navi, which were round ships of about 100 tons or
larger (Lane, p. 254).


                                                 62
Venetians were able to carry on their traditional spice trade at Alexandria (Lane, 1940).
    Van der Wee (1990, p.15) puts it as follows, “The discovery of alternative sea routes
to Asia around 1500 by Portugal and Spain disturbed Italy’s dominant position [in
re-exporting goods from Near and Far East], but it did not lead to an immediate
decline in its re-export trade from south to north.” However, Venetian and other trans-
Mediterranean trade was roughly stagnant from the start of seventeenth century.
    Note that the Dutch grabbed an increasing share of shipping to the Mediterranean,
particularly as they developed markets for colonial re-exports. Their shipping to this
area comprised 4,129 tons in 1591-1600 and 15,789 tons in 1601-10. It was 9,298 tons in
1701-10 and 13,952 tons in 1711-20 (equivalent to 3.5 standard 400 ton voyages per year
and much smaller than their Asian trade) (de Vries and van der Woude, 1997, p.381).

   8.4.3 Atlantic Trade
There is no complete series of “Atlantic trade” statistics. We use four series based on
three separate sources, all of which agree on the main points. De Vries (2002) provides
the latest estimate of trade from Europe to Asia. His estimates are by decade, so we
convert these into an estimate for a particular year. We supplement this information
with estimates from other sources of the level of trade between Europe and the Americas.
Our main sources are the recent essays in Tracy (1990), but we also use information from
the classic Davis (1962) and Steensgaard (1974). Note that the Africa trade was largely
“triangular,” i.e., involved goods to Africa, slaves to the Americas, and agricultural
products to Europe on the same trip.
    We also construct two alternative estimates of Atlantic trade from O’Rourke and
Williamson (2002). They give growth rates, but not levels, of long-distance trade from
1500 to 1850. We apply these rates to our estimates of initial trade (in annual voyages-
equivalent) to give an estimate of trade in each year. (We have also checked our results
using an alternative Williamson-O’Rourke based series, with a much lower starting point
for trade in 1500 and no growth from 1400 to 1500. Using this series does not change
our findings in any substantive way).
    Inikori (1992) gives the following estimates of Atlantic trade, including services and
intra-American trade (all in British pounds): 14.7 for middle decades of seventeenth
century, 38.4 for middle decades of eighteenth century, 102.7 for last decades of the
eighteenth century. This is somewhat lower growth between 1650 and 1750 (growth by a
factor of 2.61 versus our estimate of 3.86) and slightly higher growth between 1650 and
1800 (a factor of 6.99 versus our estimate of 6.45). Overall, this series is white consistent
with our estimates and using this does not change our main results.

   Trade in 1500
         In 1500, most of the “Atlantic” trade was Spanish and Portuguese. The Spanish
traded almost exclusively with the Americas and the Portuguese traded primarily with
Asia (their trade with Brazil was low at this time.) We do not have estimates from
the literature for 1500 precisely, but there are good numbers for the first few decades of
the sixteenth century. For 1506-10, there were 45.2 ships to and from the Spanish West
Indies per year, rising through the century (Table 2.1 in Philips 1990). The average

                                             63
weight of these ships was 99.1 tonnelada, i.e., about 14 of our standard measure of 400
tons. A ship could make at least one round-trip per year and our data are for sailings
to and from the Spanish West Indies. Most of the Spanish ships were around 100 tons
deadweight at this time.
    The round-trip from Lisbon to Goa could take from 6 to 18 months (Phillips, 1990,
p. 49), depending on the weather. “Between 1500 and 1635, about seven ships left
Lisbon each year for India, and about four began the return trip” (p. 49). Around the
end of the 1500s, losses on outbound Portuguese voyages were about 11% and 15% on
inbound (Phillips, 1990, p. 53). Maddison (2001, Table 2-7, p. 64) reports that the
average duration of the outward trip from Lisbon to Cochin was about 5.75 months and
the return took 6.5 months “once the trade was firmly established.”
    Maddison (2001) provides a good crosscheck on our data as he compiles comparable
numbers from various secondary sources. Maddison (2001, Table 2-7) reports annual
average voyages from Lisbon to the Indian Ocean as 9.0 in 1500-49 and 5.1 in 1550-99.
There were fewer return journeys (5.2 per year 1500-49 and 4.2 per year 1550-99) in
part due to ship losses but also because some ships stayed in Asia. The intra-Asia trade
was highly profitable in these early years–see de Vries (2002) for estimates of the use
of European ships in this trade. Pacey (1991) discusses how and why Europeans used
ships built in India for intra-Asian trade, so a great deal of this trade will not show up
in our data on voyages in and out of Europe.
    De Vries (2002) puts the number of Portuguese voyages from Europe to Asia as 151
in 1501-10. The number of ship departures falls over the century in his data, but tonnage
per ship rises, so that outbound Portuguese tonnage in 1501-10 was 42,778 and 49,201
in 1591-1600. De Vries’ (2002) data show that the English entered the Europe-Asia
trade only in 1581-90 (with 11 ships in the decade, with a total of just 5,060 tons) and
the Dutch entered only in 1591-1600. However, the Dutch quickly reached high levels
of activity–more than half the Portuguese tonnage in the first decade and passing
Portuguese levels by 1630.
    Total tonnage to Asia from de Vries (2002) from 1501-1600 is 465,144, which is
1,163 “400 ton equivalent voyages” over the whole 100 years. Total return tonnage from
Asia was somewhat less: 320,735 or 802 “equivalent voyages” over the century. Total
equivalent round-trip voyages are therefore 802 plus 181, which is equivalent to about
10 per year.54
    Therefore our main estimate for Atlantic trade in 1500 is 11.3 Spanish “standard”
voyages (45.2 divided by 4) plus 8.8 voyages to Asia, mostly Portuguese, for a total of
20.1 voyages per year. For our alternative estimate, using the O’Rourke and Williamson
growth numbers, we use the same starting level (but we have checked our results using
  54
     As a crosscheck on these estimates of ship size, consider the amount of spice production (from
Curtin, 1984, p.131), keeping in mind that the early Portuguese ships carried primarily spices (Maddison,
2001, p.84). In the second half of the fifteenth century, annual production of mace was about 100 metric
tons and production of nutmeg was about 1200 tons (both from the Banda Islands). Production of
cloves, from Maluku (sic), was about 1200 tons. Apparently production was lower when the Europeans
dealt directly with the islands. According to these sources, Sumatra exported as much pepper in the
fifteenth century as it did at its eighteenth-century peak. Pepper came from India as well as Sumatra.



                                                   64
an alternative, lower level of 1). Note that this implies a relatively small percentage
increase from 1400 to 1500 (compared to later rates of increase)–this is reasonable as
by all accounts there was relatively little Atlantic trade until the Spanish conquered the
Aztecs and Incas. Our estimate of Dutch and British Atlantic trade at this date is zero.

    Trade in 1600
    By 1600 the Dutch had made substantial inroads into the Asian trade (de Vries
2002), but the Portuguese remained important. Most of the trade with the Americas
was through Spain, but the British were starting to have an impact here. Overall,
the level of trade through the Atlantic probably passed the level of trade through the
Mediterranean around 1600.55
    In 1596-1600 there were 188.6 ships to and from the Spanish West Indies per year.
Phillips (1990), p.88, writes, “In the late 1620s, there were still nearly 120 ships per year
in the Indies trade... [to and from Spain]. . . By the late 1640s, an annual average of
fewer than 75 ships carried the trade, and from the late 1650s to the late 1660s, between
30 and 35 ships.”
    According to Phillips (1990, Table 2.1), Spanish ships going to and from the West
Indies in 1596-1600 had an average weight of 236.2 tonneladas. Note that our measure
is a round-trip voyage, and there is some danger of double counting on the West Indies
route (less likely a problem on the Asian route). Dividing this Spanish estimate by 2 for
round-trip voyage equivalents of 400-ton ships seems reasonable.
    There were also some British voyages, but these were mostly small-scale piracy (run
by the likes of Hawkins and Drake). These were more ad hoc occasional expeditions
than regular trade, although they were highly profitable and created the basis for the
navy that defeated the Spanish Armada in 1588.
    From de Vries (2002) we have total outbound tonnage from Europe to Asia of
1,745,318 from 1601-1700, which is about 44 voyages per year (in 400 ton equivalent
units). Return tonnage, however, was only 871,334 for the century, which is about 22
voyages per year. Therefore we take return trip equivalent voyages to be 33 per year.
    In 1602-25 Holland sent an average of 10 ships per year to Asia, while in the 17th
and 18th centuries, Portuguese sent 10-20 ships each year to Goa (Phillips, 1990, p. 54).
Maddison (2001, Tables 2-7) reports annual average voyages “departures” from Lisbon
to the Indian Ocean as 5.8 in 1600-35 and 2.5 in 1636-1700.
    Therefore our base estimate is 63 Spanish voyages (188.6 divided by 3, rounding
up) plus 33 voyages from Europe to Asia, including the Portuguese, Dutch and British,
for a total of 96 voyages. Our alternative estimate from the O’Rourke and Williamson
method is 71.5 voyages. Our estimate of Dutch trade at this time is 10 voyages and our
estimate of British trade is 5 voyages.

   Trade in 1700
   By 1700 most of the “Atlantic trade” was Dutch and British. However, in 1695-99
there were still 35 ships per year to and from the Spanish West Indies. There was a rise
  55
    Phillips (1990, p. 82) points out that the export of silver from Venice to the Levant in 1610-14 was
worth about 5.7% of total value of silver arriving in Seville in same period. She sees this as evidence
that the Levant trade “far smaller” than Indies trade.

                                                  65
from about 30 ships per year in the late 1710s to about 100 ships per year in the late
1770s (Phillips 1990, p.98). We do not have a weight estimate for those years, but in
1717-20 the average size of a ship on this route was 296.5 toneladas (Philips 1990, Table
2-1). Again, we need to adjust for the fact that a ship doing a round-trip voyage will be
counted twice in these statistics.
    Maddison (2001, Table 2-7) reports annual average voyages “departures” from Lisbon
to the Indian Ocean as 1.9 in 1701-1800. In 1671-1750, Holland sent an average of 29
ships per year to Asia
    The shipping tonnage engaged in England’s overseas trade was as follows (Davis,
1962, p. 17): in 1663, for America and West Indies, 36,000, and for East India, 8,000;
in 1686, for America and West Indies, 70,000, and for East India, 12,000; in 1771-3, for
America and West Indies, 153,000, and for East India, 29,000. East India tonnage was
fairly consistently 1/5 of America and West Indies tonnage.
    Davis (1962), p.15, puts England’s total merchant shipping tonnage at 150,000 tons
in 1640 and 340,000 in 1686. Transoceanic trade was essentially zero in 1600, rising
to over 40% of overseas trading tonnage in 1686 (i.e., before the Glorious Revolution).
Through 1713, however, there was little additional increase in merchant tonnage and
perhaps some decline (Davis 1962, p.25).
    From Davis (1962), p.200, shipping tonnages in 1686 for clearances (outbound) were
as follows (we divide by 400 for voyage equivalents). From all English ports to the
Mediterranean, 18,800 tons, which is equivalent to 47 voyages; to East India 8,400; to
the West Indies, 34,000; and to North America: 33,100. Therefore “Atlantic” trade (last
three categories) comprised 75,500 tons, or 189 equivalent voyages (and was four times
the level of Mediterranean trade). The ratio of East India voyages to West Indies/North
America voyages was 8.
    De Vries (2002) puts total outbound Europe-Asia tonnage in 1701-1750 at 1,897,377
and 1751-1795 at 2,623,906. This implies equivalent outbound “standard” voyages of 95
and 146 for the two half-centuries respectively, i.e., a doubling of the levels 1601-1700.
The return tonnage numbers imply 71 voyages per year in both half centuries.
    For 1701-1710, de Vries (2002) has outbound Europe-Asia tonnage at 266,909, which
is 667 one-way voyages (in our equivalent units) or 67 per year. Return tonnage is
164,357 in his series, which is 411 one-way voyages or 41 per year. For 1700 we take
round-trip voyages to be 41 plus 13, i.e., 54.
    According to de Vries (2002), British voyages to Asia were 40,445 tons in 1701-05,
which is equivalent to about ten 400-ton voyages per year (this is half the level from
Davis, p.200, for 1686; de Vries numbers imply about a 25% fall over this period, using
decade averages — there was some general European-wide depression in trade). Assuming
British voyages to the Americas were 8 times the level to Asia gives 80 voyages per
year. We assume French trade to the Americas was about 20 equivalent voyages (this is
approximately the ratio from the slave trade at this time.)
    Therefore our base estimate for Atlantic trade in 1700 is 12 Spanish voyages (35
divided by 3) plus 54 Portuguese, Dutch, British, French and others voyages to Asia
plus 80 voyages by the British to the Americas plus 20 voyages by the French to the



                                           66
Americas, giving 166 voyages total.56 Our estimate from O’Rourke and Williamson is
152 voyages. Our estimate of Dutch trade is 29 voyages and our estimate of British
trade is 90 voyages (note that this would have been much higher in 1686, but trade was
quite depressed around 1700).

    Trade in 1750
    In 1750 most of the “Atlantic” trade was British, French and some Dutch. In 1746-50
there were 51.4 ships to and from the Spanish West Indies.
    For 1751-60, de Vries (2002) has outbound Europe-Asia tonnage of 520,662, which
is 130 equivalent one-way voyages per year, and return tonnage of 405,039, which is 101
equivalent voyages. We take 115 per year as our estimate.
    From Phillips (1990), in 1671-1750 Holland sent an average of 29 ships per year
to Asia. British voyages to Asia in 1751-60 amounted to 85,823 tons, which is 21
voyages per year; voyages to the Americas (using the 5x multiple) would have been 105.
North (1968) confirms that tobacco ships made only one round trip per year, spending
approximately 100 days in port in the Americas, waiting for and loading cargo. There
was some speeding up of turnaround from the mid-eighteenth century.
    Davis (1962, p. 200) has clearances from English ports in 1715-17 and 1771-73 (both
are totals for 3 year periods). We take the average of the two estimates for each type
of trade. This would put clearances for East India (i.e., Asia) at 3,033 tons per year.57
Clearances for the West Indies would be 23,367 tons and clearances for North America
would be 23,217 tons. These estimates for clearances to the Americas imply total voyage
equivalents of 349 voyages (assuming two or more round-trips per year; see North, 1968,
on the improvement in sailing time.)
    The evidence on French trade to the Americas is more limited. We rely on the
qualitative analysis in Butel (1997) to arrive at a rough estimate of 25 standard voyages
equivalent.
    Therefore our main estimate for 1750 is 17 Spanish voyages (51.4 divided by 3) plus
115 total voyages to Asia, including Portuguese, Dutch, British, French and others, plus
349 British voyages to the Americas, plus 25 French voyages to the Americas, for a total
of 506 standard equivalent voyages. From O’Rourke and Williamson (2001) we have
an alternative estimate of 383 voyage-equivalents. Our estimate for Dutch trade is 29
voyages and our estimate of British trade is 356 voyages.

   Trade in 1800
   In 1800 most of the Atlantic trade was in the hands of the British and French.
However, in 1776-78, there were still 102.7 ships traveling to and from the Spanish West
Indies (Phillips 1990).
   For 1781-90, the last full decade in his data, de Vries (2002) has total outbound
Europe-Asia tonnage as 673,940, which is 1,685 “400-ton voyages” or 169 per year. He
  56
     This is consistent with Hamilton (1938, p. 170), “From the last quarter of the sixteenth century to
the last quarter of the seventeenth the tonnage of the ships plying between Spain and the Indies fell by
approximately 75 per cent.”
  57
     Note that de Vries has a similar estimate for this time period — he puts outbound tonnage from
England to Asia as 49,605 in 1711-20, i.e., an average of around 5,000 tons per year.


                                                  67
puts inbound Asia-Europe tonnage at 206,900, which is 52 equivalent voyages per year.
We take 111 voyages per year as our estimate, i.e., approximately the same level as in
1750.58
    Direct estimates of British trade to the Americas are available from Davis, 1962,
p.200. Clearances in 1771-73 (over the three year period) were 13,900 tons to the East
Indies, 104,500 to the West Indies (including the slave coasts of Africa), and 99,000 to
North America. Total tonnage to these destinations was 217,400 over three years (up
from 80,300 in 1715-17). However, there was also an increase in productivity (North,
1968). We estimate total voyage equivalents, excluding Asia, in 1771-73 to be 508.75.
    British voyages to Asia were 228,315 tons in 1781-90 (de Vries, 2002), which are
equivalent to 57 voyages per year. British (and American) equivalent-voyages to the
Americas, we assume were around 600–there was some disruption of trade due to the
war of independence, but trade grew quickly thereafter.
    French trade to the Americas was severely disrupted by the French Revolution and
consequent civil war. Even more important, was the loss of sugar production when
Haiti rebelled, defeated the army sent to subdue it, and became independent. From
Butel (1997) we infer French standard-equivalent voyages of 100.
    Therefore our main estimate for 1800 is 34 Spanish (102.7 divided by 3) plus 111
total to Asia, including Portuguese, Dutch, British and others, plus 600 British (and
American) to the Americas, plus 100 French to the Americas, for a total of 845. From
the O’Rourke and Williamson (2001) alternative method we have 676 voyages. Our
estimate of Dutch voyages is 40 voyages and our estimate of British voyages is 657.

    Trade in 1850
    At this date most of the Atlantic trade was British, French, and American. We do
not have total tonnage of shipping for this year. However, from Maddison, 2001, p.95,
we know the total carrying capacity of world shipping in various years. This generally
tracks Atlantic-trading volumes well. In tons, “sail equivalent”, shipping capacity was
320,000 tons in 1470, 730,000 in 1570, 1,450,000 in 1670, 3,950,000 in 1780, 5,880,000 in
1820 (20,000 tons of which were steam), and 14,600,000 in 1850 (800,000 tons of which
were steam). Of these totals, 100,000 is Maddison’s (2001) estimate of Asian countries’
shipping from 1470-1780.59
    For our baseline estimate, we therefore assume that Atlantic trade increased in the
same proportion as shipping tonnage between 1800 and 1850, i.e., by a factor of 3.
This puts our baseline Atlantic trade estimate at 2,535 voyages. From O’Rourke and
Williamson’s (2001) rapid growth rate for trade in this period we have trade in 1850 as
3762.7 equivalent voyages. Our estimate of Dutch trade is 120 voyages and our estimate
of British trade is 1971 voyages.


  58
    In 1750-80, Holland sent an average of 26 ships per year to Asia (Phillips, 1990).
  59
    Note that Maddison (2001) assumes that one steam ton is equivalent to 4 sail tons due to increased
productivity, primarily a higher average speed of sailing (see also North 1968). For more on the tonnage
of English owned shipping, see Davis (1962, pp. 26-27). London comprises about half of total tonnage
in 1686, falling to about one-quarter in 1786.

                                                  68
                                                           Table 1
                                                     Descriptive Statistics
                                                                          Non-
                                      Whole     Whole        Atlantic   Atlantic
                                     Sample,   Sample,       Western   Western Eastern
                                    unweighted weighted      Europe     Europe    Europe        Asia
                                                                      Weighted by population
Urbanization in 1300                     6.6         9.9        8.0      10.0       4.1        11.0
                                        (5.2)       (3.2)       (2.8)     (6.1)     (3.3)       (0.7)
Urbanization in 1400                    7.6        10.3         8.5      12.1       3.9        11.1
                                        (9.5)       (3.6)       (2.4)    (10.0)     (1.5)       (0.5)
Urbanization in 1500                     8.3        10.6       10.1      11.4       4.0        11.5
                                        (7.6)       (3.4)       (5.3)     (6.8)     (1.8)       (0.7)
Urbanization in 1600                     9.6        11.7       13.6      14.0       4.4        12.0
                                        (7.6)       (4.0)       (7.6)     (8.8)     (2.7)       (0.7)
Urbanization in 1700                    10.7        11.2       14.5      13.1       3.7        11.6
                                        (8.5)       (4.1)       (6.8)     (8.1)     (2.2)       (0.7)
Urbanization in 1800                    14.1        10.3       19.8      16.9       7.0         8.9
                                        (9.1)       (4.9)       (7.9)     (7.5)     (3.3)       (1.4)
GDP per capita in 1500                627.54       608.3      721.46    850.73     506.94        575
                                      (159.3)     (118.0)      (31.1)   (217.1)    (78.2)      (35.4)
GDP per capita in 1600                740.73       630.5      916.31    908.22     578.29      576.8
                                      (225.6)     (144.2)     (149.3)   (167.3)   (112.3)      (35.3)
GDP per capita in 1700                862.12       622.2     1079.21 980.82        636.0       574.2
                                      (348.4)     (208.1)     (321.4)   (128.2)   (136.1)      (35.3)
GDP per capita in 1820                988.00       691.7     1321.95 1095.40       719.5       575.5
                                      (373.6)     (264.5)     (348.7)   (125.3)   (174.9)      (45.7)
Constraint on Executive in 1500        1.67        1.73        1.80      1.99       1.46
                                       (0.76)      (0.79)      (0.59)    (0.99)    (0.79)
Constraint on Executive in 1600        1.67        1.53        1.65      1.54       1.45
                                       (1.01)      (0.84)      (1.15)    (0.59)    (0.79)
Constraint on Executive in 1700        1.83        1.52        1.96      1.41       1.30
                                       (1.31)      (1.17)      (1.71)    (0.94)    (0.76)
Constraint on Executive in 1800        2.25        2.18        4.16      1.90       1.00
                                       (1.82)      (1.83)      (1.72)    (1.78)    (0.00)
Atlantic Coast-to-Area               0.0057      0.0014      0.0118    0.0026       0.00       0.00
                                     (0.0117)    (0.0065)    (0.0181) (0.0052)
Average Population in                  1.15        0.25        2.34      0.18       0.00       0.00
 Atlantic Ports                        (2.53)      (1.18)      (3.22)    (0.66)

First column is unweighted means; other columns are mean values weighted by total population in year
indicated. Standard deviation is in parentheses. There are 24 European countries in these data.
Atlantic Western Europe is England, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain. Non-Atlantic
Western Europe is Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Norway, Sweden and
Switzerland. Eastern Europe is Albania, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Poland,
Romania, Russia, and Serbia. Asia is India and China. Urbanization for Europe is percent population
living in towns where the population was at least 5,000, at some time between 800 and 1800, from
Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre for Europe; comparable data for Asia are from Bairoch. GDP per capita is
from Maddison. Constraint on executive is on a scale from 1 to 7, where a higher score indicates more
constraints; this is coded using the Polity IV methodology, as explained in the text. We have not coded
constraint on the executive for Asia.
Atlantic Coast-to-Area includes those parts of Germany, Denmark and Norway that are on the North
Sea. Average population in Atlantic ports is the percent of population living in Atlantic ports in our
balanced panel dataset on average from 1300 to 1850. For more detailed definitions and sources see
Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                         Table 2
                                                                                             Atlantic Trade and Urbanization
                                                                                               Dependent variable is country-level urbanization
                                                                                                               Panel, 1300-                   Panel, 1300-                                          Panel, 1300-
                                                                              Panel, 1300-     Panel, 1000-       1850,        Panel, 1300- 1850, without          Panel, 1300-    Panel, 1000-        1850,        Panel, 1300-
                                          Panel, 1300-1850 Panel, 1000-1850      1850             1850         unweighted     1850, with Asia   Britain               1850            1850          unweighted         1850

                                               (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)             (9)              (10)           (11)
                                                                                                                                          Atlantic Trade is measured by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Average pop. in
                                                                                                          Atlantic trader dummy                                            Atlantic coastline-to- land area         Atlantic ports

                                                                                                              Panel A: flexible specification
p-value for Western Europe x                 [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.45]           [0.10]           [0.80]           [0.00]           [0.12]           [0.09]           [0.01]           [0.78]          [0.15]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x 1500                                                          0.016            0.0086           0.055             0.014           0.018              0.50            0.38             0.75            0.57
                                                                              (0.021)           (0.019)         (0.026)           (0.022)         (0.016)            (0.68)          (0.65)           (0.87)          (0.45)
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                                          0.006             -0.004         0.0495            0.0054          0.0085              0.21            0.03             0.94            0.25
                                                                              (0.023)           (0.021)         (0.028)           (0.028)         (0.018)            (0.68)          (0.64)           (0.94)          (0.45)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                                          0.032             0.022           0.071             0.032           0.024              1.81            1.64             2.01            1.20
                                                                              (0.021)           (0.019)         (0.028)           (0.026)         (0.016)            (0.63)          (0.58)           (0.94)          (0.39)
Atlantic Trade x 1750                                                          0.032             0.022           0.073             0.032           0.023              2.16            1.99             2.60            1.20
                                                                              (0.021)           (0.018)         (0.028)           (0.025)         (0.015)            (0.62)          (0.57)           (0.94)          (0.38)
Atlantic Trade x 1800                                                          0.048             0.038           0.110             0.047           0.028              3.30            3.12             3.76            1.70
                                                                              (0.019)           (0.017)         (0.028)           (0.023)         (0.015)            (0.57)          (0.51)           (0.94)          (0.35)
Atlantic Trade x 1850                                                          0.085             0.076           0.115             0.084           0.043              5.05            4.88             4.67            2.50
                                                                              (0.018)           (0.016)         (0.028)           (0.022)         (0.014)            (0.51)          (0.44)           (0.94)          (0.33)

R-Squared                                     0.87             0.85             0.89             0.87            0.82              0.84             0.93             0.94             0.92             0.83           0.92
Number of Observations                         192              240              192              240             192               208              184              192             240               192            192

                                                                                                          Panel B: structured specification
p-value for Western Europe x                 [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.35]           [0.06]       [0.83]      [0.00]      [0.11]                         [0.16]           [0.02]           [0.81]          [0.15]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x                                                               0.011            0.0083          0.016           0.011             0.005               0.75            0.65             0.62            0.37
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                            (0.0024)         (0.0020)        (0.0034)        (0.0029)          (0.0018)            (0.07)          (0.06)           (0.11)          (0.04)

R-Squared                                     0.87             0.85             0.88             0.86            0.81              0.84             0.92             0.92             0.90             0.82           0.92
Number of Observations                         192              240              192              240             192               208              184              192             240               192            192


Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies; regressions are weighted unless otherwise stated. Weighted regressions use
total population in each year as weights, from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is level of urbanization (percent of population living in towns which had at least
5,000 population at some point between 800 and 1800) in each country in each year. Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and urbanization in Asia
is from Bairoch. We report results with three different measures of Atlantic trade: a dummy for whether a country was an Atlantic trader (one for Britain, the Netherlands,
France, Spain and Portugal; zero for all others) in columns 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7; the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area, defining the Atlantic broadly to include Belgium,
Denmark, Germany, Ireland, and Norway (columns 8, 9, and 10); the average percentage population in Atlantic ports during 1300-1850 is multiplied by 100 (column 11).
Column 6 includes the available data on Asia (just for India and China) and column 7 drops the data for Britain. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages
per year. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                        Table 3
                                                                                           Atlantic Trade and GDP per capita
                                                                                                Dependent Variable is country-level log GDP per capita
                                                                                                                   Panel, 1500-                    Panel, 1500-                                         Panel, 1500-
                                                                                 Panel, 1500-      Panel, 1500-       1820,        Panel, 1500-   1820, without        Panel, 1500-    Panel, 1500-        1820,        Panel, 1500-
                                             Panel, 1500-1820 Panel, 1500-1870      1820              1870         unweighted     1820, with Asia    Britain              1820            1870          unweighted         1820

                                                  (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)             (9)              (10)           (11)
                                                                                                                                              Atlantic Trade is measured by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average pop. in
                                                                                                              Atlantic trader dummy                                            Atlantic coastline-to- land area         Atlantic ports

                                                                                                                  Panel A: flexible specification
p-value for Western Europe x                    [0.44]            [0.05]          [0.92]            [0.23]          [0.17]            [0.01]           [0.89]            [0.97]          [0.58]           [0.31]          [0.96]
 year dummies, 1600-1820 or -1870
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                                              0.14              0.15            0.16              0.14             0.13             4.43            4.46              3.42            3.00
                                                                                  (0.07)            (0.11)          (0.07)            (0.13)           (0.07)           (2.42)          (3.61)            (2.21)          (1.30)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                                              0.18              0.19            0.21              0.18             0.14             8.84            8.80              6.32            5.40
                                                                                  (0.07)            (0.10)          (0.07)            (0.12)           (0.06)           (2.27)          (3.40)            (2.21)          (1.30)
Atlantic Trade x 1820                                                              0.27              0.27            0.18              0.27             0.20            12.03           11.89              8.06            6.20
                                                                                  (0.06)            (0.10)          (0.07)            (0.11)           (0.06)           (2.10)          (3.14)            (2.21)          (1.10)
Atlantic Trade x 1870                                                                                0.22                                                                               15.84
                                                                                                    (0.09)                                                                              (2.93)

R-Squared                                        0.94             0.94             0.96              0.95            0.96              0.92            0.96              0.96             0.96             0.96           0.96
Number of Observations                            96               120              96                120             96                104             92                96              120               96             96

                                                                                                           Panel B: structured specification
p-value for Western Europe x                    [0.44]            [0.05]          [0.92]            [0.48]    [0.14]      [0.01]      [0.88]                             [0.99]          [0.54]           [0.23]          [0.93]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x                                                                  0.069             0.040            0.047             0.069           0.051              3.21            3.18             2.22            1.58
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                               (0.016)           (0.017)          (0.018)           (0.028)         (0.015)            (0.53)          (0.50)           (0.58)          (0.31)

R-Squared                                            0.94          0.94         0.96        0.95        0.96      0.92      0.96       0.96       0.96      0.96          0.96
Number of Observations                                 96           120           96         120         96        104       92          96       120        96            96
Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies; regressions are weighted unless otherwise stated. Weighted regressions use
total population in each year as weights, from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is log GDP per capita, from Maddison. We report results with three different
measures of Atlantic trade: a dummy for whether a country was an Atlantic trader (one for Britain, the Netherlands, France, Spain and Portugal; zero for all others) in columns
3, 4, 5, 6 and 7; the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area, defining the Atlantic broadly to include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, and Norway (columns 8, 9, and 10);
the average percentage population in Atlantic ports during 1300-1850, multiplied by 100 (column 11). Column 6 includes the available data on Asia (just for India and China)
and column 7 drops the data for Britain. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix
Table 1.
                                                                                     Table 4
                                                                                 Robustness Checks
                                                                               ,
                                                          Panel, 1300 to      1850,       Panel, 1300 to                      Panel, 1500 to
                                        Panel, 1300-1850,     1850,       controlling for     1850,         Panel, 1500-1820,     1820,       Panel, 1500 to 1820, Panel, 1500 to
                                          controlling for controlling for    Roman        controlling for     controlling for controlling for    controlling for  1820, controlling
                                             religion          wars          heritage        latitude            religion          wars         Roman heritage       for latitude

                                               (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)                                         (8)
                                                                      Using Atlantic trader dummy measure of Atlantic Trade
                                             Panel A: Dependent Variable is Level of
                                                         Urbanization                                        Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log GDP per capita
p-value for Western Europe x                [0.73]            [0.49]         [0.49]          [0.09]             [0.24]           [0.91]             [0.15]            [0.85]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trader Dummy x                    0.013             0.011          0.011           0.011              0.089            0.070              0.125             0.078
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade         (0.002)           (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.013)          (0.017)            (0.017)           (0.015)

p-value for Protestant x Year               [0.05]                                                              [0.00]

Wars per year in preceding century                          -0.0006                                                              0.075
                                                             (0.008)                                                            (0.029)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                            [0.89]                                                                 [0.00]

p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                  [0.11]                                                                   [0.00]

R-Squared                                    0.89              0.89           0.89            0.89               0.97             0.95               0.97              0.97
Number of Observations                       192               176            192             192                 96               88                 96                96
                                                                          Using coastline-to-area measure of Atlantic Trade
                                             Panel C: Dependent Variable is Level of
                                                         Urbanization                                        Panel D: Dependent Variable is Log GDP per capita

p-value for Western Europe x                [0.19]            [0.26]         [0.39]          [0.09]             [0.99]           [0.98]             [0.71]            [0.81]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Coastline-to-area x                          0.79              0.76           0.75            0.78               2.78             3.33               3.32              2.96
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade          (0.08)            (0.08)         (0.07)          (0.07)             (0.54)           (0.56)             (0.54)            (0.56)

p-value for Protestant x Year               [0.51]                                                              [0.05]

Wars per year in preceding century                           0.0082                                                              0.032
                                                              (0.007)                                                           (0.026)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                            [0.77]                                                                 [0.32]

p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                  [0.52]                                                                   [0.38]

R-Squared                                    0.93             0.93            0.92           0.93                0.97             0.96               0.97              0.97
Number of Observations                        192              176             192            192                 96               88                 96                96
Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies. Weights are total population
of country in each year from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable in Panels A and C is level of urbanization (percent of population
living in towns with more than 5,000 population.) Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and urbanization in Asia
is from Bairoch. Dependent variable in Panels B and D is log GDP per capita, from Maddison. Panels A and B use the Atlantic trader
dummy as the measure of Atlantic trade (one for Britain, France, Spain, Portugal and the Netherlands, zero for all others). Panels C and
D use the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year. Protestant is a
dummy for whether country was majority Protestant in 1600. Protestant x Year is the Protestant dummy interacted with year dummies
for 1600 and after. Wars per year are in preceding century through 1700, 1700-1750 for 1750, 1750-1800 for 1800 and 1800-1850 for
1850.
Roman heritage is dummy for whether country was in Roman empire and not subsequently in Ottoman empire; this is interacted with
year dummies for 1600 and after. Latitude is distance from the equator for capital city of this country today; this is interacted with year
dummies for 1600 and after. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                 Table 5
                                                                                 Growth of Atlantic Ports: Balanced Panel
                                                                                               Dependent Variable is log city population
                                                                                                                      Balanced Panel,      Balanced Panel,                       Balanced Panel,
                                                             Balanced Panel,     Balanced Panel, Balanced Panel,    1300-1850, weighted, 1300-1850, weighted, Balanced Panel, 1300-1850; with
                                           Balanced Panel,     1300-1850,          1300-1850,      1300-1850,        without London and with full set of country 1300-1850, with  Mediterranean
                                         1300-1850, weighted   unweighted           weighted       unweighted            Amsterdam        x year interactions         Asia       and Atlantic ports
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)                  (5)                  (6)                 (7)                (8)
                                                                                                     Panel A: flexible specification
                                                     Atlantic port                   Potential Atlantic port                                        Atlantic port
p-value for Western Europe x                    [0.34]             [0.05]            [0.30]           [0.16]               [0.28]               [0.30]               [0.41]            [0.32]
 year dummies, 1600-1850


Atlantic port x 1500                             -0.04             -0.05             0.027            0.048                -0.008               -0.072                -0.03             -0.05
                                                (0.19)             (0.20)            (0.17)           (0.16)               (0.20)               (0.20)               (0.20)            (0.19)
Atlantic port x 1600                             0.36               0.46              0.41             0.43                 0.41                 0.36                 0.36              0.40
                                                (0.16)             (0.20)            (0.14)           (0.16)               (0.17)               (0.17)               (0.16)            (0.16)
Atlantic port x 1700                             0.71               0.62              0.76             0.76                 0.297                0.47                 0.71              0.74
                                                (0.14)             (0.20)            (0.13)           (0.16)               (0.17)               (0.17)               (0.15)            (0.15)
Atlantic port x 1750                             0.70               0.71              0.79             0.89                 0.26                 0.46                  0.7              0.72
                                                (0.14)             (0.20)            (0.13)           (0.16)               (0.16)               (0.16)               (0.15)            (0.14)
Atlantic port x 1800                             0.79               0.92              0.95             1.10                 0.32                 0.57                0.799              0.84
                                                (0.14)             (0.20)            (0.12)           (0.16)               (0.15)               (0.15)               (0.14)            (0.14)
Atlantic port x 1850                             1.09               1.00             1.19              1.23                 0.48                 0.46                 1.09              1.10
                                                (0.13)             (0.20)            (0.12)           (0.16)               (0.14)               (0.14)               (0.14)            (0.13)

p-value for Mediterranean port x                                                                                                                                                       [0.19]
year dummies, 1500-1850
R-Squared                                       0.92               0.79               0.92             0.80                0.89                  0.95                0.94              0.92
Number of Observations                          1544               1544               1544             1544                1528                  1544                1624              1544

                                                                                                    Panel B: structured specification
p-value for Western Europe x                    [0.23]             [0.04]            [0.23]           [0.10]              [0.31]                [0.33]               [0.20]            [0.20]
 year dummies, 1600-1850

Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade               0.17              0.16                0.17             0.16               0.065                 0.078               0.27              0.17
x Atlantic Ports                                (0.02)             (0.02)            (0.017)          (0.024)             (0.019)               (0.018)             (0.017)           (0.017)

p-value for Mediterranean port x                                                                                                                                                       [0.14]
 year dummies, 1500-1850
R-Squared                                          0.92              0.79              0.92            0.79                  0.89                 0.95                 0.88             0.92
Number of Observations                            1544               1544              1544            1544                  1528                 1544                1624             1544
Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of city and year dummies; weights are level of population in each year for each city during the sample period.
Dependent variable is log city population, from Bairoch, Batou, and Chèvre. All columns report balanced panel regressions for 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700, 1750, 1800 and 1850, using only
cities for which we have data in all 8 time periods. The Atlantic port dummy equals one for a city used as an Atlantic port. Potential Atlantic ports also include ports in Belgium, Germany, and
Ireland. Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade is log average voyages per year; this is multiplied by the Atlantic port dummy (or by the potential Atlantic port dummy); the coefficient on this
interaction term is multiplied by 100. Year dummies are included for all years from 1400. Western Europe x year dummies are included for all years from 1600. For a list of Atlantic ports and
potential Atlantic ports, see the Appendix.
                                                                                           Table 6
                                                                             Robustness Checks for Growth of Atlantic Ports
                                                                        Dependent Variable is log city population
                                                                                                                         Balanced Panel,    Balanced Panel,    Balanced Panel,    Balanced Panel,
                                Balanced Panel, 1300- Balanced Panel, 1300- Balanced Panel,         Balanced Panel,        1300-1850;         1300-1850;         1400-1850;         1400-1850;
                                 1850; controlling for 1850; controlling for    1300-1850;            1300-1850;          controlling for    controlling for    controlling for    controlling for
                                       religion              religion        controlling for war   controlling for war   Roman heritage     Roman heritage         latitude           latitude
                                         (1)                    (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)

p-value for Western Europe x           [0.26]                 [0.17]                [0.11]               [0.09]              [0.009]            [0.00]             [0.01]             [0.00]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic port x 1500                    -0.04                                        -0.04                                   -0.004                                0.0008
                                       (0.18)                                       (0.19)                                   (0.19)                                (0.18)
Atlantic port x 1600                    0.41                                         0.35                                     0.37                                  0.44
                                       (0.15)                                       (0.15)                                   (0.15)                                (0.15)
Atlantic port x 1700                   0.72                                          0.66                                     0.72                                  0.81
                                       (0.15)                                       (0.14)                                   (0.14)                                (0.14)
Atlantic port x 1750                   0.67                                          0.71                                     0.74                                   0.8
                                       (0.14)                                       (0.14)                                   (0.14)                                (0.13)
Atlantic port x 1800                   0.73                                          0.81                                     0.88                                  0.87
                                       (0.14)                                       (0.13)                                   (0.14)                                (0.13)
Atlantic port x 1850                    0.89                                         1.11                                     1.20                                  1.09
                                       (0.13)                                       (0.13)                                   (0.13)                                (0.12)

Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                            0.13                                       0.17                                   0.18                                    0.16
x Atlantic Ports                                              (0.02)                                     (0.02)                                 (0.02)                                (0.016)

p-value for Protestant x Year          [0.00]                 [0.00]

Average years of war                                                               0.094                 0.106
                                                                                   (0.049)              (0.048)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                                                                            [0.00]             [0.01]

p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                                                                                        [0.00]             [0.00]

R-Squared                              0.93                   0.93                  0.92                 0.92                0.92               0.92                0.93               0.93
Number of Observations                 1544                   1544                  1480                 1480                1544               1544                1544               1544
Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of city and year dummies; weights are level of population in each year for each city during the sample
period. Dependent variable is log total urban population, from Bairoch, Batou, and Chèvre. All columns report balanced panel regressions for 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700, 1750,
1800 and 1850, using only cities for which we have data in all 8 time periods. The Atlantic port dummy equals one for a city used as an Atlantic port. Potential Atlantic ports also
include ports in Belgium, Germany, and Ireland. Total Atlantic trade is log average voyages per year. Western Europe x year dummies are included for all years from 1600. For a list of
Atlantic ports, see the appendix.
Protestant is a dummy for whether city was Protestant in 1600. Protestant x Year is the Protestant dummy interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after. Wars per year are in
preceding century through 1700, 1700-1750 for 1750, 1750-1800 for 1800 and 1800-1850 for 1850. Roman heritage is dummy for whether the city was in Roman empire and not
subsequently in Ottoman empire; this is interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after. Latitude is distance from the equator for this city; this is interacted with year dummies for
1600 and after. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                        Table 7
                                                       Growth of Atlantic Ports: Unbalanced Panel
                                                                                Dependent Variable is log city population

                                                                                                 European cities in   European cities in   European and Asian   European and Asian
                          Just European cities   Just European cities   Just European cities      balanced panel       balanced panel            cities               cities
                                  (1)                    (2)                   (3)                      (4)                  (5)                     (6)               (7)
                                                                        Potential Atlantic
                                                    Atlantic port              port                                                 Atlantic port
                                                                                             Panel A: 1300-1500
1500 dummy                       0.27                  0.27                   0.27                     0.34                0.34                     0.16              0.16
                                 (0.09)                (0.09)                 (0.09)                   (0.13)              (0.13)                   (0.04)            (0.04)
Western Europe in 1500           -0.26                 -0.27                  -0.28                    -0.30               -0.31                    -0.15             -0.16
                                 (0.10)                (0.10)                 (0.10)                   (0.14)              (0.14)                   (0.06)            (0.06)
Atlantic port in 1500                                  0.17                   0.18                                         0.09                                       0.17
                                                       (0.14)                 (0.12)                                       (0.16)                                     (0.15)
R-Squared                        0.92                   0.92                   0.92                    0.91                 0.91                    0.95              0.96
Number of Observations            686                   686                    686                     386                  386                      732               732

                                                                                             Panel B: 1500-1700
1700 dummy                       0.25                  0.25                   0.25                     0.22                0.22                     0.22              0.22
                                 (0.09)                (0.08)                 (0.08)                   (0.15)              (0.14)                   (0.04)            (0.04)
Western Europe in 1700           0.13                  0.06                   0.03                    0.24                 0.15                     0.16              0.08
                                 (0.09)                (0.09)                 (0.09)                  (0.16)               (0.15)                   (0.06)            (0.06)
Atlantic port in 1700                                   0.77                   0.76                                         0.75                                       0.77
                                                       (0.11)                 (0.09)                                       (0.16)                                     (0.12)
R-Squared                        0.94                  0.95                   0.95                     0.87                 0.94                    0.96              0.96
Number of Observations           1030                  1030                   1030                     386                  386                     1086              1086

                                                                                             Panel C: 1500-1800
1800 dummy                       0.45                  0.45                   0.45                     0.54                0.55                     0.46              0.46
                                 (0.09)                (0.09)                 (0.09)                   (0.18)              (0.17)                   (0.05)            (0.05)
Western Europe in 1800           0.17                  0.09                   0.06                     0.14                0.04                     0.17              0.09
                                 (0.10)                (0.10)                 (0.10)                   (0.19)              (0.18)                   (0.06)            (0.06)
Atlantic port in 1800                                  0.82                   0.90                                         0.88                                       0.82
                                                       (0.12)                 (0.10)                                       (0.18)                                     (0.13)
R-Squared                        0.94                   0.95                   0.95                    0.93                 0.94                    0.96              0.96
Number of Observations           1244                  1244                   1244                     386                  386                     1300              1300
Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of city and year dummies; weights are population in each year for each city during the sample
period. Dependent variable is log total urban population, from Bairoch, Batou, and Chèvre. Panel A uses data only from 1300 and 1500, Panel B uses data only from 1500
and 1700, and Panel C uses data only from 1500 and 1800. The Atlantic port dummy equals one for a city used as an Atlantic port. Potential Atlantic ports also include ports
in Belgium, Germany, and Ireland. For a list of Atlantic ports, see the Appendix.
                                                                                                 Table 8
                                                                                   Growth of Non-Atlantic Urban Population
                                                                                               Dependent Variable is non-Atlantic urbanization
                                                                                                              Panel, 1300-                    Panel, 1300-                                          Panel, 1300-
                                                                               Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1000-       1850,        Panel, 1300-   1850, without        Panel, 1300-    Panel, 1000-         1850,        Panel, 1300-
                                           Panel, 1300-1850 Panel, 1000-1850      1850           1850         unweighted     1850, with Asia    Britain              1850            1850           unweighted         1850

                                                (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)             (9)              (10)            (11)
                                                                                                                                         Atlantic Trade is measured by:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Average pop. in
                                                                                                         Atlantic trader dummy                                            Atlantic coastline-to- land area          Atlantic ports

                                                                                                             Panel A: flexible specification
p-value for Western Europe x                  [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.25]         [0.02]          [0.79]            [0.00]           [0.13]            [0.02]         [0.001]           [0.79]           [0.02]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x 1500                                                           0.016         0.0044            0.051             0.014           0.016              0.54           0.21              0.78             0.53
                                                                               (0.017)        (0.015)          (0.024)           (0.019)         (0.016)            (0.66)          (0.62)           (0.84)           (0.40)
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                                           -0.003         -0.018           0.028             -0.004          0.001             -0.40            -0.76            0.48             -0.18
                                                                               (0.018)        (0.017)          (0.026)           (0.025)         (0.017)           (0.66)           (0.62)           (0.91)           (0.37)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                                           0.016          0.002            0.026             0.015           0.018             0.06             -0.30            0.51             0.10
                                                                               (0.017)        (0.016)          (0.026)           (0.023)         (0.016)           (0.61)           (0.56)           (0.91)           (0.35)
Atlantic Trade x 1750                                                           0.014          -0.001           0.026             0.013           0.017            0.003             -0.36            0.68             -0.01
                                                                               (0.016)        (0.015)          (0.026)           (0.022)         (0.015)           (0.60)           (0.55)           (0.91)           (0.35)
Atlantic Trade x 1800                                                           0.030          0.015            0.066             0.029           0.022            1.34             0.98              2.03             0.62
                                                                               (0.016)        (0.014)          (0.026)           (0.021)         (0.014)           (0.55)           (0.49)           (0.91)           (0.32)
Atlantic Trade x 1850                                                           0.059          0.045            0.070             0.058           0.038            2.43             2.08              2.45             1.13
                                                                               (0.014)        (0.013)          (0.026)           (0.019)         (0.014)           (0.49)           (0.43)           (0.91)           (0.30)

R-Squared                                      0.89             0.87             0.90           0.88      0.79        0.83        0.92                              0.92             0.90             0.78            0.91
Number of Observations                          192              240              192            240       192         208         184                               192             240               192             192
                                                                                                      Panel B: structured specification
p-value for Western Europe x                  [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.25]         [0.02]    [0.91]      [0.00]      [0.14]                             [0.04]         [0.003]           [0.91]           [0.04]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x                                                                0.0073         0.0044          0.0079          0.0072            0.0045             0.35            0.25              0.27             0.15
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                             (0.0019)       (0.0016)        (0.0031)        (0.0025)          (0.0017)            (0.07)          (0.06)           (0.11)           (0.04)

R-Squared                                      0.89             0.87             0.90           0.88            0.78              0.83             0.92             0.90             0.88             0.78            0.90
Number of Observations                          192              240              192            240             192               208              184              192             240               192             192

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies; regressions are weighted unless otherwise stated. Weighted regressions use
total population in each year as weights, from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is level of urbanization excluding urbanization in Atlantic ports (percent of
population living in towns with more than 5,000 population that are not on the Atlantic.) Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and urbanization in
Asia is from Bairoch. We report results with three different measures of Atlantic trade: a dummy for whether a country was an Atlantic trader (one for Britain, the
Netherlands, France, Spain and Portugal; zero for all others) in columns 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7; the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area, defining the Atlantic broadly to include
Belgium, Denmark, Germany, and Norway (columns 8, 9, and 10); the average percentage population in Atlantic ports during 1300-1850 is multiplied by 100 (column 11).
Column 6 includes the available data on Asia (just for India and China) and column 7 drops Britain. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year.
For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                         Table 9 (part 1 of 2)
                                                                                    Atlantic Trade and Institutions
                                                                                                                                                            Panel, 1300 to      Panel, 1300 to
                                                                                       Panel, 1300- Panel, 1300 to Panel, 1300 to                            1850, using         1850, using
                                                                                          1850,           1850,       1850, controlling Panel, 1300 to Atlantic coast-area Atlantic coast-area
                                       Panel, 1300-                      Panel, 1300- controlling for controlling for    for Roman      1850, controlling measure of Atlantic measure of Atlantic
                                          1850        Panel, 1300-1850      1850         religion          wars           heritage        for latitude          trade               trade

                                          (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)            (5)              (6)               (7)                (8)                 (9)
                                                                                Panel A: Dependent Variable is Constraint on Executive
p-value for Western Europe x            [0.00]           [0.35]           [0.00]         [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.26]            [0.00]              [0.00]              [0.00]
year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x 1500                                    -0.42                                                                                                 -20.83
                                                         (0.47)                                                                                               (22.94)
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                    -0.14                                                                                                10.94
                                                         (0.52)                                                                                               (22.91)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                    0.29                                                                                                 62.12
                                                         (0.48)                                                                                               (21.14)
Atlantic Trade x 1750                                    0.32                                                                                                 81.45
                                                         (0.46)                                                                                               (20.78)
Atlantic Trade x 1800                                    2.07                                                                                                 79.81
                                                         (0.44)                                                                                               (18.97)
Atlantic Trade x 1850                                    2.96                                                                                                 72.25
                                                         (0.41)                                                                                               (17.13)
Atlantic Trade x                                                           0.42           0.45            0.43            0.39              0.43                                  12.99
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                        (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.06)          (0.06)            (0.06)                                 (2.31)

p-value for Protestant x year effect                                                     [0.00]
Wars per year in preceding century                                                                        -0.04
                                                                                                         (0.20)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                                                                        [0.05]
p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                                                                [0.49]
R-Squared                                0.75             0.85             0.81           0.84           0.81             0.82              0.81               0.81                0.79
Number of Observations                   192               192              192            192            176              192               192                192                 192
                                                                                           Table 9 (part 2 of 2)
                                                                                      Atlantic Trade and Institutions
                                                                                                                                                               Panel, 1300 to      Panel, 1300 to
                                                                                          Panel, 1300- Panel, 1300 to Panel, 1300 to                            1850, using         1850, using
                                                                                             1850,           1850,       1850, controlling Panel, 1300 to    Atlantic coast-area Atlantic coast-area
                                          Panel, 1300-                      Panel, 1300- controlling for controlling for    for Roman      1850, controlling measure of Atlantic measure of Atlantic
                                             1850        Panel, 1300-1850      1850         religion          wars           heritage         for latitude          trade               trade

                                             (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)                (7)                (8)                 (9)

                                                                                     Panel B: Dependent Variable is Protection for Capital

p-value for Western Europe x               [0.00]           [0.59]           [0.00]         [0.00]          [0.00]          [0.37]            [0.00]              [0.00]              [0.00]
 year dummies, 1600-1850

Atlantic Trade x 1500                                        -0.15                                                                                                -0.13
                                                            (0.47)                                                                                               (24.96)
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                        0.66                                                                                                 27.51
                                                            (0.52)                                                                                               (24.96)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                        1.09                                                                                                 78.63
                                                            (0.48)                                                                                               (23.03)
Atlantic Trade x 1750                                        1.13                                                                                                 98.12
                                                            (0.46)                                                                                               (22.65)
Atlantic Trade x 1800                                        3.40                                                                                                 89.84
                                                            (0.43)                                                                                               (20.67)
Atlantic Trade x 1850                                        3.73                                                                                                 87.83
                                                            (0.40)                                                                                               (18.67)
Atlantic Trade x                                                             0.56           0.61            0.56            0.54              0.57                                   14.31
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                           (0.06)         (0.06)          (0.06)          (0.06)            (0.06)                                 (2.49)

p-value for Protestant x year effect                                                        [0.00]

Wars per year in preceding century                                                                          -0.06
                                                                                                            (0.20)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                                                                           [0.07]

p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                                                                   [0.58]

R-Squared                                   0.73             0.86             0.83           0.85           0.83             0.84              0.83               0.79                0.77
Number of Observations                      192               192              192            192            176              192               192                192                 192


Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies. Weights are total population in each
country in each year, from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variables are constraint on executive in columns 1-8 and protection for capital in
columns 9-16, coded from Langer, as explained in the Appendix. All columns use the Atlantic trader dummy (one for Britain, France, Spain,
Portugal and the Netherlands; zero for all others) as the measure of Atlantic trade, apart from columns 7, 8, 15 and 16 which use the ratio of
Atlantic coastline (broadly defined to include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and Norway) to land area. Total Atlantic Trade is the log
average number of voyages per year. Protestant is a dummy for whether country was majority Protestant in 1600. Protestant x Year is the
Protestant dummy interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after. Wars per year are for the preceding century through 1700, 1700-1750 for
1750, 1750-1800 for 1800 and 1800-1850 for 1850. Roman heritage is dummy for whether country was in Roman empire and not subsequently in
Ottoman empire; this is interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after.
Latitude is distance from the equator for capital city of this country today; this is interacted with year for 1600 and after. For more detailed data
definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                   Table 10A
                                                                          Interaction Between Initial Institutions and Atlantic Trade
                                                                                      Using Atlantic trader dummy as measure of Atlantic trade
                                                       (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)                             (9)            (10)
                                                                                            Panel A: Dependent Variable is Urbanization
                                                                                                                Panel, 1300-                                                               Panel, 1000-
                                                    Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-      1850,       Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-      1850,
                                                       1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted        1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted

Atlantic Trader x                                                   0.011          0.011          -0.0090        -0.0026                       0.0082         0.0084         -0.012         -0.009
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                 (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.0049)       (0.0062)                      (0.0020)       (0.0020)       (0.004)        (0.005)
p-value for Initial Institutions x year              [0.61]                        [0.51]         [0.71]         [0.85]         [0.12]                         [0.08]        [0.42]         [0.92]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)

Total Atlantic Trade x Initial Institutions                                                       0.021          0.017                                                       0.021          0.022
x Atlantic Trader                                                                                (0.004)        (0.005)                                                     (0.004)        (0.004)
R-Squared                                             0.87           0.88           0.89           0.90           0.83           0.86           0.86           0.87           0.87           0.81
Number of Observations                                192            192            192            192            192            240            240            240            240            240
                                                                                           Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log GDP per capita
                                                                                                                Panel, 1500-                                                               Panel, 1500-
                                                    Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      1820,       Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      1870,
                                                       1820           1820           1820           1820        unweighted        1870           1870           1870           1870        unweighted

Atlantic Trader x                                                   0.069          0.068          -0.068         -0.079                        0.004          0.039          -0.122         -0.110
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                 (0.016)        (0.016)        (0.028)        (0.028)                       (0.017)        (0.017)        (0.030)        (0.028)
p-value for Initial Institutions x year              [0.40]                        [0.31]        [0.004]         [0.08]         [0.66]                        [0.64]          [0.01]         [0.58]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)
Total Atlantic Trade x Initial Institutions                                                        0.14           0.12                                                        0.16           0.11
x Atlantic Trader                                                                                 (0.03)         (0.02)                                                      (0.03)         (0.02)
R-Squared                                             0.94           0.96           0.96           0.97           0.97           0.95           0.95           0.95           0.96           0.96
Number of Observations                                 96             96             96             96             96            120            120            120            120            120
                                                                                      Panel C: Dependent Variable is Constraint on the Executive
                                                                                                                Panel, 1300-                                                               Panel, 1500-
                                                    Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-      1850,       Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      1850,
                                                       1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted        1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted

Atlantic Trader x                                                    0.42           0.42          -0.001         -0.096                         0.35           0.34           -0.11          -0.15
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                  (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.12)         (0.12)                        (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.10)         (0.09)
p-value for Initial Institutions x year              [0.27]                        [0.14]        [0.008]         [0.69]         [0.43]                        [0.33]         [0.01]         [0.95]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)
Total Atlantic Trade x Initial Institutions                                                        0.44           0.26                                                        0.47           0.29
x Atlantic Trader                                                                                 (0.11)         (0.09)                                                      (0.09)         (0.07)
R-Squared                                             0.76           0.81           0.82           0.84           0.76           0.72           0.77           0.78           0.70           0.71
Number of Observations                                192            192            192            192            192            240            240            240            240            240



Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies. Weights are total population in each country in each year,
from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is urbanization in Panel A, log GDP per capita in Panel B, and Constraint on the executive in Panel C. Western Europe
dummies interacted with years (from 1600) are included in all columns, but not reported to save space. Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and
urbanization in Asia is from Bairoch. Log GDP per capita is from Maddison. Constraint on the executive is coded from Langer; initial institutions are the average of
institutions in 1400 and 1500. We use the Atlantic trader dummy as the measure of Atlantic trade. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year.
Total Atlantic trade is demeaned. Main effects are evaluated at initial institutions equal to one. For data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                        Table 10B
                                                                                Interaction Between Initial Institutions and Atlantic Trade
                                                                                         Using coastline-to-area ratio as measure of Atlantic trade
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)         (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)                               (8)            (8)

                                                                                                     Panel A: Dependent Variable is Urbanization
                                                                                                                       Panel, 1300-                                                               Panel, 1000-
                                                                       Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-      Panel, 1300-      1850,       Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-      1850,
                                                    Panel, 1300-1850      1850           1850              1850        unweighted        1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted

Atlantic Coastline-to-area x                                             0.74           0.74              0.30           0.13                          0.64           0.64           0.20           -0.12
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                      (0.07)         (0.07)            (0.28)         (0.30)                        (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.25)         (0.25)
p-value for Institutions in 1500 x year                [0.61]                          [0.45]            [0.30]         [0.97]         [0.12]                        [0.12]         [0.04]         [0.40]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)

Total Atlantic Trade x Institutions in 1500                                                               0.44           0.52                                                        0.43           0.61
x Atlantic Coastline-to-area                                                                             (0.28)         (0.29)                                                      (0.24)         (0.24)
R-Squared                                                0.87            0.93           0.93              0.93           0.83           0.86           0.91           0.91           0.91           0.78
Number of Observations                                   192             192            192               192            192            240            240            240            240            240
                                                                                             Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log GDP per capita
                                                                                                                       Panel, 1500-                                                               Panel, 1500-
                                                                       Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      Panel, 1500-      1820,       Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      1870,
                                                    Panel, 1500-1820      1820           1820              1820        unweighted        1870           1870           1870           1870        unweighted

Atlantic Coastline-to-area x                                             3.38           2.99              -3.42          -2.76                         2.82           2.99           -3.42          -3.66
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                      (0.56)         (0.44)            (1.82)         (1.48)                        (0.45)         (0.44)         (1.82)         (1.18)
p-value for Institutions in 1500 x year                [0.66]                           [0.11]           [0.96]         [0.39]         [0.66]                        [0.11]         [0.96]         [0.17]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)
Total Atlantic Trade x Institutions in 1500                                                               6.28           5.40                                                        6.28           5.80
x Atlantic Coastline-to-area                                                                             (1.74)         (1.42)                                                      (1.74)         (1.13)
R-Squared                                                0.95            0.96           0.97              0.97           0.97           0.95           0.96           0.97           0.97           0.97
Number of Observations                                    96              96             96                96             96            120            120            120            120            120

                                                                                       Panel C: Dependent Variable is Constraint on the Executive
                                                                                                                       Panel, 1300-                                                               Panel, 1000-
                                                                       Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-      Panel, 1300-      1850,       Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-      1850,
                                                    Panel, 1300-1850      1850           1850              1850        unweighted        1850           1850           1850           1850        unweighted

Atlantic Coastline-to-area x                                            11.97          12.96             -12.58          -3.02                        13.08          13.83           -6.74          0.14
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                      (2.21)         (2.18)            (9.22)         (5.43)                        (1.71)         (1.69)         (7.10)         (4.19)
p-value for Institutions in 1500 x year                [0.26]                          [0.03]            [0.83]         [0.88]         [0.43]                        [0.03]         [0.81]         [0.87]
  (1600, 1700, 1750, 1800, 1850)
Total Atlantic Trade x Institutions in 1500                                                              25.19          13.56                                                       20.30          11.61
x Atlantic Coastline-to-area                                                                             (8.85)         (5.26)                                                      (6.82)         (4.07)
R-Squared                                                0.76            0.78           0.80              0.82           0.78           0.72           0.78           0.79           0.80           0.74
Number of Observations                                   192             192            192               192            192            240            240            240            240            240

Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies. Weights are total population in each country in each year,
from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is urbanization in Panel A, log GDP per capita in Panel B, and Constraint on the executive in Panel C. Western Europe
dummies interacted with years (from 1600) are included in all columns, but not reported to save space. Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and
urbanization in Asia is from Bairoch. Log GDP per capita is from Maddison. Constraint on the executive is coded from Langer; initial institutions are the average of
institutions in 1400 and 1500. We use the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area (defined broadly to include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, and Norway) as the
measure of Atlantic trade. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year. Total Atlantic trade is demeaned. Main effects are evaluated at initial
institutions equal to one. For data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                          Appendix Table 1
                                                                                                   Variable Definitions and Sources

                         Variable                                                                                   Description                                                                                           Source
Log GDP per capita in 1500, 1600, 1700, 1820 and 1870         Logarithm of GDP per capita.                                                                                        Maddison (2001)

Population in 1000, 1200, 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700,       Total population.                                                                                                   McEvedy and Jones (1978)
1750, 1800, and 1850.
Urban population in 1000, 1200, 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600,       Population living in urban areas; see appendix for details.                                                         Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988), as described in the appendix. We use Bairoch
1700, 1750, 1800, and 1850.                                                                                                                                                       (1988) for urbanization in Asia and Chandler for Asian city population.
Atlantic and Mediteranean ports                               City that is on the Atlantic or Mediteranean                                                                        Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988) for cities; location from DK Publishing (1997).

Ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area                      Length of Atlantic coastline divided by land area. Both assume modern borders. Atlantic coastline includes the         Coastline is from Integrated Coastline Management (on the web.) Land area is from
                                                              whole coast of Portugal, Ireland, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Britain. It also includes half the coastline of Spain, the World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.
                                                              two-thirds the coastline of France, half the coastline of Germany, one quarter the coastline of Denmark, and half the
                                                              coastline of Norway.

Average percent population living in Atlantic ports, 1300-    Population living in Atlantic ports divided by total population.                                                    Urban population from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988); total population from
1850                                                                                                                                                                              McEvedy and Jones (1978); location from DK Publishing (1997).
Dummy for Atlantic trader                                     Equals one for Britain, France, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain                                                See Appendix for details.

Dummy for Atlantic port.                                      Equals one for a city that was used as an Atlantic port; zero otherwise.                                            Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988) for cities; location from DK Publishing (1997).

Dummy for potential Atlantic port                             Equals one for a city that is on the Atlantic; zero otherwise.                                                      Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988) for cities; location from DK Publishing (1997).

Total Atlantic Trade                                          Average voyages per year equivalent; see appendix for details.                                                      See appendix for details.

Non-Atlantic Urbanization                                     Total urban population not in Atlantic cities divided by total population.                                          Urban population from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre (1988); total population from
                                                                                                                                                                                  McEvedy and Jones (1978); location from DK Publishing (1997).
Constraint on executive in 1800, 1850, 1960, 1970, 1990 and A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraints. Score of 1 indicates unlimited Polity IV dataset, downloaded from Inter-University Consortium for Political and
intervening years.                                          authority; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate limitations; score of 5 indicates substantial limitations; score of 7 Social Research. Variable described in Gurr 1997.
                                                            indicates executive parity or subordination. Scores of 2, 4, and 6 indicate intermediate values.


Constraint on executive from 1000 to 1800                     A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraints. Score of 1 indicates unlimited Coded by authors from Langer (1972); see appendix for more details.
                                                              authority; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate limitations; score of 5 indicates substantial limitations; score of 7
                                                              indicates executive parity or subordination. Scores of 2, 4, and 6 indicate intermediate values.


Protection for capital from 1000 to 1850.                     A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraints. Score of 1 indicates no          Coded by authors from Langer (1972); see appendix for more details.
                                                              protection; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate protection (e.g., city charters); score of 5 indicates substantial
                                                              protection (e.g., legislative representation for merchants); score of 7 indicates complete protection (e.g., merchants
                                                              control the executive.) Scores of 2, 4, and 6 indicate intermediate values.

Religion Variables                                            Majority religion of city or country.                                                                               Coded by authors from Langer (1972).



Roman heritage                                                Coded equal to one for countries that were part of the Roman empire and not subsequently part of the Ottoman        Coded by authors from Langer (1972).
                                                              empire.

Wars per year                                                 Number of years of war in preceding 50 or 100 years. Civil wars and colonial wars outside Europe are excluded.      Coded by authors from Kohn (1999)



Latitude                                                      Absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values between 0 and 1, where 0 is the equator.       Country data from La Porta et al (1999). City data from Bairoch, Batou and Chevre
                                                                                                                                                                                  (1988).
                          Appendix Table 2
                              Key Data
                                 GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country    Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Albania    1000           0.00          .      1            1
Albania    1100                         .      1            1
Albania    1200          12.50          .      1            1
Albania    1300          12.50          .      1            1
Albania    1400           1.00          .      1            1
Albania    1500           2.50        462      1            1
Albania    1600          21.00        516      1            1
Albania    1700          15.33        566      1            1
Albania    1750           8.00          .      1            1
Albania    1800          28.00        636      1            1
Albania    1850          21.80        871      1            1
Austria    1000           0.00          .      1            1
Austria    1100                         .      1            1
Austria    1200           0.96          .      1            1
Austria    1300           1.30          .      1            1
Austria    1400           2.16          .      1            1
Austria    1500           3.15        707      1            1
Austria    1600           4.52        837      1            1
Austria    1700           7.40        993      1            1
Austria    1750           9.85          .      1            1
Austria    1800          12.73       1218      1            1
Austria    1850          15.75       1863      1            1
Belgium    1000           8.25          .      3            3
Belgium    1100                         .      3            3
Belgium    1200          15.67          .      3            3
Belgium    1300          17.04          .      3            3
Belgium    1400          48.13          .      3            3
Belgium    1500          30.08        875      3            3
Belgium    1600          22.80        976      2            2
Belgium    1700          29.77       1144      2            2
Belgium    1750          23.02          .      2            2
Belgium    1800          22.80       1319      4            4
Belgium    1850          25.38       2697      5            5
Bulgaria   1000           8.75          .      1            1
Bulgaria   1100                         .      1            1
Bulgaria   1200           5.79          .      1            1
Bulgaria   1300          14.20          .      1            1
Bulgaria   1400           5.07          .      1            1
Bulgaria   1500          12.13        462      1            1
Bulgaria   1600           8.24        516      1            1
Bulgaria   1700          10.08        566      1            1
Bulgaria   1750           8.94          .      1            1
Bulgaria   1800          14.25        636      1            1
Bulgaria   1850          13.48        871      1            1
China      1000           2.50          .      .            .
China      1100                         .      .            .
                                     GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country        Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
China          1200           1.40          .      .            .
China          1300           2.40          .      .            .
China          1400           2.80          .      .            .
China          1500           2.20        600      .            .
China          1600           1.80        600      .            .
China          1700           1.90        600      .            .
China          1750           1.80          .      .            .
China          1800           1.60        600      .            .
China          1850           1.50        530      .            .
Czech Republ   1000           0.80          .      1            1
Czech Republ   1100                         .      1            1
Czech Republ   1200           0.50          .      1            1
Czech Republ   1300           3.70          .      2            1
Czech Republ   1400           4.84          .      2            1
Czech Republ   1500           4.60        707      2            1
Czech Republ   1600           3.44        837      2            1
Czech Republ   1700           3.67        993      1            1
Czech Republ   1750           3.58          .      1            1
Czech Republ   1800           4.86       1218      1            1
Czech Republ   1850           4.17       1863      1            1
Denmark        1000           0.00          .      1            1
Denmark        1100                         .      1            1
Denmark        1200           0.00          .      1            1
Denmark        1300           0.00          .      3            1
Denmark        1400           1.80          .      2            1
Denmark        1500           2.17        738      2            1
Denmark        1600          10.57        875      1            1
Denmark        1700          10.75       1039      2            2
Denmark        1750          12.00          .      2            2
Denmark        1800          13.50       1274      1            1
Denmark        1850          12.53       2003      5            5
England        1000           5.71          .      1            1
England        1100                         .      1            1
England        1200           2.39          .      1            1
England        1300           4.49          .      3            2
England        1400           5.17          .      3            2
England        1500           6.42        762      2            2
England        1600           9.92       1043      3            3
England        1700          17.16       1405      5            5
England        1750          18.80          .      6            6
England        1800          28.80       1931      7            7
England        1850          39.03       3487      7            7
Finland        1000           0.00          .      1            1
Finland        1100                         .      1            1
Finland        1200           0.00          .      1            1
Finland        1300           0.00          .      1            1
Finland        1400           1.00          .      1            1
Finland        1500           2.00        453      1            1
                                GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country   Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Finland   1600           3.00        538      1            1
Finland   1700           3.33        638      1            1
Finland   1750           2.36          .      1            1
Finland   1800           3.38        781      1            1
Finland   1850           4.20       1140      1            1
France    1000           3.92          .      1            1
France    1100                         .      1            1
France    1200           5.53          .      3            1
France    1300           6.94          .      2            1
France    1400           8.07          .      2            1
France    1500           7.60        727      2            1
France    1600           7.80        841      1            1
France    1700          10.98        986      1            1
France    1750          12.07          .      1            1
France    1800          13.96       1230      4            5
France    1850          16.71       1876      5            5
Germany   1000           5.97          .      1            1
Germany   1100                         .      1            1
Germany   1200           4.67          .      1            1
Germany   1300           6.97          .      1            1
Germany   1400           8.17          .      1            1
Germany   1500           8.60        676      1            1
Germany   1600           8.95        777      1            1
Germany   1700           7.58        894      1            1
Germany   1750          10.08          .      1            1
Germany   1800          12.86       1058      1            1
Germany   1850          14.09       1821      1            1
Greece    1000           5.50          .      1            1
Greece    1100                         .      1            1
Greece    1200           2.59          .      1            1
Greece    1300          10.08          .      1            1
Greece    1400           9.10          .      1            1
Greece    1500           3.50        462      1            1
Greece    1600           5.53        516      1            1
Greece    1700           4.00        566      1            1
Greece    1750           3.62          .      1            1
Greece    1800          12.89        636      1            1
Greece    1850           9.10        871      1            1
Hungary   1000           0.40          .      1            1
Hungary   1100                         .      1            1
Hungary   1200           0.00          .      2            1
Hungary   1300           0.56          .      2            1
Hungary   1400           1.90          .      2            1
Hungary   1500           3.28        462      2            1
Hungary   1600           1.84        516      1            1
Hungary   1700           7.20        566      1            1
Hungary   1750          13.55          .      1            1
Hungary   1800          15.08        636      1            1
                                    GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country       Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Hungary       1850          20.73        871      1            1
India         1000           0.80          .      .            .
India         1100                         .      .            .
India         1200           0.80          .      .            .
India         1300           0.80          .      .            .
India         1400           1.20          .      .            .
India         1500           1.80        550      .            .
India         1600           1.90        550      .            .
India         1700           1.00        550      .            .
India         1750           1.50          .      .            .
India         1800           1.60        533      .            .
India         1850           2.10        533      .            .
Ireland       1000           6.33          .      1            1
Ireland       1100                         .      1            1
Ireland       1200           4.00          .      1            1
Ireland       1300           7.63          .      3            2
Ireland       1400           2.50          .      3            2
Ireland       1500           2.38        526      2            2
Ireland       1600           1.36        615      2            2
Ireland       1700           5.00        715      4            4
Ireland       1750           8.50          .      5            5
Ireland       1800           9.83        839      6            6
Ireland       1850          10.77       1775      6            6
Italy         1000          12.26          .      1            1
Italy         1100                         .      3            3
Italy         1200          10.06          .      3            3
Italy         1300          16.15          .      3            3
Italy         1400          16.73          .      3            3
Italy         1500          15.82       1100      3            3
Italy         1600          23.77       1100      2            2
Italy         1700          21.53       1100      1            1
Italy         1750          21.03          .      1            1
Italy         1800          25.63       1117      1            1
Italy         1850          23.44       1499      1            1
Japan         1000           3.90          .      .            .
Japan         1100                         .      .            .
Japan         1200           3.70          .      .            .
Japan         1300           2.50          .      .            .
Japan         1400           1.50          .      .            .
Japan         1500           0.20        500      .            .
Japan         1600           4.80        520      .            .
Japan         1700           6.30        570      .            .
Japan         1750           6.20          .      .            .
Japan         1800           6.60        669      .            .
Japan         1850           6.10        737      .            .
Netherlands   1000           0.00          .      2            1
Netherlands   1100                         .      2            1
Netherlands   1200           2.00          .      2            2
                                    GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country       Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Netherlands   1300          12.00          .      3            3
Netherlands   1400          17.83          .      3            3
Netherlands   1500          28.89        754      3            3
Netherlands   1600          28.60       1368      5            5
Netherlands   1700          38.10       2110      5            5
Netherlands   1750          31.65          .      5            5
Netherlands   1800          39.55       1821      4            4
Netherlands   1850          35.23       2753      6            6
Norway        1000           0.00          .      1            1
Norway        1100                         .      1            1
Norway        1200           0.00          .      1            1
Norway        1300           3.00          .      1            1
Norway        1400           0.00          .      1            1
Norway        1500           2.00        640      1            1
Norway        1600           2.80        760      1            1
Norway        1700           4.50        900      1            1
Norway        1750           6.67          .      1            1
Norway        1800           7.00       1104      3            1
Norway        1850           7.67       1432      1            1
Poland        1000           0.00          .      1            1
Poland        1100                         .      2            1
Poland        1200           1.02          .      2            1
Poland        1300           0.94          .      3            1
Poland        1400           2.84          .      3            1
Poland        1500           4.43        462      3            1
Poland        1600           7.72        516      3            1
Poland        1700           3.30        566      3            1
Poland        1750           4.36          .      3            1
Poland        1800           5.51        636      1            1
Poland        1850           6.88        871      1            1
Portugal      1000           2.50          .      1            1
Portugal      1100                         .      1            1
Portugal      1200           5.00          .      1            1
Portugal      1300           6.88          .      1            1
Portugal      1400           8.11          .      2            1
Portugal      1500          16.64        632      1            1
Portugal      1600           9.25        773      2            2
Portugal      1700          12.10        854      2            2
Portugal      1750          19.64          .      2            2
Portugal      1800          18.69        963      2            2
Portugal      1850          15.89        997      3            3
Romania       1000           2.00          .      1            1
Romania       1100              .          .      1            1
Romania       1200           2.00          .      1            1
Romania       1300           3.67          .      1            1
Romania       1400           2.80          .      1            1
Romania       1500           4.65        462      1            1
Romania       1600           4.85        516      1            1
                                GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country   Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Romania   1700           5.72        566      1            1
Romania   1750           5.54          .      1            1
Romania   1800           5.05        636      1            1
Romania   1850           6.51        871      1            1
Russia    1000           3.80          .      1            1
Russia    1100                         .      1            1
Russia    1200           1.82          .      1            1
Russia    1300           4.23          .      1            1
Russia    1400           3.97          .      1            1
Russia    1500           2.91        500      1            1
Russia    1600           2.62        553      1            1
Russia    1700           2.46        611      1            1
Russia    1750           4.08          .      1            1
Russia    1800           6.29        689      1            1
Russia    1850           7.05        943      1            1
Serbia    1000           3.14          .      1            1
Serbia    1100                         .      1            1
Serbia    1200           0.00          .      1            1
Serbia    1300           2.58          .      1            1
Serbia    1400           3.53          .      1            1
Serbia    1500           4.98        462      1            1
Serbia    1600           7.49        516      1            1
Serbia    1700           6.00        566      1            1
Serbia    1750           3.87          .      1            1
Serbia    1800           7.77        636      1            1
Serbia    1850           6.08        871      1            1
Spain     1000          24.25          .      1            1
Spain     1100                         .      1            1
Spain     1200           6.96          .      2            1
Spain     1300          11.79          .      2            1
Spain     1400           9.98          .      2            2
Spain     1500          14.15        698      1            1
Spain     1600          20.95        900      1            1
Spain     1700          16.86        900      1            1
Spain     1750          17.08          .      1            1
Spain     1800          24.07       1063      2            2
Spain     1850          25.53       1376      4            4
Sweden    1000           0.00          .      1            1
Sweden    1100                         .      1            1
Sweden    1200           0.45          .      1            1
Sweden    1300           1.63          .      1            1
Sweden    1400           3.29          .      1            1
Sweden    1500           4.25        695      2            1
Sweden    1600           4.10        824      2            1
Sweden    1700           6.80        977      3            2
Sweden    1750           6.90          .      3            2
Sweden    1800           6.56       1198      3            3
Sweden    1850           6.86       1664      3            3
                                    GDP per  Constraint Protection for
Country       Date   Urbanization    capita on Executive    Capital
Switzerland   1000           0.33          .      1            1
Switzerland   1100                         .      1            1
Switzerland   1200           2.40          .      1            1
Switzerland   1300           2.38          .      2            2
Switzerland   1400           8.50          .      2            2
Switzerland   1500           6.63        742      2            2
Switzerland   1600           5.20        880      3            3
Switzerland   1700           6.48       1044      3            3
Switzerland   1750           8.13          .      4            4
Switzerland   1800           7.89       1280      5            5
Switzerland   1850          12.96       2202      7            7
Turkey        1000           6.20          .      1            1
Turkey        1100              .          .      1            1
Turkey        1200           4.50          .      1            1
Turkey        1300           3.00          .      1            1
Turkey        1400           4.80          .      1            1
Turkey        1500           5.90        572      1            1
Turkey        1600          12.00        575      1            1
Turkey        1700          12.20        571      1            1
Turkey        1750          10.40          .      1            1
Turkey        1800           9.10        575      1            1
Turkey        1850          10.10        543      1            1

Czech republic represents Czechoslovakia.   Serbia represents former
Yugoslavia.
                                                                                       Appendix Table 3
                                                                Atlantic Trade, Urbanization, and GDP: Alternative Trade Series
                                                                                Panel A: Dependent variable is urbanization, structured specification
                                                                                                              Panel, 1300-                   Panel, 1300-                                          Panel, 1300-
                                                                               Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1000-       1850,        Panel, 1300- 1850, without          Panel, 1300-    Panel, 1000-        1850,        Panel, 1300-
                                         Panel, 1300-1850 Panel, 1000-1850        1850           1850         unweighted     1850, with Asia   Britain               1850            1850          unweighted         1850

                                              (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)              (8)             (9)             (10)            (11)
                                                                                                                                         Atlantic Trade is measured by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Average pop. in
                                                                                                         Atlantic trader dummy                                            Atlantic coastline-to- land area         Atlantic ports



p-value for Western Europe x                [0.00]            [0.00]            [0.43]         [0.08]          [0.83]            [0.00]           [0.10]            [0.17]          [0.03]           [0.81]          [0.17]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x                                                                0.011          0.0085          0.016           0.011             0.005               0.74            0.64             0.62            0.36
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                             (0.0023)       (0.0019)        (0.0033)        (0.0028)          (0.0017)            (0.07)          (0.06)           (0.11)          (0.04)

R-Squared                                    0.87             0.85               0.89           0.87            0.81              0.84             0.92             0.93             0.91             0.82           0.92
Number of Observations                        192              240                192            240             192               208              184              192             240               192            192

                                                                             Panel B: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita, structured specification
                                                                                                              Panel, 1500-                   Panel, 1500-                                          Panel, 1500-
                                                                               Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-       1820,        Panel, 1500- 1820, without          Panel, 1500-    Panel, 1500-        1820,        Panel, 1500-
                                         Panel, 1500-1820 Panel, 1500-1870        1820           1870         unweighted     1820, with Asia   Britain               1820            1870          unweighted         1820

                                              (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)              (8)             (9)             (10)            (11)
                                                                                                                                         Atlantic Trade is measured by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Average pop. in
                                                                                                         Atlantic trader dummy                                            Atlantic coastline-to- land area         Atlantic ports



p-value for Western Europe x                [0.44]            [0.05]            [0.91]         [0.51]          [0.14]            [0.01]           [0.87]            [0.98]          [0.64]           [0.23]          [0.98]
 year dummies, 1600-1850

Atlantic Trade x                                                                0.072          0.032           0.049              0.072           0.053              3.38            2.82             2.34           0.00
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                             (0.017)        (0.015)         (0.019)            (0.030)         (0.016)            (0.56)          (0.45)           (0.61)          0.00

R-Squared                                    0.94             0.94               0.96           0.95            0.96              0.92             0.96             0.96             0.96             0.96           0.96
Number of Observations                        96               120                96             120             96                104              92               96              120               96             96

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies; regressions are weighted unless otherwise stated. Weighted regressions
use total population in each year as weights, from McEvedy and Jones. In Panel A, dependent variable is level of urbanization (percent of population living in towns with
more than 5,000 population.) Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and urbanization in Asia is from Chandler. In Panel B, dependent variable is
log GDP per capita, from Maddison. We report results with three different measures of Atlantic trade: a dummy for whether a country was an Atlantic trader (one for
Britain, the Netherlands, France, Spain and Portugal; zero for all others) in columns 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7; the ratio of Atlantic coastline to land area, defining the Atlantic
broadly to include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and Norway (columns 8, 9, and 10); the average percentage population in Atlantic ports during 1300-1850 is
multiplied by 100 (column 11). Column 6 includes the available data on Asia (just for India and China) and column 7 drops Britain.
Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year, calculated from Williamson and O'Rourke, as described in the Appendix. For more detailed data
definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                 Appendix Table 4
                     Atlantic Trade, Urbanization, and GDP: Country-Specific Measures of Atlantic Trade

                                                           (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)

                                                                            Panel A: Dependent Variable is Urbanization
                                                                                                                     Panel, 1300-                Panel, 1300-
                                                                        Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1000-      1850,     Panel, 1300-  1850, without
                                                     Panel, 1300-1850      1850           1850           1850        unweighted 1850, with Asia    Britain

p-value for Western Europe x                            [0.00]           [0.00]         [0.43]         [0.13]         [0.86]        [0.00]         [0.05]
 year dummies, 1600-1850

Country-Specific Measure of Atlantic Trade x                                            0.0140         0.0130        0.0202         0.0142         0.0056
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                                     (0.0022)       (0.0020)       (0.0035)      (0.0027)       (0.0019)

R-Squared                                                 0.87            0.85            0.9           0.88           0.82          0.85           0.92
Number of Observations                                    192             240             192           240            192           208            184

                                                                        Panel B: Dependent Variable is Log GDP per capita
                                                                                                                     Panel, 1500-                Panel, 1500-
                                                                        Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-   Panel, 1500-      1820,     Panel, 1500-  1820, without
                                                     Panel, 1500-1820      1870           1820           1820        unweighted 1820, with Asia    Britain

p-value for Western Europe x                         [0.44]              [0.05]         [0.94]         [0.45]         [0.07]        [0.00]         [0.94]
year dummies, 1600-1850


Country-Specific Measure of Atlantic Trade x                                            0.055          0.057         0.061          0.055          0.041
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                                     (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.011)       (0.017)        (0.010)

R-Squared                                                 0.94            0.94           0.96           0.96           0.97          0.93           0.96
Number of Observations                                     96             120             96            120             96           104             92

                                                                 Panel C: Dependent Variable is Constraint on the Executive
                                                                        Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1300-   Panel, 1000-   1850, with    Panel, 1000-   Panel, 1000-
                                                     Panel, 1300-1850      1850           1850           1850           Asia          1850           1850

p-value for Western Europe x                         [0.00]              [0.00]         [0.00]         [0.00]         [0.00]        [0.00]         [0.00]
 year dummies, 1600-1850

Country-Specific Measure of Atlantic Trade x                                            0.480          0.470         0.324          0.481          0.430
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                                     (0.054)        (0.048)        (0.061)       (0.054)        (0.061)


R-Squared                                                 0.75            0.71           0.83           0.77           0.77           0.8           0.76
Number of Observations                                    192             240            192            240            216            192           184

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies, weighted by current population (apart
from column 5). Dependent variable is urbanization in Panel A, log GDP per capita in Panel B, and constraint on the executive in
Panel C. Western Europe dummies interacted with years (from 1600) are included in all columns, but only the joint test for
significance is reported to save space. Urbanization in Europe is from Bairoch, Batou and Chèvre, and urbanization in Asia is from
Bairoch. Log GDP per capita is from Maddison. Constraint on the executive is coded from Langer. The measure of Atlantic trade for
each country is max{0, log of country's Atlantic trade for that year}. Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year; in
this table this is different for each country. For data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                 Appendix Table 5
                                                        Atlantic Trade and Institutions: Alternative Measures of Institutions
                                                                                                                                                                                 Panel, 1300 to
                                                                                         Panel, 1300- Panel, 1300 to Panel, 1300 to                           Panel, 1300 to      1850, using
                                                                                            1850,           1850,       1850, controlling Panel, 1300 to 1850, using Atlantic Atlantic coast-area
                                         Panel, 1300-                      Panel, 1300- controlling for controlling for    for Roman      1850, controlling coast-area measure measure of Atlantic
                                            1850        Panel, 1300-1850      1850         religion          wars           heritage         for latitude    of Atlantic trade       trade

                                            (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)               (7)                (8)                 (9)
                                                                                  Panel A: Dependent Variable is Constraint on Executive
p-value for Western Europe x              [0.00]           [0.52]           [0.00]         [0.00]         [0.00]           [0.00]            [0.00]             [0.00]              [0.00]
 year dummies, 1600-1850
Atlantic Trade x 1500                                       -0.20                                                                                               -19.61
                                                           (0.45)                                                                                              (22.97)
Atlantic Trade x 1600                                       0.12                                                                                                11.79
                                                           (0.50)                                                                                              (22.97)
Atlantic Trade x 1700                                       0.30                                                                                                11.79
                                                           (0.46)                                                                                              (22.95)
Atlantic Trade x 1750                                       0.40                                                                                                79.53
                                                           (0.45)                                                                                              (20.82)
Atlantic Trade x 1800                                       2.25                                                                                                74.88
                                                           (0.42)                                                                                              (18.99)
Atlantic Trade x 1850                                       3.13                                                                                                68.54
                                                           (0.39)                                                                                              (17.16)
Atlantic Trade x                                                            0.44           0.48           0.44             0.55              0.45                                  12.25
Volume of Aggregate Atlantic Trade                                          (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.06)           (0.07)            (0.06)                                (2.31)

p-value for Protestant x year effect                                                       [0.00]
Wars per year in preceding century                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                          (0.20)
p-value for Roman Heritage x Year                                                                                          [0.00]
p-value for Latitude x Year                                                                                                                 [0.009]
R-Squared                                  0.73             0.85             0.80           0.84           0.80            0.85              0.83                0.79               0.77
Number of Observations                     192               192              192            192            176             192               192                 192                192
Standard errors are in parentheses. Weighted panel regressions with full set of country and year dummies. Weights are total population in each
country in each year, from McEvedy and Jones. Dependent variable is constraint on executive in columns, coded from Langer, as explained in the
Appendix; in this alternative coding of institutions, Ireland has a score of 1 in all years and Spain has a score of 2 in 1500 and 1600. All columns
use the Atlantic trader dummy (one for Britain, France, Spain, Portugal and the Netherlands; zero for all others) as the measure of Atlantic trade,
apart from columns 8 and 9 which use the ratio of Atlantic coastline (broadly defined to include Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and Norway)
to land area. Total Atlantic Trade is the log average number of voyages per year. Protestant is a dummy for whether country was majority
Protestant in 1600. Protestant x Year is the Protestant dummy interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after. Wars per year are for the
preceding century through 1700, 1700-1750 for 1750, 1750-1800 for 1800 and 1800-1850 for 1850. Roman heritage is dummy for whether country
was in Roman empire and not subsequently in Ottoman empire; this is interacted with year dummies for 1600 and after.
Latitude is distance from the equator for capital city of this country today; this is interacted with year for 1600 and after. For more detailed data
definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                              Figure 1A
                                 Urbanization rates
                               weighted by population

25




20




15




10




 5




 0
     1300   1400       1500         1600         1700       1750          1800   1850




                   Western Europe          Eastern Europe          Asia
                          Figure 1B
                              Urbanization rates
                            weighted by population


30


25


20


15


10


 5


 0
     1300   1400   1500        1600           1700    1750   1800   1850




                    Atlantic traders
                    Western Europe not Atlantic traders
                    Eastern Europe
                               Figure 2A
                               GDP per capita from 1500
                                weighted by population




2500



2000



1500



1000



 500



   0
       1500            1600                 1700                1820   1870




              Western Europe                       Eastern Europe      Asia
                                 Figure 2B
                                   GDP per capita from 1500
                                    weighted by population


2500



2000



1500



1000



 500



   0
         1500             1600                 1700                1820             1870




       Atlantic traders      Western Europe not Atlantic traders          Eastern Europe
                                                   Figure 3
             Voyages per year: Atlantic Trade (to Americas, African coast and Asia via Cape), and Mediterranean
                                                    (W.Europe to Levant)

900


800


700


600


500


400


300


200


100


  0
      1300                 1400             1500              1600              1700             1750             1800




                                          Atlantic voyages per year
                                          Mediterranean voyages per year
                                                  Figure 4
             Average of log city population in Atlantic ports, West European cities that are not Atlantic ports, and
                                                Eastern Europe (balanced panel)

 5

4.5

 4

3.5

 3

2.5

 2

1.5

  1

0.5

 0
      1300               1400            1500           1600            1700           1750            1800            1850




         West European cities                                  Atlantic ports                  East European cities
                                                  Figure 5
             Average of log population in Atlantic ports, Mediterranean ports, and West European cities that are
                                                  not ports (balanced panel)
 5

4.5

 4

3.5

 3

2.5

 2

1.5

  1

0.5

 0
      1300               1400           1500           1600           1700           1750           1800           1850




              Inland West European cities                     Atlantic ports        Mediterranean ports
                                        Figure 6
                    Average of log population in Iberian Atlantic ports and other cities
                                            (balanced panel)
 5

4.5

 4

3.5

 3

2.5

 2

1.5

  1

0.5

 0
      1300   1400             1500            1600           1700            1750          1800   1850



                          Iberian cities, not Atlantic ports
                          Iberian Atlantic ports
                          Inland West European cities
                                     Figure 7
           Average of log population in British and Dutch Atlantic ports and other cities
                                         (balanced panel)
6


5



4



3


2


1



0
    1300   1400           1500           1600            1700           1750            1800   1850



                    Inland West European cities
                    British and Dutch Atlantic ports
                    British and Dutch cities, not Atlantic ports
                                      Figure 8
                              Constraint on the Executive from 1300 to 1850
6
                                          weighted by population

5



4



3



2



1



0
    1300       1400    1500               1600            1700            1750   1800      1850




    Atlantic traders    Western Europe not Atlantic traders                      Eastern Europe
