NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LAW AND FINANCE:
WHY DOES LEGAL ORIGIN MATTER?
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9379
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9379
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

We thank Pam Gill for excellent research assistance. We thank without implicating Daron Acemoglu, Maria
Carkovic, Simeon Djankov, Tim Guinnane, Simon Johnson, Paul Mahoney, Richard Messick, Jean-Laurent
Rosenthal, Andrei Shleifer, and two anonymous referees. Parts of this paper were originally part of a working
paper titled “Law, Politics, and Finance,” which was a background paper for the 2002 World Development
Report. This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Law and Finance: Why Does Legal Origin Matter?
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9379
December 2002
JEL No. G2, K2, K4, O16, P5
ABSTRACT
New research suggests that cross-country differences in legal origin help explain differences
in financial development. This paper empirically assesses two theories of why legal origin influences
financial development. First, the “political” channel stresses that (i) legal traditions differ in the
priority they give to the rights of individual investors vis-à-vis the state and (ii) this has
repercussions for the development of property rights and financial markets. Second, the
“adaptability” channel holds that (i) legal traditions differ in their ability to adjust to changing
commercial circumstances and (ii) legal systems that adapt quickly to minimize the gap between the
contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities will foster financial
development more effectively than would more rigid legal traditions. We use historical comparisons
and cross-country regressions to assess the validity of these two channels. We find that legal origin
matters for financial development because legal traditions differ in their ability to adapt efficiently
to evolving economic conditions.
Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org

Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
World Bank
Washington, DC
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org

Ross Levine
Carlson School
of Management
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1

1. Introduction
A growing body of work suggests that cross-country differences in legal origin help explain
cross-country differences in financial development. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998, henceforth LLSV) show that whether a country’s Commercial/Company law is based on
British, French, German, or Scandinavian legal origins is important for explaining the country’s laws
on creditor rights, shareholder rights, and private property rights as well as the country’s level of
bank and stock market development. Subsequent research relates legal institutions to corporate
valuations and ownership concentration (LLSV, 2002a; Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Love, 2002),
firm’s debt maturity structure, access to external finance and growth (Demirguc-Kunt and
Maksimovic, 1998, 1999), cross-firm and cross-industry capital allocation (Wurgler, 2000; Beck and
Levine, 2002; Claessens and Laeven, 2003), the informational efficiency of stock prices (Morck,
Yeung, and Yu, 2000), and financial fragility (Johnson, et al., 2000). Furthermore, Levine (1998,
1999) traces the effect of legal origin on financial development through to long-run economic growth,
suggesting that legal origin influences economic growth by shaping national financial systems.
While LLSV and others show that legal origin explains financial development, the profession
has not empirically explained why legal origin matters. North (1988), for instance, argues that
Britain has better institutions than France does. According to this view, British colonies are likely to
inherit better institutions than French colonies with positive ramifications on financial development.
Thus, legal origin may proxy for institutions that are not fundamentally related to the legal system.
Similarly, Stulz and Williamson (2003) note that British origin countries are primarily Protestant,
while French origin countries are overwhelmingly Catholic. They argue that legal origin proxies for
religious and cultural differences that influence financial development and that differences in legal
tradition, per se, are not crucial for explaining current levels of financial development. Beck,

2

Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2003), however, show that legal origin remains robustly linked with
financial development when controlling for religious composition and other national characteristics.1
While legal origin is robustly linked with financial development, the literature has not shown the
channels via which legal origin shapes finance. Consequently, this paper (1) discusses and
empirically assesses two theories of why legal origin matters for financial development and (2)
assesses whether legal origin explains financial development only through these two channels.
Legal theories emphasize two inter-related channels through which legal origin influences
finance. First, the “political” channel contends that (a) legal traditions differ in terms of the priority
they attach to private property rights versus the rights of the State and (b) the protection of private
contracting rights forms the basis of financial development (LLSV, 1999). According to this view,
the English common law evolved to protect private property owners against the crown. This
facilitated the ability of private property owners to transact confidently, with positive repercussions
on financial development (North and Weingast, 1989). In contrast, the political channel holds that
the French and German civil codes in the 19th century were constructed to solidify State power by
placing the “prince above the law” (Hayek, 1960, 166-7).2 Over time, State dominance of the
judiciary produced legal traditions that focus more on the power of the State and less on the rights of
individual investors [Mahoney, 2001]. More generally, the political channel stresses that the civil
law tradition promotes the development of institutions that advance State power with adverse
implications on financial development. Thus, the political channel highlights the degree to which the
State controls the judiciary and emphasizes the difference between common and civil law countries.
Second, the “adaptability” channel stresses that (a) legal traditions differ in their ability to
evolve with changing conditions (Hayek, 1960) and (b) legal traditions that adapt efficiently to
minimize the gap between the contracting needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities

3

will more effectively foster financial development than more rigid systems (Merryman, 1985). An
influential, though not unanimous, strand of the comparative law literature holds that the Common
law evolves efficiently as judges respond case-by-case to unforeseen and changing conditions
(Posner, 1973).3 Several scholars argue that since the Common law grants substantial discretion to
judges, inefficient laws are challenged in the courts and through repeated litigation efficient rules
replace inefficient ones.4 These authors suggest that legal systems that (i) reject jurisprudence – the
law created by judges in the process of solving disputes – and (ii) rely instead on changes in statutory
law will tend to evolve more inefficiently with negative implications for finance.
In a corollary to the adaptability view, Dawson (1968) and Merryman (1996) advance the
“French Deviation” view, which distinguishes many French law countries from France and German
law countries. According to this view, the French Revolution sought to change French law radically
by eliminating jurisprudence. Under Napoleonic legal doctrine, judges simply apply the law; judges
do not interpret the law, the principle of stare decisis is rejected (Merryman, 1996, 111-112).
Dawson (1968) and Merryman (1985, 1996) consider this a radical deviation because prior to the
Revolution, jurisprudence was an important source of French law. Since Napoleonic legal doctrine
did not work well in practice and conflicted with France’s long legal history, the French courts
circumvented the doctrine. “What the judges actually did, however, was build a body of law based to
some extent on earlier French law, nourished by French legal scholarship, but built largely through
their own decisions” (Merryman, 1996, 113). Unfortunately for French colonies, “…when the
French exported their system they did not include the information that it really does not work that
way, and they failed to include a blueprint of how it actually does work” (Merryman, 1996, 116).
Thus, unlike France, many French civil law colonies have been unable to shake off the shackles of
the Napoleonic doctrine. Critically, Germany explicitly rejected the French deviation. Building on

4

Savigny’s vision of legal science, Germany accepted the need for jurisprudence and sought to create
a responsive legal doctrine. Adopters of the German code, therefore, obtained a legal system
specifically designed to evolve with changing conditions. According to this corollary, many French
civil law countries will have more rigid legal systems and therefore support financial development
less effectively than German civil law countries, Common law countries, and France itself.
While the political and adaptability channels are inter-related parts of the law and finance
theory and while they both predict that legal origin shapes financial development, they emphasize
different mechanisms. The political channel focuses on the power of the State. Legal traditions that
strengthen the power of the State relative to private property rights tend to hinder the development of
free, competitive financial markets. In contrast, the adaptability channel focuses on the process of
law making. Legal traditions that efficiently adapt to changing conditions, by eliminating inefficient
laws and creating more efficient ones, support financial development to a greater degree than more
rigid legal systems. Of course, legal origin may operate through both channels; the political and
adaptability channels are not mutually exclusive. We empirically assess the importance of each
channel in accounting for cross-country differences in financial development.
Although there are differences between the political and adaptability channels, they are interconnected parts of the law and finance approach to financial development and it may not be feasible
to distinguish fully between these two mechanisms. Specifically, the political channel focuses on the
power of the State while the adaptability channel highlights differences in the ability of legal systems
to evolve with changing conditions. Jurisprudence, however, may be much less likely in a system
where the State controls the judiciary than in a system where the judiciary enjoys greater
independence (Damaska, 1986; Glaeser and Shleifer, 2002). This may lead to skepticism regarding
the ability to distinguish the independent effects of the political and adaptability channels. Moreover,

5

since we only have imperfect empirical proxies of State control of the judiciary and legal system
adaptability, this aggravates the identification problem. While recognizing these barriers to assessing
the comparative roles of the political and adaptability channels, we continue with our investigation
using the best available data.
This paper is related to recent research on the operation and evolution of legal systems. La
Porta et al. (2002b) shows that the independence of the judiciary and jurisprudence are closely
associated with economic freedom. We, however, focus on the channels through which legal origin
influences finance. In related work, Pistor et al. (2000, 2003) and Keinan (2000) provide detailed
comparisons of the evolution of statutory corporate law and the law on secured transactions in key
countries. In contrast, our paper uses broad cross-country regressions to assess whether legal
tradition shapes finance primarily by affecting the power of the State relative to the judiciary or
primarily by influencing the adaptability of the law to evolving conditions. Finally, Djankov et al.
(2003) collects detailed data on the operation of legal systems. They examine the link between legal
origin and the operation of legal systems and assess the association between the operation of legal
systems and corruption. We exploit data constructed by La Porta et al. (2000b) and Djankov et al.
(2003) to form proxies of (i) the power of the State over the judiciary and (ii) the degree of legal
system adaptability and then study whether legal origin influences finance through the political and
adaptability channels. Specifically, we use legal origin dummy variables as instrumental variables,
compute the exogenous component of State control over the judiciary and legal system adaptability,
and assess through which channel legal origin influences financial development.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Based on the comparative law literature,
section 2 discusses the political and adaptability channels. Section 3 describes the data and section 4
presents the results from cross-country regressions. Section 5 concludes.

6

2. The Political and Adaptability Channels of the Law and Finance Theory
2.1. The Political Channel: Historical Background
In the sixth century, Emperor Justinian had Roman law compiled. Hayek (1960) notes that
the Justinian texts represent an important break with Roman law. While Roman law placed the law
above all individuals, the Justinian texts place the emperor above the law.
From the 1400s, France’s legal system progressed as a regionally diverse mélange of
customary law, Justinian’s legal texts, and judicial decisions. Further, by the 18th century, the
judiciary’s reputation had deteriorated as the monarch sold judgeships to rich families. These
families used their control of the courts to impede progressive reform and support their own interests.
Unsurprisingly, the French Revolution turned its fury on the judiciary and moved to eliminate
the role of the judge in making and interpreting the law. Robespierre even argued that, “the word
jurisprudence … must be effaced from our language.” (Dawson, 1968, p. 426). France sought liberty
and progressive reform by creating a strong legislature and by limiting judicial independence.
Consequently, in codifying the Code, Napoleon – like Justinian – (a) unified regional legal systems
and (b) placed the State above the courts. Thus, codification supported the unification and
strengthening of the government and relegated judges to a relatively minor bureaucratic role.
Like Napoleon, Bismarck unified Germany and its legal systems through codification.
Although Bavaria and Prussia codified parts of the law during the 18th century, it was Bismarck’s
decision in 1873 to codify and unify the whole of private law in Germany that led to the adoption of
the German civil law in 1900. Thus, according to the political channel, Bismarck’s codification –
like Justinian and Napoleon before him – consolidated and strengthened the state.

7

The history of the English common law is very different. The English common law attained
its modern form in the tumultuous 16th and 17th centuries when Parliament and the English kings
battled for control of the country. The Crown attempted to reassert feudal prerogatives and sell
monopolies to raise revenues. Parliament (composed mostly of landowners and wealthy merchants),
together with the courts took the side of property owners. Ultimately, the Crown was unable to
reassert feudal privileges and its ability to grant monopolies was also severely restricted. The courts
asserted that the law is king and limited the Crown’s discretion to alter property rights. Thus, in
comparison with France during the 16th and 17th centuries, the English common law was a source of
liberty and a champion of private property rights.
2.2. The Political Channel
The political channel holds that (i) legal traditions differ in their emphasis on the rights of
private property owners vis-à-vis the rights of the State and (ii) private property rights form the basis
of financial development. Thus, historically determined differences in legal origin help explain
existing differences in financial development (LLSV, 1998).
The political channel argues that the Civil law has tended to emphasize the rights of the State,
rather than private property rights, to a greater degree than the common law with adverse
implications for financial development. Indeed, LLSV (1999, 231-2) state that, “(A) civil legal
tradition, then, can be taken as a proxy for an intent to build institutions to further the power of the
State...” A powerful State will tend to create policies and institutions that divert the flow of society’s
resources toward favored ends, which is antithetical to competitive financial markets. Furthermore, a
powerful State with a responsive civil law at its disposal will have difficulty credibly committing to
not interfere in financial markets, which will also hinder financial development.

8

In contrast, the political channel argues that the Common law historically stood on the side of
private property owners against the State. Rather than becoming a tool of the State, the Common law
has acted as a powerful counterbalance that has promoted private property rights. Thus, according to
the political channel, the common law’s comparative emphasis on private property rights relative to
the State tends to support financial development to a greater degree than the civil law.5
2.3. The Adaptability Channel: Historical Background
Not only did Justinian’s codification break with the Roman law tradition by placing the
emperor above the law; Justinian also broke with the Roman law tradition by attempting to eliminate
jurisprudence. Roman law had evolved from a law for a small community of farmers to support the
needs of an imperial city through piecemeal case-made law over many centuries. Justinian attempted
to change this doctrine and “… asserted for himself a monopoly, not only over all law-making power,
but over legal interpretation.” (Dawson, 1968, p. 122) Nevertheless, this “Justinian deviation” did
not take root; jurisprudence continued to shape the law. Thus, an essential attribute of Europe’s legal
tradition, including that in Germany and pre-Revolutionary France, is that it is dynamic, unfinished,
and changing (Dawson, 1960; 1968).
In pre-Revolutionary France, judge-made law was an important source of law. Clearly courts
must have weighed and debated the appropriate application of conflicting Roman law, customary
law, and case law as new circumstances and cases emerged. Yet, from the 14th century onward,
judicial deliberations occurred in comparative secrecy. Historically and still today, French courts
give remarkably cryptic explanations of their decisions when compared to German or British courts
(Dawson, 1968, p. 286-311).
As noted above, the French Revolution sought to make the law judge-free (Merryman, 1996).
The theory underlying the French legal doctrine is that the legislature drafts laws without gaps, so

9

judges do not make law by deciding cases. The theory is that the legislature does not draft conflicting
laws, so judges do not make law by choosing among competing statutes. The theory is that the
legislature provides clear laws, so judges do not make law by giving practical meaning to ambiguous
laws. The theory is that judges play a mechanical role. Like Justinian, Napoleon sought a code that
was so clear, complete, and coherent that there would be no need for judges to deliberate publicly
about which laws, customs, and past experiences apply to new situations.
While Revolutionaries sought to eliminate jurisprudence, Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that
the French have found ways to circumvent many of the inefficient qualities of the Napoleonic
doctrine over the last two centuries. Indeed, the lead draftsmen of the Code recognized that the
legislature could not draft complete, fully consistent, and comprehensive codes. Practitioners
recognized that the legislature could not revise the Code sufficiently rapidly to handle efficiently the
myriad of changing problems that arise in a dynamic nation. Consequently, in contrast to doctrine,
the French courts eventually built an entire body of tort law on the basis of Article 1382 of the Code
Napoleon that states that one whose act injures another must compensate that person. In contrast to
doctrine, French courts have recently used case law to recast the law of unjust enrichment, alter the
law on obligations, re-work the law of contract regarding gifts, and change the system of
administrative law (Dawson, 1968, 400-415). Thus, Merryman (1985, 1996) argues that the
Napoleonic doctrine is a “deviation” from two thousand years of legal tradition built on jurisprudence
and judicial discretion.
According to Merryman (1996), however, the exportation of the Napoleonic doctrine has
crippled the judicial systems of many French Civil code colonies and reduced the probability that
they would develop efficiently adaptive legal systems. There are four inter-related reasons for this
assertion. First, the French, unlike the English, rigidly imposed the Code Civil in its colonies even

10

though there were – and remain -- serious conflicts between the Code and local laws (ZK, 1998, 10913; henceforth ZK).6 Tensions between local law and the transferred doctrine may impede the
efficient development and application of the law.7 Second, when the French instilled the Code, they
brought the theory of the Napoleonic doctrine with its antagonism toward judges, jurisprudence, and
judicial discretion. They did not also bring the practical knowledge of how to circumvent some of
the negative attributes of the Code and reinstall an efficient role for judges. Third, given the
Napoleonic doctrine, judges “… are at the bottom of the scale of prestige among the legal professions
in France and in many nations that adopted the French Revolutionary reforms, and the best people in
those nations accordingly seek other legal careers” (Merryman, 1996, p. 116). Consequently, it is
more difficult to develop efficiently responsive legal systems if the courts do not attract the best
minds. Fourth, France has a long history of avoiding open disputes about legal interpretation
(Dawson, 1968). Moreover, Napoleonic doctrine formally inhibits open disputations by judges on
how they weigh competing statutes, ambiguous laws, and past court decisions in deciding new cases.
The exportation of this characteristic to French Civil code colonies, i.e., the absence of a legal culture
of openly discussing the application of the law to evolving conditions, hindered the development of
efficient legal systems around the world according to this view. In sum, many argue that French
Civil code colonies inherited a restrictive legal doctrine under particular conditions that enhance the
probability that their legal system will be less flexible than Common and German civil law countries.
The comparative law literature notes that German legal history is very different from
France’s. Unlike in France, from the 16th century, German courts published comprehensive
deliberations that illustrated how courts weighed conflicting statutes, resolved ambiguities, and
tackled new situations (Dawson, 1968). Law faculties at universities worked directly with courts to
decide cases and then worked to rationalize reality with the logic of the Justinian texts. Through

11

active debate and interchange between scholars and practitioners, Germany developed a dynamic,
common fund of legal ideas that formed the basis for codification in the 19th century.
In contrast to the revolutionary zeal and antagonism toward judges that shaped the Napoleonic
Code, Germany explicitly rejected the static approach adopted by the French. Unlike the French
Code, the German Code “was not intended to abolish prior law and substitute a new legal system. On
the contrary, the idea was to codify those principles of German law that would emerge from careful
historical study of the German legal system.” (Merryman, 1985, p. 31) The German civil code
embraced the need for jurisprudence in creating a responsive, flexible legal system.
The English common law tradition is almost synonymous with judges having broad
interpretation powers and with courts molding and creating law as circumstances change. The
common law is obsessed with facts and deciding concrete cases, rather than adhering to the logical
principles of codified law. Thus, the popular dictum: “The life of the law has not been logic: it has
been experience.” (ZK, 1998, p. 181). Unlike the Napoleonic doctrine, judges continually – and as a
matter of general practice -- shape the law through their decisions.
2.4. The Adaptability Channel
The adaptability channel is built on two basic premises. First, to the extent that a legal system
adapts slowly, large gaps will appear between financial needs and the legal system’s ability to
support those needs. Second, the major legal traditions differ in terms of their ability to adapt to
changing financial circumstances.
According to the adaptability channel, legal systems that embrace case law and judicial
discretion tend to be more responsive to changing economic conditions than legal systems that rely
more strictly on judgments based purely on statutory law (Posner, 1973). Inefficient laws are
challenged in the courts and “... through the process of litigation and re-litigation inefficient rules will

12

be replaced by efficient rules” (Pistor et al., 60, 2000; See Rubin, 1977; Priest, 1977). In contrast,
legal systems that reject jurisprudence necessarily rely more on statutory law changes to modernize
and adapt the law. A large legal literature, however, argues that statutory law is slow and costly to
change, so that the absence of jurisprudence tends to hinder the efficiency with which laws adapt to
changing conditions (Bailey and Rubin, 1994).8
The adaptability channel predicts that French legal origin countries, albeit not necessarily
France itself, have a lower probability of having an efficiently flexible legal system than German
civil law and especially Common law countries.
The first and main argument focuses on jurisprudence and not adhering too rigidly to statutory
law. The adaptability channel holds that the Common law is inherently dynamic as it responds caseby-case to the changing needs of society. This limits the opportunities for large gaps to grow
between the demands of society and the law. In contrast, the Napoleonic doctrine’s distrust of judges
and jurisprudence has hindered the flexibility of the legal system in many French law countries, with
adverse implications on financial development. Furthermore, many legal scholars argue that the
German law falls close to the Common law in terms of adaptability since it rejected the Napoleonic
doctrine and instead maintained its historical roots in jurisprudence and judicial discretion. As noted,
Merryman (1985) argues that France did not adhere to its legal doctrine and instead re-instilled
jurisprudence. French Civil code colonies were not so lucky, however. When the French rigidly
imposed the Code, they imposed the Napoleonic doctrine and did not necessarily include a blueprint
of how it actually should work. According to this view, French civil law countries have a lower
probability of enjoying an efficiently flexible legal system than Common or German civil law
countries.

13

Two other characteristics of French law may also work to inhibit the efficient responsiveness
of the law to changing financial conditions, especially in former French Civil code colonies. First,
Dawson (1968) emphasizes that extensive deliberations about interpreting the law have been key
characteristics of German legal history and an inherent part of the Common law, but France has
historically exhibited a dislike of open judicial disputations. Furthermore, the Napoleonic doctrine
that was exported internationally prohibits these disputations. According to the adaptability channel,
legal cultures that discourage open deliberations about the applicability and interpretation of the law
will hinder the development of efficiently dynamic legal systems.
Second, Merryman (1996, p. 116) argues that the most powerful consequence of the
Napoleonic doctrine “… may have been to demean judges and the judicial functions.” According to
the Napoleonic doctrine, judges served a mainly clerical function. Thus, in France and French law
countries, recruiting practices, salaries, and prestige frequently reflect this perspective. According to
this view, the Napoleonic doctrine became self-fulfilling: the best minds chose other professions,
which hindered efficient legal flexibility. As a consequence, the legislature will have a tendency to
write “bright line laws” to limit the role of the courts. “Once this pattern of lawmaking has been
established, however, it is hard to change” (Pistor et al., 2000, 62). Courts will not be challenged to
develop legal procedures and methods to deal with emerging conditions. Thus, according to some
scholars, these characteristics of the French law have worked to retard the development of efficiently
adaptive legal systems that support financial development.
2.5 An Aside on France vs. Germany
Though not central to our analysis, some scholars emphasize the greater adaptability of the
German relative to French law beyond former French colonies.9 Consider for instance the
assignment of contracts. Roman law started from the position that personal rights could not be

14

transferred. Over the centuries, customary law in (what is now) Germany evolved to support a wide
range of financial assignments as transferability of financial claims became an important part of
commercial arrangements. Ultimately, the courts held that assignment was complete once the
assignor and assignee agreed. In both Germany and the United Kingdom, the principle of assignment
was developed by court decisions before it was codified into the German BGB (1900) and the UK’s
Judicature Act (1873). In French law, however, the assignment is only treated as complete if the
original debtor is notified, which has potentially negative implications for asset transferability. While
the French legislature has revised certain statutes to circumvent the obsolete rules contained in the
Code, the more flexible structure of the German and Common law allowed business to more
efficiently assign debts (ZK, 135; 442-455, 1998). A similar pattern of jurisprudence is found in the
law on contracts for the benefit of third parties, e.g., insurance contracts, annuity arrangements, etc.
(ZK, 456-469). Interestingly, the German courts used the law regarding third parties to fill gaps in
tort law during the twentieth century, which further illustrates the flexibility of German courts.
Similarly, it was the German courts, not the legislature that took the lead in affording protection
against unfair conditions of business during the 20th century. As noted by ZK (1998, 336), “What we
have here is judge-made law of the purest kind.” While typical in Common law courts and Germany,
some argue that this type of judge-made law would be considered more aberrant in a French system.
2.6. Differences between the Political and Adaptability Channels
The political and the adaptability channels make conflicting predictions. First, they provide
conflicting predictions regarding French versus German civil law countries. The political channel
holds that the Civil law tradition – both French and German – tends to centralize and intensify state
power and therefore takes a more wary stance toward the development of free financial systems than

15

the Common law. In contrast, the adaptability channel stresses that Common law and German civil
law countries have notably more adaptable legal traditions than French civil law countries.10
Second and more importantly for our purposes, the two channels make different predictions
concerning the mechanism through which legal systems influence the development of financial
markets. The political channel contends that State control of the judiciary produces a system that
focuses more on the power of the State and less on the private contracting rights of individual
investors than a legal system characterized by an independent judiciary. Thus, the political channel
stresses that cross-country differences in the independence of the judiciary are critical for explaining
cross-country differences in financial development. In contrast, the adaptability channel stresses that
cross-country differences in the flexibility of the law are critical for explaining cross-country
differences in financial development. We empirically assess these hypotheses below.

3. Data
We use cross-country analyses to assess the empirical validity of the political and adaptability
channels. We examine a sample of up to 115 countries with French Civil, German Civil,
Scandinavian Civil and British Common Law origins. Due to data limitations on the political and
adaptability indicators, however, the sample is reduced to 54 countries in some of the regressions.
Our data include origin countries, which raises the question of endogeneity. Berkowitz et al.
(2002) stress the difference between legal origin countries - U.K, U.S., France, Germany, Austria,
Switzerland and the five Scandinavian countries – which formed legal traditions, and the transplant
countries, which received the legal traditions. This is less of an issue in our analysis since the legal
origin variables are primarily used as instrumental variables and we use specification tests to assess

16

the validity of the instruments. Nevertheless, we have confirmed all of the results in the paper using
a smaller sample of countries that eliminates the eleven countries listed above.
To assess the political and adaptability channels empirically, we need indicators of financial
development, legal origin, State power over the judiciary, and the adaptability of a legal system. We
describe these variables in turn. Table 1 presents descriptive statistics and correlations.
3.1. Financial Development
To measure financial development, we use indicators of financial intermediary development,
stock market development, and the protection of property rights. There is no single, universally
accepted measure of financial development. As noted in Levine (1997), financial systems arise to
mitigate information and transaction costs and thereby enhance the allocation of capital. Different
types and combinations of information, enforcement, and transaction costs in conjunction with
different legal, regulatory, and tax systems have motivated distinct financial contracts, markets, and
intermediaries across countries and throughout history. Since there are different ways to organize
financial systems – sometimes through banks, sometimes through markets, sometimes through
private contracts – we use three alternative but complementary measures of financial development.
We use the same indicators as in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003).
Private Credit equals financial intermediary credits to the private sector divided by gross
domestic product (GDP) and is measured over the 1990-95 period. Private Credit excludes credit to
the public sector and cross claims of one group of intermediaries on another. It thus measures the
amount of savings that is channeled through debt-issuing financial intermediaries to private
borrowers. King and Levine (1993a,b) and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) show a strong
connection between measures of banking sector development and economic growth. The summary
statistics in Table 1 shows a wide variation in Private Credit, ranging from over 140% of GDP in the

17

United States, the Netherlands, Japan and Switzerland to less than 5% in Sudan, Ghana, Guinea,
Sierra Leone, Uganda, Angola, and Congo (Zaire).
Stock Market Development equals the total value of outstanding equity shares as a fraction
of GDP and is averaged over the 1990-95 period. This measures the overall size of the equity market
relative to the size of the economy. Levine and Zervos (1998) and Beck and Levine (2003) show that
stock market development is positively associated with economic growth even after controlling for
the level of banking sector development. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) note that equity
market transactions tend to rely more than banking institutions on well-functioning legal systems to
defend the rights of individual investors. From this perspective, we may expect to find a closer
connection between legal origin and stock market development than between legal origin and
banking sector development. While Malaysia has a market capitalization of 189% of GDP, there are
42 countries in our sample with no measurable stock market activity.
Property Rights is an index of the degree to which the government protects private property
and enforces laws that protect private property. The data are for 1997 and were obtained from LLSV
(1999) and the Index of Economic Freedom. While Private Credit and Stock Market Development are
direct measures of the size of financial intermediaries and equity markets, Property Rights measures a
key input into the efficient operation of financial contracts and the development of formal financial
institutions: the degree of protection of private property rights. The maximum value of Property
Rights is five, while one indicates the weakest property rights protection. Twenty-five countries have
the highest degree of property right protection, while three countries have little or no protection at all
(Property Rights equals one).

18

The correlation matrix in Table 1, Panel B shows that all three measures of financial
development are highly correlated with each other. The lowest correlation coefficient is 0.52 and the
correlations are significant at the 1 per cent level.
3.2. Legal Origin
Through occupation, colonization and imitation, the British, French and German legal origin
spread around the world. Napoleon made it a priority to secure the adoption of the Code in all
conquered territories, including Italy, Poland, the Low Countries, and the Habsburg Empire. Also,
France extended her legal influence to parts of the Near East, Northern and Sub-Saharan Africa,
Indochina, Oceania, French Guyana, and the French Caribbean islands during the colonial era.
Furthermore, the French Civil Code was a major influence on the Portuguese and Spanish legal
systems, which helped spread the French legal tradition to Central and South America. The British
exported the Common law through its colonies. The Austrian and Swiss civil codes were developed
at the same time as the German civil code and the three influenced each other heavily. The German
Civil Code was not imposed but exerted a big influence on China (and hence Taiwan),
Czechoslovakia, Greece, Hungary, Japan, Korea, and Yugoslavia.
We use data from LLSV (1998, 1999) that identifies legal origin of each country’s
Company/Commercial Law. Thus, the British Legal Origin dummy variable equals one if the
country adopted its Company/Commercial law from the British Common Law and zero otherwise. A
similar rule is followed for the other legal origin dummies. Our sample comprises 43 countries with
British Common Law, 61 countries with French Civil Law, six countries with German Civil Law and
five Scandinavian Civil Law countries. The correlation analysis indicates that countries with French
Civil Law have significantly lower levels of Private Credit, Stock Market Development and Property

19

Rights than countries with German, Scandinavian, or British legal origins. German legal origin
countries have higher levels of financial development.
3.3. Indicators of the Political Channel
Our two indicators of the relative power of the judiciary vis-à-vis the executive and legislature
are from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches, and Shleifer (2002b).
Tenure of Supreme Court Judges ranges from zero to two, increasing in the tenure of the
Supreme Court judges. If tenure is for less than six years, then this variable is coded as zero. If
tenure is between six years and lifelong, then the Tenure of Supreme Courts Judges variable is coded
as one. If Supreme Court judges have lifelong tenure, then the variable is coded as two. In a legal
system that grants tenure to Supreme Court judges, this increases the independence of the judiciary
relative to the State. According to the political channel, (a) Civil law countries are less likely to grant
tenure to judges than Common law countries and (b) larger values of Tenure of Supreme Court
Judges will be positively associated with financial development.
The correlations are not fully consistent with the political channel’s predictions (Table 1).
While countries with a British common law tradition are more likely to grant Supreme Court judges
longer tenure than French civil law countries, there is not a significant correlation between German
legal origin and the Tenure of Supreme Court judges. Furthermore, Tenure of Supreme Court Judges
is not significantly correlated with the financial development indicators.
Supreme Court Power combines the tenure of Supreme Court Judges with a dummy
variable indicating whether the Supreme Court has power over administrative cases, i.e. cases
involving the government. Thus, Supreme Court Power equals one if (1) Supreme Court Judges have
lifelong tenure and (2) the Supreme Courts has power over administrative cases and equals zero if
either of these two conditions does not hold. To the extent that the Supreme Court is independent of

20

the government as measured by lifelong tenure and has control over cases involving the government,
this represents greater judicial power relative to the State. The political channel predicts that Supreme
Court judges who have life-long tenure and power over administrative cases are more independent
from the State, with positive repercussions for financial and institutional development.
The correlations indicate that British legal origin countries have the highest levels of judicial
independence while French civil law countries have the lowest levels of Supreme Court Power.
There is not a significant relationship between German legal heritage and Supreme Courts Power.
Supreme Court Power is not significantly correlated with the financial development indicators.
3.4. Indicators of the Adaptability Channel
We use two variables indicating the extent to which judicial decisions are based (i) on
previous court decisions and (ii) on principles of equity rather than on statutory law.
Case Law (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches, and Shleifer, 2002b) is a dummy
variable that indicates whether judicial decisions are a source of law. The adaptability channel
predicts that (a) Common law and German civil law countries are more likely to admit judicial
decisions as a source of law than French civil law countries and (b) countries in which judicial
decision are a source of law will adapt more easily to changing economic and financial circumstances
and therefore have higher levels of financial development. Unsurprisingly, British common law
countries have high levels of Case Law, while French civil law countries tend not to include judicial
decisions as a source of law.
Legal Justification (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2003) indicates
whether judgments have to be based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. 11 Legal
Justification takes on values of 0, 0.33, 0.67, and 1, where higher values signify the legal system
imposes greater requirements that judgments be based on statutory law. Consistent with the

21

adaptability channel, many British Common law legal systems (e.g., Australia, Canada, Ghana, New
Zealand, Malaysia, United Kingdom, and United States) have comparatively low Legal Justification
requirements (e.g., values of 0 or 0.33), where practically all French civil law countries have Legal
Justification requirements of either 0.67 or 1. The adaptability channel predicts that higher values of
Legal Justification will be associated with lower levels of financial development.
The Table 1, Panel B correlations are broadly, though certainly not overwhelmingly,
consistent with the adaptability channel. Greater adaptability is measured by higher values of Case
Law, and lower values of Legal Justification. First, British legal origin countries have the most
adaptable legal systems and French legal origin countries have the least adaptable legal systems.
There is not a significant correlation between the German legal origin dummy and either of the
adaptability indicators. Second, the adaptability indicators are generally significantly correlated with
financial development. That is, greater adaptability is positively associated with financial
development. Third, as suggested in the Introduction, the adaptability indicators are significantly
correlated with the political power indicators.
3.5. Other Possible Determinants of Financial Development
To assess the robustness of our results, we include several other potential determinants of
financial development in our empirical analysis. Latitude equals the absolute value of the latitude of
the country to control for geographic endowments. We take the data from LLSV (1999). In previous
work (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003) we have shown that Latitude helps explain financial
development.12 Independence equals the fraction of years since 1776 that the country has been
independent. We include this since a longer period of independence may provide greater
opportunities for countries to develop institutions, policies, and regulations that are conducive to open
and competitive financial markets.

22

4. Cross-Country Regressions
This section presents the results from cross-country regressions to assess (1) the importance of
legal origin in explaining cross-country variance in financial development, (2) the ability of legal
origin to explain cross-country differences in the political and adaptability indicators, and (3) the
ability of the exogenous component of the political and the adaptability channels to account for crosscountry differences in financial development.
4.1. Legal Origin and Finance
The results in Table 2 show that distinguishing countries by legal origin helps explain crosscountry differences in financial intermediary development, stock market development, and the degree
of private property rights protection. This finding was first documented by LLSV (1998) and
recently confirmed with additional robustness checks (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003).
Even after controlling for geographic endowments and the length of national independence, the legal
origin dummies enter jointly significantly in all regressions at the 1%-level. Also, note that Latitude
and Independence both enter significantly and positively in most of the regressions.
The results also indicate that French legal origin countries, on average, have substantially
lower levels of financial development than German civil law and British common law countries. The
superscript “F” on the British legal origin dummy variable indicates that the British legal origin
dummy is significantly different from the French legal origin dummy. Similarly, the “B” on the
French legal origin dummy, indicates that the French dummy is significantly different from the
British Common law dummy, and so forth. As shown, the British legal origin dummy is always
significantly larger than the French dummy and the German dummy is significantly greater than the

23

French dummy in all regressions except one. In half of the regressions, the German and British legal
dummies are not statistically different from each other, while the German legal dummy is
significantly greater in the other three regressions. This occurs particularly when using the financial
development indicator most closely associated with bank development, Private Credit.
These findings are broadly consistent with the adaptability channel. Recall, the political
channel focuses on the difference between the Common law and the Civil law. Thus, the political
channel does not predict that German civil law countries will have higher levels of financial
development than French civil law countries. The adaptability channel focuses on the distinctly static
nature of the French civil law, relative to both the British common and German civil law traditions.
Thus, the adaptability channel is consistent with the finding the French civil law countries have
notably lower levels of financial development than the other legal families. These results, however,
do not reject the political channel since legal origin may operate through both channels.
4.2. Legal Origin and the Political and the Adaptability Channels
Table 3 assesses whether legal origin explains cross-country differences in the indicators that
we use to define the political and adaptability channels. Thus, we regress the proxies for the political
and adaptability channels on the legal origin dummy variables. There are four regressions: two
political channel indicators and two adaptability indicators. We report the F-tests of whether the
legal origin dummy variables significantly explain cross-country variation in the political and
adaptability indicators. We also report cross coefficient tests, as in Table 2, of whether the
coefficients on the legal dummies are significantly different from each other.
Legal origin helps explain cross-country variation in the political and adaptability indicators.
The F-test of the joint significance of the origin dummies indicates that legal origin enters all of the
regressions significantly at the 0.01 level.

24

Consistent with the law and finance theory, the Table 3 results indicate that British common
law countries have significantly greater judicial independence (i.e., less State control over the
judiciary) and significantly more adaptable legal systems than French legal origin countries.
Specifically, the tenure of Supreme Court judges and their ability to control administrative cases are
all, on average, greater in British common law countries. Similarly, the use of case law and the
ability to use equity rather than statutory law in making judgments are, on average, greater in British
common law countries.
The Table 3 results are broadly consistent with both the political and adaptability channels.
Consistent with the political channel, the civil law countries have significantly less tenure for
Supreme Court judges and significantly less judicial control over administrative cases than Common
law countries (see the political indicator regressions in Table 3 Panel A), i.e., consistent with the
political channel civil law countries tend to foster the power of the State vis-à-vis the judiciary.
Further, there are no significant differences between French and German Civil law countries.
Consistent with the adaptability channel, the main difference is between French civil law and
British common law countries, not between civil and common law per se. The coefficient on the
German legal origin dummy always lies between the French and British coefficients and is
significantly different from the French value in the case of Case Law. These results broadly confirm
the predictions of the adaptability channel that French civil law countries are less adaptable than both
Common and German Civil Law countries.
4.3 The Political Channel and Financial Development
Table 4 assesses the questions (a) does the exogenous component of the political indicators
explain financial development and (b) does legal origin explain financial development through some

25

other mechanisms besides the political channel. To make this assessment, we use two-stage least
squares regressions with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of the following form:
1st Stage:

Political Channel Indicator

= δ[3 Legal Origin Dummies]

+ γX + v

2nd Stage:

Financial Development

= α[Political Channel Indicator] + βX + u

X is a set of exogenous variables that are included in some of the second stage regressions. The error
terms in the first and second stage regressions are v and u, respectively. The three Legal Origin
Dummies are the instrumental variables. Thus, the coefficient on the Political Channel Indicator, α,
provides information on whether State power over the judiciary influences financial development
after controlling for potential endogeneity, thus providing the answer to our first question. The test of
the overidentifying restrictions (OIR) addresses the second question: Does legal origin explain
financial development through some other mechanisms besides the political channel? The null
hypothesis of the OIR test is that the legal origin dummies are not correlated with u.13 Thus, rejection
of the OIR test is a rejection of the view that the legal origin only explains financial development
through the political channel. For the case where the regressions include, X, i.e., the second-stage
includes Latitude and Independence, the OIR test becomes a general specification test of the validity
of the instruments. We include X to assess the robustness of the findings by controlling for other
potential exogenous determinants of financial development.
The results in Table 4 do not support the political channel. First, the indicators of the political
channel do not enter any of the regressions significantly. Second, the OIR-tests are rejected in all
regressions, suggesting that legal origin explains financial development through some mechanism
besides the political channel. While some may view these results as representing an indictment of the
political channel indicators, the legal origin dummies help explain cross-country differences in the

26

political channel indicators in a manner that is consistent with theory (Table 3), but the exogenous
component of the political channel does not explain finance.
4.4 The Adaptability Channel and Financial Development
Table 5 assesses the questions (a) does the exogenous component of the adaptability
indicators explain financial development and (b) does legal origin explain financial development
beyond the adaptability indicators. To make this assessment, we use the same two-stage least squares
methodology described above.
The results in Table 5 provide qualified support for the adaptability channel. First, the
adaptability indicators enter significantly and with the correct sign in 10 of the 12 regressions when
using a 0.05 significance level and in 11 when using a 0.06 significance level. Second, the OIR-test
is not rejected for any of the Stock Market Development regressions. This suggests that the legal
origin dummies do not explain financial market development beyond their ability to explain crosscountry variation in the legal adaptability indicators. Third, the results on Property Rights are mixed.
When controlling for Latitude and Independence, i.e., when controlling for other exogenous
determinants of financial development, the OIR test is not rejected at the 0.05 level. This again
suggests that legal origin does not explain property rights beyond the adaptability indicators.
However, the OIR test is rejected in the property rights regressions when we do not control for
Latitude and Independence. For the Private Credit regressions, the OIR test is always rejected,
suggesting that legal origin explains Private Credit beyond the adaptability indicator. Since we
believe (i) equity market development reflects securities market development more generally and (ii)
securities market development requires more support from the legal system than bank development,
we view these regressions as largely – though not without qualifications – consistent with the
adaptability channel.

27

4.5 The Political and Adaptability Channels and Financial Development
We now examine the political and adaptability channels simultaneously using an extended
version of the instrumental variable procedure described above. Specifically, we estimate the
following regression.
1st Stage: Political Indicator

= δ1[3 legal Origin Dummies] + γ1X + v1

1st Stage: Adaptability Indicator

= δ2[3 legal Origin Dummies] + γ2X + v2

2nd Stage: Financial Development = α1[Political Indicator] + α2[Adaptability Indicator] + βX + u

Thus, we assess whether the exogenous components of the Political Indicator and the
Adaptability Indicator explain financial development. Since there are two endogenous variables
(Political Indicator and Adaptability Indicator) and three instruments (the three legal origin dummy
variables), there is only one degree of freedom in the OIR test, i.e., the test of whether the instruments
explain financial development beyond their ability to explain the endogenous variables.
To check the robustness of the results discussed below, we experimented with including other
instrumental variables and various X-variables. Specifically, in the case when there are no included
exogenous variables (X is empty), we tried (a) using Latitude and Independence as instrumental
variables and (b) using Latitude and Independence as instrumental variables and also including three
variables measuring each country’s religious composition as instrumental variables (i.e., the
percentage of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a non-Protestant religion, so that Protestant
is the omitted category). We get even stronger results than those reported below. Furthermore, we
also included these additional instrumental variables in the second stage, i.e., we included them as Xvariables rather than as pure instruments. Again, we get even stronger results than those reported
below.
Table 6 is organized in the following manner. There are four combinations of Political and
Adaptability indicators for each financial development indicator. Thus, Table 6 reports the results of

28

12 regressions. It also reports the test of the over-identifying restrictions (OIR test), and the F-test
from the first-stage regressions. Table 6 is divided into three panels that report the Private Credit,
Stock Market Development, and Property Rights regressions respectively.
The Table 6 regressions suggest that (1) legal origin explains financial development through
the political and adaptability channels, and not through some third mechanism and (2) the evidence is
more consistent with the adaptability channel than the political channel. In none of the 12 regressions
is the OIR test rejected at the 10 percent level.

Thus, we do not reject the null hypothesis that legal

origin only explains financial development through the political and adaptability channels.14
In none of the 12 regressions does the political indicator enter significantly and with the sign
predicted by the political channel. Theory suggests that the political indicators should enter
positively. For instance, greater Tenure for Supreme Court Judges creates greater judicial
independence and greater support for private property vis-à-vis the State and greater support for the
private contractual arrangements underlying financial development. The political indicators
sometimes enter negatively and significantly. This may occur if the predicted components of the
political and adaptability channels are highly correlated. While we obtain the same results when
adding many additional instrumental variables as specified above, we interpret the Table 6 results
cautiously. Note these results do not imply that the political channel is in general unimportant.
Rather, this paper’s results are narrowly focused on assessing whether legal origin explains stock
market development, property rights, and financial intermediary development through the political or
adaptability channels.
The data support for the adaptability channel. The adaptability indicators always enter with
the correct sign. Moreover, they enter significantly (at the 0.05 significance level) in 10 of the 12

29

regressions. For example, Case Law is positively related with Private Credit, Stock Market
Development, and Property Right when controlling for either of the political channel indicators.
We not only find a statistically significant relation between the exogenous component of legal
adaptability and financial development, but also a large economic effect. Take the example of Case
Law. According to the regressions in Table 6, countries in which judicial decisions are a source of
law, have on average 130 percentage points higher levels of Private Credit and 52 percentage points
higher levels of stock market development. Further, property rights protection is rated at least 2.6
points higher – on a five-point scale – in countries with case law.15 This is more than three standard
deviations for Private Credit, more than two standard deviations for Property Rights and more than
one standard deviation for Stock Market Development.

30

5. Conclusions
While past work shows that legal origin helps explain financial development, this paper
examines the mechanisms via which legal origin operates. The law and finance theory emphasizes
two channels. The political channel postulates that legal traditions differ in terms of the priority they
give to private property rights relative to the rights of the State. Since private property rights form
the basis of financial development, historically determined differences in legal origin explain
financial development today. The political channel holds that Civil law systems tend to promote the
development of institutions that advance State power with negative implications for financial
development. The adaptability channel stresses that legal traditions differ in terms of their
responsiveness to changing socioeconomic conditions. Since inflexible legal traditions produce gaps
between legal capabilities and commercial needs, historically determined differences in legal
tradition explain financial development today. The adaptability channel holds that French legal origin
countries are more likely to develop inefficiently rigid legal systems than British Common law and
German civil law countries with adverse repercussions for financial development.
The results provide relatively more evidence for the adaptability channel than for the political
channel. While subject to the qualifications emphasized in the Introduction, we find the following.
First, the exogenous component of legal system adaptability explains cross-country differences in
financial intermediary development, stock market development, and private property rights protection
even when controlling for the political channel. Furthermore, the results are consistent with the view
that legal origin does not explain financial market development beyond legal origin’s ability to
explain cross-country variability in legal system adaptability. Thus, the results suggest that legal
origin matters because legal traditions differ in their ability to adjust efficiently to evolving
socioeconomic conditions. Legal systems that adapt efficiently to minimize the gap between the

31

financial needs of the economy and the legal system’s capabilities will foster financial development
more effectively than more rigid legal systems. Second, the exogenous component of the political
channel does not explain cross-country variation in financial development. Third, German civil law
and British common law countries have significantly better-developed financial intermediaries and
markets and better property right protection than French civil law countries, which is fully consistent
with the adaptability channel. In terms of policy implications, these tentative results advertise the
benefits of efficient legal system adaptability.

32

1

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003) also confirm Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson’s (2001, 2002) findings that

geographical endowments affect the development of institutions, including financial institutions.
2

Interestingly, Thomas Jefferson too sought to place the State above the judiciary, while John Marshall asserted judicial

independence (Simon, 2002).
3

For countervailing views and modifications, see Cooter and Kornhauser (1980), Cooter, Kornhauser, and Lane (1979),

Blume and Rubinfeld (1982), Rubin (1982), and Kaplow (1992), Coffee (2000).
4

See, for instance, Rubin (1977, 1982), Priest (1977), and Bailey and Rubin (1994).

55

Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Pagan and Volpin (2001) stress that contemporaneous political factors influence

financial markets. The law and finance theory’s political channel is related, though distinct. It stresses that the civil law
has promoted the development of institutions that further the power of the State, which hinders financial development.
6

England did not try to replace Islamic, Hindu, or unwritten African law and the flexibility of the Common law eased its

transfer. For instance, the English courts in India were instructed to apply Islamic or Hindu law depending on the faith of
the parties in cases of inheritance, marriage, caste, etc. In Africa, judges were to apply the English law only to the extent
that local circumstances permitted and matters were to be decided by equity and good conscience as rendered necessary
by local circumstances (ZK, 1998, 225-9). While somewhat chaotic, this arguably set the stage for the evolution of an
independent, dynamic common law in the post-colonial era.
7

For an insightful analysis of the transfer of the law internationally and its effect on economic development, see

Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard (2002)
8

It is not necessarily the case that the case law responds more effectively than statutory changes. For instance, as

exemplified by the law on contracts for the benefit of third parties, English law has clung with remarkable tenacity to the
principle that ‘only a person who is a party to a contract can sue on it’.” (ZK. 1998, 468) In contrast, the Continental
countries granted greater rights to third parties through statutory changes. For a fascinating comparison of the laws of
incorporation and partnerships in the United States and French, see Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2002).
9

Zweigert and Kotz (1998, 158) argue that the unlike in France, the German civil code grants greater discretion to judges,

“... the courts in Germany have relied above all on the general clauses of Art. 138, 157, 242, and 826.”

33

10

One could argue that (i) adaptability is crucial, (ii) Common law countries tend be more flexible than Civil law

countries, and (iii) reject the view that German civil law systems tend to adapt more efficiently than French civil law
systems. We assess this empirically below.
11

Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2003) use survey data from law firms in 109 countries to construct

indicators of the functioning of the legal system when courts confront cases involving the eviction of tenants for nonpayments of rent and the collection of bounced check.
12

According to the endowment theory (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001), the

geographical endowments encountered by Europeans determined their colonization strategies. According to Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2001), in areas with more favorable disease environments, Europeans founded settler colonies,
whereas in others they established extractive colonies. Settler colonies developed long-lasting institutions that protect
private property rights and are thus conducive to the development of financial markets. Extractive colonies instead
developed long-lasting institutions that allow the few elite to exploit their positions, with adverse implications for private
property rights (Easterly and Levine, 2003). Since countries that are closer to the equator tend to have unfavorable
disease endowments, we use latitude as an exogenous proxy of geographical endowments. In our previous work we also
used settler mortality, the log of death per thousand soldiers as an indicator of the initial disease environment. However,
this indicator is only available for former colonies. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003), however, show that using
latitude as indicator of initial endowments leads to similar conclusions.
13

This produces a Lagrange multiplier test statistic that under the null hypothesis is distributed Chi-squared (m), where m

is the number of overidentifying restrictions. The number of overidentifying restrictions equals the number of excluded
exogenous variables minus the number of endogenous variables included as regressors in the second stage regression.
14

These results hold when controlling for other potential exogenous determinants of financial development, such as the

degree of ethnic diversity (Easterly and Levine, 1997).
15

These numbers are based on the smallest coefficient estimates for each financial development indicator.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, and Robinson, James A., “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401, 2001.
Acemoglu, Daron, Johnson, Simon, and Robinson, James A., “Reversal of Fortunes: Geography and
Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, forthcoming 2002.
Bailey, Martin J., Rubin, Paul H., “A Positive Theory of Legal Change.” International Review of Law and
Economics 14, 467-477, 1994.
Beck, Thorsten, Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Levine, Ross, “Law, Endowments, and Finance.” Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming, 2003.
Beck, Thorsten, and Levine, Ross, “Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does Having a Market- or
Bank-Based System Matter?” Journal of Financial Economics 64, 147-180, 2002.
Beck, Thorsten, and Levine, Ross, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth: Panel Evidence.” Journal
of Banking and Finance, forthcoming, 2003.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Pistor, Katharina, and Richard, Jean Francois, “Economic Development, Legality, and
the Transplant Effect.” European Economic Review, forthcoming, 2002.
Blume, Lawrence E., Rubinfeld, Daniel L., “The Dynamics of the Legal Process.” Journal of Legal Studies
11, 405-419, 1982.
Claessens, Stijn, Laeven, Luc, “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth.” Journal of Finance,
forthcoming, 2003.
Coffee, John C., “Privatization and Corporate Governance: The Lessons from the Securities Market Failure.”
Unpublished working paper 158. Columbia Law School, New York, 2000.

35

Cooter, Robert, Kornhauser, Lewis, “Can Litigation Improve the Law Without the Help of Judges?” Journal
of Legal Studies 9, 139-63, 1980.
Cooter, Robert, Kornhauser, Lewis, and Lane, David, “Liability Rules, Limited Information and the Role of
Precedent.” Bell Journal of Economics 10, 366-81, 1979.
Damaska, Mirjan R., The Faces of Justice and State Authority: A Comparative Approach to the Legal
Process, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1986.
Dawson, John P., The Oracles of the Law. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Law School (Reprinted in
1986 by William S. Hein & Co., Inc. Buffalo, New York), 1968.
Dawson, John P., A History of Lay Judges. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1960.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic, “Law, Finance and Firm Growth.” Journal of Finance 53,
2107-2137, 1998.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic, “Institutions, Financial Markets and Firm Debt Maturity”
Journal of Financial Economics, 54, 295-336, 1999.
Djankov, Simeon, La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Shleifer, Andrei, “The Practice of
Justice.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, forthcoming.
Easterly, William and Levine, Ross, “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 1203-50, 1997.
Easterly, William, and Levine, Ross, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic
Development.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2003, forthcoming.
Engerman, Stanley, and Sokoloff, Kenneth, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of
Growth among New World Economies.” In S.H. Haber, S.H. Ed., How Latin America Fell Behind,
pp. 260-304, Stanford CA: Stanford University Press, 1997.
Glaeser, Edward, and Shleifer, Andrei, “Legal Origins.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming,

36

November, 117, 2002.
Hayek, Friedrich, The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1960.
Himmelberg, Charles, Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Love, Inessa, “Investor Protection, Ownership, and the Cost
of Capital.” World Bank Working Paper Series No. 2834, Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2002.
Johnson, Simon, Boone, Peter, Breach, Alasdair, and Friedman, Eric, “Corporate Governance in the Asian
Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 141-186, 2000.
Kaplow, Louis, “Rules versus Standards: An Economic Analysis.” Duke Law Journal 42, 557-629, 1992.
Keinan, Yoram, “The Evolution of Secured Transactions.” Unpublished working paper, University of
Michigan Law School, 2000.
King, Robert G. and Levine, Ross, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 108, 717-38, 1993a.
King, Robert G. and Levine, Ross, “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and Evidence.” Journal
of Monetary Economics 32, 513-42, 1993b.
Lamoreaux, Naomi and Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent, “Organizational Choice and Economic Development: A
Comparison of France and the United States During the mid-19th Century.” University of California
at Los Angeles mimeo, 2002.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Pop-Eleches, Christian, and Shleifer, Andrei, “The
Guarantees of Freedom.” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University, 2002b.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W., “Investor Protection
and Corporate Valuation.” Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170, 2002a.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W., “The Quality of
Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279, 1999.
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W., “Law and Finance.”

37

Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155, 1998.
Levine, Ross, “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda.” Journal of Economic
Literature 35, 688-726, 1997.
Levine, Ross, “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-run Economic Growth.” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking 30, 688-726, 1998.
Levine, Ross, “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 8, 36-67, 1999.
Levine, Ross, Loayza, Norman, and Beck, Thorsten, “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
Causes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77, 2000.
Levine, Ross, and Zervos, Sara, “Stock Markets, Banks and Economic Growth.” American Economic Review
88, 537-58, 1998.
Mahoney, Paul G., “The Common Law and Economic Growth: Hayek Might be Right.” Journal of Legal
Studies 30, 503-525, 2001.
Merryman, John Henry, The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of Western Europe
and Latin America. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1985.
Merryman, John Henry, “The French Deviation.” The American Journal of Comparative Law 44, 109-119,
1996.
Morck, Randall Yeung, Bernard, and Yu, Wayne, “The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why do
Emerging Markets have Synchronous Price Movements?” Journal of Financial Economics 58, 215260, 2000.
North, Douglass, “Institutions, Economic Growth and Freedom: An Historical Introduction.” In M.A.
Walker, Ed., Freedom, Democracy and Economic Welfare, Vancouver: Fraser Institute, 1988.
North, Douglass, and Weingast, Barry R., “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England.” Journal of Economic History 49, 803-

38

832, 1989.
Pagano, Marco., and Volpin, Paolo, “The Political Economy of Finance.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
17, 502-519, 2001.
Pistor, Katharina, Keinan, Yoran, Kleinheisterkamp, Jan, and West, Mark D., “The Evolution of Corporate
Law.” Unpublished working paper, Harvard University (Kennedy School of Government), 2000.
Pistor, Katharina, Keinan, Yoran, Kleinheisterkamp, Jan, and West, Mark D., “Innovation in Corporate Law:
A Comparative Analysis of Ten Jurisdictions.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 2003.
Priest, George L., “The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules.” Journal of Legal
Studies 6, 65-82, 1977.
Posner, Richard A., Economic Analysis of the Law. Boston, MA: Little-Brown, 1973..
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Zingales, Luigi, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in
the 20th Century.” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming, 2003.
Rubin, Paul H., “Why is the Common Law Efficient?” Journal of Legal Studies 6, 51-64, 1977.
Rubin, Paul H., “Common Law and Statute Law.” Journal of Legal Studies 11, 205-33, 1982.
Stulz, Rene, and Williamson, Rohan, “Culture, Openness, and Finance.” Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming, 2003.
Simon, James F., What Kind of Nation: Thomas Jefferson, John Marshall, and the Epic Struggle to Create
the United States. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 2002.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital.” Journal of Financial Economics 58,
187-214, 2000.
Zweigert, Konrad, and Kötz, Hein, Introduction to Comparative Law. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press, 1998.

115
115
114
115
115
115
61
61
61
80
115
115

0.43
0.22
3.43
0.53
0.37
0.05
1.79
0.62
0.64
0.64
0.25
0.39

Mean
0.41
0.37
1.08
0.50
0.49
0.22
0.49
0.49
0.48
0.32
0.18
0.38

Std. Dev.
0.00
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Min
2.07
1.89
5
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
0.72
1

Max

Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations are presented in Panel B, respectively. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market
Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property Rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating
better enforcement. Legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, British common law, or German law tradition, and zero otherwise. Tenure of Supreme Court
Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases.
Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments have to be based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity.
Latitude is the absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Detailed variable definitions and sources are
given in the data appendix.

Private Credit
Stock Market Development
Property Rights
French Legal Origin
British Legal Origin
German Legal Origin
Tenure of Supreme Court Judges
Supreme Court Power
Case Law
Legal Justification
Latitude
Independence

N

Panel A: Summary Statistics

Table 1
Summary Statistics and Correlations

39

0.664***

40

0.041

0.549*** 0.207**

British Legal
Origin

German Legal
Origin

0.173

0.273**

Supreme Court
Power
-0.108

0.190

-0.261** -0.425***

Case Law

Legal
Justification

-0.821***

-0.317**

-0.245*

-0.303*** 0.560***

0.314*** -0.652***

0.127

0.212

0.344*** -0.249***

0.143

-0.569***

0.472***

0.471***

0.308**

-0.181*

*, **, *** Indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.

0.098

Tenure of
Supreme Court
Judges
-0.038

0.198**

-0.362*** -0.296***

French Legal
Origin

-0.405***

0.076

0.133

-0.311

-0.196

-0.229*

0.244*

0.567***

-0.402*** -0.470***

0.495***

Tenure of
Supreme
Court
Stock Market Property French Legal British Legal German Legal Supreme
Origin
Development Rights
Origin
Origin
Court Judges Power
Case Law

Property Rights 0.632*** 0.522***

Stock Market
Development

Private
Credit

Panel B: Correlation Matrix of Variables

115.160
(0.000)
13.280
(0.000)

Property Rights

British legal origin
-0.344F,G
(0.044)
0.106F,G
(0.568)
0.044F
(0.654)
0.287F
(0.015)
-1.172F,G
(0.000)
0.320F
(0.321)

French legal origin
-0.506B,G
(0.002)
-0.093B,G
(0.630)

-0.152B,G
(0.027)
0.039B
(0.764)

-1.783B,G
(0.000)
-0.424B,G
(0.216)

0.200B,F
(0.274)
0.615F
(0.076)

0.273 F
(0.058)
0.262
(0.112)

German legal origin
0.595B,F
(0.021)
0.721B,F
(0.011)

2.7642
(0.000)

0.349
(0.155)

0.834
(0.000)

Latitude

0.574
(0.021)

0.220
(0.003)

0.171
(0.077)

Independence

0.508

0.274

0.192

0.107

0.529

R2
0.383

114

114

115

115

115

115

Obs

The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 British legal origin + β3 German legal origin + β4X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock Market
Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange
as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French, British and German legal origin are dummy
variables that take on the value one for countries with French, British and German law tradition, respectively. The Scandinavian legal origin is captured by the constant. The regressions also include a vector of control
variables, X. Latitude is the absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Regressions are estimated using
Ordinary Least Squares. The subscripts B, G, F signify that the respective coefficient is significantly different from the British, German and French Legal origin coefficient, respectively. P-values are given in parentheses.
Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

5.960
(0.001)
5.450
(0.002)

Stock Market
Development

Private Credit

F-test for legal origin
13.900
(0.000)
7.760
(0.000)

Table 2
Law and Finance

41

12.510
(0.000)

Supreme Court
Power

15.060
(0.000)

F-test for legal origin
20.770
(0.000)

British legal origin
-0.048F
(0.144)
-0.117F,G
(0.479)

0.296B
(0.068)

0.150F,G
(0.437)

-0.333B
(0.114)

French legal origin
-0.690B,G
(0.000)

British legal origin
2.000F,G
(0.000)

French legal origin
1.667B
(0.000)

0.189B
(0.306)

German legal origin
-0.167F
(0.294)

-0.633B
(0.012)

German legal origin
1.500B
(0.000)

0.375

R2
0.432

0.299

R2
0.846

80

Obs
61

61

Obs
61

The regression estimated in Panel A is: Political Structure = β1 French legal origin + β2 British legal origin + β3 German legal origin, where Political Structure is Tenure of Supreme Court Judges or Supreme Court Power.
French, British and German legal origin are dummy variables that take on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, British common law tradition, and German law, respectively and zero otherwise. Tenure of
Supreme Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over
administrative cases. The regression estimated in Panel B is: Legal Adaptability = β1 French legal origin + β2 British legal origin + β3 German legal origin, where Legal Adaptability is either Case Law or Legal Justification.
Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments have to be based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. All
regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. The subscripts B, G, F signify that the respective coefficient is significantly different from the British, German and French Legal origin coefficient, respectively. Pvalues are given in parentheses.

Legal Justification

Case Law

Panel B: Legal Adaptability

F-test for legal origin
137.100
(0.000)

Tenure of Supreme
Court Judges

Panel A: Political Structure

42

Table 3
Law, Politics, and Legal Adaptability

OIR test
24.083
(0.000)
21.024
(0.000)
23.655
(0.000)
21.125
(0.000)

Tenure of Supreme Court Judges
-0.258
(0.515)
-0.108
(0.791)

OIR test
7.298
(0.026)
6.861
(0.032)
8.385
(0.015)
7.078
(0.029)

OIR test
20.930
(0.000)
12.934
(0.002)
20.951
(0.000)
12.797
(0.002)

Tenure of Supreme Court Judges
0.609
(0.442)
0.830
(0.303)

Tenure of Supreme Court Judges
0.349
(0.291)
0.450
(0.218)

0.136
(0.802)
0.975
(0.160)

Supreme Court Power

0.231
(0.311)
0.444
(0.134)

Supreme Court Power

-0.292
(0.305)
0.052
(0.876)

Supreme Court Power

2.785
(0.000)

2.107
(0.000)

Latitude

0.022
(0.937)

-0.164
(0.654)

Latitude

0.897
(0.000)

0.959
(0.007)

Latitude

0.885
(0.098)

0.876
(0.006)

Independence

0.262
(0.114)

0.142
(0.288)

Independence

0.358
(0.085)

0.299
(0.071)

Independence

61

61

61

Obs
61

61

61

61

Obs
61

61

61

61

Obs
61

The regressions estimated are: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Political Structure and Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Political Structure+ β2 Latitude+ β3 Independence, where Financial Sector Development is
Private Credit, Stock Market Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares
listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Political Structure is
Tenure of Supreme Court Judges or Supreme Court Power. Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes on value one if
Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over administrative cases. Latitude is the absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one. Independence is the percentage of years since
1776 that a country has been independent. All regressions are estimated using Instrumental Variables – two stage least squares. In the first-stage regressions the political structure indicators are regressed on the British,
French, and German legal origin dummies. P-values are given in parentheses.

Property
Rights

Panel C: Property Rights

Stock Market
Development

Panel B: Stock Market Development

Private
Credit

Panel A: Private Credit

43

Table 4
The Political Channel

OIR test
15.482
(0.000)
7.814
(0.020)
29.680
(0.000)
20.084
(0.000)

Case Law
0.534
(0.006)
0.621
(0.005)

-0.238
(0.268)
-0.718
(0.001)

Legal Justification

OIR test
2.328
(0.312)
2.617
(0.270)
3.905
(0.142)
2.067
(0.356)

Case Law
0.426
(0.009)
0.483
(0.010)

OIR test
7.818
(0.020)
2.066
(0.356)
20.034
(0.000)
5.115
(0.078)

Case Law
1.410
(0.002)
1.270
(0.003)

-0.942
(0.056)
-1.904
(0.001)

Legal Justification

-0.494
(0.031)
-0.864
(0.001)

Legal Justification

2.107
(0.000)

0.876
(0.006)

80

80

61

0.814
(0.018)

2.400
(0.000)

80

Independence Obs
61

0.350
(0.002)

Latitude

-0.014
(0.948)

80

61

0.223
(0.043)

-0.071
(0.808)

80

Independence Obs
61

0.443
(0.002)

80

Latitude

0.755
(0.000)

0.581
(0.002)

0.654
(0.018)

61

Independence Obs
61

Latitude

The regressions estimated are: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Legal Adaptability and Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Legal Adaptability+ β 2 Latitude+ β3 Independence, where Financial Sector Development
is Private Credit, Stock Market Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares
listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Legal Adaptability is Case
Law or Legal Justification. Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law. Legal Justification indicates whether judgments have to be based on statutory law rather than on
principles of equity. Latitude is the absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. All regressions are
estimated using Instrumental Variables – two stage least squares. In the first-stage regressions the political structure or legal adaptability indicators are regressed on the British, French, and German legal origin dummies. Pvalues are given in parentheses.

Property
Rights

Panel C: Property Rights

Stock Market
Development

Panel B: Stock Market Development

Private
Credit

Panel A: Private Credit

44

Table 5
The Adaptability Channel

45

Table 6 Finance, Politics, and Legal Adaptability: The Horse Race
Panel A: Private Credit
Adaptability Indicators

Case Law
1.472
(0.045)
1.347
(0.002)

Legal
Justification

-1.691
(0.101)
-2.138
(0.027)

Political Power Indicators
Tenure of
Supreme Court
Supreme
Court Judges
Power
-1.993
(0.088)
-1.292
(0.007)
-2.464
(0.071)
-1.909
(0.004)

First-stageF-tests

OIR test
0.117
(0.732)
0.000
(0.998)
0.833
(0.361)
0.317
(0.573)

Adaptability
13.090
(0.000)

14.800
(0.000)

Political
Power
3.390
(0.024)
8.920
(0.000)
3.130
(0.034)
7.250
(0.000)

Obs
59
59
54
54

Panel B: Stock Market Development
Adaptability Indicators

Case Law
0.589
(0.046)
0.525
(0.032)

Legal
Justification

-0.953
(0.033)
-1.002
(0.026)

Political Power Indicators
Tenure of
Supreme
Supreme Court
Court Judges
Power
-0.374
(0.421)
-0.179
(0.502)
-0.788
(0.176)
-0.514
(0.166)

First-stageF-tests

OIR test
1.007
(0.316)
1.597
(0.206)
0.158
(0.691)
0.627
(0.429)

Adaptability
13.090
(0.000)

14.800
(0.000)

Political
Power
3.390
(0.024)
8.920
(0.000)
3.130
(0.034)
7.250
(0.000)

Obs
59
59
54
54

Panel C: Property Rights
Adaptability Indicators

Case Law
2.759
(0.027)
2.678
(0.002)

Legal
Justification

-2.578
(0.106)
-3.407
(0.037)

Political Power Indicators
Tenure of
Supreme
Supreme Court
Court Judges
Power
-2.683
(0.173)
-1.878
(0.041)
-3.087
(0.142)
-2.667
(0.050)

First-stageF-tests

OIR test
0.776
(0.378)
0.675
(0.411)
2.527
(0.112)
1.798
(0.180)

Adaptability
13.090
(0.000)

14.800
(0.000)

Political
Power
3.390
(0.024)
8.920
(0.000)
3.130
(0.034)
7.250
(0.000)

Obs
59
59
54
54

The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Political Structure + β2 Legal Adaptability where Financial Sector Development is Private Credit, Stock
Market Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development
measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property,
with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Political Structure is Tenure of Supreme Court Judges or Supreme Court Power. Tenure of Supreme Court Judges indicates
the length of tenure of Supreme Court judges. Supreme Court Power is a dummy variable that takes value one if Supreme Court Judges have life-long tenure and jurisdiction over
administrative cases. Legal Adaptability is Case Law or Legal Justification. Case Law is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if judges base their decision on case law.
Legal Justification indicates whether judgments have to be based on statutory law rather than on principles of equity. All regressions are estimated using Instrumental Variables –
two stage least squares. In the first-stage regressions the political structure and legal adaptability indicators are regressed on the British, French, and German legal origin
dummies. (F-test results for the first stage regressions are presented, as well). P-values are in parentheses.

