                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DOES THE EVIDENCE FAVOR STATE COMPETITION
                                IN CORPORATE LAW?

                                            Lucian Bebchuk
                                             Alma Cohen
                                             Allen Ferrell

                                          Working Paper 9380
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9380


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We are grateful to Steve Choi, James Cox, Jill Fisch, Jesse Fried, Assaf Hamdani, Bert Huang, Marcel Kahan,
Jason Knott, Roberta Romano, Erich Schanz, Lynn Stout, Guhan Subramanian and workshop participants at
Harvard, the University of Marburg, and the CLEA annual meeting for valuable suggestions and discussions.
Lucian Bebchuk and Allen Ferrell are grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics and Business at
Harvard Law School for its financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Lucian Bebchuk, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Does Evidence Favor State Competition in Corporate Law?
Lucian Bebchuk, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell
NBER Working Paper No. 9380
December 2002
JEL No. G30, G38, H70, K22


                                           ABSTRACT

       In the ongoing debate on state competition over corporate charters, supporters of state
competition have long claimed that the empirical evidence clearly supports their view. This
paper suggests that the body of empirical evidence on which supporters of state competition have
relied does not warrant this claim. The paper first demonstrates that reported findings of a
positive correlation between incorporation in Delaware and increased shareholder wealth are not
robust and, furthermore, do not establish causation. The paper then shows that, even if Delaware
incorporation were found to cause an increase in shareholder value, this finding would not imply
that state competition is working well; benefits to incorporating in the dominant state would
likely exist in a “race-toward-the bottom” equilibrium in which state competition provided
undesirable incentives. Third, the analysis shows that empirical claims that state competition
rewards moderation in the provision of antitakeover protections are not well grounded. Finally,
we endorse a new approach to the empirical study of the subject that is based on analyzing the
determinants of companies’ choices of state of incorporation. Recent work based on this
approach indicates that, contrary to the beliefs of state competition supporters, states that amass
antitakeover statutes are more successful in the incorporation market.

Lucian Bebchuk                        Alma Cohen                     Allen Ferrell
Harvard Law School                    NBER                           Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue             1050 Massachusetts Avenue 1557 Massachusetts
Cambridge, MA 02138                   Cambridge, MA 02138            Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                              alcohen@nber.org               fferrell@law.harvard.edu
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................1
I. DOES DELAWARE INCORPORATION INCREASE SHAREHOLDER VALUE? ..........7
   A.          Tobin’s Q Differences Between Delaware and Non-Delaware
    Corporations ...........................................................................................................8
       1. The Current Nonexistence of Correlation ..............................................8
       2. The Fluctuations of the “Delaware Effect” .............................................9
       3. The Problem of Selection ..........................................................................11
           a. Selection Follows from the Very Presence of a Delaware Wealth Effect
           ........................................................................................................................11
           b. Understanding Selection ..........................................................................12
   B. Event Studies of Reincorporations .................................................................13
       1. The Abnormal Returns Findings: Questions of Robustness and
       Magnitude........................................................................................................13
       2. The Problem of Confounding Events ....................................................16
           a. Confounding Events ................................................................................16
           b. Scheduling Reincorporation Votes in Relatively Good Times ..............17
           c. Increased Likelihood of Takeover .............................................................18
           d. Different Reincorporation Categories.....................................................19
II. DOES A MARGINAL SUPERIORITY OF DELAWARE INCORPORATION IMPLY .20
THAT STATE COMPETITION BENEFITS INVESTORS? ...............................................20
   A. The Need to Evaluate States’ Collective Performance ..................................21
   B. A Skeptical Account of State Competition is Consistent ...........................22
   with Delaware Marginal Superiority ..................................................................22
III. DOES STATE COMPETITION WORK WELL IN THE AREA ...............................23
OF TAKEOVER REGULATION? ..................................................................................23
   A. The View That States Restrict Takeovers Excessively .................................23
   B. Claims That Delaware Corporations Are Acquired More Often .................25
   C. Claims That Delaware’s Takeover Law Is Relatively Moderate ..................26
   D. Claims That Outlier States Have Been Penalized ........................................27
   E. Claims that Antitakeover Statutes Are Outside the Parameters of State
    Competition ..........................................................................................................28
IV. RECENT EVIDENCE ON THE DETERMINANTS OF INCORPORATION
DECISIONS .................................................................................................................29
   A. A New Approach.............................................................................................29
   B. The Pattern of Incorporations.........................................................................30
   C. The Landscape of State Antitakeover Statutes ..............................................32
   D. Do Antitakeover Statutes Help States Retain In-State Corporations? ......33
   E. Do Antitakeover Statutes Help States Attract Out-of-State Corporations?
    ...............................................................................................................................34
   F. Reconsidering Established Positions ..............................................................35
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................37
                                          INTRODUCTION

       One of the most central and enduring debates in corporate law scholarship
concerns the role of states in the regulation of corporations. Simply put, what are
the costs and benefits of allowing a firm, through its incorporation decision, to select
which state’s corporate law governs its activities? The modern debate on the
subject, which began with William Cary’s attack on state competition as fostering a
“race to the bottom,”1 has produced a voluminous literature.2 The debate has had
remarkable resiliency; in recent years there has been a burst of writing by legal
academics weighing in on the subject.3 Nor is interest any longer confined to U.S.
academics; European policymakers now face the pressing question of how to
allocate regulatory authority between the institutions of the European Union and its
member national governments in the area of corporate law.4
       The dominant view among corporate law scholars has been the “race–to–the–
top” school of thought. Its supporters contend that the competition among states

1   See William L. Cary, Federalism and Corporate Law: Reflections upon Delaware, 83 YALE L.J. 663
(1974).
2 See, e.g., Ralph K. Winter, Jr., State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the Corporation,

6 J. LEGAL STUD. 251 (1977); Roberta Romano, Law as a Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation
Puzzle, 1 J.L. ECON. & ORG. 225 (1985) [hereinafter Romano, Law as a Product]; FRANK H.
EASTERBROOK & DANIEL R. FISCHEL, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE LAW 1-40 (1991)
[hereinafter EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE]; Lucian A. Bebchuk,
Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State Competition in Corporate Law, 105
HARV. L. REV. 1435 (1992) [hereinafter Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation]; ROBERTA
ROMANO, THE GENIUS OF AMERICAN CORPORATE LAW (1993) [hereinafter ROMANO, GENIUS].
3 See, e.g., Marcel Kahan & Ehud Kamar, Price Discrimination in the Market for Corporate Law, 86

CORNELL L. REV. 1205 (2001) [hereinafter Kahan & Kamar, Price Discrimination]; Leo E. Strine,
Jr., Delaware’s Corporate-Law System: Is Corporate America Buying an Exquisite Jewel or Diamond in
the Rough? A Response to Kahan & Kamar’s Price Discrimination in the Market for Corporate Law, 86
CORNELL L. REV. 1257 (2001); Sanjai Bhagat & Roberta Romano, Event Studies and the Law: Part II:
Empirical Studies of Corporate Law, 4 AM. L. & ECON. REV. 380 (2002); Stephen Choi & Andrew
Guzman, Choice and Federal Intervention in Corporate Law, 87 VA. L. REV. 961 (2001); Robert
Daines, Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value?, 62 J. FIN. ECON. 525 (2001); Lucian A. Bebchuk &
Allen Ferrell, Federalism and Corporate Law: The Race to Protect Managers from Takeovers, 99
COLUM. L. REV. 1168 (1999) [hereinafter Bebchuk & Ferrell, Federalism and Corporate Law]; Lucian
A. Bebchuk & Allen Ferrell, A New Approach to Takeover Law and Regulatory Competition, 87 VA. L.
REV. 111 (2001) [hereinafter Bebchuk & Ferrell, A New Approach]; Lucian A. Bebchuk & Allen
Ferrell, Federal Intervention to Enhance Shareholder Choice, 87 VA. L. REV. 993 (2001) [hereinafter
Bebchuk & Ferrell, Federal Intervention]; Jill E. Fisch, The Peculiar Role of the Delaware Courts in the
Competition for Corporate Charters, 68 U. CIN. L. REV. 1061 (2000); Ehud Kamar, A Regulatory
Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in Corporate Law, 98 COLUM. L. REV. 1908 (1998).
4    Two events have recently brought these issues to the forefront: the potentially sweeping
decision of the European Court of Justice in the Centros case, see Case C – 212/97, on which
country’s corporate law governs a firm and the recent rejection of a proposed European
directive on takeover regulation.


                                                   1
over attracting incorporations benefits shareholders.5 On their view, Delaware, the
dominant state for incorporations, has “won” the race for incorporations by being
the most virtuous, that is, by offering rules that maximize shareholder wealth.
Indeed, one prominent “race–to-the-top” theorist has referred to state competition
as the “genius of American corporate law.”6
       The view that state competition works well rests on two propositions: (1) that
states actively and vigorously compete for incorporations, and (2) that the ensuing
competitive threat provides the dominant state of Delaware, as well as other states,
with powerful incentives to provide value-enhancing rules. Even those skeptical of
state competition have largely not questioned proposition (1), proceeding under the
assumption that states compete vigorously. The debate has thus focused on
proposition (2) – concerning the quality of incentives – and this Article will focus on
it as well.
       In questioning the quality of incentives provided by competition, critics have
argued that the competitive threat might push states in undesirable directions with
respect to some important corporate issues. This view, to which we subscribe, holds
that state competition does not work well with respect to some (but not all)
important corporate law issues.7 On this view, state competition induces states to
provide rules that managers, but not necessarily shareholders, favor with respect to
corporate law issues that significantly affect managers’ private benefits of control,
such as rules governing takeovers. It has also been suggested that state competition
leads Delaware to offer an excessively unpredictable body of law that creates
unnecessary litigation.8
       To shed light on this debate, researchers have undertaken a large number of
empirical studies. The authors of these studies, as well as the corporate law scholars
who have used the studies in their own work, have generally interpreted the
empirical findings as supporting the race-to-the-top view. Indeed, supporters of
state competition have seized on these studies as strong – nay, decisive – evidence
that state competition serves shareholder interests. For example, Roberta Romano
has concluded that



5  For further details on this position, see Winter, supra note 2; ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2;
EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE, supra note 2.
6  See ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2.
7 See Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation, supra note 2; Bebchuk & Ferrell, Federalism and

Corporate Law, supra note 3; Bebchuk & Ferrell, A New Approach, supra note 3; Oren Bar-Gill,
Michal Barzuza, and Lucian Bebchuk, The Market for Corporate Law, Harvard Olin Discussion
Paper No. 377 (2002), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=275452; cf. Cary, supra note
1.
8 See Ehud Kamar, A Regulatory Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in Corporate Law, 98 COLUM.

L. REV. 1908 (1998); cf. Jonathan R. Macey & Geoffrey P. Miller, Toward an Interest-Group Theory
of Delaware Corporate Law, 65 TEX. L. REV. 469 (1987).


                                               2
       “[the findings of the empirical work] are compelling evidence that
       competition benefits investors.” 9

On a similar note, Frank Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel have stated:

       “Empirical studies confirm[ ] the force of competition. . . . These
       findings fatally undermine [the “race-to-the-bottom”] position . . .
       .”10

       This Article challenges this assessment of the evidence. We argue that the
conclusions supporters of state competition have drawn from the empirical evidence
are unjustified. The existing evidence does not fatally undermine the criticisms of
state competition, but rather leaves them unscathed.
       Further, evidence generated by a new empirical approach to evaluating state
competition indicates that competition rewards and encourages the amassing of
antitakeover statutes by states. This new evidence calls into question state
competition supporters’ belief that state competition does not push states to adopt
antitakeover statutes.
       The skeptical account of state competition, which we will demonstrate is
entirely consistent with the empirical evidence, is as follows: Because managers
have substantial influence over where companies are incorporated, a state that
wishes to maximize the number of corporations chartered in it will have to take into
account the interests of managers. As a result, state competition pushes states to
give significant weight to managerial interests.
       Of course, catering to managerial interests is only problematic when the
interests of shareholders and managers substantially diverge. Thus, in our view,
state competition will likely fail shareholders with respect to issues that are
“significantly redistributive” in that they involve a significant trade-off between
important managerial and shareholder interests. One area where such a divergence
of interests is likely to be particularly acute is takeover regulation. Managers
interested in preserving their jobs and private benefits of control will tend to favor
restrictive takeover rules, whatever the costs to shareholders.


9  Roberta Romano, The Need for Competition in International Securities Regulation at 90 (Yale Law
School, Research Paper No. 258, 2001) [hereinafter Romano, Need for Competition]. Professor
Romano has expressed similar views in other papers. See Roberta Romano, Empowering
Investors: A Market Approach to Securities Regulation, 107 YALE L. J. 2359 (1998) (“If a change in
domicile increases firm value, it would be exceedingly difficult to maintain that charter
competition is harmful to shareholders.”); Bhagat & Romano, supra note 3, at 384 (“One
certainly cannot read the event study literature and conclude that firms reincorporating are
reducing their shareholders’ wealth as [critics of the “race-to-the-top” theory] contend[ ].”)
10 EASTERBROOK & FISCHEL, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE, supra note 2, at 214-15. (emphasis

added).


                                                3
       Does the existing empirical evidence contradict this skeptical account, as so
many claim? Part I examines the significant body of empirical work that has sought
to determine the effects of Delaware incorporation on shareholder value. This work
includes a recent cross-sectional study suggesting that shareholder value is higher
for Delaware companies than for non-Delaware companies as well as
reincorporation event studies indicating that reincorporations to Delaware were
accompanied by increases in stock price.
       A close examination of the findings of both types of studies shows that, taken
as a whole, they do not establish a robust and significant correlation between
Delaware incorporation and higher shareholder wealth. Furthermore, even
assuming that a robust and significant correlation between Delaware incorporation
and somewhat higher shareholder value were present, supporters of state
competition have failed to distinguish satisfactorily between correlation and
causation. The correlation of Delaware incorporation and higher stock value would
not necessarily imply causation of higher stock value by Delaware incorporation.
The selection of firms that incorporate in Delaware, either initially or mid-stream, is
not random.
       Firms electing to incorporate in Delaware and firms not making such
elections must differ in some way that accounts for their different incorporation
decisions. Any stock price effects correlated with Delaware incorporation may very
well be due not to the direct effects of Delaware incorporation but rather to these
underlying differences among firms. Indeed, we show that there is evidence that
selection effects are likely to be very much at work and that inferences about the
relative value of Delaware law cannot be reliably made from existing findings on
correlations between Delaware incorporation and shareholder value.
       Although we conclude in Part I that the existing evidence fails to demonstrate
that Delaware incorporation increases shareholder value, we do believe that it is
reasonable to assume that Delaware incorporation on average benefits investors,
even if in a rather small and limited way. However, as Part II explains, a marginal
superiority of Delaware incorporation for shareholder value does not imply that
state competition (as currently structured) benefits investors. Indeed, the presence of
such a marginal superiority would be entirely consistent with our skeptical account of
state competition.11
       On our view, the incentive to cater to managerial interests, and in particular
to protect managers excessively from takeovers, exists in all states that wish to
attract incorporations. Consequently, all such states will be pushed towards
privileging managers’ interests over shareholders’ interests when the two conflict. In
such an equilibrium, Delaware incorporation might still provide some benefits to
shareholders due to Delaware’s well-developed legal infrastructure and to network


11This point is formally demonstrated in a model developed in Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk,
supra note 7.


                                             4
externalities. Nevertheless, the overall corporate regimes that states adopt would be
adversely shaped by state competition.
       The critical question to resolve, as Part II will emphasize, is whether the
existing state competition equilibrium is superior to the set of corporate rules that
would prevail in the quite different equilibrium that would obtain in the absence of
the current form of state competition. This question should not be confused, as
supporters of state competition seem to have done, with the question of whether
Delaware is somewhat better than other states in the existing state competition
equilibrium.
       Part III turns from these general considerations to the concrete case of state
takeover regulation and what it can tell us about how state competition works in an
important area of corporate law.           State takeover regulation presents state
competition supporters with a dilemma. The dilemma stems from the fact that
many state competition supporters believe that existing state takeover law restricts
corporate takeovers excessively. Supporters have therefore been forced to reconcile
this belief with their view that state competition produces desirable corporate law.
To this end, they have made empirical claims that state competition has not
contributed to the proliferation of antitakeover statutes but rather rewarded those
states that have been comparatively moderate. Delaware, by far the most successful
state in the incorporation marketplace, is usually cited as the paradigm of a state
with a “moderate” takeover regime.
       Part III shows, however, that the empirical claims made by supporters of state
competition fail to establish that state competition rewards moderation in the
provision of antitakeover protections. First, although Delaware does not go as far as
some states that have adopted extreme antitakeover statutes, it is far from clear that
Delaware is more moderate than most states in its antitakeover stance. Second, the
studies of states that adopted extreme antitakeover statutes (Massachusetts, Ohio,
and Pennsylvania) do indicate that the adoption of these statutes has been
detrimental to shareholder value, but they do not show that the incorporation
marketplace has penalized these three states by reducing the number of
incorporations in them. Whether these states have in fact been harmed or benefited
by their adoption of extreme antitakeover protections in the incorporation
marketplace is a question Part IV addresses.
       Part IV proposes a promising new approach to the empirical investigation of
state competition. We argue that researchers and corporate law scholars should
seek to identify the determinants of firms’ incorporation choices. Whereas prior
work has largely taken incorporation choices as given, and has sought to identify
how those incorporation decisions were associated with shareholder value, the
proposed approach attempts to identify the factors that determine incorporation
decisions in the first place. Furthermore, whereas prior work has largely ignored the
considerable variance among states other than Delaware with respect to success in




                                          5
the incorporation market, we argue that this variance can be used to examine how
differences in state corporate law regimes affect firms’ incorporation decisions.
        Part IV presents some summary statistics and basic cross-state comparisons
that illustrate the value of this approach. Part IV also summarizes and discusses the
findings of a separate study by two of us (the Incorporation Study) which carried
out a full empirical analysis based on this approach.12
        As will be described in more detail below, the analysis of incorporation
decisions reveals that the competition for incorporations does in fact reward the
amassing of antitakeover protections. At one end of the spectrum, states with no
antitakeover statutes, such as California, do quite poorly, retaining a relatively small
fraction of the companies headquartered in them and attracting a small or even
negligible number of out-of-state companies. At the other end of the spectrum, the
states that are quite successful on these two dimensions are typically ones that have
amassed most if not all of the standard antitakeover statutes. In general, the success
of a state in the market for incorporations increases as its level of antitakeover
protection increases (controlling, of course, for company characteristics and for the
characteristics of states other than their takeover laws).
        Interestingly, the evidence does not show that the incorporation market
penalizes states that have adopted extreme antitakeover statutes, as Massachusetts,
Ohio, and Pennsylvania have done. Although the adoption of these statutes was
universally criticized and accompanied by a significant reduction in the stock value
of corporations incorporated in these states, these states have not suffered in the
incorporation market. We do not doubt that there is some level of extreme
antitakeover protection that would “over-do it” and make a state adopting it less
attractive to incorporators. However, in contrast to the beliefs of state competition
supporters, this level has apparently not been reached by Massachusetts, Ohio, and
Pennsylvania, the three states blacklisted by scholars as extreme.
        The study of the determinants of domicile decisions can thus shed a more
systematic light on the connection between state competition and takeover rules.
Competition appears to reward, and thus encourage, the amassing of antitakeover
statutes. It is therefore difficult to maintain, as many supporters of state competition
have done, both that (1) state competition generally rewards the provision of rules
that enhance shareholder value, and (2) amassing antitakeover protections will
restrict takeovers excessively and hurt shareholder value. At least one of these two
propositions is in need of revision.


12See Lucian Bebchuk & Alma Cohen, “Firms’ Decisions Where to Incorporate,” Harvard Olin
Discussion Paper No. 351 (2002), forthcoming J. LAW & ECON (2003), available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=304386 [hereinafter Incorporation Study].
       Another contemporaneous study which applies this approach, and whose results we
discuss, is Guhan Subramanian, The Influence of Antitakeover Statutes on Incorporation Choice:
Evidence on the ‘Race’ Debate and Antitakeover Overreaching, 150 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1795 (2002).


                                              6
       Part V concludes that, in contrast to the strongly held beliefs of race-to-the-top
scholars, the evidence is consistent with, and in certain ways supports, the skeptical
view of how state competition, as currently structured, performs with respect to
certain important corporate law subjects. This conclusion has significant
implications for the ongoing debates regarding state competition, corporate
governance, and state takeover law.
       Before proceeding, we wish to note an additional reason – which is outside
the scope of this Article’s analysis – for questioning the empirical basis of the view
supporting state competition. As noted, whereas we focus here on the proposition
that competition provides desirable incentives, another key proposition underlying
the race-to-the top view is that states vigorously compete for corporate charters. In
companion work, we put forward empirical evidence questioning this premise as
well. The Incorporation Study indicates that competition is highly imperfect in that
Delaware faces scant competition in the market for out-of-state incorporations; firms
largely incorporate either in Delaware or in the state of their headquarters.13
Building on this finding, a companion work by Assaf Hamdani and one of us
provides evidence that Delaware’s dominance of the incorporation market is
stronger and more secure than has been recognized, and it then discusses how this
feature of the incorporation market casts doubt on the extent to which this market
can be relied on to produce rules that enhance shareholder value.14 This work
complements the analysis of this Article and reinforces its message – that the
existing evidence does not support the views of state competition’s advocates.

         I. DOES DELAWARE INCORPORATION INCREASE SHAREHOLDER VALUE?

       Researchers have tried to test whether Delaware corporate law is superior by
identifying how, compared with firms incorporated in other states, incorporation in
Delaware affects stock price, Tobin’s Q,15 or some other metric associated with
shareholder wealth. We begin our examination of these studies by discussing, in
Part I.A, Robert Daines’s influential paper measuring and comparing the Tobin’s Q
of Delaware and non-Delaware firms. Part I.B will then look at reincorporation
event studies, which measure stock price reaction to a firm’s reincorporation from
one state to another. We will show that the findings of some of these studies are
weaker and less conclusive than has been generally recognized. More importantly,

13 See Bebchuk & Cohen, supra note 12.
14 See Lucian A. Bebchuk & Assaf Hamdani, Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk: Reconsidering the
Debate on State Competition in Corporate Law, forthcoming Yale L. J. 2002, available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=325520. An empirical analysis that complements this work
is offered by Marcel Kahan and Ehud Kamar, The Myth of State Competition in Corporate Law,
forthcoming STAN. L. REV. (2002).
15 See RICHARD A. BREALEY & STEWART C. MYERS, PRINCIPLES OF CORPORATE FINANCE 775-76

(5th ed. 1996) (explaining Tobin’s Q).


                                             7
both reincorporation event studies and Daines’s Tobin’s Q study fail to establish
that their findings of increased value for Delaware firms, whatever the metric being
used, should be attributed to Delaware’s provision of a superior corporate law
system. It is crucial in assessing these studies to remember that incorporation and
reincorporation decisions are not random; there is thus no good basis for inferring
that the measured differences in shareholder wealth are due to differences in
corporate law quality as opposed to whatever influences firms’ (re)incorporation
decisions.

         A. Tobin’s Q Differences Between Delaware and Non-Delaware Corporations

      Recognizing the limitations of reincorporation event studies, which we will
discuss in the next section, Robert Daines sought to test the effect of Delaware
incorporation on shareholder wealth in a different way. In a recent but already
influential study, he compared Delaware and non-Delaware companies in terms of
Tobin’s Q.16 Tobin’s Q, which is the ratio between a firm’s market value and its book
value, is a widely used measure of how valuable a firm’s assets are in relation to
their replacement cost. Looking at the aggregate data from 1981 to 1996, Daines
found that Delaware companies had a higher Tobin’s Q even after controlling for a
variety of factors. He inferred from this finding that Delaware law accounts for the
higher Tobin’s Q and, therefore, acts to increase shareholder value.
      Daines’s findings have received a great deal of attention,17 and have been put
forward by supporters of state competition as strong evidence for their view.18 As
explained below, however, subsequent work has shown that the reported
correlation between Tobin’s Q and Delaware incorporation no longer exists.
Furthermore, the evidence about the existence of such a correlation in the past does
not at tell us whether such a correlation was due to a selection effect rather than
beneficial effects of Delaware incorporation.

1. The Current Nonexistence of Correlation

      Work done subsequent to Daines’s study indicates that the reported
correlation no longer exists. The Incorporation Study, examining data from the end
of 1999, found that there was no correlation between Delaware incorporation and
higher Tobin’s Q at the end of 1999.19 Another recent study, by Gompers, Ishii and


16 See Daines, supra note 3.
17 See, e.g., Steven Lipin, Firms Incorporated in Delaware are Valued More by Investors, Wall Street
Journal (Feb. 28, 2000).
18  See Jonathan Macey, Displacing Delaware: Can the Feds Do a Better job than the States in
Regulating Takeovers? 57 BUS. LAW. 1025 (2002) (relying on Daines’s findings to oppose a
proposal by Bebchuk and Ferrell for choice-enhancing federal intervention).
19 See Bebchuk & Cohen, supra note 12.




                                                 8
Metrick, using a set of controls that includes firm-level corporate governance
arrangements, found that during the 1990s Delaware incorporation was, on average,
associated with a lower Tobin’s Q.20
      Furthermore, in a working paper study focusing on the correlation between
Tobin’s Q and Delaware incorporation, Guhan Subramanian finds that no
correlation between a higher Tobin’s Q and Delaware incorporation existed in any
of the years 1996-2001.21 Subramanian improves upon Daines’s testing methodology
in several ways and provides a thorough and careful testing of the Tobin’s Q
question. While his results confirm the existence of a correlation between Tobin’s Q
and Delaware incorporation during the years 1991-1996, they indicate that such
correlation does not exist in any of the years after 1996, which is when Daines’s
study ended.
      Interestingly, the single-year regressions in Daines’s study indicate that a
positive correlation between higher Tobin’s Q and Delaware incorporation did not
exist in five years during this period (1982, 1987, 1989, 1991, 1995); in an additional
year (1996), the statistical significance of the correlation was only at the 90% level.22
Subramanian reexamines three of these years (1991, 1995, and 1996) and finds that
the correlation did exist in them but does not do so for the other three.
      In any event, whether or not the correlation existed in all of the years during
the period covered by the Daines’s study, for our purposes the crucial point is that
such a correlation does not exist at the present time. This fact should give supporters
of state competition some pause. If the existence of the correlation is viewed by them
as an indication that competition works well, shouldn’t the nonexistence of such a
correlation now lead to doubts as to whether competition is working well at the
present time?

2. The Fluctuations of the “Delaware Effect”

      An assessment of Daines’s findings should take into account the fluctuations
in the size of the Delaware effect. An examination of his results indicates that the
magnitude of the correlation varied greatly from year to year. For instance, Daines’s
regressions indicate that Delaware companies had a Tobin’s Q in 1986 that was 12%
higher (at the 99% confidence level) than that of non-Delaware companies. In the

20 See Paul A. Gompers et al., NBER Working Paper No. 8449 (August 2001). Specifically, they
find that Delaware incorporation tended to be positively correlated at the beginning of the
studied period and negative toward the end, with an average coefficient that was negative and
statistically significant.
21 See Subramanian, The Disappearing Delaware Effect, working paper, Harvard Law School (on

file with authors) (September 2002).
22   The same basic picture emerges if one uses Tobin’s Q unadjusted by industry. There were
four years in which there was no statistically significant correlation between Delaware
incorporation and (an unadjusted) Tobin’s Q and one additional year in which the statistical
significance of the correlation was only at the 90% level. Daines, supra note 3.


                                               9
subsequent year, 1987, however, the increase in Tobin’s Q associated with Delaware
incorporation was only 5%, which was statistically insignificant from zero. To take
another example, in 1991 the increase in Tobin’s Q associated with Delaware
incorporation was 4%, also not statistically significant from zero, while in 1992, that
figure suddenly increased to 12% (at the 99% confidence level).23
      Such large fluctuations from year to year are deeply puzzling if one takes the
view that differences in value between Delaware and non-Delaware companies are
the result of the benefits of Delaware law. For Daines’s attribution of the differences
in Tobin’s Q to the superiority of Delaware’s corporate law regime to be plausible,
there must have been ground-breaking legal changes in Delaware corporate law that
occurred during these years that can account for these fluctuations. It is hard to
imagine what these dramatic changes could have been. Whatever the benefits of
Delaware’s legal regime and thus of Delaware incorporation, they must be more
stable than that.
      In his working paper that re-does Daines’s analysis, using different
specifications for some key variables, Subramanian obtains results in which the
Delaware effect does not fluctuates wildly form year to year but still changes
significantly over time. He finds that, while Delaware firms were worth 2-3% more
during 1991-1996 (3% in 1991-1993 and 2% in 1994-1996), there was not statistically
significant difference between Delaware and non-Delaware firms from 1997 on.
Subramanian seeks to explain the change in the value of Delaware firms between
1996 and 1997 by a growing perception in the market, caused by three cases in
which Delaware firms fended off hostile bidders, that Delaware would allow firms
to “just say no.” Subramanian acknowledges that the permissibility of just say no
was largely established by Delaware law several years earlier and that the bidders in
the three cases on which he relies did not even try to get the Delaware courts to
order pill redemption. But he conjectures that these three cases might have made the
permissibility of just say no under Delaware law more salient. It is far from clear,
however, that such a saliency story can account for a 2% decline in the value of
Delaware firm from 1996 to 1997.
      The fluctuations in the Delaware effect, whether from year to year or from
period to period, might be due to a selection effect. Under this story, Delaware
companies differ significantly from non-Delaware firms in some underlying way –
they are of a different “type.” And it is not unusual in the stock market for the
relative pricing of firms of different types to fluctuate considerably from year to
year. This brings us to the general problem of selection.




23   Daines, supra note 3, at 535 tbl. 3.


                                            10
3. The Problem of Selection

      There might be some who, upon finding that the correlation between Tobin’s
Q and Delaware incorporation no longer exist, might want to move on to other
pieces of the empirical evidence. It would be worthwhile, however, examining
whether the existence of correlation in some past periods (even if not now) indicates
that Delaware incorporation did produce significant increases in value for
shareholders. To draw such an inference, it would be necessary to determine
whether the relationship between Delaware incorporation and a high Tobin’s Q (or
a positive abnormal price reaction in the case of reincorporation event studies) is
one of causation or mere correlation. In other words, did Delaware law cause
Delaware firms to have a high Tobin’s Q or did companies choosing to incorporate
in Delaware tend to have a higher Tobin’s Q?
      If incorporation and reincorporation decisions were random, and if we could
therefore safely assume that Delaware and non-Delaware firms were identical other
than in their state of incorporation, differences in Tobin’s Q would arguably be
attributable to Delaware’s superior corporate law regime. But if incorporation
decisions were not random, then the differences in Tobin’s Q could have resulted
from the systematic differences between firms that incorporated in Delaware and
those that did not. Below we discuss why incorporation decisions should not be
regarded as random.

       a. Selection Follows from the Very Presence of a Delaware Wealth Effect

      If there were any period in which Delaware incorporation could bring about
an increase in shareholder value, it would follow that Delaware and non-Delaware
firms differed in systematic ways other than in their state of incorporation. Consider
a period in which a move to Delaware could have produced, say, a 3% or 5%
increase in value for companies incorporated in other states.24 Why did some firms
choose to leave so much money on the table, money they could easily have collected
by simply incorporating in Delaware? There must have been something different
about these firms. The difference might have been in managerial quality, or agency
costs, or firm strategy. Whatever it was, this difference must have been significant
enough to cause non-reincorporating firms to forgo an easy and significant increase
in firm value. Once differences between Delaware and non-Delaware firms are
admitted, however, there is a real possibility that they, rather than the purported
benefits of Delaware incorporation, account for whatever differences in value
existed, at the given point in time, between Delaware and non-Delaware companies.


24Five percent is the estimate provided by Daines’s study for the value-added of Delaware law
given the pooled sample estimates. Id. at Tbl. 3. Subramanian, supra note 21, estimates that
Delaware firms were worth 2%-3% more during the period 1991-1996.


                                             11
      While Daines’s study makes an impressive effort to control for as many
parameters as possible, including type of business and firm size, it nonetheless
remains true that if in a group of seemingly identical firms, some firms incorporate
in Delaware and others do not, there must be omitted variables that produce this
differential behavior. This is all the more true if it is supposed that one choice
produces a substantial increase in firm value and the other does not.
      The presence of such variables is clearly suggested by the results of the
Incorporation Study. Using the Compustat database that Daines also used, this
study sought to identify which characteristics make companies more or less likely to
incorporate in Delaware. It found, for example, that larger and newer companies are
more likely to incorporate in Delaware. For our purposes, however, the crucial point
is that the study’s regressions, controlling for various company characteristics
(which Daines also controlled for) had an explanatory power of only 13% for the
decision whether or not to incorporate in Delaware.25 This finding clearly suggests
the importance of omitted variables in explaining why some firms but not others
choose Delaware incorporation.26

       b. Understanding Selection

      There are various explanations that could account for why firms with the
same Compustat data characteristics make different incorporation and
reincorporation decisions. Consider, for example, the following scenario.27 Law

25 Bebchuk & Cohen, supra note 12.
26 It is worth noting another interesting attempt by Daines to isolate his findings from the
selection effect. He estimates the difference in Tobin’s Q only between mature Delaware and
mature non-Delaware firms on the theory that a firm’s current valuation is unrelated to its
valuation years ago. He also estimates the difference in Tobin’s Q between Delaware and non-
Delaware firms while controlling for the prestige of the firm’s underwriter at the time of its
initial public offering, assuming that this prestige is correlated with the firm’s quality and value.
These tests also show a correlation between Delaware incorporation and a higher Tobin’s Q.
         But these tests do not solve the selection problems for two reasons. First, the finding that
otherwise identical firms, as indicated by their choice of an underwriter or maturity, make
different choices on whether or not to incorporate in Delaware still raises the same type of
questions. If the firms are really identical, one must ask what accounts for the difference in
incorporation choices, unless one believes that incorporation choices are random? And why are
underwriters with similar prestige sometimes associated with Delaware incorporations and
sometimes with non-Delaware incorporations, which are value-reducing?
         Second, these tests cannot address selection effects that occur after incorporation. We
know that some selection among firms must be occurring because of the non-random nature of
reincorporation decisions. Controlling for decisions made at the time of incorporation does not
control for the decisions that have been made since that time with respect to whether or not to
reincorporate. The current state of incorporation of the firms whose Tobin’s Qs are being
measured will reflect these post-incorporation decisions.
27 This story is suggested in Bebchuk & Ferrell, A New Approach, supra note 3, at 137-38.




                                                 12
firms centered in national financial centers such as New York City might tend to
prefer Delaware incorporation. And companies that use such law firms for their
counsel might be persuaded or influenced to incorporate in Delaware. It is possible
that these companies may be more likely to have sophisticated and ambitious
managers or have some other quality that operates to increase firm value. Of course,
this scenario, based on managerial heterogeneity, is only one of many possible
stories that an examination of the selection issue should consider. The critical point
is that the different incorporation choices of firms with the same basic financial
features – some incorporate in Delaware and some do not – are bound to reflect
some other differences between them, and the latter might account for whatever
differences in corporate value exist between Delaware and non-Delaware firms.
       Discovering what influences companies’ incorporation decisions is an area in
need of empirical work. Until such studies are available and we know a great deal
more about how firms make incorporation decisions, the attribution of differences in
firm value to differences in corporate regimes will remain questionable.

                           B. Event Studies of Reincorporations

       A number of studies have examined stock price reaction to changes in a firm’s
state of incorporation. The overwhelming majority of the firms examined by these
studies, as is true with reincorporating firms in general, reincorporate to Delaware.28
The reincorporation studies are by far the most commonly cited evidence for the
proposition that Delaware corporate law increases shareholder wealth. Such
studies, for instance, provided much of the basis for the views of Professors
Easterbrook, Fischel and Romano quoted earlier.29
       What conclusions should we draw from these reincorporation studies? The
next section will emphasize that in answering this question one should bear in mind
the flaws in some of these event studies and the fact that the documented positive
abnormal returns associated with reincorporations are, on the whole, quite modest.
Part I.B.2 will then argue that there is no firm basis for attributing these modest
positive abnormal returns to the superiority of Delaware’s corporate law regime.

1. The Abnormal Returns Findings: Questions of Robustness and Magnitude

      There have been eight reincorporation event studies. Overall, the picture that
emerges is one of modest gains accompanying reincorporation. Six of the eight
studies documented positive abnormal stock returns associated with the
reincorporating firms in the sample.30 The remaining two found negative abnormal

28 See Bhagat & Romano, supra note 3; Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2.
29 See supra Introduction.
30 See Jianghong Wang, Performance of Reincorporating Firms (1995) (unpublished manuscript on

file with authors) (Yale School of Management); Jeffrey Netter, & Annette Poulson, State


                                             13
returns associated with reincorporations; one found negative returns associated
with the entire sample,31 while the other found negative returns associated with a
subgroup of the reincorporating firms.32 Pooling the results from all eight studies,
the weighted average price reaction to reincorporation is +1.28%.33 Even accepting
this finding at face value, the positive abnormal return attributable to Delaware’s
superior corporate law regime is rather small. Before drawing any firm conclusions,
however, it is first worth taking a closer look at these event studies.
       The two earliest reincorporation event studies used problematic
methodologies that were subsequently viewed to be unreliable.34 Six subsequent


Corporation Laws and Shareholders: The Recent Experience, 18 FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 29-40
(1989); Michael Bradley & Cindy A. Schipani, The Relevance of the Duty of Care Standard in
Corporate Governance, 75 IOWA L. REV. 1-74 (1989); Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2; Peter
Dodd & Richard Leftwich, The Market for Corporate Charters: Unhealthy Competition v.s. Federal
Regulation, 53 J. OF BUS. 259-283 (1980); and Allen Hyman, The Delaware Controversy—The Legal
Debate, 4 J. OF CORP. LAW 368-398 (1979).
31 See Randall A. Heron & Wilbur G. Lewellen, An Empirical Analysis of the Reincorporation

Decision, 33 J. OF FIN. & QUANT. ANALY. 549-568 (1998).
32 See Pamela Peterson, Reincorporation Motives and Shareholder Wealth, 23 FIN. REV. 151 (1988).
33   Returns are weighted by their sample size. In taking pooled average price reactions, we
follow John C. Coates IV, Takeover Defenses in the Shadow of the Pill: A Critique of the Scientific
Evidence, 79 TEX. L. REV. 271, 283 (2000) and Michael C. Jensen & Richard S. Ruback, The Market
for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence, 11 J. FIN. ECON. 5, 12-13 (1980).
34 In the first study, Allen Hyman found positive abnormal returns for reincorporating firms for

four of the five trading days prior to the public announcement of reincorporation. Hyman, supra
note 30. But this finding does not tell us whether the positive abnormal returns were associated
with the reincorporation announcement itself, which is the relevant date. Whether statistically
abnormal returns for the sample occurred over a period spanning the five days before and after
the announcement day itself is unreported. The study does not tell us whether there were
positive abnormal returns associated with the period spanning one day immediately before and
after the announcement date, a commonly used time-frame for reincorporation studies. These
concerns are heightened by the fact that abnormal returns were determined by reference to the
performance of the Standard & Poor’s index, a somewhat unorthodox, and unreliable,
methodology.
         The second reincorporation event study, by Peter Dodd and Richard Leftwich, examined
a sample of 140 publicly traded companies that reincorporated between 1927 and 1977. Dodd &
Leftwich, supra note 30. The study did find statistically significant positive abnormal returns,
but it used an interval of two years before the reincorporation date. Such an extended period
sheds little light on the effect of reincorporation. It is generally true that using an interval of a
few days or weeks around an event, rather than just the day of the event itself, can still do a
good job of capturing the effects of the event. However, this is not true for a two-year interval.
See, e.g., S.P. Kothari & Jerold P. Warner, Measuring Long-Horizon Security Price Performance, 43 J.
FIN. ECON. 301, 301 & 337 (1997) (finding that tests of multi-year abnormal returns around firm-
specific events are "severely mis-specified" and concluding that "the interpretation of long-
horizon tests requires extreme caution."); Brad M. Barber & John D. Lyon, Detecting Long-Run
Abnormal Stock Returns: The Empirical Power and Specification of Test Statistics, 43 J. FIN. ECON. 341,


                                                  14
studies used more standard and reliable methodologies. These six studies,
summarized in the table below, present a rather mixed picture.35 Roberta Romano’s
study, the earliest and most influential of the six, found a positive abnormal return
of 4.18%.36 However, three of the subsequent five studies found abnormal returns in
the vicinity of 1%, and two of the subsequent five studies, including the most recent
event study which used the largest sample size, did not find an abnormal return that
differed from zero in a statistically significant way.

            Authors                      Abnormal Return                Sample Size
             Romano (1985)                    4.18%                       150

             Peterson (1988)                     .27%                      30

      Bradley & Schipani (1989)                  1.04%                     32

      Netter & Paulson (1989)                    .93%                      36

             Wang (1995)                         .97%                      145

      Heron & Lewellen (1998)                    -.15%                     294


       Thus, a 1% positive abnormal return is probably as fair a measure as any if
one were inclined to rely on these event studies to measure the effect on stock price
of reincorporation to a superior corporate law regime.37 Accordingly, even if the
positive abnormal stock price reaction is entirely due to the benefits of Delaware
incorporation, these benefits appear to be rather modest.38 For instance, the adoption
of confidential voting, which is usually not considered a significant change, has a
reported positive abnormal return of approximately 1%.39 But should one attribute
the entire positive abnormal return found in these event studies to the superiority of
Delaware incorporation?

342-43 (1997) (also finding that long-run tests are mis-specified and identifying new listing bias,
rebalancing bias, and skewness bias as reasons).
35 See Heron & Lewellen, supra note 31; Wang, supra note 30; Netter & Paulson, supra note 30;

Bradley & Schipani, supra note 30; Peterson, supra note 32; Romano, Law as a Product, supra note
2.
36 See Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2.
37 The pooled weighted average abnormal return of these six studies is 1.16%.
38 We do recognize, of course, that a 1% increase in firm value can still be quite meaningful in

terms of the dollars at stake. We point out the size of the abnormal return merely to place it in
perspective.
39  Coates, supra note 33, at 284 (pointing out that the positive abnormal return of adopting
confidential voting is .9234%).


                                                15
2. The Problem of Confounding Events

       a. Confounding Events

       If the subset of firms reincorporating at any point in time were a random
selection from the universe of all corporations, it would follow that unaccounted for
increases in a reincorporating firm’s stock price on the date the news of
reincorporation reached the market could reasonably be attributed to Delaware’s
superior corporate law. The randomness of the selection would help ensure that
firm-specific characteristics were not affecting stock price.
       However, there is good reason to believe (as was also the case when
considering Daines’s Tobin’s Q study) that reincorporation decisions are not
random, but rather are associated with or produced by specific events or
occurrences, a phenomenon we will refer to as “confounding events.” As a result,
any findings of positive abnormal returns could well be the result not of investors’
anticipation of moving to a better legal regime but rather of investors’ reactions to
these confounding events. The need to disentangle various effects is a generic
problem that arises with the use of event studies in the field of corporate law, but its
importance varies with the context.40 In the context of corporate reincorporations,
the presence of confounding events is an issue that must be confronted because
reincorporation decisions are clearly not random. Only some firms elect to
reincorporate, and they choose to do so at a particular point in time. Thus, some
event, perhaps the receipt of new information concerning the corporation or a new
firm strategy, must underlie the decision of the managers of a minority of
companies to pursue reincorporation to a particular state at a specific point in time.
Investors could very well revise their estimates of a company’s value in light of such
an event, if the event is observable, or in light of the inference that such an event
might have occurred, if the event is not observable. Either way, reincorporations are
likely to be accompanied by investors revising their estimates of the value of
reincorporating companies for reasons that have nothing to do with differences in
legal regimes.
       Indeed, a close examination of the reincorporation event studies confirms that
confounding events have a considerable impact on documented returns. Most of the
studies indicate that reincorporations are the product of significant selection effects
and were accompanied by certain events (which could have caused revised
valuation) or were followed by certain events (and thus could have been viewed by
investors as signals that such events might indeed follow). For example, in a well-

40 For instance, an important issue in corporate finance is the effectiveness of event studies in
identifying the underlying sources of the gains that occur as a result of corporate mergers. See
Gregor Andrade et al., New Evidence and Perspectives on Mergers, 15 J. ECON. PERSP. 103, 117
(2001).


                                               16
known study, Romano found that “most reincorporations preceded or coincided
with a series of distinct and identifiable transactions,”41 and that “the most plausible
explanation of the reincorporation phenomenon is that corporations planning to
engage in specific activities consider the choice of domicile important.”42 Such
findings are consistent with the view that reincorporations are not random, and that
the returns accompanying reincorporations reflect investors’ reactions to events that
partly coincide with, and partly might be inferred from, the reincorporation
decisions.
       Of Romano’s sample of 150 reincorporations, 63 were associated with an
active merger and acquisitions program by the firms in question.43 Such programs
are known to be associated with positive abnormal returns.44 Below we will discuss
two other types of confounding events stories that seem plausible in light of the
evidence. Each one of them could well have been present in some significant
fraction of reincorporations and could explain why, even if firms do not on average
benefit from moving to Delaware’s legal regime, reincorporations were
accompanied by increases in company value. The following list of types of
confounding events is meant to be illustrative, not exhaustive.

       b. Scheduling Reincorporation Votes in Relatively Good Times

        Managers interested in reincorporation might well prefer bringing
reincorporation proposals to a shareholder vote when things are going well, or at
least not poorly, for the company. Managers are more likely to receive shareholder
approval for a proposal if shareholders are content with the company’s overall
performance. Managers, who have a great deal of flexibility in terms of when a
reincorporation proposal will be brought before shareholders, can orchestrate, at
least to a significant extent, shareholder votes to coincide with good times.
        Thus, it might be that, on average, managers bring reincorporation proposals
to shareholders when contemporaneous news about the company’s performance, or
news expected to be released by the time of the vote, is better than average. Indeed,
to produce an average positive stock price effect, it would be enough merely that
managers avoid pursuing reincorporations at times when particularly bad news
about the company is revealed. In short, according to this story, reincorporations
may generally be accompanied by an upward revision in investors’ valuations
because investors on average receive or expect to receive better than average news.

41   See Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2. Professor Romano reports that 72% of
reincorporations between 1960 and 1982 were associated either with a public offering of stock,
mergers, or adoption of antitakeover defenses. ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2.
42 Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2, at 261.
43 Id. at 268.
44 See Katherine Schipper & Rex Thompson, Evidence on the Capitalized Value of Merger Activity

for Acquiring Firms, 11 J. OF FIN. ECON. 85 (1983).


                                             17
       The story that managers time reincorporation votes to take place when things
are going better than average sits well with a pattern established by the
reincorporation event studies. As Michael Bradley and Cindy Schipani explain,
“firms choose to reincorporate in Delaware after they have experienced an abnormal
run-up in their stock price.”45 Consistent with this observation, the Dodd and
Leftwich reincorporation event study found, both for the entire sample of
reincorporating firms as well as for the group of firms for which they had accurate
reincorporation announcement dates, that most of the abnormal returns experienced
by reincorporating firms occurred well before the event date. The same finding was
subsequently reproduced in both Romano’s 1985 event study and Bradley and
Schipani’s 1989 event study. This pattern is consistent with the view that the
reincorporation event studies lump together abnormal returns that lead to or
influence the timing of the reincorporation decision (and which could well continue
to be present at the time of the reincorporation announcement) with abnormal
returns that should be attributed to the reincorporation announcement itself, shorn
of any confounding events.
       Furthermore, the Heron and Lewellen reincorporation event study reports
that a significant number of reincorporations in the study’s raw data set coincided
with substantial corporate events such as dividend increases. Whereas Heron and
Lewellen excluded these reincorporations from the sample they studied, other
studies did not similarly attempt to exclude companies that increased their
dividends (or had other coincident events) at the same time that they announced
their plan to reincorporate, which might explain why these studies found higher
positive abnormal returns associated with reincorporation than did the Heron and
Lewellen study.

       c. Increased Likelihood of Takeover

       A second plausible confounding events story centers on takeover defenses. As
the reincorporation events studies indicate, a significant number of reincorporations
are motivated by antitakeover considerations. Reincorporating companies often
candidly admit that antitakeover considerations are a motive for seeking
reincorporation.46 When investors suspect or are told that a company is moving for
such reasons, they will adjust their valuations of the company to reflect not only (1)
the direct effect of the company being subject to a different state takeover regime,
but also (2) the increased probability, inferred from the managers’ focus on
antitakeover considerations, of the company being a target.
       The second factor, the increased probability of a takeover, is generally
received as good news by investors and can be expected to have a positive effect on

45Bradley & Schipani, supra note 30, at 67 (emphasis added)
46 See, e.g., Heron & Lewellen, supra note 31, at 553; Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2, at
225, 249-61.


                                               18
stock prices. Thus, the presence of this factor, according to this story, implies that
the reported positive abnormal returns documented in reincorporation event studies
represent an upward biased estimate of the effect of moving companies to a
different state takeover regime. Even if it were the case that the first factor
(subjecting the company to a different state takeover regime) has a sufficiently large
negative effect on stock prices so that all the antitakeover-motivated
reincorporations are accompanied by a negative abnormal return, this negative
abnormal return would still be an upward biased estimate of the lower return
caused by the first factor alone. And this upward bias in the documented returns for
part of the reincorporation sample would, of course, increase average results for the
sample as a whole.

       d. Different Reincorporation Categories

        Consistent with the significance of confounding events, two recent studies
found that the abnormal returns experienced by reincorporating firms vary
depending on the announced motivation for the firm’s decision to reincorporate.
Heron and Lewellen found that reincorporations motivated by a desire to erect
takeover defenses were accompanied by statistically significant negative abnormal
returns.47 In contrast, reincorporations motivated by a desire to limit directors’
liability resulted in positive abnormal returns.48 Peterson’s reincorporation event
study also documented that abnormal returns differed depending on the announced
motivation for reincorporation.49 If the motivation for the reincorporation was
defensive in nature, the abnormal return was -.16%, while other reincorporations
experienced a positive abnormal return of .65%.
        Romano’s 1985 study broke down reincorporations into three groups:
reincorporations that seemed motivated by mergers and acquisition programs;
reincorporations that seemed motivated by antitakeover considerations; and a
miscellaneous group consisting of all the remaining reincorporations. She found that
each of the three groups had a substantially different average abnormal return but
that the variance of the three associated abnormal returns was not statistically
significant.50
        In recent papers, Sanjai Bhagat and Roberta Romano argue that, based on
Romano’s 1985 study, confounding events do not influence the returns reported in
the event studies literature.51 Bhagat and Romano interpret the lack of statistically

47 Heron & Lewellen, supra note 31, at 549-68.
48 Id. at 550, 557 tbl. 5.
49 See Peterson, supra note 32.
50 Romano, Law as a Product, supra note 2, at 272. Peterson’s study, which also found different

abnormal returns across subgroups of reincorporating firms, did not test the statistical
significance of the returns’ variance.
51 See, e.g., Bhagat & Romano, supra note 3, at 387.




                                              19
significant differences between the three groups as evidence that “significant
positive returns upon reincorporation can be attributed to investors’ positive
assessment of the change in legal regime, not a confounding of the impact of
reincorporating firms’ other future projects.”52 But this inference, which the 1985
study did not make, is unwarranted.
       To start, such an inference would overlook the different conclusions reached
by more recent studies. Perhaps more importantly, Romano’s 1985 testing was not
designed to address the confounding events issue. The testing examined whether
reincorporations with different motivations had different effects on stock market
values. Tests for confounding events should focus on all the information that was
publicly known at the time of the reincorporation, but the information on which
Romano’s 1985 study relied differed from this category of information in two
significant ways. First, Romano’s analysis used for the classification information that
was not publicly known at the time of the reincorporation, such as information
about acquisitions in the year following the reincorporation and information
disclosed to Romano privately in response to the questionnaire she circulated to
firms many years after their reincorporation. Second, Romano’s analysis did not
include some public information that would be relevant for studying the
confounding events question, such as how the earnings and other financial
disclosures of reincorporating companies at the time of their reincorporation
compared with those of non-reincorporating companies.53
       In sum, there are good reasons, grounded in the empirical evidence, to
believe that reincorporations are accompanied by confounding events that can help
explain the documented positive abnormal returns. What is lacking in the literature
to date is a better understanding of what causes firms to incorporate at given times
in particular jurisdictions. We will return to this issue in Part IV.

       II. DOES A MARGINAL SUPERIORITY OF DELAWARE INCORPORATION IMPLY
                   THAT STATE COMPETITION BENEFITS INVESTORS?


      Part I questioned whether the available empirical evidence demonstrates that
Delaware’s legal regime benefits investors more than that of other states. In this
Part, we change directions and assume that incorporation in Delaware does add


52 Id.; see also ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2, at 18; Romano, Need for Competition, supra note 9.
53 It is also worth noting that the breakdown of reincorporating firms into groups in Romano’s
1985 study involved substantial “noise” which made it difficult to get statistically significant
results. Given that the breakdown into groups involved a great deal of noise (as the study itself
readily admits), the 1985 study prudentially emphasizes that this noise, “may very well be the
source of the test’s inability to find any significant difference among the groups.” Romano, Law
as a Product, supra note 2, at 272. The only conclusion that the 1985 study was prepared to make
was that “[w]e cannot conclude definitely that the stock returns for the different types of
reincorporations are significantly different.” Id.


                                               20
some value, even if it is difficult to measure. It is reasonable to assume that
reincorporation often adds some value; otherwise, shareholders would tend not to
vote to reincorporate. But what are the implications of such benefits for the merits
of state competition?
       Many scholars have assumed, without much discussion, that the presence of
benefits to shareholders from Delaware incorporation would prove that state
competition benefits investors. This assumption is not valid, however. The relative
performance of Delaware in a state competition system and the overall performance
of the state competition system are two separate issues. Findings of Delaware
marginal superiority do not address the question of how well state competition is
performing overall and, in particular, whether it performs better than would an
alternative regime. And it is the performance of the state competition regime overall
that is at the heart of the debate surrounding state competition for corporate
charters.

                   A. The Need to Evaluate States’ Collective Performance

        It is worthwhile emphasizing that, in many respects, the various states’
corporate regimes are not very different from each other when compared against the
range of possible choices and the laws of other countries. This feature of U.S.
corporate law has been well documented in William Carney’s comprehensive study
of state corporate law.54 The similarity is especially noteworthy in light of the
existence of fifty-one separate corporate codes and the resulting opportunity for a
wide variety of approaches to many corporate law issues.55
        Given the fundamental similarity among state corporate law regimes,
assessing the collective approach that the states have adopted in most areas of
corporate regulation is as important in assessing the value of state competition as
evaluating some of the real differences (such as in the area of takeover regulation)
that do exist between states. This assessment of states’ collective approach should
focus on those areas where there is a substantial divergence between the interests of
managers and shareholders. It is in these areas that states, including Delaware, are
likely to collectively adopt a sub-optimal position.


54 See William J. Carney, The Production of Corporate Law, 71 S. CAL. L. REV. 715 (1998); see also
John C. Coffee, Jr., The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence of Corporate
Governance and Its Implications, 93 NW. U.L. REV. 641, 702 (1999) (“[T]he best documented
finding in the empirical literature on the U.S. corporate chartering competition is that a high
degree of uniformity has emerged in American corporate laws.”).
55 For example, despite the large number of U.S. jurisdictions, none of them has offered, as the

British City Code has done, a clear and categorical ban on the use of defensive tactics in the
presence of a bona fide tender offer in the absence of shareholder approval. See 2 P.F.C. Begg,
CORPORATE ACQUISITIONS AND MERGERS: A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO THE LEGAL, FINANCIAL, AND
ADMINISTRATIVE IMPLICATIONS (Graham & Trotman Limited, 1985).


                                               21
                   B. A Skeptical Account of State Competition is Consistent
                            with Delaware Marginal Superiority

        The superiority of Delaware law, as purportedly documented by the studies
we reviewed in Part I of this paper, is consistent with the pro-state competition
position. But such a finding is equally consistent with a more skeptical theory of
how state competition works and, therefore, is inconclusive in adjudicating the
debate over state competition. Indeed, any account of state competition – whether
critical or supportive – that takes into account the substantial uniformity among
states in substantive arrangements, would likely start from the premise that
Delaware’s corporate regime is marginally better. If all states have essentially the
same substantive rules, it is likely that Delaware’s unique non-substantive
advantages will outweigh any of the relatively small differences that exist among
state laws. Delaware is the beneficiary of network externalities and a well-developed
legal infrastructure.56
        For example, consider the following skeptical account of state competition.
Just as shareholders presumably approve reincorporations when they increase firm
value, a decision by managers not to reincorporate, which is not reviewable by
shareholders under state law, is presumably in the interests of managers. With
respect to certain corporate law subjects, there will often be a substantial divergence
between the interests of managers and those of shareholders. In such circumstances,
Delaware, as well as other states, will care a great deal about satisfying managers’
preferences, as states will wish to prevent managers from pursuing reincorporation
elsewhere.57
        As we have argued in earlier work, corporate rules that are significantly
redistributive from shareholders to managers and rules that affect the discipline of
the market are likely areas where states, as a result of the competition for corporate
charters, will fail to maximize shareholder wealth. The failure to maximize
shareholder wealth in these areas will be true not only of Delaware, but of other
states as well. As a result, it is theoretical possible for there to be a competitive
equilibrium were it is true both that: (1) states adopt corporate law regimes which
tend to favor managerial interests over shareholder interests where there is
substantial divergence of interests; and (2) reincorporation to Delaware often
provides some additional value, on the margin, to shareholders if Delaware offers
advantages not reflected in its substantive rules. This reasoning can be captured
formally in a model where such an outcome is a competitive equilibrium.58

56 See generally Fisch, supra note 3.
57 See Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation, supra note 2; Bebchuk & Ferrell, Federalism and
Corporate Law, supra note 3.
58 See Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk, supra note 7. This model does differ from the position

adopted by William Cary in an important respect. Cary believed in a “race-to-the-bottom” in
which Delaware was offering especially poor corporate rules. See Cary, supra note 1. In


                                              22
       Even if it were empirically true (which we do not believe it is) that the
superiority of Delaware for many shareholders lies in its having a better substantive
regime, this should still be the beginning, not the end, of the analysis. It would still
be the case that where states have ended up overall could be questioned. One could,
for example, imagine a takeover regime, such as the one embodied in the British
City Code, that is far more hospitable to takeovers than that of Delaware or any
other state. Or one might believe that it would be preferable to have a regime even
more protective of target management than that currently provided by any state. A
regime in which dead-hand and slow-hand poison pills were permitted and
routinely used would be one such example.

                  III. DOES STATE COMPETITION WORK WELL IN THE AREA
                               OF TAKEOVER REGULATION?


       Despite the substantial similarity in state corporate law regimes, there is some
significant variance among states in their regulation of takeovers. Although most
states have adopted some antitakeover statutes, important differences remain
between states’ antitakeover stances. Supporters of states competition have sought
to reconcile their position that competition works well with the view, which is
supported by the evidence, that antitakeover statutes often do not serve
shareholders. To this end, they have made empirical claims that state competition
does not reward, and thus does not contribute to, the adoption of antitakeover
protections. As this Part shows, however, these empirical claims are unconvincing.

                  A. The View That States Restrict Takeovers Excessively

       State takeover law consists of two basic components. First, states impose
rules on bidders wishing to acquire companies. These rules are usually contained in
antitakeover statutes. Second, takeover law includes rules governing the use of
defensive tactics by managers wishing to defeat an unwanted takeover bid. In
Delaware, the law on defensive tactics consists almost entirely of judge-made law. In
other states, statutory law plays a more important role in the form of poison pill
endorsement statutes and constituency statutes.59
       While case law, such as Delaware’s law on the use of defensive tactics, is
extremely important, empirical studies of the effect of takeover law on shareholder
wealth has focused on antitakeover statutes, including statutes addressing the use of


contrast, this model puts forward a race to the bottom equilibrium in which Delaware is slightly
better than other states with respect to protecting shareholders’ interests.
59  Poison-pill endorsement statutes explicitly authorize the use of the “poison pill” defense
against hostile takeovers, a defense that is highly effective. Constituency statutes explicitly
permit target management to take into account the interests of non-shareholder groups, such as
employees, to justify fending off hostile takeovers.


                                              23
defensive tactics. Because these statutes are proposed and adopted on specific
dates, they allow for empirical estimation of their effects. The evidence from this
research consistently shows that antitakeover statutes virtually never increase firm
value and, in fact, often decrease it.60
       While a typical antitakeover statute has a negative, albeit modest, effect on
shareholder value, there are three states that have gained notoriety for the extreme
nature of their antitakeover statutes. Massachusetts, Ohio, and Pennsylvania have
adopted antitakeover statutes that either impede or substantially reduce the
attractiveness of takeovers above and beyond that normally associated with state
antitakeover statutes. All three antitakeover statutes have been heavily criticized
and identified in empirical studies as causing a substantial reduction in firm value.61
       Supporters of state competition are among those who tend to believe that
states often restrict takeovers excessively. For instance, Ralph Winter, one of the
early influential proponents of the pro-state competition position, has expressed his
belief that a legal regime that facilitates takeovers increases firm value.62 Frank
Easterbrook and Daniel Fischel have famously argued that managers should be
“passive” in the face of a takeover and not engage in defensive tactics.63 Another
leading pro-state competition theorist, Roberta Romano, has forthrightly
acknowledged the “dismal track records of most states in takeover regulation.”64
       How do supporters of state competition square this circle? The stock
response has been to emphasize the fact that Delaware, the leading corporate law
jurisdiction, has a less restrictive antitakeover statute than that of many other states.
They reason that if the most successful state has among the mildest of antitakeover

60 See, e.g., Jonathan M. Karpoff & Paul H. Malatesta, The Wealth Effects of Second-Generation
State Takeover Legislation, 25 J. OF FIN. ECON. 291 (1989) (forty second-generation statutes
adopted in twenty-six states had, on average, a -.294 % impact on stock prices on the date that
the earliest known newspaper article concerning the proposed legislation appeared). For a
survey of the many event studies on state antitakeover statutes, see GRANT GARTMAN, STATE
ANTITAKEOVER LAWS (2001) (on file with authors).
61  See Samuel J. Szewcyk & George P. Tsetsekos, State Intervention in the Market for Corporate
Control: The Case of Pennsylvania Senate Bill 1320, 31 J. OF FIN. ECON. 3 (1992) (examining
Pennsylvania’s antitakeover statute); Jonathan M. Karpoff & Paul H. Malatesta, Pennsylvania
Law: State Antitakeover Laws and Stock Prices, 46 FIN. ANALYST J. 8 (1990); L. Mick Swartz, The
1990 Pennsylvania Antitakeover Law: Should Firms Opt Out of Antitakeover Legislation, 11 J. OF
ACCT., AUDITING, & FIN. 223 (examining Pennsylvania’s antitakeover statute); Michael
Ryngaert & Jeffry Netter, Shareholder Wealth Effects of the 1986 Ohio Antitakeover Law Revised: Its
Real Effects, 6 J. L. ECON. & ORG. 253 (1990) (examining Ohio’s antitakeover statute); Robert
Daines, Do Staggered Boards Affect Firm Value? Massachusetts and the Market for Corporate Control
(working paper on file with authors) (2001) (examining Massachusetts’s antitakeover statute).
62 Winter, supra note 2, at 289.
63 See Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Proper Role of a Target’s Management in

Responding to a Tender Offer, 94 HARV. L. REV. 1161 (1981).
64 Roberta Romano, Competition for Corporate Charters and the Lesson of Takeover Statutes, 61

FORDHAM L. REV. 843, 860 (1993).


                                                24
statutes, then it follows that state competition does not encourage states to impose
excessive antitakeover protections. Specifically, supporters of state competition have
made the following four claims:

       (1)   Delaware corporations have a higher incidence of bids and a higher
             acquisition rate, indicating that Delaware’s takeover law is more
             hospitable to takeovers;

       (2)   Direct observation of the terms of states’ antitakeover laws also reveals
             that Delaware’s takeover regime is relatively moderate;

       (3)   The market for incorporations has penalized those states that have
             enacted extreme antitakeover statutes, such as Massachusetts, Ohio, and
             Pennsylvania;

       (4)   The adoption of state antitakeover statutes is largely outside the normal
             parameters of state competition for incorporations.

We will examine each of these four claims in turn.

               B. Claims That Delaware Corporations Are Acquired More Often

       Robert Daines’s Tobin’s Q study, discussed in Part I, identified Delaware’s
takeover regime as one of the factors accounting for a higher Tobin’s Q among
Delaware firms.65 He found that Delaware firms are more likely to receive bids and
are more likely to be acquired than non-Delaware firms. Daines attributed the
different bid and acquisition rates of Delaware firms to Delaware’s provision of
fewer impediments to hostile bids.
       This attribution of the different bid and acquisition rates of Delaware firms to
Delaware’s takeover law is unwarranted for several reasons. First, although cleanly
separating friendly and hostile acquisitions is tricky,66 Daines fails to distinguish
between friendly and hostile acquisitions. Because the majority of all acquisitions
are friendly, the difference in acquisition incidence might be due in large part to
differences in the incidence of friendly acquisitions of Delaware and non-Delaware
firms. Even if one were to take the view that Delaware is mildly more hospitable to
hostile takeovers than other states, it would be hard to attribute a substantial


65 On a related note, Peter Dodd and Richard Leftwich attribute the high rate of reincorporation
to Delaware in the late 1960s to Delaware’s relatively permissive stance on mergers and tender
offers. See Dodd & Leftwich, supra note 30, at 268.
66 See G. William Schwert, Hostility in Takeovers: In the Eyes of the Beholder?, 55 J. OF FIN. 2599

(2000).


                                                25
difference in the incidence of friendly acquisitions to this mild difference in the
treatment of hostile acquisitions.67
       Rather than attributing the different acquisition (and bid) rates to differences
in the treatment of hostile bids, the more plausible explanation for the differences
between Delaware and non-Delaware firms is once again self-selection. Firms
choosing to incorporate in Delaware are different in some way, and the differences
between them and non-Delaware firms could be responsible for the different bid
and acquisition rates. This theory is more plausible because the differences between
Delaware takeover law and that of most other states are relatively minor, as we will
explain in the next section, and are therefore unlikely to account for the observed
variation in the overall incidence of friendly and hostile acquisitions. Interestingly, a
recent empirical study found that whether a target firm is a Delaware firm or not
has no effect on the outcome of a hostile bid.68 In sum, Daines’s findings do not
provide a firm basis for concluding that Delaware is more hospitable to takeovers
than other states.

              C. Claims That Delaware’s Takeover Law Is Relatively Moderate

       It is far from clear that Delaware offers less antitakeover protection than most
other states. While it is true that some states have more antitakeover statutes or
antitakeover statutes of a more extreme nature, others, such as California, have no
such statutes.
       More importantly, an assessment of Delaware’s relative position cannot be
based merely on a comparison of antitakeover statutes because case law plays a
central role in Delaware’s takeover regulation. Delaware has a well-developed body
of case law, which makes the absence of some types of antitakeover statutes
practically irrelevant. Delaware’s judges have played an active role in developing
legal doctrines that permit the use of defensive tactics in general and the potent
poison pill defense in particular. Because of the large body of Delaware judge-made
law upholding the indefinite use of poison pills, there is no need for an antitakeover
statute explicitly authorizing the use of poison pills (a poison-pill endorsement
statute) or for an antitakeover constituency statute that provides managers with
discretion to defend against bids.
       Furthermore, Delaware’s case law on the use of poison pills has rendered the
absence of a control-share-acquisition antitakeover statute and a fair-price
antitakeover statute practically irrelevant; as long as a poison pill is in place, any
additional antitakeover defense is superfluous since the pill completely blocks a

67  Guhan Subramanian found no differences between Delaware and non-Delaware firms in
terms of the incidence of hostile bids. Thus, according to this evidence, the difference in
acquisition rates is largely due to the incidence of friendly acquisitions.
68 See Lucian A. Bebchuk et al., The Antitakeover Power of Classified Boards: Theory, Evidence and

Policy, 54 STAN. L. REV. 887 (2002).


                                               26
bidder from proceeding. Were a bidder to overcome the poison pill defense by
taking control of the target corporation’s board in a proxy contest (and having the
poison pill redeemed by the board), a control-share-acquisition antitakeover statute
and a fair-price antitakeover statute, which are usually only applicable to bids that
the board does not approve, would still be irrelevant.
       In contrast, the adoption of additional antitakeover statutes might be more
significant events for states with less developed case law. Poison-pill endorsement
statutes and constituency statutes in such states might provide managers with the
confidence, notwithstanding the limited case law in the state, that indefinite use of a
poison pill defense will be tolerated. Furthermore, the adoption of additional
antitakeover statutes may also convey the message that the state is committed to
providing substantial protection to managers who are facing unwanted takeovers.
Delaware has already sent this message loud and clear through its case law. Thus, it
is far from evident that Delaware’s antitakeover law is more moderate; any
comparison between Delaware’s takeover regime and those of other states must take
into account the central role in takeover regulation played by Delaware’s extensive
case law.
       Although it is difficult to compare Delaware’s takeover regime directly to that
of other states, much can be learned about the merits of state competition from a
more systematic comparison of how states other than Delaware fare in the
incorporation market when they adopt various antitakeover statutes. Given that
these states vary widely in their antitakeover statutes and how they fare in the
incorporation market, a cross-comparison within the group of non-Delaware
companies would be helpful in obtaining a better understanding on how the
incorporation market reacts to different levels of antitakeover protection. Part IV
discusses this approach.

                       D. Claims That Outlier States Have Been Penalized

       Supporters of state competition often point to the extreme antitakeover
statutes of Massachusetts, Ohio and Pennsylvania as examples of Delaware’s virtue.
Consistent with this view, pro-state competition scholars have suggested that these
three states have been penalized rather than rewarded by the incorporation market
as a result of their actions. Moreover, these scholars have directed some of their
empirical work towards documenting the adverse effects that these extreme
antitakeover statutes have had on shareholders.
       For example, Robert Daines has found that Massachusetts companies have
lower Tobin’s Qs than those of Delaware firms.69 In another study, Daines found
that the adoption of Massachusetts’s antitakeover statute was accompanied by a
significant reduction in the share value of Massachusetts companies.70 This second

69   Daines, supra note 3 at 546.
70   See Daines, supra note 61 (examining Massachusetts’ antitakeover statute).


                                                 27
study is consistent with earlier studies that found strong negative stock reactions to
the adoption of the antitakeover statutes of all three states. However, this work
simply shows that the antitakeover statutes of these states harm shareholders, a
point with which we readily agree. This in no way establishes that these states have,
in fact, been penalized by the incorporation market as a result of their bad behavior.
        Roberta Romano has pointed out that many Pennsylvania companies have
opted out of Pennsylvania’s extreme antitakeover statute.71 She argues that this
indicates that state competition has worked well. However, such an inference
should not be drawn. Because the opt-out procedure under the Pennsylvania
antitakeover statute was simple, the managers of Pennsylvania companies that
chose to opt-out were not harmed by the passage of the statute. In contrast, those
managers of companies that did not opt-out obtained substantial antitakeover
protections that they would not have enjoyed otherwise. The substantial incidence
of opting out thus does not imply that the passage of the Pennsylvania antitakeover
statute did not serve managers of a substantial fraction of Pennsylvania companies
at shareholder expense. More to the point, it does not imply that passage of the
statute harmed Pennsylvania in the market for corporate charters.
        The evidence provided by the supporters of state competition therefore fails
to demonstrate that the outlier states have actually been hurt by the incorporation
market, as they should have been if state competition does, as its supporters assert,
penalize the adoption of shareholder welfare-reducing corporate rules. Surprisingly,
supporters of state competition have made no effort to directly test their prediction
that the actions of the outlier states would actually hurt them in the incorporation
market. As we shall discuss in Part IV, this predicted effect does not in fact exist.

     E. Claims that Antitakeover Statutes Are Outside the Parameters of State Competition

       In an effort to reconcile their views on state competition with the evidence on
antitakeover statutes, state competition proponents have also argued that many
antitakeover statutes were passed to prevent particular, politically influential local
companies from being acquired. Therefore, proponents argue, these statutes
represent an aberration outside of the normal parameters of state competition. On
this view, even though the adoption of such statutes does not serve and indeed
hurts the goal of attracting incorporations, states have adopted them because of the
political power of some in-state corporate targets.72
       As Ralph Winter puts it: “The problem is not that states compete for charters
but that too often they do not.”73 The desire to increase the number of incorporations
does not encourage states to adopt antitakeover statutes; to the contrary, it
moderates their tendency, due to lobbying by firms, to do so. This argument

71  See ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2, at 68-70.
72 See Roberta Romano, The Political Economy of Takeover Statutes, 73 VA. L.REV. 111 (1987).
73 Winter, Foreword, in ROMANO, GENIUS, supra note 2.




                                                28
predicts that states that adopt antitakeover statutes to protect particular companies,
disregarding the incorporation market, will attract fewer incorporations as a result.
    Supporters of state competition have made no attempt, however, to test this
prediction by examining how the adoption of antitakeover statutes has actually
affected states’ success in the incorporation market. As we shall discuss in Part IV,
the evidence does not confirm this prediction but rather indicates that adopting
antitakeover statutes makes states more, not less, successful in the incorporation
market.

      IV. RECENT EVIDENCE ON THE DETERMINANTS OF INCORPORATION DECISIONS

                                 A. A New Approach

       A natural way to determine how state competition actually works, and
whether or not it benefits shareholders’ interests, is to focus directly on how the
choices states make with regard to corporate legal regimes affect their competitive
position in the market for corporate charters. According to the “race-to-the-top”
position, states that adopt legal regimes that diminish shareholder wealth should
suffer by attracting fewer incorporations. Conversely, states that adopt legal regimes
that enhance shareholder wealth should be rewarded with increased numbers of
incorporations. These are testable propositions.
       Unfortunately, prior empirical work has not pursued this approach. Rather,
the question it has asked is: Given incorporation decisions, does Delaware
incorporation increase firm value? As Part I emphasized, this is often equivalent to
assuming that incorporation decisions are random events, allowing researchers to
treat the incorporation decision as a given. But the fundamental premise of the state
competition debate, whichever side one takes, is that incorporation decisions are not
random but deliberate.
       Another shortcoming of most existing empirical work is that it typically
begins its analysis by dividing the incorporation market between Delaware and
non-Delaware firms. It then investigates whether incorporating in (or
reincorporating to) Delaware benefits investors. This approach effectively lumps
together all the non-Delaware states into one undifferentiated mass and thus
overlooks important variations that exist among the non-Delaware states.
       The variations among the non-Delaware states are significant in certain
respects. In particular, states vary widely in how successful they are in retaining
companies already headquartered in them (“in-state corporations”) and in attracting
corporations headquartered elsewhere (“out-of-state corporations”). Furthermore,
although states are overall rather similar in their corporate laws, there is still
significant variance among states in some areas of corporate law, such as takeover
law. Thus, the variation among states both in terms of their laws and in terms of




                                         29
their success in the incorporation market provides a natural laboratory for
examining which corporate rules make states more or less attractive.
        There is yet another advantage of our approach that is worth highlighting.
Delaware is a special case because of the important institutional advantages it offers
shareholders. Thus, in comparisons between Delaware and non-Delaware
corporations, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of these institutional advantages
from the effects of different substantive corporate rules. By focusing on the large set
of non-Delaware states, it is possible to make comparisons among states, none of
which has the special “Delaware advantages.” Removing this variable makes it
easier to identify the effects that variations in legal rules have on the distribution of
incorporations.
        Below we illustrate the value of this approach by presenting some summary
statistics and simple cross-state comparisons. A separate study by two of us (the
Incorporation Study) has carried out a full empirical analysis of the determinants of
domicile decisions.74 We will focus here on the findings of this study concerning
how takeover rules affect states’ ability to retain in-state companies as well as their
ability to attract out-of-state companies.75
        The approach that we propose can also be applied to identify how aspects of
state corporate law, other than state takeover law, affect companies’ domicile
decisions. For example, the Bebchuk and Cohen study analyzes how a state’s
adoption of the Revised Model Business Corporation Act (“RMBCA”) affects its
success.76 We focus here on takeover rules, however, because of the importance of
these rules in the debate over the merits of state competition. We start by describing
how incorporations are distributed among the states. We then examine the
distribution of various types of antitakeover statutes. Finally, we analyze these
patterns to determine whether or not antitakeover statutes actually help states retain
in-state companies and attract out-of-state companies.

                              B. The Pattern of Incorporations

       How does each state fare in terms of retaining its in-state companies and
attracting out-of-state companies? Surprisingly, most of the empirical work on state
competition has not documented these basic patterns of incorporation. Indeed, it has


74  See Bebchuk & Cohen, supra note 12.
75  Subramanian also studies empirically the effects of antitakeover statutes on the ability of
states to retain their in-state companies. See Subramanian, supra note 12. As will be discussed
below, his conclusions are consistent with those of the Incorporation study, supra note 12, with
respect to standard antitakeover statutes but not with respect to extreme statutes. He does not
study the effect of states’ antitakeover statutes on their success in attracting out-of-state
corporations.
76 It was found that adopting the RMBCA did not help states retain their in-state companies and

it made states less attractive to out-of-state companies. See Bebchuk & Cohen, supra note 12.


                                              30
not even documented how the 50% of total incorporations not captured by Delaware
are currently distributed among different states.
       The patterns we describe account for all the incorporations of nonfinancial
publicly traded companies for which there was data in the Compustat database at
the end of 1999 and which have both their headquarters and their incorporation in
the United States.77 There were 6530 such companies. Table 1 displays how the
headquarters of these companies are distributed among states. By “states” we mean
throughout the fifty-one jurisdictions consisting of the fifty states and the District of
Columbia.

                                  [   Insert Table 1 here ]

       Table 2 displays the distribution of incorporations among states. A
comparison of Tables 1 and 2 reveals the considerable differences between the
distributions of headquarters and incorporations.

                                   [ Insert Table 2 here ]

       Tables 3 displays how each state fares in the market for incorporations. The
Table displays the following for each state: (1) how many of its in-state companies it
retains, both in absolute numbers and as a percentage of all in-state companies; and
(2) how many out-of-state companies it attracts, again in absolute numbers and as a
percentage of all out-of-state incorporations.

                                       [ Insert Table 3]

       The Table indicates that the large majority of states are net “exporters” of
companies. The Tables also indicate that there is a great deal of variance among non-
Delaware states in terms of how they fare, both in retaining in-state companies and
in attracting out-of-state companies. For example, whereas California retains only
21.77% of its in-state companies, Ohio and Washington retain more than 50%, and
Minnesota and Indiana retain approximately 70%.                  As for out-of-state
incorporations, while thirty-three states attract less than ten out-of-state
incorporations each, there are four states with more than fifty each. The question on
which we shall focus next is the extent to which this relative performance depends
on the antitakeover statutes adopted by the various states.




77In focusing on nonfinancial firms we follow the approach of Robert Daines’s study, supra note
3. When financial companies are included, the results are qualitatively the same.


                                              31
                          C. The Landscape of State Antitakeover Statutes

       Table 4, which is taken from Grant Gartman’s comprehensive survey of state
antitakeover statutes,78 indicates which antitakeover statutes each state has. Most
states have at least one antitakeover statute. Pennsylvania, Ohio and Massachusetts
also have unique antitakeover statutes that will be discussed separately. The vast
majority of these statutes were adopted in the period 1985-1991.

                                         [Insert Table 4 here]

       The standard antitakeover statutes are control-share-acquisition statutes, fair-
price statutes, three-year no-freezeout business combination statutes, five-year no-
freezeout business combination statutes, poison-pill endorsement statutes and
constituency statutes. Control-share-acquisition statutes typically require a would-
be acquirer to win approval from a majority of outstanding disinterested shares
before it can acquire control. Fair-price statutes attempt to ensure that an acquirer
does not pay a premium for control and then buy the remaining shares at a lower
price. No-freezeout business combination statutes prohibit acquirers, under certain
conditions, from merging with the acquired company for a certain number of years,
typically either three or five years. Poison-pill endorsement statutes explicitly
authorize the use of the poison pill defense by target management. Finally,
constituency statutes authorize the use of defensive tactics, such as the poison pill
defense, by target management in the name of non-shareholder constituencies, such
as employees.
       As was emphasized earlier, the antitakeover statutes adopted by states might
have been important not only in what they actually did, but also arguably in the
antitakeover message they sent. For instance, adopting the full arsenal of standard
antitakeover statutes sends a clear antitakeover message to state courts and to
potential and existing incorporators. Therefore, in assessing the overall level of
protection against takeovers it is of interest to look at a state’s total number of
standard antitakeover statutes. To study cross-state differences in shareholder
protection, the Bebchuk and Cohen study uses an antitakeover index that attaches to
each state a score from zero to five, which corresponds to the number of
antitakeover statutes it has among the five standard types.
       In addition to the standard antitakeover statutes, unusual and more
restrictive statutes were adopted by three states. Pennsylvania and Ohio adopted
statutes that enables the “disgorgement” or “recapture” of all the short-term profits
made by a hostile bidder. Massachusetts adopted a statute that mandates a classified
board structure even for companies that did not elect to have a classified board in
their charter, a requirement that has a powerful antitakeover effect.79

78   See GARTMAN, STATE TAKEOVER LAWS, supra note 60.
79   See Bebchuk et al., The Antitakeover Power of Classified Boards, supra note 68.


                                                   32
          D. Do Antitakeover Statutes Help States Retain In-State Corporations?

        One fact that is immediately apparent from looking at the distribution of
incorporations from Table 3 is the presence of “home preference.” States generally
are better able to attract incorporations from companies headquartered in them (“in-
state companies”) than from companies headquartered elsewhere. Even states that
hardly attract any out-of-state incorporations are commonly able to retain a
significant fraction of their in-state companies. However, states do vary greatly in
the fraction of in-state companies that they retain.
        Table 3 indicates that states without antitakeover statutes do rather poorly in
terms of retaining their companies. Whereas the average fraction of in-state
companies retained is 38%, most states with no antitakeover statutes retain a much
lower fraction. For example, California retains only 21.77% of its in-state companies.
Conversely, Table 3 also indicates that states with all the standard antitakeover
statutes generally retain a larger-than-average fraction of their in-state companies.
For example, Indiana and Wisconsin, each of which offers a “royal flush” set of five
standard antitakeover statutes, retain 69% and 72% respectively of their in-state
companies. Finally, observe that Pennsylvania and Ohio, both of which have the
notorious recapture statute, retain a larger-than-average fraction of their in-state
companies. Pennsylvania retains 39% of all its in-state companies, and Ohio retains
54% of all of its in-state companies. The third “misbehaving” state, Massachusetts,
retains 30% of its in-state companies, a figure a bit below the average.
        Of course, these initial observations are merely suggestive, and a more
systematic testing is necessary before definite conclusions can be reached. One
needs to control for factors other than state antitakeover statutes that might be
influencing the incorporation decisions of in-state companies. The Incorporation
Study accomplished this by controlling for a number of factors that could
conceivably be important, including characteristics of the incorporating company as
well as characteristics of the state in which the company is headquartered.80
        This testing indicates that having a larger antitakeover index – that is, a larger
number of antitakeover statutes – makes a state more likely (at a 99% confidence
level, the highest degree of confidence conventionally used in such testing) to retain
its in-state companies. Of the different antitakeover statutes, the ones most useful in
retaining in-state firms are control-share-acquisition statutes, no-freezeout statutes




80 Controlled-for characteristics of the company included the company’s sales, Tobin’s Q, return
on assets, number of employees, and age (when the company went public). Controlled-for
characteristics of the state in which the company is headquartered included the state’s
population, number of located companies, per capita income, ideological leaning, geographic
region, and whether the state had adopted the RMBCA (or its predecessor the MBCA).


                                              33
with a moratorium period of more than three years, and poison-pill endorsement
statutes.81
       This testing indicates that the effect of adopting antitakeover statutes is not
only statistically significant but also large in magnitude. Controlling for other firm
and state characteristics, the Incorporation Study estimates that, had states that
currently have all the standard antitakeover statutes not adopted them, the fraction
of local firms that they retain would have been reduced from the current 49% of
such firms to 23%. Conversely, it is estimated that, adopting all the standard
antitakeover statutes by states that currently have no such statutes would have
raised the percentage of local firms that they retain from 23% to 50%.
       Finally, consistent with the observations made above, the testing indicates
that providing a recapture antitakeover statute, as do Pennsylvania and Ohio, does
not adversely affect a state’s ability to retain its in-state companies. With respect to
the classified board statute of Massachusetts, the results are mixed, depending on
the type of testing done, but overall do not support the prediction that enacting such
a statute would hurt an adopting state in the incorporation market.82

        E. Do Antitakeover Statutes Help States Attract Out-of-State Corporations?

       Even if antitakeover statutes help states retain in-state corporations, how do
these statutes affect their competitive position in attracting corporations with their
headquarters in another state (“out-of-state corporations”)? We will now turn to
this second dimension of how states fare in the competition over incorporations.
       Table 5 displays the distribution of out-of-state incorporations going to states
other than Delaware, and it lists all the states attracting more than six out-of-state
incorporations. Of the ten (excluding Delaware) that are the most successful in
attracting out-of-state incorporations, eight have either four or five antitakeover
statutes.

81 Guhan Subramanian also tests how the presence of standard antitakeover statutes affects
states’ ability to retain their headquartered companies, and his results are consistent with those
obtained by the Incorporation Study. See Subramanian, supra note 12.
82 In contrast to the results of the Incorporation Study, Subramanian concludes that the

recapture and classified boards statutes have hurt the ability of the states adopting them to
retain companies. He uses one dummy variable to stand for the presence of either a recapture or
a classified board statute and he controls only for company characteristics but not for state
characteristics other than their antitakeover statutes. Running the same regressions as
Subramanian did, the Incorporation Study obtained similar results to his. However, in order to
allow for the possibility that the incorporations market did not treat recapture and classified
boards statutes in the same way, the Incorporation Study used a separate dummy variable for
each of these statutes. With this specification, the recapture statute was no longer found to hurt
the states adopting it even without introducing state characteristics. Once state characteristics
were controlled for, the results no longer indicate a negative effect due to the classified board
statute. See Subramanian, supra note 12.


                                               34
                                   [Insert Table 5 here]

       The figures provided by Table 5 provide no basis for concluding that the
three “outlier” states, which have been blacklisted as extreme, have been hurt in the
market for out-of-state incorporations. Pennsylvania holds a respectable seventh
place (excluding Delaware) in terms of the number of out-of-state companies it
attracts. Massachusetts and Ohio are both comfortably in the top of half of states in
their ability to attract out-of-state companies.
       Again, definite conclusions cannot be drawn without controlling for
characteristics of states and firms. The Incorporation Study conducts such testing,
and its conclusions confirm what is suggested by the above observations. The
findings indicate that having a higher antitakeover index (that is, more antitakeover
statutes) makes a state more attractive -- again, at the high 99% confidence level --
for out-of-state incorporations. Of the different types of standard antitakeover
statutes, the ones most helpful for attracting out-of-state incorporations are control-
share-acquisition statutes and poison-pill endorsement statutes.
       The testing also provides clear results with respect to the two types of
extreme antitakeover statutes. Neither a classified board statute nor a recapture
statute has a statistically significant effect on the ability of a state to attract out-of-
state incorporations. Thus, again, there is no empirical basis for concluding that the
incorporations market penalizes states adopting extreme antitakeover statutes.

                          F. Reconsidering Established Positions

       States have been busy over the last three decades adopting antitakeover
statutes. They have often gone back to the drawing board more than once, either
because earlier statutes were held unconstitutional or because they wanted to take
advantage of newly hatched types of antitakeover statutes. Many states have ended
up with most or all of the standard antitakeover statutes. However, the enthusiasm
of state officials for such statutes has not been matched by shareholders. The
passage of antitakeover statutes has generally been accompanied by a negative
reaction or, at best, no reaction in the stock price of the companies governed by
them.
       As the pro-state competition position has long been the dominant view in
corporate law scholarship, most students of corporate law would agree with the
following two propositions:

   (1) Amassing state antitakeover statutes does not serve shareholders; and

   (2) State competition rewards, and thereby induces, adopting rules that serve
       shareholders.



                                            35
Facing a possible tension between these two propositions, supporters of state
competition have sought to reconcile them by advancing an additional proposition:

     (3) State competition does not reward, and indeed might discourage, the
         amassing of antitakeover statutes.

        However, as suggested by the observations made above, and by the reported
results of the Incorporation Study, proposition (3) is inconsistent with the evidence.
This implies that the commonly held view, which consists of propositions (1) and
(2), can no longer be maintained. Those who have held this view should revise their
position on at least one of these two propositions. Although the evidence discussed
in this section enables rejecting (3), it does not speak directly to which revisions
should be made. What is certain, however, is that the conventional picture of state
competition needs to be revised.
        Our own view is that, although some antitakeover statutes might not be
harmful and at times arguably beneficial,83 not all are,84 and state competition thus
provides excessive incentives to restrict takeovers. If the “race-to-the-top” story
were true, it would be particularly puzzling that competition has failed to discipline
the states adopting the most extreme antitakeover statutes. Although they have been
the subject of strongly negative market reaction and widespread criticism by
scholars of corporate law, these statutes have been on the books for a long time now.
Still, the states having these statutes continue to fare respectably in the
incorporations market – both in terms of retaining in-state companies and in terms
of attracting out-of-state companies.
        Although puzzling for the conventional “race-to-the-top” view, the adoption
of antitakeover statutes and the evidence presented in this Part are not puzzling at
all to those who hold a skeptical account of state competition. On this account, state
competition can be expected to produce excessive protections from takeovers. It is a
natural consequence of the competitive process itself as currently structured. This
process provides states with incentives to place weight on managers’ interests,
rather than solely on shareholders’ interests, when selecting rules that have a major
effect on managers.


83 Control-share-acquisitions statutes, for example, might be helpful in the absence of other
arrangements in addressing pressure to tender problems. See Lucian A. Bebchuk, Toward
Undistorted Choice and Equal Treatment in Corporate Takeovers, 95 HARV. L. REV. 1695 (1985);
Lucian A. Bebchuk & Oliver Hart, Takeover Bids vs. Proxy Fights in Contests for Corporate Control,
NBER Working Paper No. 8633 (2001).
84 Poison-pill endorsement statutes, for example, can produce excessive protection from

takeovers for the large fraction of companies that have classified boards. See Bebchuk et al., The
Antitakeover Power of Classified Boards, supra note 68.


                                               36
                                     CONCLUSION

       A recurring claim in the literature on state competition over corporate
charters is that the existing empirical evidence decisively supports the view that
state competition benefits shareholders. Those who are more skeptical of state
competition (as currently structured) and the regulatory choices it has produced,
have often been portrayed as fighting against established empirical facts. This
Article has shown that the body of empirical evidence on which supporters of state
competition rely does not warrant their claims of empirical support.
       First, the evidence does not establish that Delaware incorporation produces
an increase in share value. Although studies have found an association between
Delaware incorporation and higher shareholder value, there are significant
questions with respect to the generality, robustness, and magnitude of this
correlation. More importantly, correlation does not imply causation; any correlation
of the sort alleged could reflect the underlying differences between firms that elect
to incorporate in Delaware and those that do not.
       Second, even if it were established that Delaware incorporation is marginally
beneficial to investors in the existing state-competition equilibrium, this does not
imply that state competition benefits investors overall. In a race-toward-the-bottom
equilibrium in which all states are induced by competition to choose sub-optimal
rules (on certain issues), incorporation in the dominant state might still be beneficial
as a result of network effects and the dominant state’s institutional infrastructure.
       Third, we have shown that, contrary to claims made by supporters of state
competition, the empirical evidence does not establish that state competition
rewards moderate takeover regimes rather than the amassing of antitakeover
statutes. In particular, the claims that Delaware is more hospitable to takeovers than
average, and that states hostile to takeovers are penalized in the incorporations
market, do not have a solid empirical basis.
       Finally, we have discussed a new approach to the empirical study of state
competition, based on analyzing the determinants of companies’ decisions
regarding where to incorporate. An empirical study conducted by us using this
approach indicates that, contrary to the beliefs of state competition supporters, this
competition provides incentives for states to offer antitakeover protections. States
that amass antitakeover statutes fare better both in retaining in-state companies and
in attracting out-of-state companies. Indeed, there is scant evidence that states with
extreme antitakeover statutes, widely viewed as detrimental to shareholders, have
been penalized in the incorporation market.
       Our demonstration that the view supportive of state competition in corporate
law (as currently structured) does not have the empirical basis believed to exist by
supporters has significant policy implications. It calls for a reconsideration of
established positions on the merits of state competition and the role of federal law in
this area. It also calls for a reassessment of the body of corporate law that has been



                                          37
produced by state competition. In the key areas that directly affect managers’
private interests, the rules that have been produced by state competition should not
be regarded as presumptively value-enhancing.
       In particular, our analysis questions whether the extensive takeover
protections currently afforded managers in the United States actually serve
shareholders’ interests. Contrary to prevailing beliefs, we have shown that state
competition does not reward moderation in takeover protection. The proliferation of
antitakeover statutes and protections might have been, at least partly, the product of
incentives created by the incorporation market. These findings lend support to
proposals for federal intervention in the takeover area, either in the form of
mandatory federal takeover rules, which one of us supported in earlier work,85 or in
the form of “choice-enhancing” intervention, which we introduced in subsequent
joint work.86
       In sum, more attention needs to be paid to the possibility that state
competition might produce adverse incentives in some important areas of corporate
law. For this to happen, scholars of corporate law must first recognize that the
empirical evidence does not rule out this possibility. We hope that this Article will
help bring about such a recognition.




85 See Bebchuk, Federalism and the Corporation, supra note 2.
86 See Bebchuk & Ferrell, A New Approach, supra note 3; Bebchuk & Ferrell, Federal Intervention,
supra note 3.


                                              38
                      TABLE 1

The Distribution of Firm Locations among States
                 Number of firms
      State      located in state   Percentage
      CA              1,254          19.20%
      TX               586            8.97%
      NY               576            8.82%
      MA               360            5.51%
      FL               328            5.02%
      NJ               311            4.76%
      PA               248            3.80%
      IL               241            3.69%
      MN               212            3.25%
      CO               201            3.08%
      OH               192            2.94%
      GA               178            2.73%
      VA               154            2.36%
      CT               147            2.25%
      WA               131            2.01%
      MI               104            1.59%
      MD               101            1.55%
      MO               101            1.55%
      NC                98            1.50%
      AZ                91            1.39%
      TN                81            1.24%
      WI                72            1.10%
      OR                70            1.07%
      UT                70            1.07%
      NV                63            0.96%
      Other            560            8.58%
      Total           6,530           100%




                        39
                    TABLE 2

The Distribution of Incorporations among States

                 Number of firms
   State       incorporate in state   Percentage
   DE                3,771             57.75%
   CA                  283              4.33%
   NY                  226              3.46%
   NV                  217              3.32%
   MN                  178              2.73%
   FL                  165              2.53%
   TX                  147              2.25%
   CO                  132              2.02%
   PA                  124              1.90%
   MA                  118              1.81%
   OH                  112              1.72%
   NJ                  111              1.70%
   GA                   83              1.27%
   WA                   79              1.21%
   VA                   74              1.13%
   MI                   60              0.92%
   WI                   57              0.87%
   MD                   54              0.83%
   OR                  54               0.83%
   UT                  52               0.80%
   IN                   50              0.77%
   NC                  46               0.70%
   TN                  39               0.60%
   MO                   36              0.55%
   IL                   32              0.49%
   Other               230              3.52%
   Total              6,530             100%




                        40
                                       TABLE 3
Migration and Emigration in the “Market for Corporate Law”

          Number of Number of firms                       Number of firms
             firms    located and   As percentage of located elsewhere As percentage of
          located in incorporate in all firms located in but incorporate in all out-of state
State        state       state             this state           state        incorporate
AK              2           1               50.00%                 2             0.03%
AL             29           3               10.34%                2              0.03%
AR             20           3               15.00%                 0             0.00%
AZ             91          21               23.08%                 0             0.00%
CA          1,254         273               21.77%               10              0.19%
CO            201          74               36.82%                58             0.92%
CT            147          17               11.56%                 3             0.05%
DC             25           2                8.00%                 0             0.00%
DE             27          27              100.00%             3,744            57.57%
FL            328         137               41.77%                28             0.45%
GA            178          71               39.89%                12             0.19%
HI             13           6               46.15%                 2             0.03%
IA             25          10               40.00%                4              0.06%
ID             15           2               13.33%                 1             0.02%
IL            241          27               11.20%                5              0.08%
IN             56          39               69.64%                11             0.17%
KS             35          11               31.43%                 8             0.12%
KY             29           7               24.14%                 2             0.03%
LA             45          18               40.00%                4              0.06%
MA            360         108               30.00%               10              0.16%
MD            101          25               24.75%                29             0.45%
ME             10           4               40.00%                0              0.00%
MI            104          58               55.77%                 2             0.03%
MN            212         158               74.53%                20             0.32%
MO            101          26               25.74%                10             0.16%
MS             14           4               28.57%                8              0.12%
MT              6           6              100.00%                 0             0.00%
NC             98          38               38.78%                0              0.00%
ND              4           0                0.00%                 0             0.00%
NE             18           4               22.22%                 3             0.05%
NH             28           3               10.71%                 0             0.00%
NJ            311          80               25.72%               31              0.50%
NM              9           4               44.44%                 3             0.05%
NV             63          45               71.43%               172             2.66%
NY            576         141               24.48%               85              1.43%
OH            192         105               54.69%                 7             0.11%
OK             61          22               36.07%                 5             0.08%
OR             70          50               71.43%                 4             0.06%
PA            248          98               39.52%                26             0.41%
RI             24           6               25.00%                 1             0.02%
SC             30           9               30.00%                 1             0.02%
SD              7           4               57.14%                 0             0.00%
TN             81          33               40.74%                 6             0.09%
TX            586         139               23.72%                8              0.13%
UT             70          32               45.71%                20             0.31%
VA            154          56               36.36%                18             0.28%
VT             11           4               36.36%                 0             0.00%
WA            131          68               51.91%               11              0.17%
WI             72          52               72.22%                5              0.08%
WV              8           3               37.50%                0              0.00%
WY              9           3               33.33%                12             0.18%
Total        6530        2137                                   4393
Average                                     38.10%                               1.33%




                                            41
                                      TABLE 4
                       Standard Antitakeover Statutes

                                                    No
                                                Freezeouts
               Number of   Control                (years     Poison Pill
State           Statutes   Share     Fair Price prohibited) Endorsement Constituencies
Alaska             0          0           0          0            0            0
Alabama            0          0           0          0            0            0
Arkansas           0          0           0          0            0            0
Arizona            4          1           1          3            0            1
California         0          0           0          0            0            0
Colorado           1          0           0          0            1            0
Connecticut        3          0           1          5            0            1
DC                 0          0           0          0            0            0
Delaware           1          0           0          3            0            0
Florida            4          1           1          0            1            1
Georgia            4          0           1          5            1            1
Hawaii             3          1           0          0            1            1
Iowa               3          0           0          3            1            1
Idaho              5          1           1          3            1            1
Illinois           4          0           1          3            1            1
Indiana            5          1           1          5            1            1
Kansas             2          1           0          3            0            0
Kentucky           4          0           1          5            1            1
Louisiana          3          1           1          0            0            1
Massachusetts      4         1           0          5             1            1
Maryland           5          1           1          5            1            1
Maine              1          0           0          0            0            1
Michigan           3          1           1          5            0            0
Minnesota          4          1           1          4            0            1
Missouri           4          1           1          5            0            1
Mississippi        3          1           1          0            0            1
Montana            0          0           0          0            0            0
North Carolina     3          1           1          0            1            0
North Dakota       1          0           0          0            0            1
Nebraska           2          1           0          5            0            0
New Hampshire      0          0           0          0            0            0
New Jersey         4          0           1          5            1            1
New Mexico         1          0           0          0            0            1
Nevada             5          1           1          3            1            1
New York           4          0           1          5            1            1
Ohio               5          1           1          3            1            1
Oklahoma           2          1           0          3            0            0
Oregon             4          1           0          3            1            1
Pennsylvania       5          1           1          5            1            1
Rohde Island       4          0           1          5            1            1
South Carolina     3          1           1          2            0            0
South Dakota       5          1           1          4            1            1
Tennessee          5          1           1          5            1            1
Texas              1          0           0          3            0            0
Utah               2          1           0          0            1            0
Virginia           4          1           1          3            1            0
Vermont            1          0           0          0            0            1
Washington         3          0           1          5            1            0
Wisconsin          5          1           1          3            1            1
West Virginia      0          0           0          0            0            0
Wyoming            3          1           0          3            0            1
Average/total     2.7        27          27         33           25          31




                                        42
                         TABLE 5
The Division of the Market for Out-of-State Incorporations
                      Number of firms
        State       incorporate in state   Percentage
        DE                3,744             85.23%
        NV                  172              3.92%
        NY                  85               1.93%
        CO                  58               1.32%
        NJ                  31               0.71%
        MD                  29               0.66%
        FL                  28               0.64%
        PA                   26              0.59%
        MN                  20               0.46%
        UT                  20               0.46%
        VA                   18              0.41%
        GA                   12              0.27%
        WY                  12               0.27%
        IN                  11               0.25%
        WA                  11               0.25%
        CA                  10               0.23%
        MA                   10              0.23%
        MO                  10               0.23%
        KS                    8              0.18%
        NC                   8               0.18%
        TX                    8              0.18%
        OH                   7               0.16%
        TN                    6              0.14%
        Other               49               1.12%
        Total              4,393             100%




                             43
