                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            CONSUMPTION OVER THE LIFE CYCLE:
                               SOME FACTS FROM CONSUMER
                                EXPENDITURE SURVEY DATA

                                      Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
                                             Dirk Krueger

                                          Working Paper 9382
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9382


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




All comments are welcomed to jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu or dkrueger@leland.stanford.edu. We would like
to thank Andrew Atkeson, Michele Boldrin, Hal Cole, MariaCristina De Nardi, Thesia Garner, Narayana
Kocherlakota, Lee Ohanian, Luigi Pistaferri, Edward Prescott and participants at seminars in numerous
institutions and especially at the Bureau of Labor Statistics for many helpful comments. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde and Dirk Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Consumption over the Life Cycle: Some Facts from Consumer Expenditure Survey Data
Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde and Dirk Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 9382
December 2002
JEL No. D12, D91, E21, C14, J10


                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper uses a seminonparametric model and Consumer Expenditure Survey data to
estimate life cycle profiles of consumption, controlling for demographics, cohort and time e.ects.
In addition to documenting profiles for total and nondurable consumption, we devote special
attention to the age expenditure pattern for consumer durables. We find hump-shaped paths over the
life cycle for total, for nondurable and for durable expenditures. Changes in household size account
for roughly half of these humps. The other half remains unaccounted for by the standard complete
markets life cycle model. Our results imply that households do not smooth consumption over their
lifetimes. This is especially true for services from consumer durables. Bootstrap simulations suggest
that our empirical estimates are tight and sensitivity analysis indicates that the computed profiles
are robust to a large number of different specifications.

Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde                                    Dirk Krueger
University of Pennsylvania                                    Department of Economics
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu                                        Stanford University
                                                              579 Serra Mall
                                                              Stanford, CA 94305-6072
                                                              and NBER
                                                              dkrueger@leland.stanford.edu
1. Introduction

This paper uses a seminonparametric model and Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) data
to estimate life cycle profiles of consumption, controlling for demographics, cohort and time
eﬀects. In addition to documenting profiles for total and nondurable consumption, we devote
special attention to the age expenditure pattern for consumer durables.
   Our main finding is that consumption expenditures for both nondurables as well as
durables display a significant hump over the life cycle, even after accounting for changes
in family size. This finding is clearly at odds with the basic predictions of the standard life
cycle model1 . For instance, according to this model consumption expenditure profiles for
nondurables should be smooth. If utility is equally desirable over time up to some discount
factor, households want to equate marginal utilities across time and states of the world, pos-
sibly with some growth rate, depending on the interest rate and the discount factor. With
isoelastic period utility, a natural benchmark to match long-run growth trends, consumption
growth itself should be constant across time. This is not at all what we observe in the data.
   Our empirical findings are even more strikingly at odds with standard theory in the case of
expenditures on consumer durables. If consumption services from durables are proportional
to their stock, separable from nondurables in the utility function, and interest rates are
constant and equal to the time discount factor, a household would immediately build up
its desired stock of durables. Further expenditures occur only to replace depreciation. As
with nondurables, under this benchmark model one does not expect to observe the hump in
expenditures we document empirically.
   In order to assure that the estimated consumption life cycle profiles are not just artifacts
of sampling uncertainty or due to a particular choice of our econometric model, we perform
bootstrap simulations to assess the precision of our estimates and a number of robustness
checks. We find that confidence intervals and bands are tight around our point estimates.
This suggests that the hump cannot be explained purely by sampling uncertainty. In addition,
our sensitivity analysis shows that our main findings survive across a wide set of econometric
specifications.
   Two reasons motivate our empirical study. First, we want to provide empirical life cycle
consumption profiles that can be used to assess the ability of quantitative life cycle simula-
tion models, pioneered by Auerbach and Kotlikoﬀ (1987), to match the data. These models

   1
     By the standard model we mean a model in which households have utility that is separable in nondurable
consumption, service flows from durables and leisure, and face no idiosyncratic shocks (or have available a
complete set of insurance claim to isolate consumption from these shocks) or liquidity constraints.


                                                    2
typically abstract from business cycle fluctuations, cohort eﬀects and diﬀerences in household
size. Comparing model-generated life cycle consumption patterns with their empirical coun-
terparts therefore requires the removal of the time, cohort and demographic eﬀects discussed
above.
   Second, we not only attempt to provide life cycle expenditure patterns for nondurable
consumption, but also for expenditures on consumer durables. Any quantitative study of
portfolio choice over the life cycle has to account for the fact that for most households the
largest share of their portfolio consists of consumer durables, in particular houses. By docu-
menting empirical life cycle expenditure patterns for durables we again aim at establishing a
benchmark for judging the performance of quantitative models.
   We undertake the analysis of nondurables and durables jointly since, at each point in
time, a household faces a trade-oﬀ between purchasing nondurables, durables and saving in
financial assets. Furthermore, the households’ ability to borrow may depend on its stock of
consumer durables. Therefore all these decisions are interdependent and the resulting life
cycle profiles should be analyzed simultaneously. Also, by quantifying the size, timing and
correlation between the humps in nondurables and durables our empirical results may shed
light on which deviations from the standard benchmark model can most accurately account
for the data. For example, the findings in this work provide the motivation for Fernández-
Villaverde and Krueger (2002) who show that a life cycle model with consumer durables that
provide both utility and collateral services is capable of generating life cycle consumption
profiles quantitatively consistent with the data.
   There is a long literature documenting empirical life cycle consumption expenditures on
nondurables. Examples include, among many others, Carroll and Summers (1991), Carroll
(1992), Deaton (1992), Kotlikoﬀ (2001) and Gourinchas and Parker (2002). Our paper builds
on this tradition, but oﬀers the following new contributions.
   First, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to exploit the information on consumer
durables from the Consumer Expenditure Survey to build life cycle expenditure profiles on
these items.
   Second, we revisit the issue of controlling for family size and propose the use of house-
hold equivalence scales for this purpose. The recent contributions of Blundell et al. (1994),
Attanasio and Browning (1995) and Attanasio et al. (1999) emphasize the importance of
household size changes to rationalize consumption expenditure profiles over the life cycle.
These papers argue that demographics can explain, at least in a substantial part, why con-
sumption tracks income over the life cycle. Using several household equivalence scales we find


                                              3
that demographics indeed play a large role, accounting for roughly half of the size of the hump
in both expenditures on nondurables and durables. This leaves the other half of the hump
unaccounted for by the standard complete markets life cycle model. Liquidity constraints,
prudence in the light of idiosyncratic uncertainty and nonseparabilities in the utility function
are potential candidate explanations for these findings.
       Third, in addition to accounting for demographics we also control for cohort, time and
age eﬀects in a flexible way that imposes minimum conditions on the data. In particular, we
specify a seminonparametric partial linear model which we estimate with a Speckman estima-
tor. This procedure provides eﬃciency advantages, compared to the use of dummy variables,
to estimate age profiles, yet its application for our problem is relatively straightforward.
       Finally, as mentioned above, we use the bootstrap to evaluate the tightness of our esti-
mates, an issue that has received little attention in the literature. Our simulations are useful
in establishing that life cycle consumption profiles are estimated very precisely.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the CEX data that we
use as well as our procedure to build a pseudopanel of households from the raw data. Section
3 presents the specification of the estimated model of life cycle consumption and it explains in
detail how we control for age, time and cohort eﬀects and for demographic changes. Section 4
discusses our main empirical findings. In section 5 we document how robust our main findings
are to sampling uncertainty and diﬀerent econometric specifications. Section 6 concludes by
suggesting some implications of our results and pointing to future research. The appendix
contains further details about the data and variable definitions used in the paper.


2. The CEX Data

To document our facts about consumption over the life cycle we use the 1980-1998 data from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey2 . During the last few years, following the work of Cutler
and Katz (1991), Mace (1991) and Attanasio and Weber (1995), among others, the CEX
has become one of the main sources for empirical work on consumption. The survey is a
rotating panel. Each household is interviewed every three months over five calendar quarters
and every quarter 20% of the sample is replaced by new households3 . In the initial interview

   2
     Our sample is only limited by data availability. Prior to 1980, the CEX was conducted about every 10
years and not on a regular basis. Data for years after 1998 are not yet released. We excluded the years 1982
and 1983 because of methodological diﬀerences in the survey. See Attanasio (1998) for details.
   3
     The CEX definition of a household is a consumer unit that consists of any of the following: (1) all members
of a particular household who are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other legal arrangements; (2) a
person living alone or sharing a household with others or living as a roomer in a private home or lodging house


                                                       4
information on demographic characteristics and on the inventory of major durable goods of
the consumer unit is collected. Further expenditure information is gathered in the second
through the fifth interviews using uniform questionnaires. In total, around 5000 households
participate in the survey each quarter. The CEX is designed to constitute a representative
sample of the U.S. population.
    For the purpose of this paper, two issues with the way the CEX data are collected make it
diﬃcult to use them directly. First, the CEX records only data on consumption expenditure,
and not on consumption services, our object of interest. Second the CEX lacks a significant
panel dimension since it only follows households for at most 5 quarters. In the remaining
part of this section we discuss how we address both issues.

2.1. Expenditures versus Consumption

As mentioned before the CEX does not report a measure of consumption services, arguably
the object of stongest interest from the point of economic theory; it only reports expenditures
on consumption goods. This distinction is not very relevant for the case of nondurable
goods for which it is plausible to equate the flow of consumption services to expenditures
in the current period, but is crucial when dealing with consumer durables. For example, if
the household buys a car today, it will receive a flow of transportation services over a long
number of periods, despite the fact that expenditures are only incurred (and show up in the
data) once, namely in the current period. As an alternative to the analysis of expenditures
one could impute service flows from the stocks of durables. However, the CEX only provides
partial information for the value of that stock. While the survey asks for an estimate of the
present value of the owned residence and the original cost of vehicles, it only takes a physical,
but not a value inventory, of major household appliances owned by the household. The
omission of these items may significantly underestimate the stock of durables for low-wealth
households and thus, since younger households tend to be wealth-poor, distort estimates of
life cycle consumption profiles for durables4 .
    These diﬃculties lead us to focus our analysis on expenditure data. Quantitative life cycle

or in permanent living quarters in a hotel or motel, but who is financially independent; or (3) two or more
persons living together who use their incomes to make joint expenditure decisions. Financial independence is
determined by the three major expense categories: housing, food, and other living expenses. To be considered
financially independent, at least two of the three major expenditure categories have to be provided entirely
or in part by the respondent.
    4
      Also note that, since we do not observe the initial stock of durables of the cohort and the sample length
is fairly small, we cannot use the perpetual inventory method to build estimates of the stocks of consumer
durables.


                                                      5
models which incorporate durables have predictions not only for service flows from durables,
but also for the timing of expenditures on these durables over the life cycle. Our results
may serve as an empirical benchmark against which the predictions of these models can be
evaluated. Nevertheless, even though our main focus is on expenditures, we also exploit the
information in the CEX on present values of owned residences, thus indirectly providing life
cycle profiles of services from owned homes5 .

2.2. A Pseudopanel Approach

The second problem mentioned above is that the short panel dimension of the CEX makes the
use of direct panel techniques problematic. An alternative is to exploit the repeated nature
of the survey and build a pseudopanel. New households that enter the survey are a randomly
chosen large sample of the US population and, consequently, they contain information about
the consumption means of the groups they belong to. This information can be exploited by
interpreting the observed group means as a panel for estimation purposes. This method, pio-
neered by Browning, Deaton and Irish (1985) and developed by Deaton (1985) and Heckman
and Roob (1985), is known as the pseudopanel or synthetic cohort technique6 .
       In order to associate a household with a particular cohort we use the age of the reference
person7 . We define ten cohorts with a length of 5 years and we follow them through the
whole sample, generating a balanced panel. With our choice of the number of cohorts we
trade oﬀ the need for a large time series dimension to exploit the longitudinal aspect of the
pseudopanel for the desire of a large cohort size to confidently assume that the sample means
are good approximations to their population counterparts. Most of our cells have between
200 and 500 observations, with a mean of around 350.
       We use our pseudopanel to estimate life cycle profiles of total consumption expenditures,

   5
     If owner-occupied housing and other durables are complements, life cycle profiles of housing services can
serve as first approximations of profiles for other durables, with the approximation the better, the stronger
the complementarity between housing and services from other durables.
   6
     Beyond increasing the time dimension of the data, a pseudopanel presents other advantages over pure
panels. First, it eliminates the attrition problem. Most longitudinal surveys have low responses rates and
these rates deteriorate when the same households are interviewed repeatedly. More importantly, attrition
introduces a sample selection problem because of its possible correlation with explanatory variables. Second,
the long temporal dimension of the pseudopanel approximately averages out expectational errors. Third, with
pseudopanels we are not required to control for individual eﬀects, as we would when using pure micro data,
a diﬃcult task when dealing with such a short panel as the CEX. Pseudopanels smooth out within-cohort
heterogeneity by aggregating across agents. Note that this aggregation does not remove common cohort
eﬀects, but these are more easily controlled in the longer sample created by the pseudopanel.
   7
     The reference person of the consumer unit is the first member mentioned by the respondent when asked
to “Start with the name of the person or one of the persons who owns or rents the home”. It is with respect
to this person that the relationship of the other consumer unit members is determined.


                                                      6
nondurable consumption expenditures and expenditures on durable goods. To obtain a pre-
liminary feeling for the basic characteristics of the data we plot, in figure 2.2.1, total quarterly
consumption expenditures, in thousands of 1982-84 dollars for our pseudopanel. Each line
represents observations for one of the cohorts. In the same way we plot, in figure 2.2.2,
expenditures on nondurables and in figure 2.2.3 expenditures on consumer durables.

2.3. Pseudopanel versus Pooled CEX Data

An alternative to the pseudopanel approach is to rely exclusively on the cross-sectional na-
ture of the CEX survey and pool all observations. This alternative is closely related to a
pseudopanel construction, except in two aspects. First, most estimations undertaken with
pseudopanels do not weight each cohort by the size of observations in each cell. A pool,
in practice, does exactly this since each household counts as one observation (unless also
weighted). For relatively homogeneous cohort sizes the practical impact of this diﬀerence is
minor. Also, from an estimation eﬃciency perspective it is ambiguous whether the weighted
estimates are to be preferred. The second diﬀerence is that in a balanced pseudopanel (as
in our case) we disregard observations from those cohorts that are not covered in the data
during the entire sample period (i.e. those that are too young in 1980 to be already in the
CEX) and from those cohorts that were already of advanced age at the beginning of the
sample period and thus have small cohort sizes because of mortality. Since both types of
households are relatively rare, their quantitative impact is small, and it is not clear to us that
the information they provide compensates for the problems associated with their inclusion8 .
Nevertheless, for completeness below we also present selected results from pooled data and
compare them to those obtained with the pseudopanel.


3. Specification and Estimation of Life Cycle Profiles

The most straightforward way to document consumption profiles over the life cycle may be
to plot consumption against the age of the household head. This simple procedure, however,
faces at least two problems. First, our data do not allow us to observe the profile of the same
cohort for more than for 19 years. As explained above we address this problem by pooling
information from diﬀerent cohorts using a pseudopanel. Second, households in these cohorts

   8
    It is also worth noting that the size of a pseudopanel (680 observations) is much smaller that the size
of the pooled data (345436 observations). This smaller size has considerable computational advantages, in
particular when carrying out the bootstrap to derive standard errors of estimated life cycle profiles.



                                                    7
were born at diﬀerent dates and may have experienced very diﬀerent conditions during their
lifetime (think, e.g., about the cohort that went through the Great Depression during their
prime working age). Also, with positive long-run growth of real wages, cohorts born at later
dates have higher discounted lifetime earnings. Therefore, when using synthetic cohorts to
measure pure life-cycle eﬀects on consumption expenditures, it is crucial to control for cohort
eﬀects. But even if we observe one cohort over its entire life cycle, aggregate fluctuations will
aﬀect consumption profiles of the cohort; and these eﬀects should not be attributed to aging,
but rather to time eﬀects. In subsection 3.1 we describe how to disentangle cohort and time
eﬀects from age eﬀects, the object of interest of our analysis.
   A second problem is that the CEX reports consumption data for households and not for
individuals in that household. For our purpose it is crucial to separate changes in consumption
expenditure induced by changes in family size and changes in other economic circumstances,
since most quantitative life cycle models of consumption abstract from variations of household
size and composition as the household ages. To provide useful empirical benchmark life cycle
consumption patterns we adjust the raw data for demographics; section 3.2 describes our
procedure to that eﬀect.

3.1. Controlling for Age, Cohort and Quarter Eﬀects

A simple and flexible way to relate age and consumption expenditure is to use a nonparametric
regression of consumption on age. In particular we could estimate the model:

                                       cit = m (ageit ) + εit                                 (1)

where cit is the consumption expenditure of the household i at time t, ageit is the age of
the household i at time t, measured in years, m (ageit ) = E (cit |ageit ) is a smooth function of
ageit and εit is an independent, zero mean, random error. This estimation model, however,
does not include cohort or time eﬀects. Since, as previously discussed this omission may be
of importance, we modify our estimation equation (1) to account for these eﬀects.
   Consequently we estimate the partial linear model

                            cit = πi cohorti + π t γ t + m (ageit ) + εit                     (2)

where cohorti is a dummy for each cohort (except the youngest one) and γ t a dummy for
each quarter. Using dummies for cohort and quarter eﬀects has the advantage of allowing the
data to pick the preferred profiles for these eﬀects without imposing functional forms that

                                                 8
tend to be rejected by the data (see, e.g., Heckman and Vytlacil (2001) for evidence against
parametric assumptions).
       Because time, age and cohort eﬀects are linearly dependent it is not possible to separately
identify all of them without further assumptions9 . Our identification scheme is an adaptation
of the one outlined by Deaton (1997). The main idea is to impose the assumptions that
time eﬀects are orthogonal to a time trend and that their sum is normalized to zero10 . This
identification amounts to attributing linear trends in the data to a combination of age and
cohort eﬀects. Attanasio (1998) discusses the advantages of this procedure in detail.
       The partial linear model (2) can be easily estimated using the two step estimator proposed
by Speckman (1988)11 . In this procedure the nonlinear part m (ageit ) (the cross-sectional
conditional expectation) is estimated with a Nadaraya-Watson estimator of the form
                                           Pn PT
                                            i=1 t=1    Kh (age − ageit ) ∗ cit
                              ch (age) =
                              m             P n PT
                                                                                                        (3)
                                               i=1    t=1 Kh (age − ageit )

                            ³   ¡ ¢2 ´ ¡¯ u ¯    ¢
where Kh (u) =       0.75
                       h
                             1 − uh   I ¯ h ¯ ≤ 1 is an Epanechnikov kernel12 and h is the band-
                    13
width parameter .
       Two sources of errors in variables may aﬀect our results. First, because of sampling vari-
ance, the observed consumption means may diﬀer from the cohort means. Since this error
only aﬀects the left-hand side variable (it is plausible that the average age is measured with
high accuracy; in all cells, age samples averages are very close to the age interval midpoints),
it only increases the variance of the residuals, provided that the error has a zero mean. Sec-
ond, consumption data may suﬀer from large measurement errors. If these errors are linear
and have zero cohort mean, the pseudopanel helps us because aggregation over the cohort
sample will average them out.

   9
     Since we apply a nonlinear transformation to the age variable, time, cohort and age are not perfectly
collinear. However, these variables are so highly collinear that without further identifying restrictions we
would obtain extremely imprecise estimates.
  10
     Thus there are no dummies for the first two quarters. These eﬀects are recovered using the orthogonal-
ization and normalization conditions discussed in the main text.
  11
     The idea of the procedure is to first regress cit on m(ageit ) to obtain residuals ν it and a smoothing
matrix S. We apply this matrix to cohort and time eﬀects, and project vit on the so corrected eﬀects. The
constructed new adjusted values for consumption are then nonparametrically regressed on age.
  12
     Härdle (1990) discusses in detail the advantages of an Epanechnikov kernel for applications like ours.
Beyond Härdle’s arguments, the approximate lack of bias of this kernel in small samples will prove useful
when applying bootstrap methods below.
  13
     For our benchmark estimates we choose a bandwidth parameter of h = 5 years; in section 5.5 we defend
this choice and perform sensitivity analysis with respect to this parameter.




                                                     9
3.2. Controlling for Family Size: Household Equivalence Scales

Interpreting the results from estimating (2) directly on the data is diﬃcult. Not only con-
sumption expenditure, but also, as shown in Figure 3.2.1, household size displays a hump
over the life cycle. Households of diﬀerent size plausibly face diﬀerent marginal utilities from
the same consumption expenditure, and economic theory only predicts that marginal utilities
should be equated across time (up to some constant depending on the discount factor and the
interest rate) and not expenditures per se. Consequently, changes in household size may go
a long way towards explaining the hump in consumption, as argued in two influential papers
by Attanasio and Weber (1995) and Attanasio et al. (1999).
       We therefore want to quantify how much of the change in consumption over the life cycle
is explained by demographics. The information contained in expenditure shares helps in an-
swering this question. We can attribute changes in expenditures on particular consumption
items as a household ages either to changes in household size or to changes in consumption
profiles. This accounting exercise is undertaken by household equivalence scales which quan-
tify the change in consumption expenditure needed to keep welfare of a family constant when
its size varies14 .
       The simplest scale divides total expenditures by household size to obtain per capita house-
hold consumption. This scale therefore assumes that a household’s technology to transform
expenditures into service flows exhibits constant returns to scale. Theory and evidence sug-
gests otherwise. Lazear and Michael (1980) point to three diﬀerent mechanisms through
which household size aﬀects the rate of transformation between expenditures and services
(family goods, scale economies and complementarities) and present data implying that their
quantitative eﬀects are important. Their findings suggest that more elaborate equivalence
scales are needed to deflate household consumption expenditure by household size.
       We do not undertake the construction of a new household equivalence scale ourselves.
Rather we borrow from rich previous work. Our reading of this literature is as follows.
First, there is agreement about the existence of economies of scale in household consumption.
Second, there exist diﬀerences of opinion with respect to their size.
       To summarize these diﬀerences we present a representative sample of household equiva-
lence scales in table 3.2.1 (in which, for convenience, we assume the first two members of the

  14
    Early papers that deflate household consumption expenditure by a function of family size include Zeldes
(1989), who includes adjusted food requirements as a regressor in some of his Euler equation estimates, and
Blundell, Browning and Meghir (1994), who plot the life cycle path of consumption, deflated by the number
of adults plus 0.4 times the number of children in the household, for U.K. data.



                                                    10
household to be adults and the rest children). Columns 2 to 5 are based on expert evalua-
tions and columns 6 and 7 are econometric estimates based on observed household choices15 .
Interestingly, the two explicit econometric procedures deliver point estimates that tend to be
lower than the expert scales16 .

                          Table 3.2.1: Diﬀerent Household Equivalence Scales
                Family Size OECD NAS HHS DOC                            LM    Nelson Mean
                      1            1         1        1        1         1       1         1
                      2           1.70      1.62    1.34     1.28      1.06     1.06     1.34
                      3           2.20      2.00    1.68     1.57      1.28     1.17     1.65
                      4           2.70      2.36    2.02     2.01      1.47     1.24     1.97
                      5           3.20      2.69    2.37     2.37      1.69     1.30     2.27

       Since all reported estimates have advantages and drawbacks we choose their mean as
our benchmark scale; it combines simplicity and a relatively conservative stand on the eﬀect
of household size17 . In section 5.2 below we document how robust our main findings are
to changes in the household equivalence scale. Note that the chosen scale is very close to
the equivalence scale of the HHS, the estimates of Johnson and Garner (1995) and to the
constant-elasticity equivalence scales used by Atkinson et al. (1995), Buhmann et al. (1988)
and Johnson and Smeeding (1998), among others.
       After choosing a particular equivalence scale we take consumption expenditure measures
cit from the CEX, use the demographic information of the household to obtain the equivalence
                                                               cit
scale esit and adjust consumption to obtain e
                                            cit =             esit
                                                                   .   With the adjusted consumption we
then estimate the partial linear model

                                e
                                cit = πi cohorti + π t γ t + m (ageit ) + εit                               (4)
  15
      These are constructed, respectively, by the OECD (OECD (1982)), the Panel on Poverty and Family
Assistance of the National Academy of Sciences (Citro and Michael (1995)), the Department of Health and
Human Services (Federal Register (1991)), the Department of Commerce (US Department of Commerce
(1991)), Lazear and Michael (1980) and Nelson (1993). Since the latter estimates only scales for families of
size 2 or higher, to complete the table we took 1.06 as the scale entry for households of size 2 from Lazear
and Michael (1980).
   16
      Beyond the results in the table, the literature presents a large number of alternative equivalence scales,
such as Colosanto et al. (1984), Datzinger et al. (1984), Johnson and Garner (1995), Jorgenson and Slesnick
(1987), Garner and de Vos (1995) and Phipps and Garner (1994). These scales stay within the bounds set
by the columns 2 and 8 of table 3.2.1.
   17
      To evaluate our choice it is important to remember, as explained in the appendix, that our measures
of consumption do not include expenditures on either health or education, two major causes of increases in
expenditures for households with children.

                                                      11
and interpret the generated consumption life cycle profiles18 .


4. Results

In this section we present the results of our estimation of (4). First we examine the data
with minimal econometric treatment. In figure 4.1.1 we plot the profile of total quarterly
consumption expenditure against the age of the household without any adjustment by family
size, cohort or age eﬀects. Consumption follows a clear hump; it increases from $3800 at the
age of 20 to $6900 at the peak in the late forties, and decreases afterwards. This pattern is
well known and has been repeatedly reported in the literature (see, e.g. the widely cited work
by Carroll and Summers (1991)). More interestingly, similar humps appear if we separately
plot nondurable consumption expenditure (figure 4.1.2) and expenditures on durables (figure
4.1.3) against the age of the household19 . The hump in durables expenditures, is, to the best
of our knowledge, a fact that has not been documented before in the literature. Note that
both humps, for durables and nondurables, are of similar magnitude (the increase from age
20 to the peak is around 80%) and that the peak occurs at the same stage in the life cycle,
around the late forties.
       To control for changes in demographics we use the equivalence scale discussed in section
3 and repeat the estimation of life cycle profiles. Figure 4.1.4 plots total expenditure against
household age, with and without controls for cohort and quarter eﬀects. Two main findings
deserve comment. First, comparing figure 4.1.4 to figure 4.1.1 we see that the size of the
hump, measured as the ratio between consumption at the peak and at the beginning of the
life cycle, is reduced by a bit less than 50% but the hump still clearly appears. Adjusted
quarterly consumption increases from around $2900 to nearly $4300 and then decreases to
about $2300. Also note that the peak in consumption is postponed, close to the age of fifty.
       Second, as seen from the comparison of both profiles (with and without quarter and cohort
eﬀects) these additional controls have limited explanatory power. The quarter eﬀects are in

  18
      We need to point out several potential problems with our method. First, family size is endogenous. A
procedure that explains the increase in consumption by the increase in family size without explicitly controlling
for this endogeneity may find biased estimates for consumption profiles. For instance, individuals that are
more productive in raising children are more likely to have larger families. Second, as pointed out by Pollak
and Wales (1979), a welfare analysis requires to infer unconditional preferences for a demographic structure
and consumption, whereas usually only preferences for goods conditional on a particular demographic profile
are studied. Ferreira et al. (1998) estimate a model that allows for endogenous choices in family size and
obtain even larger economies of scale than Lazear and Michael (1980). Finally, for equivalence scales to be
used successfully they should not vary across household income levels (i.e. should be base independent). Using
a flexible semiparametric estimator of demand functions Pendakur (1999) does not reject base independence.
   19
      See the appendix for our definition of total expenditures, and durables and nondurables expenditures.


                                                       12
general small, with the exceptions of significantly negative values in 1992 and significantly
positive values for the quarters in 1984 and in 1997 and 1998. This pattern is plausible as
it agrees with standard business cycle dating. The cohort eﬀects are nearly flat. Diﬀerent
reasons may explain this finding. The strong performance of the stock market during the last
two decades which especially profited older cohorts may have compensated the long-run real
wage growth advantage (which was less than stellar in the 80’s and early 90’s) of younger
cohorts with smaller financial asset holdings. Also the recent changes in relative wages may
have helped older, and more skilled cohorts in comparison with (at the current point of their
life cycle) less skilled younger cohorts.
       Figure 4.1.5 plots expenditures on nondurables. We see that consumption grows until the
fifties and then declines, especially around retirement age, suggesting that some consumption
expenditures are related to work. Comparing this to Figure 4.1.2 we observe a reduction of
the hump of around a 50%. Figure 4.1.6 plots expenditures on consumer durables: yet again
we observe a clear hump, although expenditures are already relatively high at the beginning
of the adult life cycle, due to first purchases of durable goods. Interestingly enough, the
reduction of the hump is quite similar to the case of nondurables (around 52%). These
figures show, as for the raw data, that both expenditures on durables and nondurables have
very similar patterns and peak at the same time. Thus, even if changes in demographic
composition of households can account for around half of the hump in consumption and
hence are crucial in understanding life cycle profiles, other departures from the standard life
cycle model of consumption are needed to quantitatively account for the data20 .
       Figure 4.1.6 possibly contains the most surprising result of this paper. Suppose that
financial markets are complete, utility is separable in nondurable consumption and services
from durables, and that the real interest rate is equal to the time discount factor (which, as
the depreciation rate, is constant over time), then the optimal life cycle profile of consumer
durables is to immediately build up the desired stock and to simply replace depreciation
from thereon21 . We do not see anything like this in the data; rather the process of durables

  20
      The presence of a hump is, in fact, robust to further breakdowns of expenditures. For instance, even if we
focus on adult equivalent food consumption (a necessary good for which a higher degree of smoothing would
be expected), we see a hump, with quarterly expenditures beginning at around $475, increasing until $630 and
later falling to $385. Studying food consumption is also interesting because it allows comparison with data
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), a survey with a long panel dimension. This comparison
is performed in Fisher and Johnson (2002) who show that data on food consumption from the PSID and the
CEX agree about the presence (and quantitative size) of a hump over the life cycle. In subsection 5.7 we oﬀer
further details about the breakdown of expenditures on consumer durables.
   21
      >From a quantitative point of view, model simulations indicate that this result does not depend on the
assumptions about interest rates (unless empirically unreasonable processes are assumed), but does depend


                                                      13
accumulation appears to be incremental over the life cycle22 .
    This finding is consistent with related evidence in the literature suggesting that households
cannot perfectly smooth their consumption of services from durables. Alessie et al. (1997),
Attanasio et al. (2000), and Eberly (1994) provide evidence of credit constraints for car
purchases, Barrow and McGranahan (2000) document a spike in purchases of durables by low
income households at the time Earned Income Credit checks are received and Browning and
Crossley (1999) present evidence that expenditures on small consumer durables are cut back
during unemployments spells. Finally Fisher and Johnson (2002) compute imputed services
from a subset of durables using CEX data (and additional assumptions) and document a
hump for these services, suggesting a lack of consumption smoothing over the life cycle.
    In the next section we analyze how robust our findings are. First we evaluate the precision
of our estimates by constructing confidence bands around the point estimates using the
bootstrap. Then we assess how our results change if we use alternative methods to control
for household size, with particular attention devoted to the eﬀects the age of children of the
household have on life cycle consumption profiles. After discussing two important technical
details in our estimation we conclude the section with a more detailed analysis of life cycle
expenditure pattern on consumer durables.


5. Robustness Analysis

5.1. Using the Bootstrap to Evaluate Sampling Uncertainty

Since we want to provide empirical life cycle consumption profiles that can serve as a useful
benchmark for quantitative work our profiles should be precisely estimated. In order to
assess this precision we present standard errors constructed with bootstrap methods. Even
though, under relatively mild technical conditions, the Speckman estimator is consistent and
asymptotically normal, its small sample properties tend to be better reflected by the bootstrap
than by asymptotic approximations23 . This is especially true at both ends of the age profiles
because of the low number of observations.

crucially on the separability and complete markets assumption.
  22
     This statement does depend on the assumed absence of in-kind intergenerational transfers of durables
Their presence at the beginning of the life cycle could rationalize low expenditures on durables, since these
have been provided by the intergenerational transfer. However, data from the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS) suggest that these transfers are fairly small (see Cardia and Ng (2000)).
                                                                      1
  23
     In particular, the kernel estimates converge more slowly than n− 2 and the asymptotic distributions have
                                                       1
unconventional expansions that are not powers of n− 2 , making their use in finite samples problematic. See
Hall (1992a) for details.


                                                     14
       To implement the bootstrap we adapt Härdle’s (1990) procedure to the Speckman estima-
tor. We generate 500 samples of 680 observations each, drawing with replacement from the
original pseudopanel. Then we apply the Speckman estimator to each of these new datasets.
In this step care needs to be taken because the small sample bias of the kernel estimator dis-
torts the fitted values of the new estimates and therefore transmits the bias to the computed
standard error. Hall (1992b) suggests to choose a new smoothing parameter h that implies
undersmoothing relative to the point estimate24 . We carry out this bias-removal strategy
with an undersmoothing factor of 0.8.
       Figure 5.1.1a) plots the 95% confidence interval for the age profile of adult-equivalent
expenditures on nondurables, controlling for cohort and quarter eﬀects. The size of the
interval indicates that the age profile is estimated precisely. This result nothing but restates
the fact that, as shown in the plot for the raw data, most observations group themselves quite
naturally following a hump. Note that the interval (and the intervals and bands in the other
figures) is not centered around the point estimates because of undersmoothing. Figure 5.5.1b)
plots the widest confidence interval computed from all the bootstrap replications, i.e. the
worst possible case generated in the 500 simulations. The most interesting figure, however,
is 5.5.1c) which shows a 95% confidence band, which covers the whole true curve (instead of
each point separately, as in a confidence interval). Its interpretation is that, if we were able
to get repeated samples from the original population of households, 95% of the associated
age-consumption profiles would lie entirely within the band. Since any curve that can be
plotted entirely inside this small band implies a significant hump, figure 5.5.1c) strongly
reinforces our confidence in the point estimates: the data indicate a hump in consumption
of nondurables, with size between 20% and 65% and a peak between age 45 and 50. Finally,
figure 5.5.1d) plots all 500 simulated profiles: without exceptions all simulations generate a
quantitatively significant hump in consumption life cycle profiles.
       Figures 5.1.2 a)-d) repeat the same exercise for adult-equivalent expenditures on durables,
again controlling for cohort and quarter eﬀects. As before, our life cycle consumption profiles
are quite precisely estimated. Similar figures (not included in the paper) are obtained for
specifications without cohort and quarterly eﬀects, with either only quarter or cohort eﬀects,

  24
    See Horowitz (2001) for a theoretical explanation. Undersmoothing is achieved with a choice of a new
smoothing parameter h0 = e · h, where e < 1 such that nh0r+1 → 0 as n → ∞ (here r ≥ 2 is an even
integer). As shown in Hall (1992a), using the Edgeworth expansion of a properly
                                                                           ³        ´defined pivotal statistics,
                                                                               0 −1
the bootstrap estimator of the confidence interval will be accurate up to O (nh )     . This asymptotic result
does not provide clear advice for the appropriate choice of e in small samples. We tried several values of e
without obtaining large diﬀerences in the results.



                                                      15
defining durables and nondurables in diﬀerent ways, including and excluding housing, cor-
recting for family size in diﬀerent ways and other specifications we experimented with. We
conclude that sampling uncertainty is unlikely to change our main findings25 .

5.2. Diﬀerent Household Equivalence Scales

The choice of the equivalence scale we use does matter for the size of the hump in consumption
over the life cycle, but not for its existence. We estimated life cycle profiles using all scales
reported in table 3.2.1. and we always found the hump. To show a sample of the results we
plot in figure 5.2.1. the life cycle profile of nondurables consumption for three equivalence
scales: the two extremes in our table 3.2.1 (OECD and Nelson) and the mean equivalence
scale we use for our benchmark results. To facilitate the comparison of results we have
normalized all three consumption profiles to one at the beginning of the life cycle. We
observe that all scales deliver a hump, with its size depending on the extent of economies
of scale in household consumption. In particular, the use of the Nelson’s equivalence scale
increases the hump, measured as the ratio from the peak of consumption to the consumption
at the beginning of the life cycle, from 1.32 in our benchmark case to 1.50. On the other
hand, the use of the OECD’s equivalence scale reduces the hump to 1.20. So even if this
hump is quite smaller, it is still clearly present. In fact even per capita consumption has a
hump. Demographics completely eliminate the hump only with decreasing returns to scale,
an assumption that contradicts all empirical evidence we are aware of, and our intuition26 .

  25
      We check the robustness of our bootstrap results in two ways. First we implement a strategy with
replacement subsampling to account for possible heterokesdasticity of errors. Subsampling generates results
that are more robust since the simulations are less sensitive to violations of regularity conditions. The
drawback of subsampling is larger variability and slower convergence of the estimates (see Horowitz (2001)).
Confidence intervals and bands are slightly bigger than in the benchmark bootstrap, but otherwise the results
are nearly identical. See, as an example, figure 5.1.3 for nondurables, controlling for cohort and quarter
eﬀects. Second, we implement a block sampling strategy to deal with possible data dependence since even
with quarter and cohort eﬀects, a basic resampling strategy may miss complicated dependences in the data.
We experiment with several block sampling schemes; in all cases our findings are nearly indistinguishable
from the main results. For instance, figure 5.1.4. reports outcomes from a cohort-based block sample scheme
for nondurables with cohort and quarter eﬀects.
   26
      We also investigate how our results change when we use separate equivalence scales for durables and
nondurables. For durables expenditures the use of the scales on owned housing presented by Garner and
Short (2001) and Nelson (1988) delivers even more pronounced humps since they estimates large economies
of scale for housing.




                                                     16
5.3. Controlling for the Age of the Children

All equivalence scales used so far distinguish between adults and children in the household,
but not between children of diﬀerent ages. It is plausible, however, that a teenager has higher
consumption needs than an infant, so that a larger increment in consumption expenditures
is required for a teenager to keep the household at the same level of utility. If this is the
case we may obtain biased results with our child-age-independent scale. In this subsection
we explore this hypothesis.
   A first alternative is to compute the variation in the cost of children by ages needed to
keep a constant standard of living for the family. Lindert (1978 and 1980) estimates that
these costs are fairly stable across the age of a child, particularly once education and health
expenditures are excluded (as we do in our exercise, unless we use total consumption). With
his equivalence scale for children we therefore would obtain results very similar to those in
our benchmark estimation.
   Browning and Ejrnæs (2002) propose a diﬀerent approach in a paper that forcefully argues
for explicitly taking account of the age of children in the household when deflating consump-
tion by household size. First they define the number of equivalent adults, nit , in household i
at time t as
                                  nit µ
                                   c
                                               ³ age ´      ³ age ´2      ³ age ´3 ¶
                                  X                  j            j             j
                 nit =   nait   +      µ0 + µ1         + µ2          + µ3                          (5)
                                  j=1
                                                  20           20            20

where nait is the number of adults, ncit the number of children and (µ0 , µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ) are parameters
in the polynomial used to approximate the age eﬀects of children. To ensure that a 20 year
old “child” is equivalent to an adult, they impose the restriction µ3 = 1 − µ0 − µ1 − µ2 . In a
second step the authors allow for economies of scale by specifying esit = (nit )δ , where esit is
the final equivalence scale for household i at date t.
   The parameters (δ, µ0 , µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ) can be estimated once ln(esit ) = δ ln(nit ) has been sub-
stituted into an Euler equation for the household that relates first diﬀerences in household
log-consumption ∆ ln(cit ) to first diﬀerences in household scales ∆ ln(esit ). Browning and
Ejrnæs (2002) report point estimates for these parameters, using British data from the Fam-
ily Expenditure Survey (FES). Their results imply that the hump in life cycle consumption
is accounted for by demographics of the household, now including the age of children.
   Repeating Browning and Ejrnæs’ procedure for U.S. data or even simply applying their
estimated scales is impossible because the CEX family data files only report the age of the
children in two diﬀerent bins (less than two years old and between two and 15 years old)

                                                    17
and consider all others members of the household as adults. Given these data limitations we
approximate Browning and Ejrnæs’ procedure in a crude but implementable way. We assume
that children between two and 15 years old are equivalent to 0.2 adults and from age 16 on
they are equivalent to one adult. Infants of age less than two count as zero adults.
    Browning and Ejrnæs divide their data into a group of more and a group of less educated
households and estimate the parameters (µ0 , µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ) for these groups separately. Figure
5.3.1 compares our approximation to their original estimates of children age-adjusted equiv-
alence scales. We see that our simple scheme matches their estimates quite well. Note that
the higher the children equivalence scales, the more costly are children and the stronger is the
reduction of the life cycle hump in consumption due to demographics. Therefore our approx-
imation, by overstating the cost of infants and teenagers above the age of 15 and by roughly
matching the mean for children between the ages of two and 15 favors the hypothesis that
all of the hump in the data can be attributed to changes in family size and composition27 .
    In order to implement their approach we also need to specify a value for the parameter
δ that controls the degree of increasing returns to scale in consumption with respect to
household size. We choose δ = 0.86, the mean of Browning and Ejrnæs’ estimates for the two
education groups they consider28 .
    With our new adult equivalence scales adjusted by the age of children, we re-estimate
our partial linear model. A sample of our findings is presented in figure 5.3.2, where we
show total expenditures with cohort and quarter eﬀects. In order to facilitate interpretation
we also plot our benchmark profiles and normalize both graphs so that consumption at the
beginning of the life cycle equals to 1 in both cases. The original and the newly estimated
profile are qualitatively similar, with both of them featuring a clear hump over the life cycle,
but show quantitative diﬀerences. In particular, the divergence of the two profiles becomes
significant around the age of 45, where households with children of ages 16 and older begin
to be frequent in the data. The equivalence scale motivated by Browning and Ejrnæs, for
example, features a drastic increase from 2.12 to 2.57 for a household with two adults and
a child when it turns 16. This indicates that the divergence of the two graphs is partially

  27
     Note, however, that Browning and Ejrnæs obtain their results with British data. It is an open question
whether we would obtain similar estimates if we could use U.S. data with more detailed information about
the age of children.
  28
     Under the assumption that the first two members of a household are adults and the remaining are children
between the ages of two and fifteen, the implied equivalence scale is (1, 1.82, 1.97, 2.12, 2.27, . . .). Comparing
this scale to the ones in table 3.2.1 we observe that it is similar to most scales, with the exception of the
eﬀect induced by increasing family size from one to two adults, which is much larger for the scale implied by
Browning and Ejrnæs’ estimates.



                                                        18
due to our imperfect implementation of their approach (for data reasons we have to treat
all household members above the age of 16 as adults), and partially due to the fact that
Browning and Ejrnæs estimate increasing returns to scale weaker than those implied by all
scales in table 3.2.1.
   We summarize our results as suggesting that, for U.S. data from the CEX, controlling for
the age of children in a detailed way is unlikely to remove the hump in life cycle consumption
in the raw data, but may reduce its size somewhat.

5.4. Diﬀerent Alternatives to Control for Family Size

There are at least four alternatives to equivalence scales to control for household size and
composition. First, one may divide the original sample into groups corresponding to diﬀerent
household sizes. With the resulting separate samples of households with size 1, size 2 and so
on we can repeat our estimation for each of these groups. This procedure may be interpreted
as a bivariate kernel on age and family size where the smoothing parameter for family size
dimension is less than one. We do not use this approach as our benchmark because of the
endogeneity of household size. Individuals living alone at age 25 constitute a very diﬀerent
subsample of the population than individuals living alone at age 45 since the first group
includes both individuals that will still live alone in 20 years and those who will form house-
holds with more than one member during the next 20 years. Despite these caveats we carry
out the exercise as sensitivity analysis; figures 5.4.1, 5.4.2 and 5.4.3 plot the results for total
expenditures, nondurables expenditures and durables expenditures respectively. For nearly
all household sizes we observe humps in life cycle consumption expenditures of similar size
and location as in our benchmark estimates.
   A second alternative to correct for family size is to use a flexible specification of preferences
that allows to control for demographic factors through the use of additional regressors. This
approach, proposed by Attanasio et al. (1999) uses a linear approximation of the Euler
equation for consumption, modified by the inclusion of additional demographic variables zt
(or instruments for them) to obtain

                   ∆ log (ct+1 ) = constant + σ log (1 + rt+1 ) + θ∆zt+1 + ²t+1                 (6)

Estimation of the parameters of (6) provides an implicit correction for demographic changes.
There may be several problems with this approach which lets us prefer our procedure. First,
a rich specification of the demographic variables to capture shifts in the utility function may


                                                19
result in overparametrization and loss of eﬃciency. The resulting reduction in the precision of
the parameter estimates may explain why the authors cannot reject the null hypothesis of cor-
rect model specification. Second, demographic variables may proxy for liquidity constraints,
which makes the estimates θ̂ hard to interpret29 . Third, since labor income is hump-shaped
over the life cycle and fertility choices are endogenous, households with limited access to
intertemporal trade will choose a simultaneous hump in both consumption expenditure and
family size, even though one does not cause the other. If the Euler equation is not estimated
simultaneously with an optimality condition for fertility, (6) may spuriously pick up the hump
in consumption through the estimates for the demographic parameters. Note, however, that
although our methodology diﬀers from Attanasio et al. (1999), the equivalence scale we use
comes close to the one implicit in their point estimates of the demographic parameters (this
scale is 1, 1.57, 1.80, 2.04, ...). Consequently, if we use their implicit estimates we obtain
results similar to those from our benchmark specification.
    A third approach is to use dummies, fit , for diﬀerent household sizes in our partial linear
model in the form:

                            cit = π i cohorti + πt γ t + π it fit + m (ageit ) + εit                        (7)

This use of dummies to correct for household size is the approach Gourinchas and Parker
(2002) employ30 . Their results for nondurables suggest that this alternative approach yields
results that are qualitatively similar to the ones presented in this paper.
    Finally, an innovative alternative to controlling for household size is to estimate profiles for
individuals directly. Deaton and Paxson (2000) report individual life cycle saving profiles for
Taiwan. We do not follow this strategy because an analysis of profiles for individuals requires
an explicit model of resource allocation within the household, and there does not seem to be
widespread agreement about a “standard” model for this. The problem is especially severe
for consumer durables: what is the portion of services from a TV, car or refrigerator owned
by a household that each individual consumes? We do not attempt to provide an answer to
these diﬃcult questions in this paper31 .

   29
      In the presence of liquidity constraints, the estimation of a log-linearized Euler equation may have prob-
lems on its own. See Attanasio and Low (2000), Carroll (2001) and Ludvigson and Paxson (2001).
   30
      Instead of a kernel estimator they use a set of age dummies in (7) to capture age eﬀects (also, they deal
with the multicollinearity problem by employing unemployment rates instead of time dummies to capture
time eﬀects). Using dummies is equivalent to a kernel estimator with such a small smoothing parameter that
only information from households in the same cohort is used.
   31
      On a technical level, implementing this strategy with U.S. data does require the integration of the member
files with the family files from the CEX, not a trivial task. Future research on this issue seems particularly


                                                      20
5.5. Choice of the Bandwidth

An important technical point that deserves further discussion is choice of the bandwidth h of
the nonparametric kernel inside the partial linear model. For example, an h = 1 means that
the conditional expectation m (ageit ) in (3) is computed using only household observations
with age in the interval [ageit − 1, ageit + 1] , whereas an h = 20 uses observations with age
in [ageit − 20, ageit + 20]. Therefore this parameter controls the degree of smoothness of
the estimate of the curve m, and it determines the trade-oﬀ between small sample bias and
variance (a small h gives small bias and large variance whereas a large h gives the opposite
results). Since consistency of the estimates only requires that, as n → ∞, h should satisfy
h → 0 and nh → ∞, asymptotic theory does not provide much guidance for the choice of h in
a small sample. Cross-validation methods32 suggest a lower value for h than the one we find
preferable for our application. We search for a hump (or the absence of it) in consumption, a
low frequency pattern, while cross validation tries to capture the high frequency movements.
This implies that we are mostly concerned with increasing the “signal to noise” ratio of the
raw data and suggests that a slightly “oversmoothed” curve is a better choice33 . We settle
for a benchmark value of h = 5; now we check the robustness of our results by computing
the regressions for h = 1 and h = 10. Figures 5.5.1-5.5.2 plot the results of this exercise, for
nondurables and durables, respectively. In the first case the hump (measured as before) is
basically constant, and is reduced by around 5% when h = 10. For expenditure on durables,
the hump is increased by 11% when h = 1 and reduced by around 14% when h = 10. The fact
that even for h = 10, where a lot of nonlocal information is used, a clear hump in consumption
expenditures on both nondurables as well as durables emerges, suggests that this finding is
not an artefact of the particular nonparametric procedure but rather a basic characteristic of
the data.

5.6. Pseudopanel versus Pooled CEX Data

When we use all pooled observations from the CEX instead of our pseudopanel, we obtain
roughly the same results as above. As a sample of our findings, in figure 5.6.1 we plot the

important.
  32
     Cross-validation searches for the smoothing parameter that minimizes the mean of a penalizing function
(such as the Mean Square Error) when diﬀerent parts of the sample are eliminated. This minimization trades
oﬀ bias for variance to optimize the objective function of the researcher. Intuitively, this procedure maximizes
the ability of the regression to forecast within the sample (see Härdle (1990)).
  33
     Other practitioners have argued in favor of this less formal approach to the choice of bandwidths. See
again Härdle (1990) for examples.



                                                      21
age profiles from adult equivalent expenditures on nondurables both for the pseudopanel
and for the pooled data. Noticeable diﬀerences occur only at the beginning of the life cycle
where the pooled data set has many more observations than the pseudopanel. If anything,
the use of pooled data increases the size of the hump for nondurables. However, we are
skeptical about how much weight should be placed on the very few consumption observations
of households with head age of 16 to build life cycle profiles. This concern and our desire
to enable comparability with previous empirical studies explains our decision to take the
pseudopanel estimation as our benchmark case.

5.7. Assessing the Importance of Housing

A large fraction of expenditures on consumer durables stems from housing. Since out-of
pocket expenses of owning a home are potentially significant in the first years of ownership
and then decline, while consumption services from the home are roughly constant, the link
between expenditure on owned dwellings and its services, the ultimate object of interest, may
be particularly weak34 . In this section we therefore want to, at least partially, assess whether
our previous results for consumer durables are primarily driven by its biggest component.
       Figure 5.7.1 plots the estimation results for adult equivalent expenditure on durables,
excluding housing and figure 5.7.2 plots the same for expenditures on housing. Both figures
display a clear hump over the life cycle, suggesting that our previous results were not driven
by the aggregation of expenditures on durables. It is worth noting that expenditures on
housing increase more steeply over the first ten years of adult life than expenditures on other
durables, so that the peak of the hump occurs earlier (mid 30’s vs. 50) and is more sizeable
(45% vs. 37%).
       If we disaggregate one level further and separate expenditures on owned residential housing
(figure 5.7.3) and expenditure on rented dwellings (figure 5.7.4) we observe that, over the life
cycle, renting is substituted by home ownership (although this trend is reversed at the very end
of the life cycle). This substitution pattern explains why expenditures on owned residences
are hump-shaped. But even conditional on ownership, as in figure 5.7.5., or rentership, as in
figure 5.7.6., we see expenditure patterns that suggest lack of consumption smoothing over
the life cycle35 .

  34
     Our definition of housing expenditures includes expenditures on owned dwellings and rented dwellings
used for residential purposes by the household. Expenditures on owned dwellings include mortgage interest,
property taxes, repairs, maintenance and insurance. Expenditures on rented dwellings correspond to rent
payments by the household.
  35
     We ought to interpret figures 5.7.5-6 somewhat carefully since the households that have positive renting


                                                     22
    Housing is also the only component of durables for which the CEX contains useful in-
formation about its services, since the survey collects information about the monthly rental
value of the owned residence, as estimated by the household head36 . Figure 5.7.7 plots the
estimated life cycle profile for data, not adjusted by household equivalence scales, and figure
5.7.8 does the same for the data deflated by our equivalence scales. The first figure shows
that, when controlling for quarter and cohort eﬀects, the peak of (market valued) housing
services does not occur until the mid fifties, then decreases slightly, only to mildly increase
towards the end of the life cycle. Figure 5.7.7. also is one of the few instances in this paper
where cohort eﬀects play a significant role for the results37 , with later cohorts living in more
expensive homes. The pattern in figure 5.7.7 is roughly consistent with a hypothetical model
in which households face financial constraints that prevent them from obtaining their desired
home at the beginning of the life cycle. As they age, these households move into better and
better homes, until they reach their target house, which is kept until the end of their life
cycle, to assure a smooth flow of housing services.
    Figure 5.7.8, which adjusts for household size, shows a similar picture, except for the
end of the life cycle. The late increase in the household-size-adjusted rental value of the
home is due to the reduction in household size (usually one spouse dies) which are not
associated with changes in residence (as figure 5.7.7 indicates). This empirical finding is
suggestive of models with (financial or psychological) adjustment costs or models in which
durables provide important collateral services (for instance, to hedge against catastrophic
health expenditures), in which households at the end of the life cycle own more valuable
houses than otherwise optimal38 .


6. Conclusions

In this paper we document the life cycle profiles of consumption, with special emphasis
on the distinction between expenditures on durables and nondurables. We find that both
expenditures on nondurables and durables have a sizeable hump, roughly 50% of which is
accounted for by changes in household demographics. The other half remains to be explained

expenditures at age 40 are a very diﬀerent subgroup of the population than the one that rents at age 25,
raising serious sample selection issues.
  36
     Households are asked: “If someone were to rent your home today, how much do you think it would rent
for monthly, unfurnished and without utilities?”. Note that this question was not asked in 1980 and 1981.
  37
     Quarter eﬀects are of minor importance for figures 5.7.7-8.
  38
     Note that the same findings as in our figures 5.7.7-8 emerge if we use the new variable of housing services
defined by Fisher and Johnson (2002). They generate a series for the rental value of each households’ dwelling,
equal to the paid rent, equal to the imputed rent or to the sum of both.

                                                      23
by factors not present in the standard complete markets life cycle model of consumption, one
of the main workhorses of modern macroeconomics.
   The failure of this model is especially serious for expenditures on durables. Instead of
immediately building up their stock of durables and then just compensating for depreciation,
households in our data continue to increase expenditures until quite late in their life cycles.
Our limited evidence on services from the biggest durable item, residential housing, suggests
that these services are not smoothed over the life cycle either.
   There are a number of possible deviations from the basic life cycle model that may qualita-
tively account for the humps documented in this paper. First, one may relax the assumption
of separability between leisure and consumption. Ghez and Becker (1973) and Heckman
(1974) propose models where utility services are produced with time and goods as inputs.
When time becomes more expensive (i.e. wages are higher), agents substitute goods for time
in the production function of utility services, generating a correlation between labor income
and consumption. A second departure, dating back to Nagatani (1972) and developed in Car-
roll (1992) and Attanasio et al. (1999), is the introduction of uninsurable uncertainty (e.g.
with respect to labor income or lifetime) into a model where households are prudent. Agents
wanting to self-insure against this uncertainty do not consume as much early in life as they
would in the benchmark life cycle model. Finally Thurow (1969) and later Zeldes (1989),
among others, have argued for the importance of liquidity constraints that prevent young
households from borrowing against future (higher) labor income to finance higher current
consumption.
   None of these explanations is mutually exclusive. An important task in applied economics
consists in measuring the quantitative importance of each of them. This paper provides
an empirical target against which quantitative success these explanations may be assessed
against. Since expenditures on consumer durables are an important share of total household
consumption expenditures, an important asset in a households’ portfolio, and an important
determinant for a households’ ability to borrow, an explicit incorporation of durables into
models of life cycle consumption seems to be called for. In documenting life cycle profiles of
expenditures on durables we want to empirically inform recent and future quantitative work
on this issue, examples of which include Díaz and Luengo-Prado (2002), Fernández-Villaverde
and Krueger (2002) and Laibson et al. (2001).




                                              24
7. Appendix: Data Sources

We take our consumption data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), as provided
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Our sample years consist of 1980-1981 and 1984-1998,
with a total of 68 longitudinal surveys.
   We take each household as one observation and use the demographic information of the
reference person to define cohort membership, independent of this person’s gender. We select
only those households with both positive income and consumption expenditure. As most of
the literature we do not attempt to control for topcoding of consumption observations. The
very high topcoding limits (or their nonexistence for food consumption and other items) in
the CEX and the very low survey response rates of the wealthiest households in the U.S.
imply that only a extremely small fraction of our sample is right-censored. As a consequence,
it is unlikely that the lack of proper topcoding treatment aﬀects the results in a significant
manner.
   We compute “total expenditure” using the variable with the same name in the detailed
expenditure files. We divide consumption in these files into three diﬀerent groups. The data
on “expenditure on nondurables” include food, alcohol beverages, tobacco, utilities, personal
care, household operations, public transportation, gas and motor oil, entertainment and
miscellaneous expenditures. The variable “expenditure on durables” sums expenditures on
owned dwelling, rented dwelling, house equipment, vehicles, books and electronic equipment.
We define as ambiguous expenditure apparel, out-of-pocket health and education expenditures
(unless we analyze “total expenditures” which includes all expenditures in the CEX). We
account for changes in the consumption classification methodology over the sample years in
the CEX, in order to assure consistency of our consumption measures.
   Finally, each expenditure category is deflated using its own specific, not seasonally ad-
justed, Consumer Price Index (CPI) component for urban consumers. The dollar figures are
adjusted to 1982-84 dollars using the “current methods” version of the CPI. This version
rebuilds past CPI’s with the present methodology to produce a price deflator series that is
consistent over time.




                                             25
References
 [1] Alessie, R., M. Devereux and G. Weber (1997), “Intertemporal Consumption, Durables
     and Liquidity Constraints: A Cohort Analysis”. European Economic Review 41, 37-59.

 [2] Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoﬀ (1987), Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge University
     Press.

 [3] Atkinson, A., Rainwater, L. and T.M. Smeeding (1995), “Income Distribution in OECD
     Countries: Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS)”. Social Policy Studies
     18, OECD.

 [4] Attanasio, O. P. (1998), “Cohort Analysis of Saving Behavior by U.S. Households”.
     Journal of Human Resources 33, 575-609.

 [5] Attanasio, O.P., J. Banks, C. Meghir and G. Weber (1999), “Humps and Bumps in
     Lifetime Consumption”. Journal of Business and Economics 17, 22-35.

 [6] Attanasio, O. P. and M. Browning (1995), “Consumption over the Life Cycle and over
     the Business Cycle”. American Economic Review 85, 1118-1137.

 [7] Attanasio, O., P.K. Goldberg and E. Kyriazidou (2000), “Credit Constraints in the Mar-
     ket for Consumer Durables; Evidence from Microdata on Car Loans”. NBER Working
     Paper 7694.

 [8] Attanasio, O. and H. Low (2000), “Estimating Euler Equations”, NBER Technical Work-
     ing Paper 253.

 [9] Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1995), “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertem-
     poral Optimization? Evidence for the Consumer Expenditure Survey”. Journal of Po-
     litical Economy 103, 1121-1157.

[10] Barrow, L. and L. McGranahan (2000), “The Eﬀects of the Earned Income Credit on
     the Seasonality of Household Expenditures”. National Tax Journal, forthcoming.

[11] Blundell, R., M. Browning and C. Meghir (1994), “Consumer Demand and the Life-Cycle
     Allocation of Household Expenditures”. Review of Economic Studies 61, 57-80.

[12] Browning, M. and T. Crossley (1999), “Shocks, Stocks and Shocks: Consumption
     Smoothing and the Replacement of Durables during an Unemployment Spell”. Mimeo,
     Institute of Economics, University of Copenhagen.

[13] Browning, M., A. Deaton and M. Irish (1985), “A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply
     and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle”. Econometrica, 53, 503-543.

[14] Browning, M. and M. Ejnæs (2002), “Consumption and Children”. Mimeo, Institute of
     Economics, University of Copenhagen.




                                            26
[15] Buhmann, B., Rainwater, L., Schmauss G. and T.M. Smeeding (1988), “Equivalence
     Scales, Well-Being, Inequality and Poverty: Sensitivity Estimates across Ten Countries
     Using the Luxembourg Income Study Database”. Review of Income and Wealth, 34,
     115-142.
[16] Cardia, E. and S. Ng (2000), “How Important are Intergenerational Transfers of Time?
     A Macroeconomic Analysis”. Mimeo, John Hopkins University.
[17] Carroll, C.D. and L.H. Summers (1991), “Consumption Growth Parallels Income
     Growth: Some New Evidence” in B.D Bernheim and J.B Shoven (eds), National Saving
     and Economic Performance, University of Chicago Press for the NBER.
[18] Carroll, C.D. (1992), “The Buﬀer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic Evi-
     dence”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 23, 61-156.
[19] Carroll, C.D. (2001), “Death to the Log-Linearized Consumption Euler Equation! (And
     Very Poor Health to the Second-Order Approximation)”. Advances in Macroeconomics,
     1, article 6.
[20] Citro, C.F. and R. T. Michael (1995), Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. National
     Academy Press.
[21] Colosanto, D., A. Kapteyn, J. van der Gaag (1984), “Two Subjective Measures of
     Poverty. Results from the Wisconsin Basic Needs Survey”. Journal of Human Resources
     19, 127-137.
[22] Cutler, D. and L. Katz (1991), “Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution of
     Income and Consumption in the 1980’s”. American Economic Review, 82, 546-551.
[23] Datzinger S, J. van der Gaag, M.K. Taussig and E. Smolensky (1994), “The Direct
     Measurement of Welfare Levels: How Much Does it Cost to Make Ends Meet?”. Review
     of Economics and Statistics, 66, 500-505.
[24] Deaton, A. (1985), “Panel Data from Time Series of Cross-Sections”. Journal of Econo-
     metrics 30, 109-126.
[25] Deaton, A. (1992), Understanding Consumption. Oxford University Press.
[26] Deaton. A. (1997), The Analysis of Households Surveys. John Hopkins University.
[27] Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (2000), “Growth and Saving Among Individuals and House-
     holds”. Review of Economics and Statistics, 82, 215-225.
[28] Díaz, A. and M. Luengo-Prado (2002), “Durable Goods and the Wealth Distibution”.
     Mimeo, Universidad Carlos III.
[29] Eberly, J. (1994), “Adjustment of Consumers’ Durables Stocks: Evidence from Automo-
     bile Purchases”. Journal of Political Economy 102, 403-436.
[30] Federal Register (1991), 56, n 34.

                                            27
[31] Fernández-Villaverde, J. and D. Krueger (2002), “Consumption and Saving over the Life
     Cycle: How Important are Consumer Durables”. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
     Available at www.econ.upenn.edu/~jesusfv

[32] Ferreira, M.L., R.C. Buse and J.P. Chavas (1998), “Is There Bias in Computing House-
     hold Equivalence Measures”. Review of Income and Wealth, 44, 183-198.

[33] Fisher, J.D. and D.S. Johnson (2002), “Consumption Mobility in the United States:
     Evidence from Two Panel Data Sets”. Mimeo, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

[34] Garner, T.I. and K. de Vos (1995), “Income Suﬃciency vs. Poverty: Results from the
     United States and The Netherlands”. Journal of Population Economics 8, 117-134.

[35] Garner, T.I. and K.S. Short (2001), “Owner-Occupied Shelter in Experimental Poverty
     Measurement with a ‘Look’ at Inequality and Poverty Rates”. Mimeo, Bureau of Labor
     Statistics.

[36] Ghez, G.R. and G. Becker, (1975), The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life
     Cycle. Columbia University Press for the NBER.

[37] Gourinchas, P.O. and J. A. Parker (2002), “Consumption over the Life Cycle”. Econo-
     metrica 70, 47-89.

[38] Hall, P. (1992a), The Bootstrap and Edgeworth Expansion. Springer-Verlag.

[39] Hall, P. (1992b), “Eﬀect of Bias Estimation on Coverage Accuracy of Bootstrap Confi-
     dence Intervals for a Probability Density”. Annals of Statistics 20, 675-694.

[40] Härdle, W. (1990), Applied Nonparametric Regression. Cambridge University Press.

[41] Heckman, J.J. (1974), “Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation
     of the Relationship Between Income and Consumption over the Life Cycle”. American
     Economic Review 64, 184-194.

[42] Heckman, J.J. and R. Robb (1985), “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact
     of Interventions” in J.J. Heckman and B. Singer (eds), Longitudinal Analysis of Labor
     Market Data. Cambridge University Press.

[43] Heckman, J.J. and E. Vytlacil (2001), “Identifying the Role of Cognitive Ability in
     Explaining the Level and Change in the Return to Schooling”. Review of Economics and
     Statistics 83, 1-12.

[44] Horowitz, J. (2001), “The Bootstrap” in J.J. Heckman and E. Leamer (eds), Handbook
     of Econometrics, vol. 5.

[45] Johnson, D.S. and T.I. Garner (1995), “Unique Equivalence Scales: Estimation and
     Implications for Distributional Analysis”. Journal of Income Distribution 4, 215-234.




                                           28
[46] Johnson, D.S. and T.M. Smeeding (1998), “Intergenerational Equity in the United
     States: the Changing Well-being of the Old and the Young, 1960-1995”. Mimeo, Bu-
     reau of Labor Statistics.

[47] Jorgenson, D. and D. Slesnick (1987), “Aggregate Consumer Behavior and Household
     Equivalence Scales”. Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 5, 219-232.

[48] Kotlikoﬀ, L.J. (2001), Essays on Saving, Bequest, Altruism and Life-Cycle Planning.
     MIT Press.

[49] Laibson, D., A. Repetto and J. Tobacman (2001), “A Debt Puzzle”. Mimeo, Harvard
     University.

[50] Lazear, E. and Michael, R.T. (1980), “Family Size and the Distribution of Real Per
     Capita Income”. American Economic Review 70, 91-107.

[51] Lindert, P. H. (1978), Fertility and Scarcity in America. Princeton University Press.

[52] Lindert, P.H. (1980), “Child Cost and Economic Development” in R. Easterlin (ed),
     Population and Economic Change in Developing Countries. Chicago University Press
     for NBER.

[53] Ludvigson, S. and C. H. Paxson (2001), “Approximation Bias in Linearized Euler Equa-
     tions”. Review of Economics and Statistics 83, 242-256.

[54] Mace, B. (1991), “Full Insurance in the Presence of Aggregate Uncertainty”. Journal of
     Political Economy 99, 928-56.

[55] Nagatani. K. (1972), “Life Cycle Savings: Theory and Fact”. American Economic Review
     62, 344-353.

[56] Nelson, J. (1988), “Household Economies of Scale in Consumption: Theory and Evi-
     dence,” Econometrica 56, 1301-1314.

[57] Nelson, J. (1993), “Independent of a Base Equivalence Scales Estimation Using United
     States Micro-Data”. Annales d’Économie et de Statistique 29, 43-62.

[58] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1982). The OECD List of
     Social Indicators.

[59] Pendakur, K. (1999), “Semiparametric Estimates and Test of Base-Independent Equiv-
     alence Scales”. Journal of Econometrics 88, 1-40.

[60] Phipps, S. and T.I. Garner (1994), “Are Equivalent Scales the Same for the United
     States and Canada?”. Review of Income and Wealth 40, 1-17.

[61] Pollak, R.A. and T.J. Wales (1979), “Welfare Comparisons and Equivalence Scales (in
     Equality: The Individual vs. the Family)”. American Economic Review 69, 216-221.



                                             29
[62] Speckman, P. (1988), “Kernel Smoothing in Partial Linear Models”. Journal of the Royal
     Statistical Society B 50, 413-436.

[63] Thurow, L. (1969), “The Optimal Lifetime Distribution of Consumption Expenditures”.
     American Economic Review 59, 324-330.

[64] U.S. Department of Commerce (1991). Trends in Relative Income: 1964 to 1989. Series
     P60-177.

[65] Zeldes, S. (1989), “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investiga-
     tion”. Journal of Political Economy 97, 305-346.




                                            30
                               Figure 2.2.1: Total Expenditure
                 8000




                 7000




                 6000
Thousands of $




                 5000




                 4000




                 3000




                 2000
                     20   30   40       50         60       70   80   90

                                             Age
                               Figure 2.2.2: Expenditures non Durables
                 3000



                 2800



                 2600



                 2400



                 2200
Thousands of $




                 2000



                 1800



                 1600



                 1400



                 1200



                 1000
                     20   30       40        50         60     70        80   90

                                                  Age
                              Figure 2.2.3: Expenditures Durables
                 3500




                 3000




                 2500
Thousands of $




                 2000




                 1500




                 1000




                 500
                    20   30     40        50         60     70      80   90

                                               Age
                              Figure 3.2.1: Family Size
              4.5



               4



              3.5



               3
Family Size




              2.5



               2



              1.5



               1
               20   30   40         50         60         70   80   90

                                         Age
                              Figure 4.1.1: Total Expenditure
                 7000


                 6500


                 6000


                 5500
Thousands of $




                 5000


                 4500


                 4000


                 3500


                 3000


                 2500
                    20   30   40       50         60      70    80   90

                                            Age
                               Figure 4.1.2: Expenditures non Durables
                 2400




                 2200




                 2000
Thousands of $




                 1800




                 1600




                 1400




                 1200




                 1000
                     20   30       40        50         60     70        80   90
                                                  Age
                              Figure 4.1.3: Expenditures Durables
                 3000




                 2500




                 2000
Thousands of $




                 1500




                 1000




                 500
                    20   30     40        50         60     70      80   90
                                               Age
                           Figure 4.1.4: Total Expenditure adult equivalent
                 4500




                 4000




                                                                      Age, Cohort and
                                                                      Quarter Effects

                 3500
Thousands of $




                 3000




                 2500



                                                        Age Effects



                 2000
                     20   30       40        50         60            70         80     90

                                                  Age
                         Figure 4.1.5: Expenditures non Durables adult equivalent
                 1500




                 1400                                              Age, Cohort and
                                                                   Quarter Effects




                 1300
Thousands of $




                 1200




                 1100




                 1000
                                                               Age Effects




                 900
                    20      30        40       50         60       70           80   90
                                                    Age
                         Figure 4.1.6: Expenditures Durables Adult Equivalent
                 1800




                 1600




                 1400                                                   Age, Cohort and
                                                                        Quarter Effects
Thousands of $




                 1200




                 1000




                 800
                                                             Age Efffects




                 600
                    20    30        40       50         60      70          80            90
                                                  Age
                  Figure 5.1.1 a): 95% confidence interval                    Figure 5.1.1 b): Widest confidence interval
                 1450                                                         1500

                 1400                                                         1450

                 1350                                                         1400

                                                                              1350
                 1300
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $
                                                                              1300
                 1250
                                                                              1250
                 1200
                                                                              1200
                 1150
                                                                              1150
                 1100                                                         1100
                 1050                                                         1050

                 1000                                                         1000
                     20      40        60       80                                20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                              Age



                   Figure 5.1.1 c): 95% confidence band                                Figure 5.1.1 d): All simulations
                 1500                                                         1500

                 1450                                                         1450

                 1400                                                         1400

                 1350                                                         1350
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $




                 1300                                                         1300

                 1250                                                         1250

                 1200                                                         1200

                 1150                                                         1150

                 1100                                                         1100

                 1050                                                         1050

                 1000                                                         1000
                     20      40        60       80                                20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                              Age
                  Figure 5.1.2 a): 95% confidence interval                    Figure 5.1.2 b): Widest confidence interval
                 1700                                                         1800

                 1600

                 1500                                                         1600

                 1400
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $
                                                                              1400
                 1300

                 1200
                                                                              1200
                 1100

                 1000                                                         1000
                 900

                 800                                                          800
                    20       40        60       80                               20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                             Age



                   Figure 5.1.2 c): 95% confidence band                               Figure 5.1.2 d): All simulations
                 1800                                                         1800



                 1600                                                         1600
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $




                 1400                                                         1400



                 1200                                                         1200



                 1000                                                         1000



                 800                                                          800
                    20       40        60       80                               20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                             Age
                  Figure 5.1.3 a): 95% confidence interval                    Figure 5.1.3 b): Widest confidence interval
                 2400                                                         2500


                 2200


                 2000                                                         2000
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $
                 1800


                 1600                                                         1500


                 1400


                 1200                                                         1000
                     20      40        60       80                                20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                              Age



                   Figure 5.1.3 c): 95% confidence band                                Figure 5.1.3 d): All simulations
                 2500                                                         2500




                 2000                                                         2000
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $




                 1500                                                         1500




                 1000                                                         1000
                     20      40        60       80                                20          40        60        80
                                    Age                                                              Age
                  Figure 5.1.4 a): 95% confidence interval                                      Figure 5.1.4 b): Widest confidence interval
                 2400                                                                          2500


                 2200


                 2000                                                                          2000




                                                                              Thousands of $
Thousands of $




                 1800


                 1600                                                                          1500


                 1400


                 1200                                                                          1000
                     20       40        60        80                                               20          40        60         80
                                                                                                                      Age


                    Figure 5.1.4 c): 95% confidence band                                                Figure 5.1.4 d): All simulations
                 2500                Age                                                       2500




                 2000                                                                          2000
Thousands of $




                                                             Thousands of $




                 1500                                                                          1500




                 1000                                                                          1000
                     20       40        60        80                                               20          40        60         80

                                     Age                                                                              Age
Figure 5.2.1: Comparison of Different Equivalence Scales, nondurable Consumption
     1.6



                                             Nelson Equivalence Scale
     1.5




     1.4


                                                    Mean Equivalence Scale
     1.3




     1.2




     1.1




      1

                              OECD Scale


     0.9




     0.8
        20      30       40       50         60         70          80       90
                                       Age
                                      Figure 5.3.1: Age-Changing Equivalence Scales
                 1.2




                   1
                                                               Browning-Ejrnaes
                                                               Age-Changing Equivalence
                                                               Scale, more education
                 0.8




                 0.6
Thousands of $




                            Our Age-Changing Equivalence Scale

                 0.4




                 0.2




                   0

                                                  Browning-Ejrnaes
                                                  Age-Changing Equivalence
                                                  Scale, less education
                 -0.2




                 -0.4
                        0         2       4        6       8        10       12      14   16   18   20
                                                                   Age
        Figure 5.3.2: Comparison of Consumption Profiles
1.5




1.4
                                            Benchmark Equivalence Scale




1.3




1.2




1.1




 1               Age-Changing
                 Equivalence Scale



0.9




0.8




0.7
   20   30       40          50            60        70          80       90
                                     Age
Figure 5.5.1: Expenditures non Durables adult equivalent, different smoothing parameters
                     1500




                     1400


                                                                   h =10


                     1300
    Thousands of $




                     1200


                                                   h=5


                     1100




                     1000         h=1




                     900




                     800
                        20   30         40   50          60   70           80   90
                                                  Age
Figure 5.5.2: Expenditures Durables adult equivalent, different smoothing parameters
                   2000



                                                         h=5

                   1800




                           h = 10
                   1600
  Thousands of $




                   1400




                   1200


                              h=1


                   1000




                   800




                   600
                      20            30   40   50         60    70   80    90
                                                   Age
                        Figure 5.6.1: Expenditures non Durables adult equivalent
                 1500




                                                                  Pseudopanel
                 1400




                 1300
Thousands of $




                                    Pooled Data
                 1200




                 1100




                 1000




                 900
                          30         40           50         60         70      80
                                                       Age
                       Figure 5.7.1: Expenditures Durables, Non Housing, adult equivalent
                 900




                 800




                 700

                                                                    Age, Cohort and
                                    Age Effects                     Quarter Effects
Thousands of $




                 600




                 500




                 400




                 300




                 200
                    20         30           40    50         60      70           80    90
                                                       Age
                         Figure 5.7.2: Expenditures Durables, Housing, adult equivalent
                 900




                 850




                 800


                                    Age Effects
                 750
                                                                  Age, Cohort and
                                                                  Quarter Effects
Thousands of $




                 700




                 650




                 600




                 550




                 500




                 450
                    20         30           40    50         60       70            80    90
                                                       Age
                  Figure 5.7.3: Expenditures Durables, Owned Housing, adult equivalent
                 500




                 450


                                                              Age, Cohort and
                                                              Quarter Effects
                 400




                 350
Thousands of $




                 300




                 250




                 200                                                  Age Effects




                 150




                 100
                    20      30       40       50         60      70             80   90
                                                   Age
                  Figure 5.7.4: Expenditures Durables, Rented Housing, adult equivalent
                 400




                                 Age, Cohort and
                 350
                                 Quarter Effects




                 300
Thousands of $




                 250                                                     Age Effects




                 200




                 150




                 100
                    20      30         40          50         60   70      80          90
                                                        Age
                  Figure 5.7.5: Expenditures Durables, Owned Housing, adult equivalent
                 900




                 800




                 700
Thousands of $




                                                                      Age, Cohort and
                                                                      Quarter Effects

                 600




                 500




                 400
                                                   Age Effects




                 300
                    20      30       40       50          60     70            80       90
                                                   Age
                  Figure 5.7.6: Expenditures Durables, Rented Housing, adult equivalent
                 800




                 750




                 700
Thousands of $




                 650                                        Age, Cohort and
                                                            Quarter Effects




                 600




                 550


                                             Age Effects


                 500




                 450
                    20      30       40        50          60         70      80    90
                                                    Age
                               Figure 5.7.7: Equivalent Rental Value
                 600

                                                            Age, Cohort and
                                                            Quarter Effects


                 500




                 400
Thousands of $




                 300


                                         Age Effects

                 200




                 100




                    0




                 -100
                     20   30      40       50          60          70         80   90
                                                 Age
                         Figure 5.7.8: Equivalent Rental Value, adult equivalent
                 450



                 400
                                Age, Cohort and
                                Quarter Effects
                 350



                 300



                 250
Thousands of $




                                                             Age Effects
                 200



                 150



                 100



                 50



                  0



                 -50
                    20     30           40        50           60          70   80   90
                                                       Age
