                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INTERPRETABLE ASSET MARKETS?

                                             Ravi Bansal
                                         Varoujan Khatchatrian
                                             Amir Yaron

                                          Working Paper 9383
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9383


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We thank seminar participants at Duke University, and The Wharton School, and Andy Abel, Tim Bollerslev,
Michael Brandt, Bob Hall, George Tauchen, Tom Sargent, Ken Singleton and anonymous referee for helpful
comments. Financial support from The Rodney L. White Center at the Wharton School is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Ravi Bansal, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Interpretable Asset Markets?
Ravi Bansal, Varoujan Khatchatrian, and Amir Yaron
NBER Working Paper No. 9383
December 2002
JEL No.


                                           ABSTRACT




       In this paper we show that measures of economic uncertainty (conditional volatility of

consumption) predict and are predicted by valuation ratios at long horizons. Further we document

that asset valuations drop as economic uncertainty rises — that is, financial markets dislike

economic uncertainty. Moreover, future earnings growth rates are sharply predicted by current price-

earnings ratios. It seems that much of the variation in asset prices can be attributed to fluctuations

in economic uncertainty and expected cash-flow growth. This empirical evidence is consistent with

the implications of existing parametric general equilibrium models. Hence, the channels of

fluctuating economic uncertainty and expected growth seem important for interpreting asset markets.


Ravi Bansal                    Varoujan Khatchatrian                  Amir Yaron
Fuqua School of Business       Department of Economics                The Wharton School
Duke University                Duke University                        University of Pennsylvania
Box 90120                      Durham, NC 27708-0097                  2256 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Durham, NC 27708               khv@duke.edu                           Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
ravi.bansal@duke.edu                                                  and NBER
                                                                      yaron@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

In this paper we provide new evidence that relates asset prices, consumption volatility and
expected growth. In particular, we show that economic uncertainty (that is, consumption
volatility) sharply predicts and is predicted by asset valuation ratios. Our evidence shows
that a rise in economic uncertainty leads to a fall in asset prices, and that high valuation ratios
predict low subsequent economic uncertainty. In addition, we show that there is a strong
positive relation between aggregate earnings growth and asset prices. In all, our evidence
suggests that fluctuations in economic uncertainty and expected growth are potentially
important channels for interpreting asset markets and the variation in asset prices.
   Why is this evidence relevant? First, this empirical evidence highlights an often discussed
but not verified view that aggregate economic uncertainty (i.e., real aggregate consumption
volatility) has sizable effects on asset valuations and that financial markets dislike economic
uncertainty. Our empirical work for the U.S. and foreign economies suggests that the effects
of fluctuating economic uncertainty on asset valuations are quantitatively sizable. Second,
the evidence regarding growth rates suggests that fluctuations in expected growth directly
affect asset valuations, and that information regarding future expected growth is encoded
in current asset valuations. The work of Barsky and DeLong (1993), Bansal and Yaron
(2000), and Hall (2001), and Ang and Bekaert (2001) highlight the importance of fluctuating
expected economic growth in interpreting asset valuations. Our overall evidence regrading
economic uncertainty and expected growth suggests that a plausible interpretation of asset
markets is based on these economic fundamentals. A rise in economic uncertainty increases
expected returns and leads to a fall in asset valuations. A rise in expected growth, on the
other hand leads to a rise in asset valuations. Both these effects can be interpreted from
the perspective of existing general equilibrium models (see for example Bansal and Yaron
(2000)).
   An alternative view of asset markets “shuts-off” the channels of expected growth rates and
economic uncertainty, as growth rates in these models are assumed to be i.i.d (e.g., Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), Cechetti, Lam, and Mark (2000)). These models suggest that asset
markets can be interpreted via the channels of fluctuating risk aversion and/or distorted
beliefs. The empirical evidence provided in this paper does not exclude the possibility
of time-varying risk-aversion; however, it does suggest that channels related to observable
macroeconomic fluctuations (in expected growth and volatility) can by themselves go a long
way to help interpret market movements.

    In addition to the empirical evidence for quarterly data 1949.1 - 1999.4, we find broadly


                                                2
similar evidence from other economies as well (we focus on three large economies UK,
Germany, Japan). More concretely, we find that consumption volatility predicts price-
dividend and price-earnings ratios, with R2 in excess of 20%. Interestingly, it is difficult
to find comparable evidence if one replaces consumption volatility with simple measures of
market volatility. Future, realized consumption volatility is predicted by current valuation
ratios, and at horizons of 4-8 quarters, the R2 s from these regressions are about 6%. Current
valuation ratios do not predict future realized market volatility. The slope coefficient in
the regressions that link valuation ratios to consumption volatility is always negative and
significant—as predicted by our economic model. We document that our evidence is robust
to alternative measures of consumption volatility. To account for finite sample issues we
also provide finite sample empirical distributions for the various parameters for statistical
inference.
       While the links between economic uncertainty and valuations highlight some new
empirical evidence, the links between growth rates and valuation ratios is much explored
(see for example Campbell and Shiller (1988), Bansal and Lundblad (2002), Hall (2001),
and Ang (2002) among others). Future cash dividend growth rates are not well predicted by
current valuation ratios.1 Future earnings growth, at horizons of 4-16 quarters are sharply
predicted by current valuation ratios. The fact that at longer horizons growth rates are
predictable is interesting and indicates that low frequency components in earnings growth
rates contain important economic information regarding asset prices. We find that about
55% of the variation in price-earnings ratios can be explained by variations in expected
growth rates and about 45% by variation in expected returns. Further we document that
about half of the fluctuations in expected returns may be due to fluctuations in economic
uncertainty. In all, we argue that the economic uncertainty and growth channels permit an
interpretation of asset markets which is largely consistent with the implications of received
economic models.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the motivation and
framework of our analysis. Section 3 shows the implications of predictability regressions we
use in our empirical work. Section 4 discusses data and Section 5 presents our empirical
results. Section 6 provides some concluding remarks.
   1
    Bansal and Yaron (2000) show, that the connection between expected growth and asset valuations may
be somewhat difficult to detect in the data as valuation ratios themselves are affected by additional factors,
such as stochastic volatility of consumption, a measure of economic uncertainty. Lettau and Ludvigson
(2002) also provide additional reasons for why this link may be difficult to detect.




                                                      3
2         The Economy and Asset Valuation

To provide a framework to analyze our empirical evidence it is useful to write the log valuation
ratio using the Campbell and Shiller (1988) approximation,
                                                        ∞
                                                        X j
                                pt − yt = κ0 + Et             κ1 [gy,t+j − rt+j ].                       (1)
                                                        j=1


where yt+1 is the log level of cash-flows, gy,t+1 is the growth rate of market cash-flows, and rt+1
is the continuously compounded return on the market portfolio.2 An additional accounting
implication of the above present value restriction is that
                                      ∞
                                      X j
                    var(pt − yt ) =         κ1 [cov(gy,t+j , pt − yt ) − cov(rt+j , pt − yt )]           (2)
                                      j=1


This equation says that variation in asset valuations pt − yt can only come from variations
in expected cash-flow growth and/or variations in expected asset returns. The infinite
sum of κj1 cov(gy,t+j , pt − yt )/var(pt − yt ) is the fraction of the variance in pt − yt that
can be attributed to fluctuating expected growth and analogously, the infinite sum of,
−κj1 cov(rt+j , pt − yt )/var(pt − yt ), is the fraction that emanates from variation in expected
returns. Different economic models impose different restrictions on the expected return
process and the growth rate of cash flows—this leads to different implications for asset
valuations. For example, if expected growth rates are constant, then all the variability in the
valuation ratio will be due to fluctuating expected returns—which may vary due to changing
risk aversion. This interpretation of asset markets is different from a model that highlights
the role of fluctuating expected growth and fluctuating economic uncertainty. We discuss
these differences next and highlight empirical implications of the various models that allow
us to interpret the behavior of asset prices.


2.1        Fluctuating Economic Growth and Uncertainty Channel

In this section we briefly present an economic model that highlights the importance of the
channels related to fluctuating economic uncertainty and expected growth.
        Let the aggregate consumption gc,t+1 process,

                                gc,t+1 = µ + xt + σc,t ηt+1
    2
    κ1 is given by the steady-state relationship of exp(p − y)/(1 + exp(p − y)), thus a number slightly lower
than one. κ0 is an approximation constant.

                                                         4
                                 xt = ρxt−1 + ϕe σc,t et+1                                         (3)
                               2
                              σc,t+1 = σ 2 + ν1 (σc,t
                                                  2
                                                      − σ 2 ) + σw wt+1

                                                      2
where xt is the conditional expected growth rate, σc,t   is the conditional variance, and et+1 ,
ηt+1 , and wt+1 , are N iid(0, 1) shocks. Consider an endowment economy as in Lucas (1978)
where the representative agent has Epstein and Zin (1989) - Weil (1989) preferences. In this
economy the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution is

                                                    θ
                           Mt+1 = exp(θ ln δ −        gc,t+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 )
                                                    ψ

and the Euler condition for valuing any asset ri,t+1 ≡ log(Ri,t+1 ) is,

                                          θ
                       Et [exp(θ ln δ −     gc,t+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 + ri,t+1 )] = 1                 (4)
                                          ψ
                                                                                   1−γ
The parameter ψ, is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), and θ = 1−   1 , with γ
                                                                                     ψ
being the risk aversion parameter. The return, rc,t+1 , denotes the log return on the claim to
the consumption stream.
   To make our point and keep the discussion brief we will focus on the asset valuation
associated with the claim to the consumption stream. Consider zt = pt − ct , the log price-
consumption ratio, that is, the market value of the claim to the consumption stream relative
to current consumption. Exploiting the Euler equation (4), the solution the solution for this
                                          2
asset valuations is zt = b0 + bx xt + bσ σc,t —where;

                                                1
                                           1−   ψ
                                bx =                                                               (5)
                                          1 − κ1 ρ
                                          0.5[(θ − ψθ )2 + (θbx κ1 ϕe )2 ]
                                bσ =                                                               (6)
                                                    θ(1 − κ1 ν1 )

It immediately follows that bx is positive only if ψ, the IES, is greater than one . In this case a
rise in expected growth leads to an increase in the consumption valuation ratio. In addition γ
is also greater than one (i.e., θ < 0), bσ is negative – that is a rise in volatility lowers the price-
consumption ratio. In other words—when IES is larger than one higher expected growth
raises asset valuations and a rise in economic uncertainty lowers asset valuations. In economic
terms this capture the intuition that when agents anticipate higher economic growth (all else
held fixed), they are willing to buy more equity and drive up equity valuations. On the other
hand when economic uncertainty rises, agents require greater compensation of holding equity
and this drives the asset valuations down.

                                                     5
   An implication of the economic growth and uncertainty channel is that current asset
valuations should help predict future growth rates and future economic uncertainty – in
particular, higher valuation ratios should predict higher economic growth and lower future
economic uncertainty. In contrast when economic growth is not predictable, then bx = 0,
and current valuations contain no information regrading future growth rates. Further, if
fluctuating economic uncertainty is absent, then bσ = 0, and asset valuations should provide
no information regrading future economic uncertainty. It is instructive to note that when
θ = 1, that is the case of CRRA power utility, a rise in economic uncertainty will raise asset
valuations (see equation (6) above). Also note that with power utility, if the IES is less than
one (that is risk-aversion is larger than one), then a rise in expected growth lowers the asset
valuation (see equation(5)).

   The model specification for the risk premium on assets can simply be characterized by its
implications for the pricing kernel. As shown in Appendix A the pricing kernel (that is the
IMRS in terms of the state variables) is determined by both volatility shocks and growth rate
shocks. Most importantly, with the Epstien-Zin preferences the risk premium on all assets
is comprised of compensation for the consumption innovation risk and the consumption
volatility risk. With the above assumed consumption growth dynamics, compensation for
volatility risk is absent in the power utility case. In particular, the risk premium on the
consumption claim is,

                                        2          2
                Et [rc,t+1 − rf,t ] = γσc,t + λe Bσc,t + λw κ1 bσ σw2 − 0.5V art (rc,t+1 )         (7)

where B = κ1 bx ϕe is the asset exposure to expected growth rate news, λe ≡ (1 − θ)B is the
market price of expected growth rate risk, λw ≡ (1 − θ)bσ κ1 is the market price of volatility
risk, and V art (rc,t+1 ) = (1+B 2 )σc,t
                                     2
                                         +(bσ κ1 )2 σw2 is the usual conditional variance of the return
(details of these derivations are in Appendix A) due to our use of continuous returns. Note
that risks associated with shocks to consumption volatility, carry a separate risk premia—
volatility risk is priced. The first term in the premium is the familiar i.i.d case where risk
aversion multiplies consumption volatility. The second term captures the exposure of the
asset return to expected growth rate news and the third term is the compensation for risk
associated with fluctuating consumption volatility. With IES larger than one, and γ > 1,
the market price for volatility risk is positive. The above discussion implies, that generally
risk premia is a linear affine function of consumption volatility, that is

                                                                  2
                                     Et [rt+1 − rf,t ] = γ0 + γ1 σc,t                              (8)



                                                    6
This is a canonical equation for the risk premia that appear in many equilibrium asset pricing
models (see for example, models considered in Hansen and Singleton (1982), Hansen and
Singleton (1983), Mehra and Prescott (1985), Abel (1990), Kandel and Stambaugh (1991),
Campbell (1993), Bansal and Yaron (2000)) where γ0 and γ1 capture attitudes toward risk
governed by preferences and technology in the economy.3
   As discussed in Bansal and Yaron (2000) in general for any asset with cash-flows y the
asset valuation pt − yt will be determined by

                                                                   2
                                    pt − yt = b0 + by,x xt + by,σ σc,t                                  (9)

The coefficients by,x and by,σ are the analog of the coefficients bx and bσ related to the valuation
ratio zt of the consumption stream discussed above. The intuition and interpretation of the
economic model for asset valuations discussed above for the consumption stream would be
credible if (i) The R2 from regressing future pt+J − yt+J on to σc,t should be sizeable with a
negative slope coefficients, (ii) future economic uncertainty, σc,t+J , should be forecastable by
pt − yt , and (iii) current pt − yt should predict future growth rates, gy,t+J . This, as discussed,
would be the case if IES is larger than one and the risk aversion parameter is larger than
one as well. Consequently empirical evidence regarding (i)-(iii) can be interpreted from the
perspective of the economic model discussed above. Note that equation (9) is essentially the
solution for the present value expression discussed in (1).


2.2     Alternative Interpretations

An alternative interpretation of asset markets is to rely on “stochastic risk aversion” (see
for example Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001)). Growth
rates are assumed to be i.i.d , but there is important time-variation in the risk preferences.
That is, γ1 is time varying (denoted as γ1,t ) and it approximately follows a linear time-series
process. In this case
                                          pt − yt = b0 + bγ γ1,t                                       (10)

In external habit models, γ1,t could be determined by the history of past consumption
growth rates. Hence, valuation ratios may be related to observable past consumption
growth rates. However, as the underlying cash-flow growth rates are i.i.d , bσ = 0. As
   3
    Specifically, in the example above and for the return on the consumption claim γ0 = [λw κ1 bσ −
0.5(bσ κ1 )2 )]σw
                2
                  , and γ1 = γ + λe B − 0.5(1 + B 2 ). In Bansal and Yaron (2000) we show how to price a
claim to dividends which is modelled as a levered claim on the consumption process containing additional
independent shocks. Nonetheless, the general structure for the asset risk premium and its valuation ratio is
analogous to the one presented in the example above.

                                                     7
there are no fluctuations in economic uncertainty, asset valuations, pt − yt , neither predict
economic uncertainty nor are predicted by it. Further, current pt −yt provides no information
regarding future growth rates as growth rates are not forecastable. Consequently, (i)-(iii)
discussed above highlight some of the differences across these alternative interpretations for
asset markets. We recognize that these differences across alternative interpretations can
potentially be bridged by modifying the underlying cash-flow and/or preference processes.
Nonetheless, our empirical work highlights which channels are quantitatively important for
interpreting asset markets and thus can serve as a guide for any fruitful synthesis.

   It is important to note the stochastic risk aversion channel relies heavily on fluctuating
expected returns to interpret asset markets–these fluctuations are related to the fluctuations
in risk aversion of the agent. Fluctuations in the risk premia are also a part of the growth-
uncertainty based models (see equation (8)–the risk premium fluctuations in this model is
directly related to the fluctuating uncertainty in the economy. In both cases pt − yt will
predict the expected return of the market. Consequently, the regression or multi-horizon
returns on pt − yt (see equation (12) below) cannot tell us if the sources of variation in the
expected return are due to fluctuating risk-preferences or fluctuating economic uncertainty,
          2
that is σc,t . However, as discussed above, the link between price-cash-flow ratios and
economic uncertainty can be quite informative in discriminating across these alternative
interpretations. This indeed motivates one of the projections discussed below.
   Motivated by the discussion above, the next section provides explicit details regarding
the various regressions we undertake in our empirical work.



3     Predictability Regressions

3.1    The Variance of Valuation Ratios

The link between growth rates and valuation ratios provide useful information regarding
the sources of variation in valuation ratios (see for example Campbell and Shiller (1988),
Cochrane (1992)). Equation (11) below provides information regarding the role that growth
rates play in determining valuation ratios. That is we consider the following projection,

                        L
                        X
                              gy,t+l = β0 + β1,L (pt − yt ) + ut+L , L ≥ 1               (11)
                        l=1




                                                 8
The companion return projection is

                                L
                                X
                                      rt+l = a0 + a1,L (pt − yt ) + ut+L L ≥ 1                                (12)
                                l=1


    To derive an approximate decomposition of the variance of pt − yt one can simply redefine
                                                      P
the left hand side of the projection (11) above to be Ll=1 κl1 gy,t+l and analogously for equation
(12). At horizon of L the percentage of the variance of pt − yt attributable to growth rates
                β                                                                         −a
is βg (L) = β1,L,κ1,L,κ
                   −a1,L,κ
                           , and the part attributable to fluctuations in returns is β1,L,κ1,L,κ
                                                                                             −a1,L,κ
                                                                                                     ,
where here the explicit dependence on κ allows for the possibility of scaling the element of
the dependent variable by κ as described above.
    The R2 s of the projections (11) and (12) are important for interpreting asset markets.
For example, if the R2 in the growth rate regression is fairly small, then almost all of the
variation in pt − yt must come from variation in expected returns. In this case, the R2 s of
the return projection (12) must be large. If the R2 s of the growth rate projection (11) are
large, this implies that growth rates are predictable. In fact this channel is the focus of the
work in Barsky and DeLong (1993), Bansal and Lundblad (2002), Bansal and Yaron (2000),
and Hall (2001), who argue that fluctuations in expected growth rates are quantitatively
important for understanding asset markets. In contrast, Campbell and Cochrane (1999),
Barberis, Huang, and Santos (2001), and Shiller (1989) provide models where almost all of
the variation in asset prices is due to fluctuations in expected returns.4


3.2       Do Markets Dislike Economic Uncertainty?

Using the return regression and the relation between pt − yt and measures of economic
uncertainty we can provide a direct link between economic uncertainty and the expected
return.
       We consider two empirical measures for economic uncertainty.                         The first is a non-
parametric volatility measure. Specifically, we use the residuals ηc,t from an AR(1)
specification for consumption growth, and then define the volatility measure as σc,t−1,J =
   4
    Given the direct link between the parameters and the definition of R2 , and in particular assuming
β1,L ≥ 0 and −a1,L ≥ 0, which is the typical case in the data, it follows that

                                                XL                                        XL
           V ar(pt − yt ) = {V ar(pt − yt )V ar(   gy,t+l )Rg2 }1/2 + {V ar(pt − yt )V ar(   rt+l )Rr2 }1/2
                                                l=1                                       l=1

where Rg2 and Rr2 refer to the R2 s of the projections in equations (11) and (12) respectively.


                                                          9
       P
log( Jj=1 |ηc,t−j |). The residuals in the sum in σc,t−1,J could be weighted but rather than
trying to estimate these weights and introduce additional estimation error, we use our
specification with small to moderate lag lengths J. This approach is motivated by Anderson,
Bollerslev, and Diebold (2002) who show that such a measure provides more accurate
information regarding ex-ante volatility.5 Our second specification for volatility, denoted
σc,t , is parametric and is based on modelling consumption growth as following an AR(1)-
GARCH(1,1). As discussed below, our results are robust to these alternative measures of
volatility.
   To empirically analyze the underlying sources of risks that are driving asset prices and
the expected return in equation (8), consider the following projection

                               pt − yt = b0 + bσ,J σc,t−1,J + u1,t , J ≥ 1                                (13)

A negative bσ in the above projection indicates that financial markets dislike economic
uncertainty. As discussed above in terms of economic models, if IES and the risk aversion
parameter is larger than one, then the slope coefficient bσ,J should be negative. Intuition
also suggests that larger economic uncertainty should tend to lower asset valuations.
       Now equation (13) can be combined with (12) to derive the following result

                                   L
                                   X
                               Et [         rt+l |σc,t−1,J ] = c0 + a1,L bσ,J σc,t−1,J                    (14)
                                      l=1


Note that a1,L < 0 and bσ,J < 0, implies that the coefficient on consumption volatility in the
return projection is positive. Hence a rise in economic uncertainty lowers asset prices and
increases the expected return.6
       In addition to the projection in (13) we also consider the following projection,

                            |ηc,t+J | = α0 + α1,J (pt − yt ) + u2,t+J , J ≥ 1                             (15)

where |ηc,t+J | is the absolute value of the consumption residuals at date t + J. Note that
this is a measure of realized consumption volatility. Equation (15) provides important
information regarding the extent to which volatility is long-lasting and time-varying. That
   5
      Note that while we can use squared residuals to model the variance, this matters little to our results.
We choose to take absolute values to make the measure less sensitive to outliers, as argued in Davidian and
Carroll (2002) and Pagan and Schwert (1990).
    6
      If measures of economic uncertainty are fairly persistent then, as shown in Bansal and Yaron (2000),
fluctuations in economic uncertainty get reflected in returns almost in the form of first differences. This may
make it more difficult to detect the effects of economic uncertainty solely in returns, and may be more visible
in the level of valuation ratios, as in projection (13).

                                                           10
is, if volatility is long-lasting then current valuation ratios should be able to predict future
realized consumption volatility, and α1,J should be different from zero. Further, if financial
markets dislike economic uncertainty, and the process for this is persistent, then one would
suspect that α1,J should be negative as well. That is current high valuation ratios signal low
future realized volatility. If, on the other hand, consumption growth is i.i.d as in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) then independent of the specification for past habits, current valuation
ratios should not predict future realized consumption volatility. In addition, note that any
predictability of realized volatility also provides evidence that consumption volatility is time-
varying.7
        Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan (1989), Whitelaw (1994), Brandt and Qang (2002) and
others explore the relation between expected returns and market volatility. In contrast, our
focus is more directly on the valuation ratios and its links to consumption volatility. If one
measures economic uncertainty by using market volatility instead of consumption volatility,
then the implication in (14) is related to that explored in Breen, Glosten, and Jagannathan
(1989), and Whitelaw (1994). In general we arrive at this implication for the expected return
via the two companion projections (that is equation (13) and equation (12)).



4         Data

Our benchmark analysis for the U.S. is based on quarterly data spanning the period 1949.1-
1999.4. U.S. consumption of nondurables and services is taken from the BEA (Bureau of
Economic Analysis). Returns are based on CRSP Value Weighted Return.
    To derive the price-dividend ratios we use monthly observations of returns including
and excluding dividends to generate the dividend series. The quarterly price-dividend ratio
is based on an arithmetic average of the dividends of the last four quarters. In addition
to measures of consumption and dividend growth we also utilize evidence on aggregate
earnings growth. This data is constructed from NIPA accounts. All sources and relevant
data construction are given in Appendix B.
   To corroborate our evidence on the U.S. we also collected data for three other countries:
Germany, Japan, and United Kingdom. All sample data starts in 1972.1 and ends in
1998.2. The consumption and CPI measures are taken from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics. The financial data for these countries is collected from DataStream and Morgan
Stanley Capital International stock market data. The data was kindly provided to us by
    7
    That is, the conditional expectation of the absolute value of future consumption residuals is not a
constant.

                                                  11
John Campbell (for more details see Campbell (1999)). All the data details are provided in
Appendix B.

   In Table 1 we provide summary statistics of the U.S. data. In each panel we provide
the mean and volatility of the price-dividend ratio, price-earnings ratio, and consumption,
dividend, and earnings growth. We provide the fourth and eighth quarter autocorrelations
(corresponding to one and two years).
   In all our empirical work we use two alternative measures of cash-flows, cash-dividends
and earnings. While much of the earlier evidence has focused on cash-dividends (see for
example Cochrane (1992)), this measure is far from perfect as total payouts from corporations
may include other methods of paying their stockholders (such as repurchases). Our choice of
earnings (cash-dividends+undistributed profits) is similar to that used in Hall (2001), and
provides a measure that is relatively less affected by financial policy. For both measures
of cash-flows we construct a standard cash-flow index as in Campbell (1999), where the
cash-flow index is the amount that investors would receive if they invested one dollar in the
market. As a practical issue, this matters little to our results, as the earnings growth rate
series and the growth rates of the earnings index have a correlation of 99%.



5       Empirical Evidence

We start our empirical analysis by examining the U.S. data for the quarterly sample. First
we document evidence in support of conditional volatility in consumption growth. Next
we present results relating valuation ratios and volatility, and then discuss the relationship
between valuation ratios and growth rates. We then proceed to corroborate this evidence by
examining the international data and an analogous sub-sample of the U.S.


5.1     Evidence for the U.S.

5.1.1    Consumption Dynamics and Volatility

Our benchmark results are based on the non-parametric volatility measure. Specifically, we
first run the following regression on real consumption growth,

                                  gc,t = µ + A1 gc,t−1 + ηc,t                            (16)




                                              12
The results are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The AR(1) minimizes estimation imprecision
in generating volatility measures.8 The absolute value of the residuals from the above
regression, |ηc,t | characterize the realized volatility of the consumption growth rate. Table
2 also presents the first, fourth and eighth autocorrelations of the absolute residuals. The
autocorrelations are significantly different from zero and clearly display the persistence in
conditional volatility of consumption. At all these horizons and even longer ones, the Q-stats
(the Ljung-Box statistic) are large and significantly different from zero with p-values well
less than 0.01. The absolute value of the residuals are autocorrelated and this is indicative
of time varying volatility in consumption.
    Given this persistence one measure of consumption volatility that we consider is σc,t−1,J ≡
    P
log( Jj=1 |ηc,t−j |), where J denotes how many lags of realized volatility are used. For our
second volatility measure we consider a AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) specification;

                                      gc,t = µ + A1 gc,t + ηc,t
                                       2              2           2
                                      σc,t = ω0 + ω1 ηc,t−1 + ω2 σc,t−1                    (17)

The estimates for this specification are given in panel C of Table 2. The estimates of
ω1 and ω2 are both significant implying, again, consumption volatility is time varying. It
is interesting to note that the correlation between the GARCH(1,1) based volatility and
σc,t−1,J (with J = 8) is 0.89, which indicates that they capture very similar information
regarding fluctuating consumption volatility. The estimation of the consumption dynamics
is conducted via GMM using the scores of log likelihood of (17) as the moment conditions.
   In addition to measuring economic uncertainty based on consumption volatility, we also
use the more standard based market return volatility σrm ,t−1,J as a measure of uncertainty.
Estimates for the non parametric and the AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) market volatility are provided
in panel B and D of Table 2.


5.1.2      Economic Uncertainty and Asset Valuations

Our first regression, looks at whether lagged volatility predicts future valuation ratios as
stated in equation (13). Columns 2-4 in Table 3 provide respectively, the estimate, t-statistic,
and R2 from the regression above. These are robust t-statistics which take into account
sampling error of the first stage construction of σc,t−1,J . For constructing the standard
errors for this projection we use a 2-stage GMM estimator (see Ogaki (1993)) – hence all the
standard errors take account of the estimation error in estimating the consumption dynamics.
  8
      Our results are not sensitive to this particular choice.

                                                        13
The different rows provide results for bσ,J using increasing number of lags, J, in constructing
the volatility measures. The results in the panel A are from regressing price-dividend ratios
on volatility. The results for panel B are for regressing price-earnings ratio on volatility.
Finally, columns 8-10 in the table provide analogous results when we use σrm ,t−1,J as the
regressor capturing volatility.
   As an additional check on our results, columns 5-7 in the table provide Monte-Carlo
evidence on the finite sample properties of the t-statistics and R2 in our environment. We
simulate consumption growth (market return) based on the estimated AR(1)-GARCH(1,1)
process in panel C (D) in Table 2 and discussed in (17). For each draw, which is of the
same length as our data, we estimate an AR(1) process for consumption growth, and then
construct σc,t−1,J based on the absolute residuals. The price-earnings and price-dividend ratio
are each simulated based on an AR(1) process that were fitted in the data.9 These valuation
processes are independent from the measured consumption volatility process. Consequently,
the regression slope coefficient from regressing the asset valuation (consumption volatility)
on the consumption volatility (asset valuation) should be zero. Our Monte Carlo distribution
is based on 20,000 draws. For each draw we estimate the parameters of interest, t-stats, and
R2 s. As in the data, the t-stats correct for the two step estimation in deriving σc,t−1,J .
How does one interpret these Monte-Carlo results? To the extent that our t-statistics (R2 s)
in the data are larger than the bottom (top) 5% of the t-statistics (R2 s) of the empirical
distribution based on the Monte-Carlo—this suggests that our test statistics in the data are
very significant and support the predictions of our model.
  For the case of consumption uncertainty, σc,t−1,J , the sign as predicted by our economic
model is negative and all estimates have significant (at 2.5%) robust t-statistics. Moreover,
these t-statistic are also significant with respect to the 2.5 percentile of the distribution of
t-statistics in our Monte-Carlo. The R2 in these regression rise to 26% for price-dividend
ratios, and 33% for price-earnings ratios for horizon for J = 8 quarters. Again, these R2 are
always larger than the 95 percentile of R2 in the Monte-Carlo – indicating that the R2 s in
the data are significant. Finally, in the upper subplot in Figure 1 we plot the normalized
                                                   P
measure of consumption volatility, i.e., log( Jj=1 |ηc,t−j |), and the normalized price-earnings
ratio. The negative correlation between these two series is visibly striking. Analogous results
with market volatility are substantially weaker—the projection coefficients are negative but
not significantly different from zero. Overall the evidence above suggests that fundamental
measure of economic uncertainty, as captured by consumption volatility, is priced in the
   9
    Specifically, the price-earnings ratio is simulated using an AR(1) process with the following parameters:
an intercept of 0.098, an autoregressive coefficient of 0.960, and an innovation standard deviation of 0.102.
The analogous parameters for simulating the price-dividend ratio are 0.085, 0.977, and 0.078 respectively.


                                                     14
market. Negative slope coefficients imply that a rise in economic uncertainty leads to a fall
in asset valuations—that is, financial markets dislike economic uncertainty.


5.1.3      Valuation Ratios Predict Economic Uncertainty


Next, we document that in addition to the fact that realized volatility helps predicting future
price-dividend ratios, current price-dividend ratios are useful in predicting future realized
volatility, |ηc,t+J |. This suggests that current financial valuations embody useful information
for predicting future economic uncertainty—and that consumption volatility is time-varying.
In Table 4 we display results for the regression in equation (15). The results based on
consumption volatility (left columns) clearly display the fact that volatility is predicted by
both price-dividend ratios (panel A) and price-earnings ratios (panel B). Again, as predicted
by our model, the signs are negative and are significant at the 1% for horizons of one, four
and eight quarters. Moreover, the R2 s are 4-10% for each of these horizons. It is important
to realize that in these regressions the dependent variable is a single realized volatility. It is
clear from the R2 s that if one would regress sums of future realized volatilities on the current
valuation ratios the R2 s would further rise substantially with horizons.
       Using the same Monte Carlo set-up as described above we also provide the finite sample
distribution for the test statistics—note in the Monte Carlo, the projection coefficients
should be zero. Again, this supports our claim that the t-statistic and the R2 ’s in the
data are for these projections are our significant. In all, these results demonstrate that
future economic uncertainty is long-lasting and hence can be predicted by current valuation
ratios. It is again important to note that once market volatility is used as the measure of
economic uncertainty (right columns), the results are no longer significant. This indicates
that consumption volatility is a good barometer of fundamental economic uncertainty.10


5.1.4      GARCH Consumption Volatility and Robustness of Results

An important econometric issue is that valuation ratios and consumption volatility are
fairly persistent processes. This may lead to spurious regression results (e.g., Granger and
Newbold (1986), Hodrick (1992), Stambaugh (1999)). To address this issue we use the
AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) consumption dynamics to measure consumption volatility. To account
for the persistence is variables we also include distributed lags of the dependent variable in
  10
    Using an analogous volatility measure based on GDP residuals leads to similar results as the consumption
based volatility.



                                                    15
our projections. Hence we consider

                                                                    2
                   pt − et = α1,0 + α1,1 (pt−1 − et−1 ) + α1,2 log σc,t−1 + ²1,t               (18)
                        2                                            2
                   log σc,t = α2,0 + α2,1 (pt−1 − et−1 ) + α2,2 log σc,t−1 + ²2,t              (19)

           2
where log σc,t , is the log of the conditional volatility process for consumption based on the
AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) (see equation 17) process. Evidence based on these projections mitigate
the possibility of spurious regressions. The parameter α1,2 provides information on whether
volatility is important for predicting valuation ratio. This is the counterpart to equation
(13). Similarly, the coefficient α2,1 provides information on whether valuation ratios predict
future economic uncertainty. This is the counterpart to equation (15). All standard errors
and t-statistics are constructed using a 2-step GMM estimator, which takes account of the
estimation error in estimating the AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) process for consumption growth.

   The results are given in Table 5. The first two columns of Panel A provide data estimates,
while the rest provide Monte-Carlo based estimates. As before the Monte-Carlo takes
the conservative view that valuation ratios are unaffected by uncertainty. To provide a
Monte Carlo distribution for our test statistics, as before, we simulate an univariate AR(1)
process for the valuation ratio under consideration, which is independent of the consumption
growth rate process. Further, we draw from the AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) consumption dynamics
reported in Table 2 and for each draw fit an AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) model. The length of each
draw is the same as our sample size in the data. We use, as in the data, a 2-step GMM
estimator to construct the finite sample distribution for the t-stats.
    Evidence in in Panel A in Table 5 shows that our results are robust to the inclusion of
distributed lags of the variable. As predicted by our model, the coefficient α1,2 continues to
be significantly negative. Further, the data’s t-stat of -2.08 is well below the 2.5 percentile
of t-stats in the Monte-Carlo. Panel B provides analogous results for the projection in which
price-earnings ratio predicts future volatility. As Panel B demonstrates, the inclusion of
distributed lag makes no difference to our results. The t-stat of -2.95 on α2,1 , is highly
significant in the data.
   We have also reported the regressions with the GARCH based consumption volatility
where the distributed lags of the left hand variable are dropped. In Panel A of Table 5 we
show that this regression produces results that strongly support our earlier evidence. The
data estimate of the t-statistic is -5.08 and significant at 2.5% cutoff based on the Monte
Carlo distribution. The regression where the valuation ratio is used to predict consumption
volatility is also of the right sign and highly significant in the data. In the data the t-statistic


                                                16
is -4.60, the 2.5% cutoff based on the Monte Carlo empirical distribution for the t-statistic
is -2.5. This GARCH volatility based evidence is similar in its content and stronger to that
discussed in sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3. In all, Table 5 strongly confirms the previous univariate
projections based on the non-parametric volatility measure.


5.1.5    Growth Rate and Return Predictability

There is a long standing literature on predicting dividends and returns (see Campbell (1999),
Hodrick (1992)). In Table 6 we provide regression results for predicting dividends and
earnings growth rates by valuation ratios – this is a version of equation (11) for these growth
rates. Our main point is that, empirically, dividends behave very differently from earnings.
The results for predicting dividend growth (middle columns) replicate what is found in the
literature – that is dividend growth is not predictable by price dividend ratios. This is
also true for trying to predict dividend growth using price-earnings ratio. Earnings growth,
however, is predicted by price-dividend ratios, and in a sizable and significant manner by
price-earnings ratios (left columns). In particular, using the price-earnings ratio to predict
earnings growth yields positive slope coefficients with R2 s as high as 23% at a horizon of 12
quarters, and 31% at an horizon of 16 quarters. Table 7 provides the Monte-Carlo results for
earnings growth. We let earnings growth follow an AR(1) that is independent of the price-
earnings ratio.11 The table clearly shows that at least for horizons of 8 quarters or more both
the t-stats and R2 s are significant (at the 90%) with respect to the Monte-Carlo empirical
distribution. Finally, the bottom panel in Figure 1 displays a tight positive link between
price-earnings and earnings growth. As price-earnings ratios predict future earnings with
a positive and significant slope coefficient, financial markets like higher expected growth.
This is also consistent with the views and evidence documented in Bansal and Yaron (2000),
Bansal and Lundblad (2002), Hall (2001), and Ang and Bekaert (2001).
   Table 6 (right columns) report results for predicting market returns using price-dividends
(panel A) and price-earnings ratio (panel B). The results replicate the well known findings of
return predictability by price-dividend ratios. These are significant and rise with horizon.12
On the other hand, price-earning ratios predict returns with R2 s that are substantially
smaller than when price-dividend ratios are used. For each horizon, these R2 are significantly
smaller than the corresponding R2 s for predicting future earnings growth.
  11
     Using the data estimates, earnings growth rates are generated with the following AR(1) parameters: an
intercept of 0.002, an autoregressive coefficient of 0.201, and an innovation standard deviation of 0.067.
  12
     See Stambaugh (1999), Goyal and Welch (1999), Torous and Valkanov (2000), and Ang (2002) for recent
discussions on inference difficulties in the context of this regression.



                                                   17
    What are the implications of these results? A common view, driven by the focus on
price-dividend ratios, is that fluctuations in cost of capital and not in cash flows are the key
for explaining fluctuations in asset valuations. In fact, Cochrane (1992) and Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) advocate that about 100% (or more) of the fluctuations in price-dividend are
attributable to cost of capital. Our evidence for dividends coincides with this. Specifically,
the percentage of the variance of price-dividend ratios that are explained by dividend growth
rates at a 12 quarter horizon is βg (12) = −0.13 (see section 3.1 for βg (L) expression, where
we scaled the elements in the dependent variable by κ1 = 0.9967 – as Campbell and Shiller
(1988)) with standard error 0.15, and at a 16 quarter horizon, βg (16) = −0.20 with standard
error of 0.16. Considerable caution should be exercised in interpreting this evidence; Bansal
and Yaron (2000) show that in a model where dividend growth is predictable at long horizons,
the current price-dividend will have considerable difficulty in detecting this predictability.
The capacity of price-dividend ratios to predict future dividend growth is muted by the
effects of other state variables (such as consumption volatility) on the current price-dividend
ratios. Lettau and Ludvigson (2002) provide additional reasons why it may be difficult for
current price-dividend ratios to predict future dividend growth rates, even if future dividend
growth rates are predictable.
   However our evidence based on earnings casts an important question mark regarding the
economic interpretation from the dividends based evidence. About 60% of the fluctuations
in price-earnings ratios are driven by earnings growth rates while the rest (about 40%)
is driven by fluctuations in costs of capital. Specifically, based on the 12 quarter results,
βg (12) = 0.60 with a standard error of 0.17. The comparable results for 16 quarter horizons
are βg (16) = 0.56 with a standard error of 0.16. This indicates that if one broadens the
notion of cash-flows to include earnings the economic conclusions are quite opposite to those
based on cash-dividends. Earnings are more volatile and less managed relative to cash-
dividends. Consequently, earnings may provide more valuable information regrading future
growth prospects (expected growth). Additionally, cash-dividends do not characterize the
entire collection of pay outs of corporations (e.g., they miss repurchases and new issuances).
This, we suspect, is the reason why earnings based evidence may differ from that of cash-
dividends.
   In equation (14) we derived results which allowed us to determine, based on two
companion regressions, the slope coefficient from regressing returns on consumption
volatility. As both parameters, a1,L (slope from the return regression (12)) and bσ,J (slope
from regression (13)) are negative it follows that the implied slope coefficient in return
projection in equation (14) is positive. For example, with J the lag length used to construct
consumption volatility fixed at 8, and L = 4 the horizon at which the market return is

                                              18
predicted, the coefficient in the return regression (14) is 0.034 with standard error (0.018)
and with L = 8 is 0.070 (0.040). Hence, a rise in consumption volatility increases the expected
return on the market. When consumption volatility is replaced by market volatility the slope
coefficients are essentially zero. It seems that at least with simple measures of volatility,
the connection between consumption volatility and expected returns is stronger. Finally, as
discussed earlier about 45% of the variation in price-earnings can be attributed to fluctuations
in cost of capital—our evidence suggests that about half of this can be attributed to variation
in consumption volatility. Hence, an economically significant portion of the variability is cost
of capital may indeed be due to fluctuating economic uncertainty (consumption volatility).
    In summary, the evidence of a negative relationship between consumption volatility
and valuation ratios, along with the finding that higher valuation ratios, predict higher
earnings growth is consistent with the economic growth and the economic uncertainty channel
discussed earlier. This evidence can easily be interpreted from the perspective of economic
models as discussed above.


5.2    Evidence from Other Economies

To corroborate our evidence on the link between economic uncertainty, growth rates and
valuation ratios we repeat our analysis above using data from the three prominent foreign
economies, Germany, Japan, and United Kingdom. The data statistics for these countries
are given in Table 8. In addition, to these countries we also present results for the U.S. for
this shorter sample for comparability.

    In Table 9 we present volatility results. The various panels correspond to the different
countries. As each country would require its own parametric volatility model, we choose,
for space considerations, to present results only with the non-parametric volatility measure
σc,t−1,J . In the first two column blocks we present results for the way consumption volatility
σc,t−1,J predicts price-dividend and price-earnings ratios. The last two column blocks report
results for predicting future realized volatility by price-dividend and price-earnings ratios.
The results for Germany, the U.K. and the sub-sample of the U.S. are broadly consistent
with our previous findings. That is we find significant negative coefficients and large R2 s
for economic uncertainty predicting future valuation ratios and in turn for current valuation
ratios predicting future economic uncertainty. Japan is the only outlier where the results are
not significant on some dimensions.

   In Table 10 we report predictability results for returns, dividends and earnings growth for
these international countries. Save for Japan, the results are comparable to those that we

                                              19
document in the US for the entire sample. It is worth mentioning that for the shorter
US sample, the return predictability results for price-dividend and price-earnings ratios
become insignificant. On the other hand earnings growth during this period are significantly
predictable with R2 as large as 47% at the 12 quarter horizon. Hence in the post 1972 sample
almost all of the variation in valuation ratios is determined by fluctuations in expected growth
rates.

   The six subplots in Figure 2 display the link between price-earnings, earnings growth,
and consumption volatility. The pronounced negative correlation between uncertainty and
valuation seen for the U.S. is apparent for these countries as well. In addition the positive
relation between valuation ratios and future earnings growth is evident as well. Overall the
message is quite clear. Our evidence for the longer U.S. sample is generally also found in
these foreign countries as well as the U.S. sub-sample.



6    Conclusion

In this paper we show that measures of economic uncertainty (conditional volatility of
consumption) predicts and is predicted by valuation ratios at long horizons. We show
that asset valuations drop as economic uncertainty rises—that is, financial markets dislike
economic uncertainty. Moreover, long horizon R2 s from predicting future economic growth
(earnings growth) are fairly high for the U.S. price-earnings ratios. Our overall evidence is
consistently found across foreign economies as well. Our evidence suggests that about 55%
of the variation in asset prices can be attributed to fluctuations in expected cash-flow growth
and about 45% to expected return. We argue that the channels associated with fluctuating
economic uncertainty and economic growth are important for a reasonable interpretation of
asset markets.




                                              20
References
Abel, A., (1990), Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the Joneses,
    American Economic Review 80, 38–42.

Anderson, T., T. Bollerslev, and F. Diebold, (2002), Parameteric and non-parameteric
   volatility measurement, Working Paper, Duke University.

Ang, A., (2002), Characterizing the ability of dividend yield to predict future dividend
    growth in log-linear present value models, Working Paper, Columbia University.

Ang, A. and G. Bekaert, (2001), Stock return predictability: Is it there?, Working Paper,
    Columbia University.

Bansal, R. and C. Lundblad, (2002), Market efficiency, asset returns, and the size of the risk
    premium in global equity markets, Journal of Econometrics 109, 195–237.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron, (2000), Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
    pricing puzzles, NBER working paper 8059, December 2000.

Barberis, N., M. Huang, and T. Santos, (2001), Prospect theory and asset pricing, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 1–53.

Barsky, R. B. and B. DeLong, (1993), Why does the stock market fluctuate?, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 108, 291–311.

Brandt, M. and Q. Qang, (2002), On the relationship between the conditional mean and
    volatility of stock returns: a latent var approach, NBER working paper 9056.

Breen, W., L. Glosten, and R. Jagannathan, (1989), Economic significance of predictable
    variations in stock index returns, Journal of Finance 44,5, 1177–1189.

Campbell, J. Y., (1993), Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data, American
   Economic Review 83, 487–512.

Campbell, J. Y., (1999), Asset prices, consumption and the business cycle, chapter 19, 1231–
   1303, Elsevier Science, North-Holland, In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, John
   B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane, (1999), By force of habit: a consumption-based
   explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107,
   205–251.

Campbell, J. Y. and R. Shiller, (1988), The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
   dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–227.

Cechetti, S., P. Lam, and N. Mark, (2000), Asset pricing with distorted beliefs: Are equity
    returns too good to be true?, American Economic Review 90, 787–805.


                                             21
Cochrane, J. H., (1992), Explaining the variance of price dividend ratios, Review of Financial
    Studies 5, 243–280.
Davidian, M. and R. Carroll, (2002), Variance function estimation, Journal of the American
    Statistical Association 82, 1079–1091.
Epstein, L. G. and S. Zin, (1989), Substitution, risk aversion and the temporal behavior of
    consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57, 937–969.
Goyal, A. and I. Welch, (1999), The myth of predictability: Does the dividend yield forecast
    the equity premium?, Working Paper, UCLA.
Granger, C. and P. Newbold, (1986), Forecasting Economic Time Series, Academic Press,
    San Diego, California.
Hall, R., (2001), Struggling to understand the stock market, American Economic Review 91,
     1–11.
Hansen, L. P. and K. Singleton, (1982), Generalized instrumental variables estimation of
    nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica 50, 1269–1286.
Hansen, L. P. and K. Singleton, (1983), Stochastic consumption, risk aversion and the
    temporal behavior of stock returns, Journal of Political Economy 91, 249–265.
Hodrick, R., (1992), Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Alternative procedures for
    inference and measurement, Review of Financial Studies 5, 357–386.
Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh, (1991), Asset returns and intertemporal preferences, Journal
   of Monetary Economics 27, 39–71.
Lettau, M. and S. Ludvigson, (2002), Expected return and expected dividend growth,
    Unpublished manuscript, Stern Business School, New York University.
Lucas, R., (1978), Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1445.
Mehra, R. and E. Prescott, (1985), The equity premium: a puzzle, Journal of Monetary
   Economics 15, 145–61.
Ogaki, M., (1993), Generlized Method of Moments: Econometric Applications, chapter 17,
    455–488, Elsevier Science Publisher, North-Holland, In Handbook of Statistics, G.S
    Maddala, C. R. Rao, and H. D. Vinod editors.
Pagan, A. R. and G. W. Schwert, (1990), Alternative models for conditional stock volatility,
    Journal of Econometrics 45, 267–290.
Shiller, R. J., (1989), Market Volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Stambaugh, R., (1999), Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375–421.
Torous, W. and R. Valkanov, (2000), Boundries of predictability:            Noisy predictive
    regressions, Unpublished manuscript, UCLA.

                                             22
Weil, P., (1989), The equity premium puzzle and the risk free rate puzzle, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 24, 401–421.

Whitelaw, R., (1994), Time variation and covariations in the expectation and volatility of
    stock market returns, Journal of Finance 49, 515–541.




                                           23
7      Appendix-A: Model Derivation
The consumption process is given by

                                      gc,t+1   =     µ + xt + σc,t ηt+1
                                          xt   =     ρxt−1 + ϕe σc,t et+1                                               (20)
                                       2
                                      σc,t+1   =     σ 2 + ν1 (σc,t
                                                                2
                                                                    − σ 2 ) + σw wt+1
                                                   2
where xt is the conditional expected growth rate, σc,t is the conditional variance, and et+1 , ηt+1 , and wt+1 ,
are N iid(0, 1) shocks.
In this economy the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution is
                                                              θ
                                    Mt+1 = exp(θ ln δ −         gc,t+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 )
                                                              ψ

and the Euler condition for valuing any asset ri,t+1 ≡ log(Ri,t+1 ) is,

                                                   θ
                                Et [exp(θ ln δ −     gc,t+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1 + ri,t+1 )] = 1                             (21)
                                                   ψ
                                                                                              1−γ
The parameter ψ, is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), and θ =                  1
                                                                                              1− ψ
                                                                                                     , with γ being the risk
aversion parameter. The return, rc,t+1 , denotes the log return on the claim to the consumption stream.


7.1      The return on consumption portfolio, Rc
We conjecture that the log price-consumption ratio follows, zt = b0 + bx xt + bσ σt2 . Armed with the
endogenous variable zt we substitute the approximation rc,t+1 = κ0 + κ1 zt+1 − zt + gc,t+1 into the Euler
equation (21).
                  2
Since gc , x and σc,t are conditionally normal, rc,t+1 and ln Mt+1 are also normal. Exploiting the normality
of rc,t+1 and ln Mt+1 , we can write down the Euler equation (21) in terms of the state variables xt and σc,t .
As the Euler condition has to hold for all values of the state variables, it follows that all terms involving xt
must satisfy the following:
                                          θ
                                         − xt + θ[κ1 bx ρxt − bx xt + xt ] = 0.                                         (22)
                                          ψ
It immediately follows that,
                                                                      1
                                                               1−     ψ
                                                       bx =                                                             (23)
                                                              1 − κ1 ρ
which is (5) in the main text.
                               2
Similarly, collecting all the σc,t terms leads to the solution for bσ ,

                                         2         2      1     θ
                             θ[κ1 ν1 bσ σc,t − bσ σc,t ] + [(θ − )2 + (θbx κ1 ϕe )2 ]σc,t
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          = 0,                          (24)
                                                          2     ψ
which implies that
                                                              θ 2
                                                   0.5[(θ −   ψ)    + (θbx κ1 ϕe )2 ]
                                          bσ =                                          ,                               (25)
                                                          θ(1 − κ1 ν1 )
the solution given in (6).
Given the solution above for zt it is possible to derive the innovation to the return rc as a function of the
evolution of the state variables and the parameters of the model.


                                                              24
                            rc,t+1 − Et (rc,t+1 ) = σc,t ηt+1 + Bσc,t et+1 + bσ κ1 σw wt+1 ,                     (26)
                         ϕe            1
where B = κ1 A1 ϕe = κ1 1−κ1ρ
                              (1 −     ψ ).   Further it follows that the conditional variance of rc,t+1 is

                                    V art (rc,t+1 ) = (1 + B 2 )σc,t
                                                                 2
                                                                     + (bσ κ1 )2 σw
                                                                                  2
                                                                                    .                            (27)


7.1.1     IMRSs

Now substituting for rc,t+1 and the dynamics of gc,t+1 , we can re-write the IMRS in terms of the state
variables — referring to this as the pricing kernel. Suppressing all the constants in the pricing kernel,
                                              θ
         mt+1 ≡ lnMt+1       =    θ ln δ −      gc,t+1 + (θ − 1)rc,t+1
                                              ψ
                                         xt                         2
                Et [mt+1 ] =      m0 −      + bσ (κ1 ν1 − 1)(θ − 1)σc,t
                                         ψ
                                    θ
        mt+1 − Et (mt+1 )    =    (−    + θ − 1)σc,t ηt+1 + (θ − 1)(bx κ1 ϕe )σc,t et+1 + (θ − 1)bσ κ1 σw wt+1
                                    ψ
                             =    λm,η σc,t ηt+1 − λm,e σc,t et+1 − λm,w σw wt+1                                 (28)

where λm,η ≡ [− ψθ + (θ − 1)] = −γ, λm,e ≡ (1 − θ)B, λm,w ≡ (1 − θ)bσ κ1 , and B and bσ are defined above.
Note that the λ’s represent the market price of risk for each source of risk, namely ηt+1 , et+1 , and wt+1 .


7.1.2     Risk Premia for rc,t+1

The risk premium for any asset is determined by the conditional covariance between the return and mt+1 .
Thus the risk premium for rc,t+1 is equal to
Et (rc,t+1 − rf,t ) = −covt [mt+1 − Et (mt+1 ), rc,t+1 − Et (rc,t+1 )] − 0.5vart (rc,t+1 ).
Exploiting the innovations in (26) and (28) it follows that,
                                            2            2                 2
                    Et [rc,t+1 − rf,t ] = γσc,t + λm,e Bσc,t + κ1 bσ λm,w σw − 0.5V art (rc,t+1 )                (29)

where V art (rc,t+1 ) is defined in equation (27).



8       Appendix B: Data
A. USA
The data covers quarterly sample from 1949.1 till 1999.4. The following series are used to construct the
valuation ratios, real rates of return on the market and real growth rates of dividends, earnings, and
consumption:

    • P : Total market value (in billions of dollars), Source: CRSP Indices (Stock File Index).
    • Pindx : Stock price index on NYSE/AMEX. For each month, the price index is calculated as
      Pindx,t = (V W RET Xt +1)·Pindx,t−1 (where t is in months). The price index for a quarter is the price
      index for the last month of the quarter. VWRETX is the value weighted return on NYSE/AMEX
      excluding dividends, taken from CRSP.




                                                            25
    • Dindx : Dividend index on NYSE/AMEX. Calculated as follows: the dividend yield for each month
      is calculated as DYt = (1 + V W RET Dt )/(1 + V W RET Xt ) − 1 (t is in months). The dividend for
      each month is calculated as Dindx,t = DYt · Pindx,t (t is in months). The dividend for a quarter
      is the sum of the dividends for the 3 months comprising the quarter. VWRETD and VWRETX
      are, correspondingly, the value weighted return on NYSE/AMEX including and excluding dividends,
      taken from CRSP. The series are subsequently
                                            P3       deseasonalized by taking a four period backward moving
      average of the series, i.e. D̃indx,t = j=0 Dindx,t−j , where t is in quarters. This constructed dividend
      index is identical to that used by Campbell (1999).
    • E: Corporate profits (earnings) after tax (in billions of dollars) = dividends in the corporate sector
      + undistributed profits in the corporate sector. Series includes all corporate businesses that belong
      to US residents. Source: NIPA Section 1, Table 1.14, line 24.
                                                                                             Et
    • Eindx : Corporate after-tax earnings index. Calculated as Eindx,t = Pindx,t−1 ·       Pt−1 ,   where t is in
                                                               Et
      quarters. Hence the earnings per dollar invested are    Pt−1 ,
                                                                 and the amount invested at date t − 1 is
      Pindx,t−1 . The present stream of earnings Eindx (discounted at the rate of market return) is equal
      to the one dollar initial investment and is directly comparable to the Dindx described above. The
      correlation between the log growth of the earnings index and the log growth of the earnings series E
      is 0.99.
    • C: Consumption of non-durables and services (in billions of dollars). Source: NIPA Section 1, Table
      1.1, (line4 + line5).
    • Rm : Net return on NYSE/AMEX: Rm,t = (Dindx,t + Pindx,t )/Pindx,t−1 − 1, where t is in quarters.
      It is also possible to obtain the series by compounding monthly value weighted returns (including
      dividends).
    • Pc : Deflator of non-durables consumption and services, inferred from NIPA Section 8, Table 8.7 as
      Pc = (line7+line8)/(line14+line15) = (Per capita non-durable goods in current dollars + Services in
      current dollars)/(Per-capita non-durable goods + services in chained (1996) dollars).


B. Foreign Economies
The data covers quarterly sample from 1972.1 till 1998.2. The following series are used to construct the
valuation ratios, real rates of return on the market and real growth rates of dividends, earnings, and
consumption:

    • P : Market capitalization (in local currency). Calculated as Pt = Pt$ · ERt using monthly data and
      taking the value in the last month of each quarter. ERt is the monthly (end of period) nominal
      exchange rate in units of national currency per 1 US Dollar (source: IMF’s International Financial
      Statistics CD-ROM); Pt$ is the market capitalization in US dollars (source: Morgan Stanley Capital
      International).
    • Pindx : Stock price index (in local currency) at the end of each quarter. Source: Morgan Stanley
      Capital International (received from Prof. John Campbell)
    • Dindx : Dividend index. Monthly index is calculated as Dindx,t = Pindx,t · DYt , where Pindx,t is the
                                                                                  R        /Rindx,t−1
      monthly stock price index and DYt is the monthly dividend yield. DYt = Pindx,tindx,t /Pindx,t−1
                                                                                                      − 1, where
      Rindx,t is the return index from Morgan Stanley Capital International, and time t in the equation
      is in months. The dividend index for a quarter, is the sum of the dividends for the three months
      comprising the quarter. The dividends are multiplied by 1.33 for the UK and by 1.5625 for Germany
      because of tax credits available to domestic investors (received from Prof. John Campbell)
    • E: Corporate earnings (in local currency). Calculated as Et = (Pt$ /P Et ) · ERt using monthly data
      and summing up over the three months of each quarter. ERt is the monthly (end of period) nominal
      exchange rate in units of national currency per 1 US Dollar (source: IMF’s International Financial
      Statistics CD-ROM); Pt$ is the market capitalization in US dollars (source: Morgan Stanley Capital
      International); P Et is the price-to-earnings ratio (source: Morgan Stanley Capital International).

                                                      26
                                                                                     Et
• Eindx : Corporate after-tax earnings index. Calculated as Eindx,t = Pindx,t−1 ·   Pt−1 ,   where t is in
  quarters.
• C: Private consumption at current prices. This includes non-durables+services+durables. Source:
  IMF’s International Financial Statistics CD-ROM (received from Prof. John Campbell).
• Rm : Net return on the market index. Calculated as Rm,t = (Dindx,t + Pindx,t )/Pindx,t−1 − 1, where
  t is in quarters (received from Prof. John Campbell).
• Pc : Consumer price index in the last month of the quarter. Source: IMF’s International Financial
  Statistics CD-ROM (received from Prof. John Campbell).


The resulting series are calculated as follows:

    gd,t = log(Dindx,t /Pc,t ) − log(Dindx,t−1 /Pc,t−1 )
    ge,t = log(Eindx,t /Pc,t ) − log(Eindx,t−1 /Pc,t−1 )
    gc,t = log(Ct /Pc,t ) − log(Ct−1 /Pc,t−1 )
                   1+R
    rm,t = log( Pc,t /Pm,t
                       c,t−1
                             )
    (pt − dt ) = log(Pindx,t /Dindx,t )
    (pt − et ) = log(Pindx,t /Eindx,t )




                                                     27
              Table 1 Summary Statistics: United States (Quarterly)

                               E(·)    σ(·) corr(gc , g· ) AC(4) AC(8)

                                   USA (1949.1-1999.4)
                  gc          0.008 0.005              0.009           −0.128
                  gd          0.005 0.017    0.11    −0.037            −0.023
                  ge          0.002 0.068    0.31    −0.094            −0.159
                  rm          0.021 0.078              0.002           −0.032
                  (p − d)     3.333 0.317              0.768            0.594
                  (p − e)     2.203 0.422              0.781            0.576

                                   USA (1972.1-1998.2)
                  gc          0.007 0.005              0.034 −0.194
                  gd          0.004 0.015    0.16    −0.183 0.078
                  ge          0.004 0.064    0.32      0.054 −0.257
                  rm          0.019 0.082            −0.016 −0.029
                  (p − d)     3.340 0.295              0.680 0.496
                  (p − e)     2.247 0.343              0.706 0.509


gc , gd , and ge denote respectively the real growth rate of consumption, dividends, and earnings.
rm is the real return on the market portfolio. p − d and p − e denote the log price-dividend and
price-earnings respectively. E(·) and σ(·) denote the mean and standard deviation, and AC(j)
is the jth autocorrelation.




                                               28
   Table 2 Consumption Growth and Market Return Projections (Quarterly)

                     Growth Rates/Returns                          Absolute Residuals

                    µ      A1     ω0     ω1      ω2               AC(1) AC(4) AC(8)

                                              AR(1) Estimates

                                   Panel A: Consumption Growth
     Estimate 0.007 0.234                        Estimate 0.174 0.088 0.049
     S.E.     0.001 0.080                         Q-stat 6.20 17.73 30.76

                                        Panel B: Market Return
     Estimate 0.020 0.066                          Estimate 0.108 0.071 -0.083
     S.E.     0.006 0.079                           Q-stat 2.39 9.61 16.20

                                    AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) Estimates

                             Panel C: Consumption Growth
     Estimate 0.007 0.310 1.63∗ 0.143 0.788
     S.E.     0.001 0.076 1.68∗ 0.073 0.091

                                Panel D: Market Return
     Estimate 0.002 0.090 0.002 0.139 0.541
     S.E.     0.006 0.078 0.001 0.118 0.166


Panel A reports the parameters for the following regressions for consumption growth, gc,t =
µ + A1 gc,t−1 + ηc,t . Panel B reports analogous results for the market return, rm,t =
                                            2              2            2
µ + A1 rm,t−1 + ηrm ,t . Panel C models σc,t   = ω0 + ω1 ηc,t−1 + ω2 σc,t−1  . Panel D models
the conditional volatility of the market return as σrm ,t = ω0 + ω1 ηrm ,t−1 + ω2 σr2m ,t−1 . The
                                                    2                 2

sample is 1949.1-1999.4. A ∗ implies the estimate should be multiplied by 10−6 . All standard
errors are Newey-West. The Q-stat refer to the Ljung-Box test of the null of no autocorrelations
up to order J.




                                               29
           Table 3 Economic Uncertainty Predicting Future Valuation Ratios: USA

            Data                   Monte-Carlo                          Data                     Monte-Carlo

J   bσ,J    t-stat R̄2     t(2.5%) t(5%) R̄2 (95%)               bσ,J    t-stat R̄2       t(2.5%) t(5%) R̄2 (95%)

                       Regressor σc,t−1,J                                            Regressor σrm ,t−1,J

                                  Panel A: Price-Dividend Ratio

1 -0.084 -2.614 0.08        -1.870 -1.496          0.04        -0.049 -2.274 0.03          -1.546 -1.232          0.02
4 -0.254 -3.703 0.19        -3.873 -3.197          0.16        -0.088 -1.275 0.02          -2.733 -2.266          0.09
8 -0.358 -3.153 0.26        -4.024 -3.256          0.25        -0.135 -1.348 0.03          -2.998 -2.474          0.16

                                   Panel B: Price-Earnings Ratio

1 -0.111 -2.428 0.08        -1.826 -1.435          0.04        -0.026 -0.446 0.00          -1.521 -1.214          0.02
4 -0.364 -4.053 0.23        -3.708 -3.047          0.15        -0.000 -0.001 0.00          -2.669 -2.268          0.08
8 -0.489 -4.398 0.33        -3.778 -3.111          0.23        -0.019 -0.150 0.00          -2.913 -2.430          0.14



     The panels correspond to quarterly sample of 1949.1-1999.4. The left-hand panels are
     regressions of future valuation ratios on consumption  PJ uncertainty. The regressor is a measure
     of ex-ante consumption volatility, σc,t−1,J ≡ log( i=1 |ηc,t−i |), where consumption residuals,
     ηc,t , are obtained from gc,t = µ + A1 gc,t−j + ηc,t . The right-hand panels are regressions of
     future valuation Pratios on market volatility on. The regressor is a measure of market volatility,
                         J
     σrm ,t−1,J ≡ log( i=1 |ηrm ,t−i |), where rm is the market return, and ηrm ,t is the residual from
     the regression, rm,t = µ + A1 rm,t−j + ηrm ,t .
     In the regression in Panel A, volatility predicts future price-dividend ratios, pt − dt =
     b0 +bσ,J Xt−1,J +ut , for J = 1, 4, 8. In the regression in Panel B, volatility predicts future price-
     earnings ratio, pt − et = b0 + bσ,J Xt−1,J + ut , for J = 1, 4, 8, where Xt,J = {σc,t,J , σr,t,J }, in the
     left and right column blocks respectively—all standard errors are Newey-West with lag length
     J. The t(2.5%), t(5%) and R̄2 (95%) correspond to the respective percentiles of the empirical
     distribution of the t-statistics and R̄2 based on a Monte-Carlo with 20,000 replications. The
     Monte-Carlo is designed so that valuation ratios are independent from volatility. Further details
     regarding the Monte-Carlo are given in the text in section 5.1.2.




                                                        30
           Table 4 Valuation Ratios Predicting Future Economic Uncertainty: USA

            Data                 Monte-Carlo                         Data                   Monte-Carlo

J   a1,J    t-stat R̄2    t(2.5%) t(5%) R̄2 (95%)             a1,J    t-stat R̄2     t(2.5%) t(5%) R̄2 (95%)

                      Predicting |ηc,t+J |                                     Predicting |ηrm ,t+J |

                                 Panel A: Price-Dividend Ratio

1 -1.012 -4.027 0.08       -3.200 -2.661        0.04       -0.592 - 1.760 0.02        -2.322 -1.929        0.02
4 -0.788 -3.064 0.04       -3.059 -2.553        0.04       -0.194 - 0.549 0.00        -2.353 -1.935        0.02
8 -0.796 -3.130 0.04       -3.035 -2.501        0.04        0.117 0.330 0.00          -2.434 -1.997        0.02

                                 Panel B: Price-Earnings Ratio

1 -0.806 -4.899 0.10       -3.121 -2.602        0.04       -0.154 - 0.713 0.00        -2.378 -1.976        0.02
4 -0.629 -3.772 0.05       -3.066 -2.530        0.04       -0.034 - 0.154 0.00        -2.392 -1.985        0.02
8 -0.594 -3.590 0.04       -3.062 -2.518        0.04       -0.017 - 0.087 0.00        -2.465 -2.053        0.02



     The panels correspond to quarterly sample of 1949.1-1999.4. The table entries provide
     regression results for predicting realized future economic uncertainty by current valuation ratios.
     The regressor in Panel A is the price-dividend ratio, and in Panel B is the price-earnings ratio.
     The measure of economic uncertainty in the left-hand panels is realized consumption volatility
     |ηc,t+J |, and market volatility |ηrm,t+J | in the right-hand panels, where consumption residuals,
     ηc,t , are obtained from gc,t = µ+A1 gc,t−1 +ηc,t . The regressions are Yt+J = α0 +α1,J Xt +ut+J
     for Xt = {pt − dt , pt − et }, and Yt+J = {|ηc,t+J |, |rm,t+J |}, J = 1, 4, 8—all standard errors
     are Newey-West with J lags. The t(2.5%), t(5%) and R̄2 (95%) correspond to the respective
     percentiles of the empirical distribution of the t-statistics and R̄2 based on a Monte-Carlo with
     20,000 replications. The Monte-Carlo is designed so that valuation ratios are independent from
     volatility. Further details regarding the Monte-Carlo are given in the text in section 5.1.3.




                                                     31
        Table 5 Price-Earnings Ratios and Economic Uncertainty USA

                         Data                         Monte-Carlo

                   Est. t-stat R̄2       t(2.5%) t(5%) R̄2 (95%) R̄2 (97.5%)


                       Panel A: Predicting Price-Earnings Ratio

                                                    2
                             pt − et = α0 + α1 log σc,t−1 + ²t

             α1 -0.503 -5.08 0.34          -2.93    -2.40     0.22        0.28

                                                                2
               pt − et = α1,0 + α1,1 (pt−1 − et−1 ) + α1,2 log σc,t−1 + ²1,t

            α1,2 -0.035 -2.08 0.94         -1.78    -1.50     0.96        0.97
            α1,1 0.937 40.32

                              Panel B: Predicting Volatility

                               2
                          log σc,t−1 = α0 + α2 (pt−1 − et−1 ) + ²t

             α2 -0.705 -4.60 0.36          -2.45    -2.05     0.23        0.29

                    2                                            2
               log σc,t = α2,0 + α2,1 (pt−1 − et−1 ) + α2,2 log σc,t−1 + ²2,t

            α2,1 -0.128 -2.95 0.84         -1.55    -1.34     0.93        0.94
            α2,2 0.856 26.67


                                            2
The consumption volatility measure is log σc,t – the log of the conditional volatility estimated
by an AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) in panel C of Table 2. The Monte-Carlo columns provide statistics
based on 20,000 simulations. The t(2.5%) and t(5%) and R̄2 (95%), R̄2 (97.5%) are the respective
t-stat and R̄2 percentiles in the Monte-Carlo’s empirical distribution. The Monte-Carlo is
designed so price-earnings ratio is independent of the consumption volatility – further details
are given in in the text in section 5.1.4.




                                              32
Table 6 Valuation Ratios Predicting Future Growth Rates and Returns: USA


    J    β1,J   t-stat         R̄2        β1,J t-stat         R̄2       β1,J    t-stat       R̄2
                      PJ                             PJ                             PJ
        Predicting       i=1   ge,t+i   Predicting      i=1   gd,t+i   Predicting        i=1 rm,t+i


                           Panel A: Price-Dividend Ratio
    4   0.059   0.802      0.01     0.001 0.054 0.00                   -0.139   -2.071      0.06
    8   0.120   0.819      0.02    -0.015 -0.462 0.00                  -0.256   -2.102      0.11
   12   0.237   1.366      0.07    -0.041 -1.327 0.01                  -0.366   -1.931      0.15
   16   0.325   1.333      0.11    -0.084 -1.941 0.03                  -0.494   -1.846      0.20

                           Panel B: Price-Earnings Ratio
    4   0.095   1.485      0.06    -0.017 -0.971 0.01                  -0.074   -1.533      0.03
    8   0.195   1.650      0.14    -0.027 -0.937 0.01                  -0.149   -1.646      0.07
   12   0.287   2.284      0.23    -0.036 -1.310 0.02                  -0.195   -1.521      0.09
   16   0.350   2.071      0.31    -0.058 -1.649 0.04                  -0.272   -1.586      0.15


The panels correspond to quarterly sample of 1949.1-1999.4. Table entries are for predicting
future
PJ growth rates by current valuation ratios. The left-hand PJ       panels predict earnings growth
         g
   i=1 e,t+i   , the middle panel predict dividend growth     i=1 d,t+i , and the right-hand panel
                                                                  g
                     PJ
predicts returns i=1 rm,t+i . The regressors are the price-dividend ratio and the price-earnings
                             PJ
ratio. The regressions are i=1 gl,t+i = β0 + β1,J Xt + ut+J where Xt = {pt − dt , pt − et }, and
                                             PJ
gl,t , l = e, d, and analogous regression for i=1 rm,t+i . All standard errors are Hodrick (1992)
corrected with J lags.




                                               33
                Table 7 Price-Earnings Ratio and Growth Rates

                        Data                            Monte-Carlo

            J   β1,J    t-stat R̄2        t(90%) t(95%) t(97.5%) R̄2 (95%)
                            PJ
                                i=1   ge,t+i = β0 + β1,J (pt − et )

           4    0.095   1.485   0.06       1.609     2.033      2.425   0.07
           8    0.195   1.650   0.14       1.638     2.115      2.506   0.13
           12   0.287   2.284   0.23       1.733     2.194      2.615   0.20
           16   0.350   2.071   0.31       1.790     2.274      2.709   0.27



This table provides Monte-Carlo evidence for the predicting earnings growth. The t(90%),
t(95%) and R̄2 (95%) correspond to the respective percentiles of the empirical distribution
of the t-statistics and R̄2 based on a Monte-Carlo with 20,000 replications. Both data and
Monte-Carlo use Hodrick (1992) standard errors with J lags. Further details regarding the
Monte-Carlo are given in the text in section 5.1.5.




                                                34
                  Table 8 Summary Statistics: Foreign Economies

                                E(·)    σ(·) corr(gc , g· ) AC(4) AC(8)

                                 Germany (1972.1-1998.2)
                gc             0.005 0.012              0.154 −0.014
                gd             0.002 0.052   0.05       0.091 −0.073
                ge             0.004 0.118   0.11     −0.190 0.059
                rm             0.023 0.096              0.025 −0.082
                (p − d)        4.580 0.361              0.754 0.593
                (p − e)        1.601 0.460              0.712 0.534

                                Japan (1972.1-1998.2)
                gc           0.008 0.014              0.100 0.189
                gd          −0.005 0.022     0.30     0.322 0.318
                ge          −0.008 0.092   −0.10    −0.086 −0.050
                rm           0.012 0.108            −0.071 −0.065
                (p − d)      5.806 0.566              0.894 0.794
                (p − e)      2.384 0.597              0.854 0.650

                            United Kingdom (1972.1-1998.2)
                gc           0.005 0.015              0.006 0.115
                gd           0.003 0.036    0.16      0.028 0.074
                ge           0.005 0.059    0.17     −0.008 −0.253
                rm           0.021 0.108             −0.132 0.082
                (p − d)      4.253 0.311              0.628 0.473
                (p − e)      1.306 0.381              0.578 0.334


gc , gd , and ge denote respectively the growth rate of real consumption, dividends, and earnings.
rm is the real return on the market portfolio. p − d and p − e denote the log price-dividend and
price-earnings respectively. E(·) and σ(·) denote the mean and standard deviation, and AC(j)
is the jth autocorrelation.




                                               35
     Table 9 Valuation Ratios and Economic Uncertainty: International


      J        Est. t-stat R̄2         Est. t-stat R̄2       Est.   t-stat R̄2      Est. t-stat R̄2

    l.h.s:        pt − dt                  pt − et              |ηc,t+J |               |ηc,t+J |
    r.h.s:        σc,t−1,J                 σc,t−1,J             pt − dt                 pt − et

                                                  Panel A: Germany
       1     -0.052   -0.448   0.02   -0.080   -0.486 0.03 -0.554 -1.611    0.02   -0.794   -2.460   0.08
       4     -0.279   -2.403   0.13   -0.301   -1.657 0.09 -0.507 -1.412    0.01   -0.655   -3.754   0.05
       8     -0.447   -2.465   0.20   -0.385   -1.113 0.08 -0.489 -1.423    0.01   -0.539   -3.060   0.03
      12     -0.586   -2.250   0.24   -0.497   -1.141 0.08 -0.534 -1.654    0.01   -0.630   -4.091   0.04

                                                Panel B: Japan
       1      0.026    0.174   0.00 0.031 0.334 0.00 0.094 0.422            0.00   0.193    0.945    0.00
       4     -0.036   -0.203   0.00 -0.064 -0.331 0.00 0.231 1.136          0.00   0.374    2.085    0.03
       8     -0.231   -0.785   0.02 -0.307 -0.955 0.04 0.158 0.629          0.00   0.412    2.055    0.03
      12     -0.424   -1.251   0.06 -0.540 -1.187 0.08 0.123 0.514          0.00   0.416    1.499    0.02

                                            Panel C: United Kingdom
       1     -0.068   -0.905   0.05   -0.093 -1.070 0.06 -0.342 - 1.038 0.00       -0.373   -1.489   0.01
       4     -0.255   -2.842   0.20   -0.380 -3.804 0.32 -0.365 - 0.830 0.00       -0.136   -0.424   0.00
       8     -0.465   -7.150   0.41   -0.641 -7.966 0.55 -0.487 - 1.130 0.01       -0.192   -0.570   0.00
      12     -0.554   -8.736   0.55   -0.703 -5.737 0.66 -0.999 - 2.204 0.06       -0.845   -3.263   0.08

                                               Panel D: United States
       1     -0.019   -0.525   0.00   -0.039   -0.797 0.01 -0.548 -1.451    0.01   -0.699   -1.682   0.03
       4     -0.220   -2.591   0.15   -0.257   -3.024 0.14 -0.380 -0.768    0.00   -0.646   -1.747   0.02
       8     -0.338   -2.178   0.25   -0.372   -2.895 0.22 -0.376 -0.615    0.00   -0.562   -1.620   0.01
      12     -0.366   -1.871   0.24   -0.417   -2.836 0.23 -0.425 -0.612    0.00   -0.491   -1.250   0.01

The panels correspond to quarterly sample of 1972.1-1998.2. Regressions in left column block
are pt − dt = b0 + bσ,J σc,t−1,J + ut , for J = 1, 4, 8, 12. Regressions in second from left panel
                                                                                          PJ
are pt − et = b0 + bσ,J σc,t−1,J + ut , for J = 1, 4, 8, 12, where σc,t−1,J ≡ log( i=1 |ηc,t−i |).
Regressions in third from left panel are |ηc,t+J | = α0 + α1,J (pt − dt ) + ut+J , for J = 1, 4, 8, 12.
Regressions in right panel are |ηc,t+J | = α0 + α1,J (pt − et ) + ut+J , for J = 1, 4, 8, 12. The panel
for the United States corresponds to the sample for the other countries. All standard errors
are Newey-West with J lags.




                                                      36
             Table 10 Valuation Ratios and Growth Rates: International


      J       Est. t-stat R̄2          Est. t-stat R̄2         Est. t-stat R̄2       Est. t-stat R̄2

                PJ                       PJ                     PJ                     PJ
    l.h.s:        j=1 gd,t+j               j=1 ge,t+j             j=1 rm,t+j             j=1 rm,t+j
    r.h.s:        pt − dt                  pt − et                pt − dt                pt − et

                                                 Panel A:    Germany
      4      0.159    2.436    0.26   0.264    1.359 0.14     0.026 0.235    0.00    0.029    0.502   0.00
      8      0.267    2.066    0.30   0.452    1.490 0.22    -0.002 -0.008   0.00    0.070    0.724   0.00
     12      0.316    1.743    0.27   0.527    1.450 0.20    -0.026 -0.083   0.00    0.111    0.885   0.01
     16      0.324    1.321    0.22   0.310    0.853 0.04    -0.106 -0.250   0.00   -0.060   -0.237   0.00

                                                    Panel B: Japan
      4      0.048    3.150    0.24    0.077    1.037 0.03 -0.043 -0.510     0.00   -0.053   -0.839   0.01
      8      0.088    3.052    0.29    0.110    1.201 0.02 -0.103 -0.622     0.02   -0.128   -1.019   0.04
     12      0.105    2.653    0.26    0.026    0.206 0.00 -0.216 -0.877     0.08   -0.282   -1.254   0.11
     16      0.105    1.998    0.18   -0.190   -1.145 0.02 -0.361 -1.144     0.16   -0.546   -1.597   0.24

                                          Panel C: United Kingdom
      4      0.110    2.741    0.13   0.287 2.825 0.34 -0.238 -1.275 0.08           -0.134   -0.887   0.04
      8      0.169    2.916    0.14   0.465 3.093 0.39 -0.339 -1.442 0.10           -0.230   -1.282   0.07
     12      0.171    2.465    0.10   0.406 2.574 0.24 -0.458 -1.648 0.19           -0.291   -1.562   0.12
     16      0.126    1.522    0.05   0.373 2.236 0.19 -0.523 -1.496 0.21           -0.349   -1.593   0.15

                                               Panel   D: United States
      4       0.014    1.112   0.00   0.195    2.363   0.19 -0.093 -0.869    0.01   -0.000   -0.003   0.00
      8       0.014    0.539   0.00   0.376    2.443   0.34 -0.200 -0.960    0.03   -0.025   -0.130   0.00
     12      -0.014   -0.334   0.00   0.520    2.328   0.47 -0.214 -0.767    0.03    0.039    0.152   0.00
     16      -0.043   -0.941   0.00   0.652    2.320   0.60 -0.321 -0.890    0.07    0.060    0.187   0.00

TheP panels correspond to quarterly sample of 1972.1-1998.2. Regressions in first panel columns
       J
are i=1 gd,t+j = β0 + β1,J (pt − dt ) + ut+J , for J = 4, 8, ..., 16. Regressions in second from
              PJ
left panel are i=1 ge,t+j = β0 + β1,J (pt − et ) + ut+J , for J = 4, 8, ..., 16. Regressions in third
                    PJ
from left panel are j=1 rm,t+j = a0 + a1,J (pt − dt ) + ut+J , for J = 4, 8, 12, 16. Regressions
                   PJ
in right panel are j=1 rm,t+j = a0 + a1,J (pt − et ) + ut+J , for J = 4, 8, 12, 16. The panel for
the United States corresponds to the sample for the other countries. All standard errors are
Hodrick(1992) corrected with J lags.




                                                        37
Figure 1 :Earnings Growth, P/E Ratios, and Consumption Volatility: USA




                3

                2


                1

                0


               -1

               -2

               -3
                    55    60     65    70    75     80      85    90    95

                       Cons. Volatility (12 qrt.)        log price-earnings ratio



               3

               2

               1

               0

              -1

              -2

              -3

              -4
                    55     60    65    70    75     80     85    90    95

                    12 quarter earnings growth            log price-earnings ratio



The top panel plots consumption volatility, σc,t−1,12 , against log price-earnings, (pt − et ).
The bottom panel plots earnings growth et − et−12 , against pt−12 − et−12 . All variables are
standardized.


                                               38
Figure 2 :Earnings Growth, P/E ratios and Consumption Volatility: International

                                                           Germany
       4                                                                3

                                                                        2
       2
                                                                        1


       0                                                                0


                                                                        -1
      -2
                                                                        -2


      -4                                                                -3
           76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98                               76   78   80   82    84   86      88   90   92   94   96   98

           12 quarter earnings growth   log price-earnings ratio                  Cons. Volatility (12 qrt.)        log price-earnings ratio




                                                             Japan
       3                                                                3


       2
                                                                        2

       1
                                                                        1
       0
                                                                        0
      -1

                                                                        -1
      -2


      -3                                                                -2
           76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98                               76   78   80   82    84   86      88   90   92   94   96   98

           12 quarter earnings growth   log price-earnings ratio                  Cons. Volatility (12 qrt.)        log price-earnings ratio




                                                              U.K.
       2                                                                3


       1                                                                2


       0                                                                1


      -1                                                                0


      -2                                                                -1


      -3                                                                -2


      -4                                                                -3
           76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98                               76   78   80   82    84   86      88   90   92   94   96   98

           12 quarter earnings growth   log price-earnings ratio                  Cons. Volatility (12 qrt.)        log price-earnings ratio




   The right-hand plots display consumption volatility, σc,t−1,12 , against log price-earnings,
   (pt − et ). The left-hand plots display earnings growth et − et−12 , against pt−12 − et−12 . All
   variables are standardized.


                                                                   39
