                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                       PAYING FOR THE FILP

                                              Takero Doi
                                              Takeo Hoshi

                                          Working Paper 9385
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9385


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




This paper was prepared for the volume on Structural Impediments to Growth that is being edited by Magnus
Blomstrom, Jennifer Corbett, Fumio Hayashi and Anil Kashyap for the NBER and will be published by the
University of Chicago Press. We thank Albert Ando, Thomas Cargill, Jenny Corbett, Masahiro Higo,
Toshihiro Ihori, Yasushi Iwamoto, Anil Kashyap, Kiyoshi Mitsui, as well as participants of the conference
on Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan and a seminar at the Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, for
helpful comments. We also thank Masayasu Murakami, Shinobu Shiikawa, and Komako Tanaka for advice
on data collection and Larry Meissner for extremely helpful editing. Any remaining errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Takero Doi and Takeo Hoshi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.
Paying for the FILP
Takero Doi and Takeo Hoshi
NBER Working Paper No. 9385
December 2002
JEL No. G2, G3, H6, H7


                                           ABSTRACT

        This paper examines the financial health of the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program (FILP)

as of the end of March 2001. We study the financial conditions of FILP recipients, which include

public corporations and local governments. We find many are de facto insolvent. Our estimates

suggest as much as 75% of the FILP loans are bad. The expected losses are estimated to be about

¥75 trillion (over 15% of GDP). We also studied the effects of the FILP reform of April 2001, which

tries to introduce market discipline in allocation of FILP funds. No significant changes in financial

flow are detected, yet. The financial market seems to differentiate the newly introduced FILP agency

bonds, which are supposed to without government guarantee, from government guaranteed bonds.

It is too early to tell, however, whether the financial market will become an effective monitor of

FILP agencies.


Takero Doi                                    Takeo Hoshi
Faculty of Economics Graduate School          Keio University and Pacific Studies
of International Relations                    University of California, San Diego
2-15-45 Mita                                  108-8345 9500 Gilman Drive
Minato-Ku, Tokyo                              La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
Japan                                         and NBER
tdoi@econ.keio.ac.jp                          thoshi@ucsd.edu
         The Fiscal Investment and Loan Program (FILP) in Japan collects funds through
government financial institutions (most notably postal savings) and uses the funds to finance
public projects undertaken by government-affiliated corporations or to finance government loans
to borrowers in targeted areas (targeted industries, small firms, mortgage borrowers, etc). Many
countries have government-sponsored loan programs: the Japanese program is distinguished by its
size. At the end of fiscal 2000 (March 2001), the FILP program involved ¥418 trillion, equal to
some 82% of GDP, and the program's uses of funds statement totaled more than GDP. The postal
savings system, the most important source of funds for the FILP is the world's largest financial
institution. It held ¥250 trillion in deposits (35% of total household deposits) at the end of fiscal
2000.
         The FILP may promote welfare and economic growth by financing projects that have such
large externalities that private institutions would not undertake them. It also may be an
impediment to welfare and growth by allowing the government to pursue wasteful projects.
Historically the program has ignored market information, and its sheer size makes the cost of
resource misallocation enormous.
         This chapter examines the financial condition of the FILP and analyzes reforms begun in
April 2001.
         The goal of examining the FILP's financial condition is to see if it constitutes a serious
impediment to the recovery of the Japanese economy. FILP's accounts are notoriously opaque.
We scrutinize the balance sheets of recipients of FILP funds, including special public corporations
(SPCs), central government accounts, and local governments. Through this exercise, we can
estimate the amount of financial losses of the FILP either buried in current balance sheets or
expected to emerge in the near future.
         The data show that existing losses and expected transfers to cover future losses are
enormous. These losses are implicit claims on the government (and hence on taxpayers). Together
with other implicit claims, such as the cost of cleaning up the financial sector (see Fukao’s chapter
in this volume), FILP losses can seriously impede economic recovery.
         Because the FILP is supposed to finance socially useful projects that private institutions
are unwilling to undertake, it is natural for there to be losses. And, in fact, the central government
has been transferring funds from its accounts to numerous FILP agencies in the form of explicit
subsidies and capital contributions. The losses may be a result of insufficient past subsidies for
social-welfare-increasing (but high-externality) projects. However, any argument that stresses the
welfare-enhancing aspects of the FILP must be weighed against the substantial cost. That so little
                                                                                                    2
      has been done until recently – even by the government – to explore the cost-benefit of FILP
      programs is telling.
              Our second purpose is to describe the reform of the FILP introduced in April 2001 and to
      evaluate its likely impact. The main stated goal of the reform is the introduction of "market
      discipline" in the allocation of funds. Thus, we examine whether reform can be expected to reduce
      FILP losses in the future.
              The work presented here updates and expands that of a number of researchers (primarily
      available only in Japanese), as outlined in the Appendix on the literature.
              The chapter is organized as follows. After briefly describing how the FILP is structured
      and its size, we begin our investigation of the financial health of FILP agencies. This involves
      performing a close examination of the balance sheets of the major FILP recipients, correcting for
      various accounting problems. The financial conditions of local governments, which are also
      important borrowers of the FILP, are then taken up. This is a topic not covered extensively by
      other researchers.
              We then discuss the essence of the FILP reform introduced in April 2001, and evaluate the
      effects that are observable so far. We conclude by pointing out the direction for future research.


1     Background


      The FILP is a government-sponsored program that finances government financial institutions and
      other government-related agencies. It is not just a system of simple financial intermediation
      because the government and FILP agencies are also linked through flows of direct grants and
      subsidies. This section presents a brief overview of the structure, size, and history of the FILP.


1.1   Structure and Size


      Figure 1 diagrams the structure of the FILP before the 2001 reform, paying particular attention to
      the inter-relations between financial intermediation and fiscal transfers. The magnitude of the
      sums involved is given in Table 1, sources of funds, and Table 2, uses of funds.
              The Trust Fund Bureau (TFB) Fund is by far the most important source, providing some
      83% of funds as of the end of March 2001. The majority of the TFB Fund comes from postal
      savings. Its other major source is pension reserves, which are the difference between the premium
      receipts and pension payouts of the public pension system during the current fiscal year.
                                                                                                      3
             Uses of FILP funds are grouped into seven categories, as shown in Table 2. Box 1 explains
      the FILP loan to the general account.


      Box 1: FILP Loan to the General Account

      The ¥7.3 trillion FILP loan to the general account relate to privatization of the former Japan
      National Railroads (JNR). The JNR started to run deficits in 1964, but was allowed to continue
      operation and to add to its debt. When JNR was privatized in 1987, ¥25.5 trillion of its debt and
      some JNR assets were transferred to a newly created JNR Settlement Corporation (JNRSC). The
      remaining debt was assumed by the central government and creditors (including the TFB) received
      newly issued Japanese government bonds. JNRSC was supposed to pay down its debt over 10
      years using proceeds from sales of the assets it received. Assets sales stalled and the amount of
      liabilities actually increased. When the statute establishing JNRSC expired in 1997, the
      government assumed almost all of its ¥28.3 trillion debt. Thus, the ¥7.3 trillion loan from the FILP
      should be considered a loan to these already-failed corporations.


              The first five uses are formally put in the "FILP Plan" every year and submitted to the Diet
      as an attachment to the budget bill. Thus, the size of the FILP Plan (¥418 trillion for the end of
      March 2001) is smaller than the total size of the FILP. This is because the total program includes
      the TFB's holding of government bonds and other financial assets.
              The FILP Plan disburses funds to many local governments, which account for 24% of net
      FILP loans, and 57 other entities. Of the latter, 11 are central government accounts (Postal Savings
      Special Account, 9 other special accounts, and JNR loans) and 46 are "FILP agencies" (8
      government financial institutions, 27 SPCs, and 11 special firms).
              Table 3 summarizes data on the 58 entities that had outstanding FILP loans or
      government-guaranteed bonds (which are held by the public but considered a part of the FILP) at
      the end of March 2001. The total was ¥414 trillion, or ¥357 trillion net of ¥57 trillion loaned back
      to the postal savings system.


1.2   Historical Development


      When the FILP started in the 1950s, financing economic recovery was the most important goal.
      Hence, the FILP heavily targeted industrial financing through the Japan Development Bank (JDB,
                                                                                                   4
    predecessor of the present Development Bank of Japan) and other government financial
    institutions. When the economy recovered and started to grow rapidly, the focus gradually shifted
    to housing (including mortgage lending) and projects to improve living standards (such as building
    sewer systems). Providing assistance to small businesses also became an important goal.
    Financing industrial development does not constitute a large area for the FILP Plan any more: only
    1% of new funds are used for this purpose. Table 4 provides a breakdown of the FILP Plan for
    fiscal 2001 by target areas.


2   Financial Condition of FILP Agencies


             In this and the next five sections, we examine the financial condition of the FILP recipients
    other than the local governments, which collectively receive 76% of the total net FILP loans. The
    financial condition of the local governments is examined in Section 8.
             The first step in analyzing the financial condition of the FILP recipients is to look at the
    self-reported accounting information. By their own accounts, nine recipients of FILP funds are
    insolvent. That is only a very partial picture, however. The publicly disclosed accounting
    statements of FILP recipients exhibit serious problems, which make it hard to assess their financial
    conditions.
             To provide a more accurate list of insolvent agencies and estimate the cost to taxpayers of
    the FILP, in each of the next four sections we look at a problem area and make adjustments to
    provide a more accurate assessment.
             The first three areas involve financial losses already accumulated. The losses already made
    come from two principal sources: under-reserving for bad loans and over-valuing assets. In
    addition, other adjustments need to be made to the stated capital (reserves) of many FILP
    participants. Our analysis of these areas involves examining the balance sheets of FILP
    participants. 1
             The fourth area is the present value of the cost of covering expected future losses that will
    arise if FILP agencies continue to operate. To estimate this, we rely on projections made by the
    agencies themselves.

    1
      Five special accounts and one special firm do not publish balance sheets regularly, so they are excluded from our
    analysis. Fortunately, the ¥4.5 trillion in FILP loans to them amounts to just 1.3% of net FILP loans. The six are noted
    on Supplemental Table 1, which is available on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.
     Also available on our web sites and the NBER web site are the balance sheets and income statements included in the
    administrative cost statements compiled by the SPCs studied here.
                                                                                                                         5
3   Capital (Reserves)


    In assessing financial condition, we have paid special attention to the amount of capital (usually
    called reserves in public corporation accounting). The amount of capital measures how much loss
    the entity can sustain without requiring additional resources from the government. Negative
    capital means de facto insolvency. Because the government is both a large creditor and the equity
    holder of public corporations, insolvency implies future losses for the government, and hence for
    taxpayers. If the capital is positive but very small, taxpayers are risk for providing more money if
    even small losses occur. We will see that this is a pervasive problem.
             The amount of capital falls for many corporations when they restate their balance sheets
    based on accounting standards for the private sector. By their own accounts, nine agencies are
    insolvent (have negative capital ratios). (As an example of how labyrinthine FILP accounting is,
    a tenth agency is insolvent on its original balance sheet but manages to become solvent using
    private sector standards!)
             Data on capital are included in Appendix Table 1 as column 5. Supplemental Table 2 lists
    the amount of capital for each government account and public corporation as reported on its
    original balance sheet (that is, using accounting standards for public corporations) and on its
    administrative cost statement (using standards for private sector firms), as well as the capital ratio.
    It is available on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.
             There is a quite serious accounting problem regarding the largest recipient of FILP funds,
    Government Housing Loan Corporation (GHLC), and two small special accounts. Their balance
    sheets list cumulative losses on the asset side. The losses are to be paid off over time by gradually
    reducing capital. Because the losses have been identified already and are not likely to be
    eliminated (without a corresponding reduction of the capital or infusion of new capital), it is
    necessary to subtract these items from capital immediately to get an unbiased picture of their
    current financial condition. In our analysis, the cumulative losses are subtracted from assets in
    calculating these agencies' capital. Such losses amount to ¥518.6 billion in total.



4   Non-Performing Loans


                                                                                                         6
Disclosed non-performing loans totalled ¥5.6 trillion in March 2001, which is 3.2% of total loans
made by the institutions. This is a lower bound for the level of bad loans. Although reporting of
non-performing loans may be better than before, the small loan-loss reserves of many institutions
suggest serious under-reserving. Table 5 column 1 summarizes the amount of bad loans disclosed
in the administrative cost statements. (Supplemental Table 3 has data for each agency. It is
available on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.)
        Bad loans on the administrative cost statements of government financial institutions are
"risk management loans," defined in the same way as for private sector banks. These are loans to
failed enterprises, loans more than 3 months past due, and restructured loans (that is, have relaxed
conditions). Note that loans clearly headed for trouble, but technically still performing, do not
need to be included. SPCs must disclose only loans that are past due more than 6 months; they hold
6.4% of the bad loans in the table.
         In determining under-reserving, we assume 100% of reported bad loans will be lost
eventually. The 100% loss rate may seem extreme, but the late 1990s experience of private sector
banks shows this actually is a rather conservative assumption. At the end of March 1996, the first
time that all banks in the private sector disclosed risk-management loans, the total was ¥28.5
trillion. Disposal of bad loans cost banks ¥34.7 trillion in the following three years. Despite
writing off 122% of the starting level, total risk-management loans at the end of March 1999 stood
at ¥29.6 trillion, slightly higher than the initial level! This suggests risk-management loans at the
end of March 1996 were severely under-reported. It seems reasonable to expect a similar
magnitude of under-reporting by SPCs.
         Of the 26 agencies covered, only 5 have reserves equal to or in excess of their bad loans.
For the 21 agencies that are under-reserved, estimated under-reserving is ¥3.2 trillion. One agency,
JFM, does not have any loan loss reserves on its balance sheet, but it should (Box 2). Total
under-reserving including JFM reaches ¥8.3 trillion. Table 5 summarizes loan loss reserves and
reserves as a percentage of bad loans.




Box 2. Japan Finance Corporation for Municipal Enterprises



                                                                                                   7
      Table 5 and Supplemental Table 3 do not list Japan Finance Corporation for Municipal Enterprises
      (JFM), which raises fund by issuing government guaranteed bonds and lends to local governments
      and public corporations owned by local governments, because it claims to have no risk
      management loans. Because we have budget data for local governments, we could estimate JFM
      under-reservation in the same way we estimate expected losses on FILP funds lent to local
      governments. The details are reported later, but the calculation suggests that ¥5,072.5 billion of
      JFM loans is likely to be uncollectible, and thus the amount of under-reservation also is ¥5,072.5
      billion.



5     Valuation of Physical Assets


      The value of physical assets reported on balance sheets of SPCs may not reflect the true value of
      the assets, primarily because they are not properly depreciated, and also because assets are not
      marked-to-market.
               When book value (original cost) is used for land purchased a long time ago, its actual value
      can be significantly understated. On the other hand, if a corporation has assets that have lost value
      (such as land purchased in the late 1980s), book value may overstate the true value.
               Improper depreciation of physical assets is a more serious problem and it tends to overstate
      the level of existing assets. For example, Iwamoto (1998a, p 166) reports that Japan Highway
      Public Corporation is allowed to (and actually does) accumulate reserves for depreciation out of
      profits whenever it feels it is convenient, rather than charging depreciation every year. Hence the
      assets figures on its balance sheet are gross capital numbers, which include past depreciation. To
      get net numbers, one has to subtract cumulative reserves (for future redemption of loans) from the
      capital. Capital calculated in this way still suffers from the problem of under-reporting of
      depreciation, because the corporation charges depreciation only when a sufficient amount of profit
      is realized.


5.1   Revaluing Assets


      For 12 corporations that carry large amounts of physical assets on their books, we have revalued
      their assets to reflect market value changes and proper depreciation. All are involved in urban
      development or providing infrastructure.
                                                                                                      8
             Comparing the amounts reported on their original balance sheets to those reported in their
    administrative cost statements, some public corporations adjusted their assets figures substantially
    downward. Still, our calculations suggest the official numbers remain over-stated for many
    agencies, and the level of mis-valuation varies significantly. For the 11 with over-valuations, the
    total is ¥11.4 trillion.2



6   Future Losses


    In addition to the losses already incurred, some FILP agencies are expected to generate more
    financial losses if they continue to operate. Carefully estimating the size of such future losses is
    beyond the scope of this chapter. Instead, we rely on the policy cost analysis conducted by each
    FILP agency.
            The analysis, which calculates a present discounted value of estimated government
    subsidies needed to cover the difference between revenues from FILP projects and their costs,
    started in fiscal 1999. That year, the analysis was applied to 5 agencies. In fiscal 2000, coverage
    was extended to 14 agencies, and with fiscal 2001, all 33 agencies that receive new funds from the
    FILP were required to publish a policy cost analysis. Kikkawa et al (2000) have found that the
    published policy cost analyses often seriously over-estimate future revenues, and hence
    under-estimate the policy cost. Thus, the published data should be taken as a lower bound for
    expected future losses.
            Projects are expected to generate more revenue than costs at 5 agencies. For the 28
    agencies expecting policy costs, the total as of March 2001 is ¥11.7 trillion; for all 33 agencies the
    projected cost is ¥11.4 trillion. (The estimate made by each agency is in Appendix Table 1 column
    3.)


7   FILP Agency Losses




    2
     Supplemental Appendix A describes the revaluation method in detail and discusses the depreciation rates and land
    price series used for each corporation. Data are in Supplemental Table 4. These are available on our web sites and the
    NBER web site, listed at the end of the references. Two other agencies report significant physical assets, but we are
    unable to revalue their assets because changes in accounting rules in 1986 prevent a consistent time series.
                                                                                                                        9
    Table 6 summarizes and totals the financial losses revealed by our analysis in the previous sections.
    At March 2001, for the 34 FILP agencies for which we estimate losses the total was ¥31.0 trillion.
    These losses reduce the agencies' net capital, in some cases giving them negative net capital.
            Our analysis finds 20 FILP agencies that are insolvent (have negative net capital) including
    projected policy costs. Of these, 9 are admittedly insolvent (have negative capital on their
    administrative statements), and another 11 are shown to be insolvent after adjustments for the
    accounting problems we have outlined. Data are in Appendix Table 1.
            The 20 insolvent agencies represent more than 60% (¥217 trillion) of net FILP fund loans.
    Not all of the bad loans have been, or will be, truly lost to the FILP. Indeed, because the borrowers
    are all government or quasi-government institutions, we expect all FILP loans to be paid in full
    eventually. Taxpayer money will be used if necessary, as has already happened for the former JNR.
    That means the funds the agencies receive to pay back FILP loans should be considered a cost of
    the FILP, one that will be borne by future taxpayers.
              Thus, a comprehensive approach to the FILP's cost to the public is to estimate what it
    would take to bail-out all FILP agencies. This involves computing the amount of capital originally
    contributed by the government that has already been lost and the cumulative losses that exceed the
    government's original capital. Data for 44 agencies are in Appendix Table 2.
              The government has lost all or part of its capital in 40 agencies, a total of almost ¥12.4
    trillion. Losses that exceed original capital add another ¥23.4 trillion, for a total loss of ¥35.8
    trillion.



8   Local Governments


    Of ¥357 trillion of net FILP funds outstanding at the end of March 2001, ¥87 trillion (24.4%) were
    loans directly to local governments and public enterprises owned by local governments. These
    entities also borrow from the JFM, which is a large recipient of FILP funds. Thus, the solvency of
    local governments is an important determinant of the financial health of the FILP.
            The amount of FILP loans to local governments each year is determined in a process that
    is led by the Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications
    (Ministry of Home Affairs before the government restructuring in January 2001). The process
    requires any local government planning a bond issue to obtain Ministry permission in advance.


                                                                                                     10
        When permission is granted, the Ministry also decides how much of the bonds will be bought by
        the TFB Fund and Postal Life Insurance Fund.
                There is no mechanism ensuring FILP loans go only to financially healthy entities. Indeed,
        loans are routinely used by the Ministry to distribute funds to financially troubled local
        governments and may even be skewed toward such governments. Doi (2002) found that a local
        government that depends heavily on FILP loans tends to have low tax revenues and a large amount
        of "local-allocation tax grants" (lump-sum grants distributed by the central government to make up
        for shortages in local tax revenues.)
                Thus, one would suspect that many local governments with high debts are servicing the
        debts using funds provided by the central government. If this is the case, we would find a
        substantial amount of non-performing FILP loans to local governments.
                Local governments are not required to prepare balance sheets, which prevents us from
        applying the approach used for FILP agencies. So, in this section, we focus on the ability for a
        local government to pay off its current outstanding bonds.


8.1     Local Government Solvency and Losses


        For each local government, we calculate debt capacity defined as the present discounted value of
        future expected primary surpluses (revenues minus non-interest expenditures). If the current local
        government debt exceeds the calculated debt capacity, we conclude the local government is de
        facto insolvent.
                Budget data for fiscal 1997 through 2000 are used. A lack of budget data prevents
        including public enterprises owned by local governments. Thus, the estimates reported are a lower
        bound for the losses expected in FILP loans to local governments and local public enterprises.
                We start by estimating future primary surpluses for each local government, using six
        different scenarios.


8.1.1   Estimating Procedure


        Letting Si denote the expected primary surplus for the local government i, we can calculate the
        debt capacity of the government, denoted by Bi* as:



                                                                                                          11
                  S 
        Bi* = max  i ,0                                                                              (1)
                  r 


        where r is the constant discount rate, assumed to be 4%.
               Note that we assume debt capacity cannot be below zero. Thus, if a local government runs
        a primary deficit, its debt capacity is defined as zero.
               By comparing Bi* to the outstanding debt as of the end of March 2001, denoted by Bi,2001,
        we can calculate the amount of debt that is not likely to be paid off. Let us define DFi,2000 as:

        DFi , 2001 = max{Bi , 2001 − Bi* ,0}                                                           (2)


        If DFi,2000 is strictly positive, we say the local government is de facto insolvent and the size of
        DFi,2000 shows the magnitude of insolvency. The result, of course, depends critically on the
        estimated level of Si.


8.1.2   The Scenarios


        In the baseline case (Scenario 1), we assume this is constant and equal to the simple average of the
        primary surpluses in fiscal 1997-2000.
                Because we estimate the future primary surplus from data for four years when the economy
        was stagnating (April 1997 through March 2001), it might be lower than the long-run level after
        the economy recovers. To address this, we consider Scenario 2, which assumes general revenue
        (tax revenue, local transfer taxes, and local-allocation tax) jumps 20% in the first year and stays
        there.
                Another assumption in the baseline case is that the future primary surplus does not grow.
        Scenario 3 considers an alternative where the surplus grows 2% each year.
                In the first three scenarios, we assume the local governments can continue to rely on
        local-allocation tax grants from the central government. That system, however, is likely to change
        in the near future. Its overhaul is an important part of the fiscal decentralization that the
        government has been deliberating since the mid 1990s.
                A Decentralization Promotion Committee was created within the Prime Minister's Office
        in 1995, and started drafting a decentralization plan. The committee published its final report in
                                                                                                              12
        June 2001. On the issue of local-allocation tax grants, the committee argues that there should be
        a transfer of tax bases from the central government to local governments to improve the fiscal
        condition of local governments and that the local-allocation tax grants should be reduced so that
        the transfer of tax bases is neutral to the total tax revenue of the central and local governments (see
        Decentralization Promotion Committee 2001, ch 3 §1).
                In Scenarios 4, 5, and 6, we consider the case where the tax base for local-allocation tax
        grants is assumed to be transferred to local governments according to the current size of their own
        tax revenues, and local-allocation tax grants become zero. Scenario 4 assumes the expected future
        primary surplus is given by the average for fiscal 1997-2000. Scenario 5 assumes general tax
        revenue increases 20% in the first year and then stays constant. Scenario 6 assumes the future
        primary surplus grows 2% annually.


8.1.3   Results


        Table 7 summarizes the results of our calculation. At the end of fiscal 2000, total debts
        outstanding for 47 prefectures, 693 cities (and wards in Tokyo), and 2,557 towns and villages
        amounted to ¥125.5 trillion, of which ¥55.0 trillion was owed to the FILP fund and ¥8.2 trillion
        was owed to the JFM (Japan Finance Corporation for Municipal Enterprises). These are amounts
        in the Ordinary Accounts of local governments, and do not include debts in Enterprise Accounts
        and of public corporations owned by the local governments.
                If the current system of local-allocation tax grants continues and if the primary surpluses
        of local governments do not improve (Scenario 1, the baseline case), the current level of local
        debts is estimated to exceed the debt capacity for all 47 prefectures, 326 out of 693 cities, and
        1,240 of 2,557 towns and villages. The total size of the insolvency is ¥89.5 trillion. In other words,
        these entities have borrowed almost ¥90 trillion more than we expect them to be able to repay
        based on their current tax and spending patterns. Assuming that the insolvency is addressed by
        defaulting on the loans (rather than raising taxes or cutting spending) and that FILP loans and JFM
        loans have the same seniority as other debts, 64% (¥35.2 trillion) of the outstanding FILP loans to
        local governments and 62% (¥5.1 trillion) of the outstanding JFM loans to local governments will
        be defaulted.
                When we assume the system of local-allocation tax grants is decentralized (Scenario 4),
        debt capacity improves for some prefectures and cities, while the capacity of many towns and


                                                                                                            13
     villages declines. This is because the current allocation of tax grants is skewed in favor of
     financially poor local governments, which include many towns and villages.
             Scenarios 2 and 5, which assume an economic recovery that increases general revenue
     20%, of course produce much smaller losses. Comparing Scenarios 2 and 5 suggests that the
     increased debt capacity of local governments in Scenario 2 mostly results from increased
     local-allocation tax grants at local governments already receiving disproportionately large
     allocations. When the system of grants is decentralized (Scenario 5), these governments lose the
     extra large allocations. The result suggests that many such local governments would not be able
     to meet the debt payments without re-distribution through grants at the current level.
             Scenarios 3 and 6, which have 2% annual growth in the primary surplus, see enhanced debt
     capacities of some local governments, but the expected amount of insolvency are not much
     different from the baselines (Scenarios 1 and 4).



9    Overall Cost to Taxpayers


     Table 8 summarizes total bad loans. Of the ¥357 trillion of net FILP funds, 75% (¥267 trillion) can
     be considered bad loans.
             Our estimate of the total cost to taxpayers to bail-out and recapitalize public corporations,
     cover local-government defaults, and retire former Japan Rail-related debt is ¥78.3 trillion, which
     amounts to over 15% of fiscal 2000 GDP (Table 9). As discussed previously, we consider this a
     lower bound.



10   "Fundamental Reform"


     A government study in the late 1990s found three shortcomings in the FILP that have motivated
     change (FILP Report 2000, p 24). First, the TFB, which handled all the deposits from postal
     savings and pension reserves, may have become too big to be efficient. Second, too much
     consideration for TFB depositors (that is, the pension funds and postal savings) may have been
     keeping the cost of FILP funds too high. Third, the opaque nature of the FILP's subsidy
     component may have been hiding substantial future burdens on taxpayers.


                                                                                                       14
               To address these issues, effective 1 April 2001 the FILP went through a "fundamental
       reform." Figure 3 shows how the FILP system will look when the "transition" is complete.
               The TFB has been abolished. Its personnel and assets have been inherited by the Fiscal
       Loan Fund (FLF). Postal savings and pension reserves are not automatically deposited into the
       FLF. Instead, the funds are invested in the financial market at the discretion of the postal savings
       and pension systems, as was the case already for a small share of the funds.
               How FILP agencies raise their funds also has changed. Under the new FILP, the agencies
       raise funds in three ways. The preferred way is for an agency to issue its own bonds in the
       financial market. The Framework of the Fundamental Reform declares that each agency should
       "make utmost effort to issue FILP agency bonds" (FILP Report 2000, p 28). Agencies not healthy
       enough to place bonds in the open market will be allowed to issue bonds with a government
       guarantee. Finally, agencies can tap funds raised collectively through the issuance of FILP bonds
       by the FLF.


10.1   Intended Results of the Reform


       Use of FILP agency bonds rather than TFB funds can potentially eliminate the problem of fund
       costs, if some FILP agencies can issue bonds at lower yields than they have been paying the TFB
       for funds.
                Non-transparency is addressed by requiring further disclosure of FILP agencies and the
       FILP system as a whole. Two specific measures have been implemented.
                First, starting with fiscal 1999, the government began calculating the "policy cost" for each
       FILP agency and publishing the result. Policy cost is defined as the present discounted value of
       the stream of net transfers from the government to an agency. This measure reveals the expected
       cost to the government (thus, taxpayers) to sustaining operation of an agency.
                Second, in June 2001, the Fiscal System Council of the Ministry of Finance came up with
       a recommendation on accounting disclosures for SPCs. As a result, all SPCs (many of which are
       FILP agencies) were required to publish "administrative cost statements" for fiscal 2000 by the
       end of September 2001. These are discussed in the next section.


10.2   Administrative Cost Statements



                                                                                                          15
       SPCs are required to publish balance sheets and income statements using the accounting standards
       of private sector firms beginning with the fiscal 2000 (which ended March 2001). The opportunity
       cost of government funds used as capital for the agency also is calculated. Adding that to the loss
       shown on the income statement yields the "administrative cost statement" (gyosei cost keisansho).
       (The importance of including the opportunity cost of government funds was first pointed out by
       Fukao 1998.)
               The statements are supposed to be free from the accounting problems identified in earlier
       sections. For example, the Fiscal System Council's guideline requires SPCs to adjust depreciable
       assets for depreciation. They also require government financial institutions (but not SPCs) to
       disclose non-performing loans using the same criteria as private sector financial institutions.
               Although the reform was launched on 1 April 2001, implementation is planned to be
       gradual and many "transitional measures" are provided. For example, postal savings and the
       pension reserves are committed to buy a substantial amount of FILP bonds until the market for the
       bonds fully develops. Moreover, the postal savings and the postal life insurance fund plan to buy
       bonds directly from local governments, because most local governments would have trouble
       floating bonds in the market. Thus, the "discretion" that the postal savings and other funds are
       supposed to enjoy is seriously limited during the "transition" period.


10.3   Actual Substantive Change is Not Assured


       A comparison of the old and new systems reveals the possibility that, the government's claim that
       the reform is "fundamental" notwithstanding, the new system may in practice not differ
       substantially from the old after all. It is possible for the new system to replicate the financial flows
       of the old system even after the "transitional measures" expire. For example, postal savings may
       continue to buy FILP bonds, and FILP agencies may continue to borrow from the FLF. Then,
       although the name of the intermediary is different, the flow of funds would be exactly the same as
       under the old system. Moreover, local governments will not be required to issue bonds in the
       financial market and can continue to depend on the FLF.3



       3
           Several local governments – including Tokyo Metropolitan and Osaka City – were issuing bonds in the financial
       market before the reform. The amount of outstanding local bonds so issued is, however, a little less than 10% of total
       local bonds outstanding. In the first year since the reform, the issuance amount has hardly changed.
                                                                                                                           16
               The introduction of FILP agency bonds, which are supposed to be without government
       guarantees, may not change the situation much, either. The market may continue to believe FILP
       agency bonds are implicitly guaranteed by the government. Wallison (2001) makes an interesting
       comparison between FILP agency bonds and bonds issued by government-sponsored enterprises
       (GSEs), such as Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) in the United States. He
       points out that even though US legislation explicitly states that Fannie Mae securities are not
       government guaranteed, yields on its securities are only slightly higher than on US Treasury bonds.
        Thus, he is skeptical of the idea of market discipline from FILP agency bonds.



11     Effects of Reform


       Reform does not change losses that the FILP has already sustained, but it may prevent FILP
       agencies from accumulating further losses. After the reform, public corporations are supposed to
       raise funds from the financial market. The postal savings and pension reserve funds, which used
       to fund them automatically through the TFB now can invest in the financial market, without
       necessarily buying the FILP bonds or FILP agency bonds.
                The changes are intended to expose public corporations to market monitoring. A
       loss-accumulating corporation may have difficulty raising funds and may be forced to restructure
       its operation. Or, the central government may be forced to subsidize a corporation explicitly so
       that it can continue its loss-making but socially beneficial activities.
                Writing 14 months from the start of the reform, we can examine some early data to see
       whether the reform looks promising.
                First, we look at how uses of postal savings funds and the sources of funds used by FILP
       agencies have changed. Second, we study the secondary market pricing of the limited number of
       FILP agency bonds being traded.


11.1   Flow of Funds


       Financial flows in the FILP need to change substantially to make FILP agencies subject to the
       market discipline. However, the reform may not necessarily change the flow of funds: if the postal
       savings system chooses to buy FILP agency bonds, FILP bonds, and local government bonds,
       flows in the reformed FILP will replicate those of the old FILP.
                                                                                                      17
               Table 10 shows planned uses of postal savings funds for the first two years after the FILP
       reform (fiscal 2001 and 2002). There are no substantial changes: the majority of available funds
       are to be invested in the FILP and most of the rest is to be invested much as it was by the TFB. The
       optimistic interpretation is that the allocation of postal savings so far has been heavily constrained
       by transitional measures that require postal savings to absorb a substantial amount of FILP bonds.
               The sources of funds for FILP agencies also show little change. Table 11 gives the amount
       of the FILP loans to public corporations in the FILP plans for fiscal 2001 and 2002 and compares
       those to the size of FILP agency bond issues. The introduction of FILP agency bonds is perhaps
       the most important aspect of the reform, but they have not become a major source of funds.
       Although for fiscal 2002 the ratio of bonds to loans is planned to slightly exceed 14%, it will take
       a long time for the total outstanding amount of bonds to approach the level of loans.



12     The Market's View of Agency Bonds


       A key question is whether the market sees these bonds as having implicit government guarantees.
        If it does, market discipline will be absent, as there is no incentive to monitor and evaluate the
       agencies. To find the market's view, this section looks at ratings and spreads between agency
       bonds and JGBs.


12.1   Ratings


       Table 12 shows the bond ratings for FILP agencies granted by major rating agencies. Tokyo-based
       R&I (Rating & Investment Information Inc) has the most extensive coverage of the three major
       rating agencies, assessing bonds issued by 15 FILP agencies. The Japanese branches of Moody's
       and Standard & Poors rate far fewer, and add only 2. Thus, 17 FILP agencies are rated by at least
       one rating agency.
               R&I seems to distinguish among FILP agencies, and this suggests it does not see all the
       bonds as government guaranteed. Three government financial institutions are rated as high as
       Japanese government bonds (JGBs) were in May 2002. Most of the 14 others were one notch
       below. Moody's and S&P rank the same 3 agencies on par with JGBs as R&I does. The numbers
       of FILP agencies that Moody’s and S&P rate are so small that it is hard to judge if they are
       carefully distinguishing between FILP agency bonds issued by different agencies.
                                                                                                          18
12.2   Spreads
       By comparing yields on FILP agency bonds to those on JGBs or government-guaranteed bonds
       (also issued by public corporations), we can see if the market views FILP agency bonds as
       implicitly guaranteed. As of May 2002, 28 bonds issued by 17 FILP agencies have sufficient
       secondary-market data.
                Figure 4 plots the yields of FILP agency bonds and JGBs against maturities. Agency bonds
       all are above the yield curve of JGBs, with the premium exceeding 80 basis points for some issues.
        Thus, the market seems to view FILP agency bonds as significantly more risky than JGBs.
               Figure 5 compares FILP agency bonds to government-guaranteed bonds (many issued by
       the agencies). The market clearly distinguishes FILP agency bonds from government-guaranteed
       bonds issued by the same agencies.
               Looking at the yield spreads between the 28 bonds and comparable JGBs shows substantial
       differences from one agency to another. The spreads for bonds issued by JBIC and Development
       Bank of Japan, which are healthier than the other agencies in our analysis and are rated the same
       as JGBs by all three rating agencies, have been relatively small (11 to 14 basis points). Agencies
       with high estimated financial losses, tend to have high spreads (68 to 82 basis points). At 30 May
       2002, Urban Development Corp, lowest-rated of the agencies reviewed by R&I and de facto
       insolvent based on our accounting, had a spread of 77.7 basis points. The widest spread was 81.8
       basis points for an unrated issue of Japan Regional Development Corp, although it is solvent even
       after accounting adjustments.4
               The gap between low-spread agencies and high spread agencies seems to have widened
       after April 2002. This may suggest that the financial market for FILP agency bond is getting better
       at discriminating between bonds issued by different agencies.
               Although the FILP reform talked about using FILP agency bonds as a device to apply
       market discipline on public corporations, it is not clear how that will work in the extreme. There is
       no transparent mechanism to deal with failures of public corporations and defaults of FILP agency
       bonds. Indeed, there is no legal procedure for closing a poorly performing public corporation.




       4
         Supplemental Table 5 provides data on the spreads of each issue. It is available on our web sites and the NBER web
       site, listed at the end of the references. The Japan Securities Dealers Assoc, our original source, posts secondary market
       quotes (in Japanese) on its web site: www.jsda.or.jp.
                                                                                                                             19
               Thus, although our review suggests an emergence of market signals on the quality of
       specific FILP agency bonds, it is not clear how useful this will be in improving the allocation of
       funds.



13     Conclusions


       This chapter has examined the financial cost that the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program has
       imposed on taxpayers by studying the financial condition of recipients of FILP loans: mainly
       public corporations and local governments. Many FILP recipients are de facto insolvent. Of the
       ¥357 trillion of the net FILP funds, about ¥267 trillion is loaned to insolvent recipients. The cost
       to taxpayers to clean up the expected FILP loss is estimated to be at least ¥75 trillion, over 15% of
       2001 GDP.
               Together with the massive cost of cleaning up the financial sector (chapter 1 in this volume
       by Fukao) and the increasing burden of the social security system (chapter 3 in this volume by
       Dekle), the losses in the FILP constitute a serious impediment to recovery of the Japanese
       economy. To the extent that funds have been misallocated to projects with low returns or that
       losses have resulted from inefficient use of funds, this chapter provides evidence that the FILP has
       hurt economic growth, at least since the late 1990s.
               Regarding the FILP reforms introduced in April 2001, we found the pattern of financial
       flows in the FILP has hardly changed. Some good news is that the financial market distinguishes
       FILP agency bonds from government-guaranteed bonds, which is essential if the use of FILP
       agency bonds is to introduce market discipline on their issuers. It is too early to tell, however,
       whether the bonds will be an effective disciplinary device.


13.1   Other Issues


       There are four major issues about the FILP and its future that this chapter did not examine
       thoroughly. These are left for future research.
              First, nothing is said about the welfare aspects of the FILP. If foregone opportunities from
       resource misallocation are taken into account, the welfare cost of the FILP might turn out to be
       even larger than our estimate of financial losses suggests. On the other hand, some loss-making


                                                                                                         20
agencies may be providing welfare-enhancing services that offset the financial losses. Examining
welfare aspects of the FILP is an important future research topic.
        Second, we relied on estimates of "policy cost" published by each FILP agency. As
Kikkawa et al (2000) show, for several FILP agencies, this most likely understates the true
magnitude of the cost. Studies to improve the estimates of future losses are needed.
        Third, empirical analysis of the new FILP is limited by the amount of data, because the new
regime started just 14 months ago. It is important to continue monitoring changes in the pattern
of financial flows and development of the market for FILP agency bonds.
        Finally, the lack of a clear mechanism to close down poorly performing public
corporations is an important shortcoming of the 2001 FILP reform. Such a mechanism is a
necessary condition for disciplining through FILP agency bonds. Absent a strong government
commitment not to bail out public corporations, and a credible mechanism to prevent bail-outs,
market discipline will not develop (see Iwamoto 1998b).
        Such a mechanism is also necessary to deal with the losses that have already been incurred
by the FILP. It is important to recognize the losses as soon as possible and to decide on the
loss-sharing mechanism. Without a clear loss-sharing mechanism, negotiations between
stakeholders will lead to delay. Delay increases the losses. Serious research on efficient closure
rules for non-performing FILP agencies is an urgent task.




                                                                                                21
Appendix: Literature Review


Good descriptions of the FILP and the postal savings system in English are Cargill and
Yoshino (2000, 2001). Bayoumi (1998) is a nice introduction to the FILP and the Japanese
fiscal system in general.
        FILP Report, an annual publication available on the Ministry of Finance's web site
(www.mof.go.jp/english), is an official guide to the FILP. The description is often
self-congratulatory, but it provides basic information.
        Kikkawa, Sakai, and Miyagawa (2000) examines the financial health of selected FILP
agencies. Their study focuses on the future expected cash flows of the agencies. They
estimate the present value of the future losses (negative cash flows) of FILP agencies to be
much higher than the estimates published by the MOF. In this chapter, we do not estimate
future cash flows for each agency. Instead, we use the MOF estimates. The results in Kikkawa
suggest that our estimates of total losses are most likely the lower bound of the true amount.
        Wallison (2001) discusses the FILP reform of 2001 and argues that the attempt to rely
on the market to discipline FILP agencies without privatizing them is likely to fail. Iwamoto
(2002) argues that the reform has failed to force the government to re-evaluate the role of SPCs
and to close down the ones that have ceased to be useful.
        In Japanese, a comprehensive survey of the huge body of research is provided by
Iwamoto (2001). Most of it examines government financial institutions in the FILP, such as the
Japan Development Bank and the Government Housing Loan Corporation.
        Matsuura (1990), Kono (1993), and Fukao (1998) are among several papers that seek
to provide a comprehensive picture on how the FILP works. They carefully disentangle the
complex flow of funds and subsidies among the central government, public corporations, and
local governments in the FILP.
        The work most closely related to this essay are Iwata (1998a) and Doi and Mori (2002).
 Iwata finds serious under-capitalization, a substantial amount of bad loans, and significant
under-reporting of depreciation for selected FILP agencies. Doi and Mori find similar
problems for a wider set of FILP agencies. This essay complements their analyses by using
more recent data. Most importantly, we use the financial statements of public corporations
based on private-sector accounting standards, which were first published 2001. The problems
Iwata, and Doi and Mori identified are still found even with supposedly better accounting.


                                                                                             22
       Yoshida and Konishi (1996) was the first comprehensive analysis of the financial
condition of the FILP agencies. Perhaps hindered by incomplete disclosure and improper
accounting, they failed to recognize the serious financial problem hidden in the FILP. It is also
possible that the magnitude of the problem was smaller then. In any case, using more recent
data, we find much a larger problem than they did.
       Higo (2001) provides a very useful description of the FILP reform of April 2001.
       Noguchi and Sasaki (1999) examined yield spreads between government-guaranteeed
bonds and a few non-government-guaranteed bonds issued by FILP agencies before the 2001
FILP reform. They found the spreads were at most 15 basis points, suggesting the financial
markets considered the bonds implicitly government-guaranteed. We find more substantial
spreads between FILP agency bonds and government-guaranteed bonds since the FILP reform.
       We go beyond a descriptive analysis of the reform and try to examine its impact
empirically. This chapter also examines the financial health of local governments, something
the works cited generally pay little, if any, attention to.




                                                                                              23
References


Bayoumi, Tamim (1998). "The Japanese Fiscal System and Fiscal Transparency," in Bijan B.
Aghevli, Tamim Bayoumi, and Guy Meredith, editors, Structural Change in Japan:
Macroeconomic Impact and Policy Challenges. Washington DC: International Monetary
Fund, p 177-212.


Cargill, Thomas F., and Naoyuki Yoshino (2000). "The Postal Savings System, Fiscal
Investment and Loan Program, and Modernization of Japan's Financial System," in Takeo
Hoshi and Hugh Patrick, editors, Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial System. Boston
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, p 201-230.


Cargill, Thomas F., and Naoyuki Yoshino (2001). The Postal Savings System and Fiscal
Investment and Loan Program in Japan: Financial Liberalization, Dilemmas, and Solutions.
Manuscript.


Decentralization Promotion Committee, Prime Minister's Office. 2001. Final Report on-line at
www8.cao.go.jp/bunken/bunken-iinkai/saisyu. In Japanese.


Doi, Takero (2002). "System and Role of Local Bonds Permits in Japan," in Toshihiro Ihori,
Takero Doi, Ryuta Ray Kato, Hiroki Kondo, Hideo Nakano, Toru Nakazato, and Shouichi
Sato, editors, Government Deficit and Fiscal Reform in Japan, pp 121-51. Boston MA:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.


Doi, Takero, and Takeo Hoshi (2002) "FILP: How Much Has Been Lost? How Much More
Will Be Lost?" NBER Working Paper xxxx


Doi, Takero, and Koichiro Mori (2002). Koteki Nenkin Tsumitatekin no Keizai Bunseki
(Economic Analysis of Public Pension Reserves). Tokyo: Nihon Hyoron-sha, forthcoming.


Economic Planning Agency (1998). Nihon no Shakai Shihon (Social Infrastructure of Japan).
Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Shimpo-sha.


                                                                                         24
Fukao, Mitsuhiro (1998). "Zaisei Toyushi Seido no Gaikan to Mondai no Shozai (Fiscal
Investment and Loan Program: An Overview and Problems)" in Kazumasa Iwata and
Mitsuhiro Fukao, editors, Zaisei Toyushi no Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis of the Fiscal
Investment and Loan Program). Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha, p 1-23.


Higo, Masahiro (2001). "Zaisei Toyushi no Genjo to Kadai: 2001 Nendo Kaikaku ga Zaito no
Kino ni Ataeru Eikyo (Status quo and problems of Fiscal Investment and Loan Program:
Effects of the FILP reform in FY 2001)." Working Paper Series 01-1, Research and Statistics
Department, Bank of Japan.


Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil Kashyap (2001). Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The
Road to the Future. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.


Iwamoto, Yasushi (1998a). "Zaisei Toyushi to Shakai Shihon Seibi (Fiscal Investment and
Loan Program and Infrastructure Investment)" in Kazumasa Iwata and Mitsuhiro Fukao,
editors, Zaisei Toyushi no Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis of the Fiscal Investment and
Loan Program). Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shimbun-sha, p 147-174.


Iwamoto, Yasushi (1998b). "Zaito Sai to Zaito Kikan Sai (FILP Bonds and FILP Agency
Bonds)," Financial Review, 47: 134-53.


Iwamoto, Yasushi (2001). "Nihon no Zaisei Toyushi (Fiscal Investment and Loan Program:
A Perspective on Government Interventions in the Japanese Financial Sector)." Economic
Review, 52(1): 2-15.


Iwamoto, Yasushi (2002). "The Fiscal Investment and Loan Program in Transition," Journal
of the Japanese and International Economies, forthcoming.


Iwata, Kazumasa (1998). "Zaisei Toyushi no Shorai (The Future of Fiscal Investment and
Loan Program)" in Kazumasa Iwata and Mitsuhiro Fukao, editors, Zaisei Toyushi no Keizai
Bunseki (Economic Analysis of the Fiscal Investment and Loan Program). Tokyo: Nihon
Keizai Shimbun-sha, p 245-97.


                                                                                            25
Kikkawa, Masahiro, Takeshi Sakai, and Hiroyuki Miyagawa (2000). "Soundness of the Fiscal
Investment and Loan Program," in Mitsuhiro Fukao, editor, Structural Problems of Japanese
Financial System. Tokyo: Japan Center for Economic Research, p 41-59.


Kono, Koretaka (1993). Zaisei Toyushi no Kenkyu (Research on the Fiscal Investment and
Loan Program). Tokyo: Zeimu Keiri Kyokai.


Matsuura, Katsumi (1990). "Zaisei Toyushi — Koteki Kin'yu — no Kenkyu (Analysis of
Fiscal Investment and Loan Program). Economic Analysis, 119: 1-80.


Nobuchi, Taku, and Hiroo Sasaki. 1999. "Tokushu Hojin To ga Hakkosuru Hi-seifu-hosho-sai
no 'Amnoku no Seifu Hosho' ni tsuite no Ichi Kosatsu" (A Study of 'Implicit Government
Guarantee' of Non-Government-Guaranteed Bonds Issued by Special Public Corporations)."
Financial Review 49: 167-88


Wallison, Peter J. (2001). "An American Looks at FILP," manuscript, American Enterprise
Institute.


Yoshida, Kazuo, and Sachio Konishi (1996). Tenkanki no Zaisei Toyushi (Fiscal Investment
and Loan Program in Transition). Tokyo: Yuhikaku.


The web sites for further data are:
www.econ.keio.ac.jp/staff/tdoi
www.irps.ucsd.edu/faculty/thoshi
www.nber.org/data/




                                                                                         26
Table 1

Sources of FILP Funds, March 2001

(billion yen and percents)


Line      Amount        Share      Source

—         439,663        83.1      Trust Fund Bureau Fund
4          61,658        11.6      Postal Life Insurance Fund
5           3,383         0.6      Industrial Investment Special Account
6          24,579         4.6      Government-guaranteed Bonds

          529,283         100      Total

Components of the Trust Fund Bureau (TFB) Fund

          Amount       Share       Share
                      of total     within TFB

1         247,008        46.7      56.7     Postal Savings
2         142,593        26.9      32.4     Pension Reserves
3          50,062         9.5      11.4     Others1

Line numbers refer to Figure 1.
1 Includes postal life insurance premiums collected during the fiscal year (which are
deposited into the TFB) and short-term deposits by some special accounts, as well as profits
and reserves at the TFB.

Source: Ministry of Finance (2001). FILP Report 2001.




                                                                                           27
Table 2

Uses of FILP Funds, March 2001

(billion yen and percents)


Line      Amount        Share      Use

10          7,279         1.4      General account (JNR loans)1
11         57,350        10.8      Postal Savings Special Account2
12          6,298         1.2      Other special accounts
13        259,617        49.0      FILP agencies3
14         87,270        16.5      Local government

–         417,814        78.9      FILP Plan total

15         72,682        13.7      Central government bonds4
–          38,787         7.3      Other5

          529,283         100      Total uses

          471,993            –     Total excluding Postal Savings SA

Line numbers refer to Figure 1.
1 TFB loans to the former Japan National Railroad (JNR) and former JNR Settlement Corp
(JNRSC), which the government assumed (see Box 1). Unlike other loans to the general
account, these are included in the formal FILP Plan.
2 Funds the TFB has loaned back to the postal savings system for it to invest directly. These
are excluded from the net total.
3 Includes ¥3,352 in contributed capital and ¥256,265 in loans.
4 Including JNR loans (note 1) the central government total is ¥79,961 billion.
5 Includes short-term loans (mainly to the Special Account for Grants of Allocation Tax
and Transfer Taxes [to local governments]) and certain financial investments with a maturity
of less than 5 years.

Data Source: FILP Report 2001.




                                                                                          28
Table 3

FILP Loans and Bond Guarantees, 31 March 2001

(billion yen)


# of recipients1    Amount         Originating lending source

           47       270,844        Trust Fund Bureau2
           32        61,658        Postal Life Insurance
            3            31        Industrial Investment SA

           51       332,533        Net total FILP loans2

           24        24,579        Government-guaranteed bonds

           57       357,112        Total

            1        57,350        Postal Savings SA loans

           58       414,462        Total FILP funds3


1 Number of recipients, counting local governments (which have TFB and PLI loans) as 1.
Not counting local governments and the Postal Savings SA (note 2), there are 50 recipients of
FILP loans and an additional 6 have bond guarantees but no loans.
2 Excludes funds the TFB has loaned back to the postal savings system for it to invest
directly. With them, loans from the TFB total ¥328,194 and total loans are ¥389,883.
3 Adding ¥3,352 in capital contributions to this yields the ¥417,814 FILP Plan total in
Table 2.

Source: This table is the column totals of Supplemental Table 1, which provides data (from
FILP Report 2001) on each of the 58 recipients. It is available on our web sites and the NBER
web site, listed at the end of the references.




                                                                                          29
Table 4

Distribution of FILP Plan by Target Area, Fiscal 2001

(percents)


    29.9     Housing
    19.9     Living environment
    16.1     Small and medium businesses
    11.2     Road construction
     4.8     Trade and economic cooperation
     3.9     Social welfare
     3.4     Regional development
     2.8     Education
     2.4     Agriculture1
     2.3     National land preservation2
     2.3     Transport and communication
     1.0     Industry and technology

The FILP plan total for the year was ¥32.5 trillion.

1      Includes forestry and fisheries.
2      Includes reconstruction in the event of disaster.

Cargill and Yoshino (2000, Table 8.3) show the uses of FILP funds by target areas from 1955
to 1998.




                                                                                        30
Table 5

Disclosed Bad Loans of FILP Agencies, 31 March 2001

(billion yen and percents)


     Bad Loans:       Loan Loss Reserve:
   yen1    % of         in      as % of          Name or type of agency and
           all loans2   yen bad loans3           number of agencies4

 1398         1.8        41          2.9      Government Housing Loan Corp
 3148         5.0      1629         51.8      Other gov't financial institutions (6)
  519         2.3       354         41.6      SPCs (18)
  534         4.9       465         87.0      Shoko Chukin Bank

 5599         3.2      2489         44.5      Total for all agencies

 5441         3.2      2262         41.6      Total for under-reserved agencies (21)


The absolute amount of under-reserving for each agency is included in Appendix Table 1.
Total under-reserving (the difference between bad loans in column 1 and reserves in column
3) is ¥3179 for under-reserved agencies. Including JFM (see Box 2), the total is ¥8251.
1 For government financial institutions and Shoko Chukin Bank, entries are for
risk-management loans. SPCs are allowed to use a less strict definition. For them, the figures
show amounts of loans past-due 6 months or more or loans to bankrupt entities that they report
with their balance sheets.
2 Bad loans as a percentage of total loans made.
3 An entry under 100% means the agency is under-reserved.
4 Only agencies that disclose non-performing loans are included.

Source: Summarized from Supplemental Table 3, which provides data specific to each agency.
It is available on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.




                                                                                           31
Table 6

Total Financial Losses of FILP Agencies with Losses, 31 March 2001

(billion yen)


 Number of        Amount
agencies with       of
each type of loss  loss             Source of loss

     22             8,251           Under-reserving of bad loans
     11            11,357           Over-valuing of assets
     28            11,657           Policy costs
      3              -228           Policy gains offsetting other losses

     34            31,037           Total


Source: Appendix Table 1, which gives data by agency.

Note: The total amount (¥31.0 trillion) is about 6% of GDP.




                                                                           32
Table 7

Expected Insolvency of Local Governments, 31 March 2001

(billion yen)

    Source of Funds:                                      Borrower, by type:
   JFM1          FILP             Total2       Prefect-        Cities &      Towns &
                                                 ures           wards         villages

       -                 -             -           47             693          2557            Number
   8,246.4          54,999.5           -            -               -              -           Total loaned
       -                 -       124,760.7     72,326.3        41,831.4       10,603.0         Total debt2

Loans to Insolvent Entities3                                                                   Scenario
                a
   6,160.4          42,331.1     105,775.5     69,546.4        29,767.3        6,461.8         1
   1,443.6          10,964.1      30,150.5     25,622.9         3,665.3          862.2         2
   5,207.6          36,199.1      94,659.8     66,656.9        23,244.4        4,758.5         3
   5,803.0          39,553.1      85,463.4     52,475.8        22,737.7       10,249.9         4
   4,389.8          31,785.9      64,891.2     46,115.2         9,135.7        9,640.2         5
   5,718.6          39,171.5      84,762.0     52,475.8        22,158.7       10,127.4         6

Expected Default4
                b
   5,072.5          35,201.8      89,517.4     61,862.5        22,633.4        5,021.5         1
     462.7           3,494.4       9,374.4      5,943.1         2,929.2          502.1         2
   4,397.3          30,317.1      76,342.5     53,983.2        18,316.4        4,042.8         3
   5,679.1          38,925.9      84,282.2     52,475.8        21,558.1       10,248.2         4
   4,263.1          31,178.8      63,617.2     46,089.4         7,931.4        9,596.3         5
   5,582.8          38,384.2      83,118.6     52,475.8        20,472.1       10,170.7         6


The scenarios are explained in the text. The analysis excludes local public enterprises because of
a lack of data. These enterprises have losses, so the estimates here are lower bounds.
1 JFM is the Japan Finance Corporation for Municipal Enterprises.
2 Total debt outstanding, defined as "local bonds" plus "contract-authorized liabilities" minus
"reserve" minus "net excess of revenue" at the end of fiscal 2000.
3 Sum of the debts of insolvent local governments, where insolvency is defined as debts
exceeding debt capacity. Debt capacity is the present discounted value of the expected level of
primary surplus, as explained in the text. A 4% discount rate is assumed.
4 Sum of the differences between total debts and debt capacities under each scenario. The
seniority of FILP and JFM loans are assumed to be the same as other liabilities.
a    Value for Loans to Insolvent Entities used in Table 8.
b Value for Expected Default used in Table 9.

Source: Authors' calculations.




                                                                                                33
Table 8

Bad Loans in the FILP, 31 March 2001

(trillion yen)

       Amount            Borrower

       7.3       JNR-related debt (Box 1)
     217.0       Insolvent agencies1
      42.3       Insolvent local governments (Table 7)

     266.6       Total


1 Insolvent agencies (that is, agencies with negative net capital) are listed in Appendix
Table 1. Their debt is included with their entries in Supplemental Table 1, which is available
on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.




                                                                                            34
Table 9

Expected Cost to Taxpayers, 31 March 2001

(trillion yen)


   Amount        Source

      7.3        JNR-related debt (Box 1)
     35.8        Cost to restore capital of FILP agencies
                 (Appendix Table 2), composed of:
                 12.4      Lost original capital
                 23.5      Cumlative operating losses in excess of original capital
     35.2        Expected default of local government debt (Table 7)

     78.3        Total


Note: The cost to restore capital of FILP agencies (¥35.8 trillion) in this table differs from the
total financial losses reported in Table 6 (¥31.0 trillion) because the figure in this table
includes the losses that are already reported on the agencies’ original balance sheets even
before we estimate the additional losses in Table 6.




                                                                                               35
Table 10

Sources and Uses of New Postal Savings Funds

(in billion yen)

    2001a     2002b

                         Sources of Funds:
 32,297      23,723      Matured TFB deposits
  8,223      15,393      Other1
-16,019      -3,848      Reduction in deposits2

24,501       35,267      Total

                         Uses of Funds:
15,800       13,600      FILP bonds
 1,200        7,950      Other JGB3
   450          450      Public corporation bonds
   550          550      Local government bonds
 1,000          980      Local government loans
   934          713      Loans to depositors
   400          400      Corporate bonds
    50           50      Foreign bonds
   750        2,350      Money trust4
 3,367        8,224      Short-term securities


1     Income from the investments made by postal savings on its own account.
2     Expected net withdrawals by depositors in the postal savings system.
3     Japanese government bonds.
4     This relates to the Postal Life Insurance Welfare Corp.

a     Fiscal year ending 2002 March 31.
b     Fiscal year ending 2003 March 31.

Source: www.yusei.go.jp/pressrelease/japanese/kawase/001224j301.html. Posted 24 Dec
2000, in Japanese. Heisei 13 / Heisei 14 nendo ni okeru Yubin Chokin Shikin Unyo Keikaku
(Postal Savings Fund Investment Plan for Fiscal 2001 / 2002).




                                                                                       36
Table 11

Use of FILP Agency Bonds

(in billion yen and percent)

    2001a     2002b

22,759        1,749       New FILP loans1
 1,006        2,487       New issues of FILP agency bonds
 4.4%        14.3%        Agency bonds as % of loans


1     Does not includes loans to the central government or to local governments.
a     Fiscal year ending 2002 March 31.
b     Fiscal year ending 2003 March 31.

Source: Heisei 14 nendo Zaisei Toyushi Keikaku (Fiscal 2002 FILP Plan) available at
www.mof.go.jp/seifuan14/zt004.pdf.




                                                                                      37
Table 12

Ratings of FILP Agency Bonds (May 2002)


S&P Moody R&I         Agency

AA- Aa1      AAA      Japanese government bonds (JGB)

AA-   Aa1    AAA      Japan Finance Corp for Municipal Enterprises
AA-   Aa1    AAA      Development Bank of Japan
AA-   Aa1    AAA      Japan Bank for International Cooperation
A+    Aa1       -     Japan Highway Public Corp
      Aa3       -     Hanshin Expressway Public Corp
             AA+      Japan Finance Corp for Small Business
             AA+      National Life Finance Corp
              AA      Agriculture, Forestry & Fisheries Finance Corp
              AA      Japan Railway Construction Public Corp
              AA      Metropolitan Expressway Public Corp
              AA      Promotion & Mutual Aid Corp for Private Schools
              AA      Social Welfare & Medical Service Corp
              AA      Water Resources Development Public Corp
              AA-     Corp for Advanced Transport & Technology
              AA-     Japan Scholarship Foundation
              AA-     New Tokyo International Airport Authority
               A+     Urban Development Corp

Sources: Moody's Japan (www.moodys.co.jp), Standard & Poor's
(www.standardpoors.com/japan), Rating & Investment Information (R&I) (www.r-i.co.jp).




                                                                                        38
                                        Figure 1. Structure of the FILP Before April 2001

                                                 Savers, Policy Holders, Taxpayers
                                                             Savings                                                            Premiums
                      Premiums
  National Taxes




                                                                                                                                4
                                                              Postal Savings




                                                                                                                Local Taxes
                                                   Special Account of Financial               General
                                        Invest      Liberalization Measures                   Account                               PLIF
                                                             Loans                               Deposits
                                   Financial                 11                                  1
                                    Market                                       Invest

                                                                                                        Loans
            Pension                     Deposits
                                                       Trust Fund Bureau Fund
            Reserves                       2
                                                                                                    Bonds
                                                                                         Loans
                                                                Deposits
                   Subsidy




                                          Bonds
                                                          Loans                                                                  Loans
                                          15
                                                                           Special              Subsidies
                                                                          Accounts
  Central                               Transfers
   Gov’t                                                                            12
  General
                                                                                Projects
  Account                                        Grants                                                          Local
                                                                                                              Governments
                                                                  and Capital
                                                                   Subsidies
                     and Capital




                                     Government                                   Projects
                      Subsidies




                                                                                                                                  14
                                     Guaranteed
   5
                                     Bonds                                                      Subsidies
                                                                                         13     and Capital                   Projects
                                     6

                                                                                                                                Loans
 IISA                                                      FILP Agencies
                     Loans




IISA Industrial Investment Special Account
PLIF Postal Life Insurance Fund

A box represents a sector or an institution involved in the FILP. The arrows indicate the direction
of the movement of funds, with solid lines indicating financial transactions and broken lines being
fiscal transfers. Numbers next to the lines refer to entries in Tables 1 and 2, which provide the yen
amounts represented by the lines.

                                                                                                                                           39
                                                Figure 2. Structure of the New FILP After April 2001

                                                                     Savers, Policy Holders, Taxpayers
                        Premiums                                              Savings                     Premiums




                                                                                                                                    Local Taxes
                     Pension                                                                                Postal Life
                                                                 Postal Savings
                     Reserves                                                                             Insurance Fund
                                                                 Invest
                      Subsidy




                                        Invest
                                                                                    Invest
                                        Financial
                                         Market
  National Taxes




                                                                                 Fiscal Loan Fund
                                                                  FILP
                                                                                                                      Bonds
                                                                 Bonds                                     Loans
                                                                                    Deposits
                                Bonds




                                                                               Loans
                                           FILP Agency Bonds




                                                                                               Special            Subsidies
                                                                                              Accounts
      Central                                                   Transfers
       Gov’t
      General
                                                                                                     Projects
      Account                                                        Grants                                                        Local
                                                                                                                                Governments
                                                                                       and Capital
     Appropriation




                                                                                        Subsidies
                        and Capital




                                                                                                       Projects
                         Subsidies




                                                               GGB




                                                                                                                  Subsidies
                                                                                                                  and Capital      Projects


 IISA                                                                            FILP Agencies
                       Loans



IISA                  Industrial Investment Special Account

A box represents a sector or an institution involved in the FILP.The arrows indicate the direction
of the movement of funds, with solid lines indicating financial transactions and broken lines being
fiscal transfers. The postal savings and the postal life insurance fund plan to buy bonds directly
from local governments, because most of the local governments would have trouble floating their
bonds in the market. The purchases of local bonds are not included in this figure.

                                                                                                                                                  40
          Figure 3. Yields on FILP Agency Bonds and JGBs (%, May 30, 2002)

2.5
                     YIELDJGB             YIELDSPC
2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
      0          1        2       3       4       5          6        7       8       9   10

                                              MAT

 Figure 4. Yields of FILP Agency Bonds and Government Guaranteed Public
                     Corporation Bonds (%, May 30, 2002)




      2.5
                          Government Guaranteed                  FILP Agency Bonds
      2.0

      1.5

      1.0

      0.5

      0.0
             0        1       2       3       4          5        6       7       8       9    10

                                                      Maturity


                                                                                                    41
Appendix Table 1
Total Financial losses of the FILP and Net Capital of FILP Agencies, 31 March 2001
(billion yen)

     Losses resulting from:
Under-       Over-
Reserved    Valued       Policy    Total      Gross        Net
Loans1      Assets2      Costs3   Losses4    Capital5     Capital6    Agency

                                                                      Government Financial Institutions
1356.7          -       -154.9    1201.8      -188.8      -1390.6     Government Housing Loan Corp
 500.9          -         43.6     544.5      -180.1       -724.6     National Life Finance Corp
 179.3          -         88.7     268.0       155.2       -112.8     Japan Finance Corp for Small Business
 149.5          -        499.0     648.5       244.8       -403.7     Agriculture Forestry & Fisheries Finance Corp
5072.5          -          9.3    5081.8      1324.7      -3757.1     Japan Finance Corp for Municipal Enterprises
 134.5          -          5.0     139.5        49.3        -90.2     Okinawa Development Finance Corp
 273.3          -        128.2     401.5      1616.2       1214.7     Development Bank of Japan
 281.2          -        723.1    1004.3      7338.2       6333.9     Japan Bank for International Cooperation

                                                                      Special Public Corporations
   40.3     1199.4      1234.2    2473.9       417.4      -2056.5     Urban Development Corp
   29.6        -         325.7     355.3      -819.8      -1175.1     Pension Welfare Service Public Corp
   10.1        -           -        10.1      1508.9       1498.8     Employment & Human Resources Development Org
    0.0      165.2        36.5     201.7       -15.8       -217.5     Japan Environment Corp
    -         43.1       -10.7      32.4       107.7         75.3     Teito Rapid Transit Authority
    5.3        -          78.7      84.0       134.8         50.8     Japan Regional Development Corp
    -         37.0        74.7     111.7        -7.4       -119.1     Japan Sewage Works Agency
   16.2        -          69.6      85.8       297.8        212.0     Social Welfare & Medical Service Corp
    5.4        -           4.9      10.3      3315.2       3304.9     Promotion & Mutual Aid Corp. for Private Schools of Japan
    9.7        -         104.9     114.6       -77.8       -192.4     Japan Scholarship Foundation
    0.1        -        1374.3    1374.4       686.1       -688.3     Japan Green Resources Corp
    4.7        -           -         4.7       107.4        102.7     Japan Intl Cooperation Agency
    -       4445.1      3461.5    7906.6      6109.1      -1797.5     Japan Highway Public Corp
    -       1107.2       371.2    1478.4       994.8       -483.6     Metropolitan Expressway Public Corp

                                                                                                                                  42
   -          475.6       270.9        746.5        187.1        -559.4       Hanshin Expressway Public Corp
   -          648.4       630.6       1279.0       -623.0       -1902.0       Honshu-Shikoku Bridge Authority
   0.0       2553.4         2.0       2555.4       -645.8       -3201.2       Japan Railway Construction Public Corp
   -          218.6       -62.0        156.6        282.9         126.3       New Tokyo International Airport Authority
   6.7          -           3.3         10.0        962.8         952.8       Corp for Advanced Transport & Technology
   -          464.0       235.4        699.4         42.3        -657.1       Water Resources Development Public Corp
   4.2          -           -            4.2         10.9           6.7       Fund for Promotion and Development of Amami Isles
   1.5          -           0.6          2.1         25.5          23.4       Metal Mining Agency of Japan
 100.2          -        1824.2       1924.4       1474.9        -449.5       Japan National Oil Corp
   -            -           -            -        -3489.0       -3489.0       Postal Life Insurance Welfare Corp

                                                                              Special Firms
   69.3          -         53.2        122.5        608.5         486.0       Shoko Chukin Bank
    -            -          2.2          2.2        419.1         416.9       Kansai International Airport Co Ltd
    -            -          1.3          1.3         26.3          25.0       Org for Promoting Urban Development

8,251.3    11,357.0    11,429.2a    31,037.4           -            -         Total
    -           -           -            -        -6,047.5    -23,467.2       Total for negative capital


1    Under-reserved bad loans are from Supplemental Table 3, column 1 minus column 3. An entry of 0.0 means the agency's non-performing loans
were found by our analysis to be fully reserved.
2    Over-valued assets are from Supplemental Table 4, column 2 minus column 3.
3    Policy costs numbers are found in FILP Report 2001 Extension Volume: Policy cost Analysis of FILP Projects FY2001 and at
www.mof.go.jp/english/zaito/zaito2001e-exv/exv-index.htm.
4    Total losses are the sum of the first 3 columns.
5    Gross capital is from the agency's Administrative Cost Statement where available, otherwise from its original balance sheet. These are reported
on Supplemental Table 2.
6    Net capital is gross capital minus total losses.
a    Composed of ¥11,656.8 in policy costs from 28 agencies and ¥227.6 in policy benefits from 3 agencies.
Five special accounts and one special firm do not publish balance sheets regularly, so they are excluded from our analysis. These are noted on
Supplemental Table 1

Supplemental Tables are available on our web sites and the NBER web site, listed at the end of the references.

                                                                                                                                                 43
Appendix Table 2
Government Capital and Public Funds Already Lost, 31 March 2001
(billion yen and percents)

Government capital                  Public loss of:
 %1          Yen2        Original
                         capital3        Other4       Total    Agency
                                                               Government Financial Institutions
100         166.2       166.2   *       1390.6        1578.8   Government Housing Loan Corp
100         321.9       321.9   *        724.6        1046.5   National Life Finance Corp
100         410.9       410.9   *        112.8         523.7   Japan Finance Corp for Small Business
100         311.1       311.1   *        403.7         714.8   Agriculture Forestry & Fisheries Finance Corp
100          16.6        16.6   *       3757.1        3773.7   Japan Finance Corp for Municipal Enterprises
100          63.2        63.2   *         90.2         153.4   Okinawa Development Finance Corp
100        1039.4         0                0             0     Development Bank of Japan
100        6986.2       652.3              0           652.3   Japan Bank for International Cooperation

                                                               Special Public Corporations
 99.3       683.0       683.0   *       2056.5        2739.5   Urban Development Corp
100        1075.4      1075.4   *       1175.1        2250.5   Pension Welfare Service Public Corp
100        2118.4       620.2              0           620.2   Employment & Human Resources Development Org
 78.8        15.6        15.6   *        217.5         233.1   Japan Environment Corp
 53.4        31.0         0                0             0     Teito Rapid Transit Authority
100         135.8        85.0              0            85.0   Japan Regional Development Corp
 55.4         1.5         1.5   *        119.1         120.6   Japan Sewage Works Agency
100         292.6        80.6              0            80.6   Social Welfare & Medical Service Corp
100         723.1       371.9              0           371.9   Labor Welfare Corp
 95.4        51.5        30.9              0            30.9   Org for Pharmaceutical Safety & Research
100          48.7         0                0             0     Promotion & Mutual Aid Corp. for Private Schools of Japan
100           3.7         3.7   *        192.4         196.1   Japan Scholarship Foundation
 99.9      1257.7       110.2              0           110.2   Japan Small & Medium Enterprise Corp
100         675.9       675.9   *        688.3        1364.2   Japan Green Resources Corp
100         132.6        29.9              0            29.9   Japan Intl Cooperation Agency
 92.8        70.3        49.6              0            49.6   Bio-oriented Technology Research Advancement Inst
                                                                                                                           44
100          1980.1         1980.1     *    1797.5        3777.6          Japan Highway Public Corp
 50           298.5          298.5     *     483.6         782.1          Metropolitan Expressway Public Corp
 50           235.1          235.1     *     559.4         794.5          Hanshin Expressway Public Corp
 67.5         516.9          516.9     *    1902.0        2418.9          Honshu-Shikoku Bridge Authority
 99.5          64.2           64.2     *    3201.2        3265.4          Japan Railway Construction Public Corp
100           284.7          158.4             0           158.4          New Tokyo International Airport Authority
 88.1          20.8            0               0             0            Corp for Advanced Transport & Technology
 99.1         382.5          217.9             0           217.9          Telecommunications Advancement Org of Japan
100             2.4            2.4     *     657.1         659.5          Water Resources Development Public Corp
 63.1           7.2            3.0             0             3.0          Fund for Promotion & Development of the Amami Isles
100            23.7            0.3             0             0.3          Metal Mining Agency of Japan
 84.9        1636.8         1636.8     *     449.5        2086.3          Japan National Oil Corp
 99.98        548.3          384.7             0           384.7          Japan Science & Technology Corp
 96.9         319.9          265.9             0           265.9          Information-Technology Promotion Agency
 94.5         305.6          252.2             0           252.2          Japan Key Technology Center
 56.7          57.6            1.0             0             1.0          Industrial Structure Improvement Fund
 72.4           9.5            0.2             0             0.2          New Energy & Industrial Technology Development
100           442.2          442.2     *    3489.0        3931.2          Postal Life Insurance Welfare Corp

                                                                          Special Firms
 79.8         394.1            6.3              0            6.3          Shoko Chukin Bank
 66.7         394.7          116.6              0          116.6          Kansai International Airport Co Ltd

                          12,380.4         23,467.2     35,847.6          Totals

Not all institutions with government capital contributions are FILP agencies. This table covers only FILP agencies.

1    Government's percentage share of paid-in (contributed) capital.
2    Amount of government contribution on the agency's balance sheet. This includes any contributions through the Industrial Investment
Special Account (IISA), which are included in the formal FILP plan, as well contributions directly from the general account and from other
special accounts, which are not included in the FILP plan.
3    Government's loss of its original capital. If net capital (Appendix Table 1 column 6) is negative (as is the case for 20 agencies), all the
government contribution to the corporation is considered lost. These cases are indicated by an *.

                                                                                                                                             45
      If net capital is positive but smaller than the government contribution (as is the case for 20 agencies), the net loss is the government's
share of net capital minus its contribution (column 4). The government's share of net capital is column 1 (as a decimal) times Appendix Table
1 column 6. In 7 cases, the government did not provide 100% of capital.
4     Government's share of losses that exceed its original capital contribution. The assumption is that all loans to insolvent FILP recipients
eventually will be taken over by the government (as has already happened for the former JNR), while non-governmental contributors of
capital will lose no more than their original capital.
      For insolvent corporations (marked with *), the additional loss is the amount of negative net capital from Appendix Table 1 column 6.
For solvent corporations, it is the amount by which the government's share of net capital is less than its contribution (column 4). The
government's share of net capital is column 1 (as a decimal) times Appendix Table 1 column 6.




                                                                                                                                             46
