NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVE OF JAPAN’S
CORPORATE GROUPS AND THEIR PROSPECTS
Yishay Yafeh
Working Paper 9386
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9386
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

This essay was written during visits to the Saïd Business School and the Nissan Institute, University of
Oxford, and to the Eitan Berglass School of Economics, Tel Aviv University, whose hospitality is gratefully
acknowledged. I am extremely grateful to Masaharu Hanazaki of Hitotsubashi University and to Hideaki
Miyajima of Waseda University for assistance in gaining access to Japanese data sources, to Colin Mayer for
the industry growth data and to Nao Saito and Anat Tamir for research assistance. I am also grateful to the
Editors of the NBER volume on Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan, and to Larry Meissner, Sumner
la Croix, and participants of an NBER conference held in Tokyo for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Yishay Yafeh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

An International Perspective of Japan's Corporate Groups and their Prospects
Yishay Yafeh
NBER Working Paper No. 9386
December 2002
JEL No. G3, I2
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the literature on corporate groups in Japan and elsewhere, and offers a
comparison of Japan's corporate groups with groups in other developed and developing countries.
It then proceeds to examine the evolution of corporate groups in Japan since the mid-1970s. The
main conclusions that emerge are that: 1. Empirical evidence on the economic roles of corporate
groups in Japan is limited. 2. Japanese groups are, in some respects, quite similar to groups in other
countries, but their risk and return characteristics differ substantially. 3. There is little to suggest that
over the past thirty years groups have had a major impact on Japan's industrial structure. In view of
these findings, and because there is no evidence that Japanese groups (unlike those in some other
countries) enjoy any particular political clout, it is unlikely that corporate groups will constitute an
impediment to structural change in Japan.

Yishay Yafeh
School of Business Administration
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem 91905, Israel
msyafeh@pluto.mscc.huji.ac.il
and
Economics Department
University of Montreal
C.P. 6128, Succursale
Centre-ville, Montral
H3C 3J7, CANADA
yishay.yafeh@umontreal.ca

Academic and popular views of the keiretsu, as postwar Japanese corporate groups are
sometimes called, range from complete dismissal to admiration of their influence,
whether it is alleged to enhance economic growth or to restrict entry into the Japanese
market. During the 1990s, cross-shareholding arrangements within groups, and ties
between ailing financial institutions and their client firms, have often been mentioned as
potential impediments to structural change, especially with respect to the introduction of
market-based means of corporate finance and governance.
The present paper has three objectives. The first is to review the literature on
corporate groups in Japan and elsewhere, summarizing the evidence on the economic
roles (if any) corporate groups have played in the Japanese economy. The second
objective is to present, for the first time, a comparison of Japanese groups and corporate
groups in other developed and developing countries. The main conclusion emerging
from this comparison is that Japanese groups, while similar to groups elsewhere in some
respects, are different in their risk and return characteristics. The third objective is to
describe the evolution of Japan’s groups since the mid-1970s and to examine whether or
not groups constitute an impediment to structural change in Japan.
With some exceptions, there is limited evidence of the economic importance of
corporate groups in postwar Japan. There is also little to suggest that groups have had a
major impact on growth rates of particular industries, and no evidence that Japanese
groups (unlike those in other countries) enjoy any particular political clout. It is
therefore unlikely that corporate groups will constitute an impediment to structural
change.
Powerful, family controlled, pyramidal groups (zaibatsu) existed in Japan from
the late 19th century to just after World War II. Our focus here, however, is on corporate
groups in postwar Japan. These are usually divided into two types. The first consist of
firms operating in many industries, with large financial institutions (a city bank, a trust
bank, and insurance companies) at the core. These are variously termed horizontal,
financial, or bank-centered groups. There are six major groups of this type, three with
zaibatsu roots.
The second type consists of a large manufacturer and related suppliers within the
same industry or in closely related sectors. These are often described as vertical or
manufacturer-centered groups. Examples include Toyota or Hitachi.
The discussion here focuses mostly on bank-centered groups. First I review the
literature on corporate groups in general, and then evaluate the empirical evidence on
the economic importance of Japan’s corporate groups. I then make a cross-sectional
comparison between Japanese corporate groups and those in other countries, and
describe the evolution of groups in Japan over time, including their prospects.

1. Identifying Corporate Groups
The criteria used to define the boundaries of a group and to identify members vary
considerably across countries and studies (Khanna 2000). In most countries, including
Japan, membership is typically informal. (Exceptions include Italy, where the law
identifies “common control” (see Bianchi et al. 2001) and Chile, where groups are legal
entities.)
Still, the literature has struggled to provide a definition - or at least definitions
for each country. Leff (1978, p 673) put forward “a group of companies that does
business in different markets under a common administrative or financial control,” but
this is clearly inappropriate in postwar Japan, where groups lack common control.
Strachan (1976) defines a group as a long-term association of firms and the people who
own and manage them, and points out that a group cannot be identified purely on the
basis of a single metric. The criteria used to identify membership in Japanese groups
have mostly been based on measures of long-term relations among member firms.
1.1 Origins of Japanese Groups
The prewar and war-time economy of Japan was dominated by large, diversified
conglomerates (zaibatsu). At war’s end the four major zaibatsu represented about a
quarter of paid-in capital and a much larger shares in finance and heavy industries
(Hoshi and Kashyap 2001, p 69 Box 3.5, and Hadley 1970). The zaibatsu were familyowned conglomerates, controlled through holding companies which in turn held a large
number of shares in a first tier of subsidiaries. First-tier subsidiaries controlled a second
tier of companies, and so forth, forming a pyramid of firms. Horizontal ownership and
personnel ties between group firms were also common.1
Following Japan’s defeat in 1945, the US occupation authorities (Supreme
Commander for the Allied Powers = SCAP) regarded the zaibatsu as an important part
of the Japanese social and economic structure that was responsible for the war. In
particular, the market power of the zaibatsu and the tremendous wealth of the founding
families made the dissolution of the conglomerates one of the first and most important
targets of the Occupation reforms.
1

Okazaki (2001) argues that the zaibatsu were not powerful enough to “dominate” the Japanese economy

before the start of World War II, but during the war they increased market power and played an important
role in providing military equipment and supplies to the Japanese Imperial Army.

The zaibatsu dissolution reforms started soon after the end of the war and ended
around 1950. The holding companies were dismantled and new ones prohibited by law,
the founding families were stripped of their shares, and many of the incumbent
managers were purged and barred from corporate office. The resulting change of
ownership was of enormous scale: some estimates suggest that over 40% of all
corporate assets in Japan changed hands (Bisson 1954). The shares transferred were
resold by the Holding Companies Liquidation Commission (HCLC) using several
methods designed to guarantee disperse ownership structure (see Hadley 1970, p 18187). Indeed, following the conclusion of the reforms, shareholding by individuals in
Japan reached an all time high of approximately 70% around 1949 (Aoki 1988).
Despite the hopes of the Occupation, the newly created ownership structure
proved unstable. With the reopening of the Tokyo Stock Exchange in 1949, individuals
who received shares during the reforms (especially company employees and residents of
cities where the companies operated) began to sell, and individual shareholding began
to decline. By the early 1950s a new ownership structure had emerged: most companies
were owned by other companies and by financial institutions, most notably large
commercial banks (“city banks”).
Ownership ties were sometimes part of reciprocal cross-shareholdings, often
along the lines of the former zaibatsu - especially among what had been the three
largest: Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Sumitomo (see Hoshi 1994, Yafeh 1995). These ties
were further reinforced in the late 1960s, and “new” groups centered on major (city)
banks were formed (Dai-Ichi Bank and Nippon Kangyo Bank, which later merged to
form the DKB group, Fuji, and Sanwa).
There are several possible reasons why the period of dispersed ownership was so
short. Individuals may have been too poor and too risk averse to wish to hold equity,
and preferred to increase their consumption or save in the form of bank accounts rather
than hold shares.
Another reason asserted by many authors (for example, Miyajima 1994) is that
the reformed firms were exposed to hostile takeovers once their zaibatsu shareholders
were removed. Low equity prices soon after the war are posited to have made Japanese
firms easy targets. In order to prevent this, managers sought to establish a friendly,
stable ownership structure dominated by firms associated with each other in the prewar
period. However, it is not clear who the potential raiders could have been.
An alternative explanation for the short life of extensive individual ownership is
simply that it was inefficient. Yafeh (1995) shows that, other things equal, the greater
the percentage of a firm’s outstanding shares expropriated and resold by the Occupation,
the worse was the firm’s performance in the early 1950s. This is consistent with the

view that large shareholders play an important role in corporate governance (Shleifer
and Vishny 1986). Concentrated family ownership did not reappear, apparently because
the “old wealth” of the prewar period had been destroyed by the reforms.
The efficiency argument is less likely to explain the reinforcement of crossshareholding in the 1960s. Then, some fear of hostile takeovers was plausible as Japan
opened to foreign capital.
1.2 Who is a Group Member?
Unlike the prewar zaibatsu, postwar groups in Japan have no central control, and
identifying affiliation with a group is not straightforward. Core members typically take
part in “presidents’ clubs,” which are regular meetings of senior executives. Members of
these clubs are easy to identify, and constitute about 10% of all listed manufacturing
firms in Japan (Weinstein and Yafeh 1995).
Beyond the presidents’ club, researchers have used a variety of measures to
identify group members. Commonly used definitions are those of three major
publications: Keizai Chosa Kyokai’s Keiretsu no Kenkyu, Toyo Keizai’s Kigyo Keiretsu
Soran, and Dodwell Marketing Consultants’ Industrial Groupings in Japan. These
weigh various aspects of the relationship between a firm and other group members,
most notably the extent and stability of cross-shareholding arrangements, and the extent
and stability of credit and equity relations maintained with the group’s main financial
institutions. The frequency of personnel exchange appears to be a relatively less
important component.
The existing weighting schemes (and the corresponding data sources) usually
concur as far as the identification of core group members is concerned, but may differ
considerably in defining the boundaries of groups. Thus, Weinstein and Yafeh (1995)
find the correlation between the lists of members identified by different sources to be
not very high although all commonly used definitions suggest that group affiliated
companies constitute some 40% to 50% of all listed manufacturing firms. Gibson
(1995), looking at bank-firm ties in the early 1990s without reference to groups,
suggests that several plausible methods agree on the identity of the “main bank” of most
companies, although his methodology is not designed for identifying members in bankcentered groups.
While credit relationships within groups are fairly easy to interpret, the
prevalence and significance of equity ties is more controversial. The extent of equity
ties reported by different sources varies within the group definition used. Mitsubishi and
Sumitomo presidents’ club member firms had around 25% of their equity held by other
group firms in 1990, whereas the corresponding figures for other groups hover around

15% to 16% (Sheard 1997). Figures for non-presidents’ clubs firms are typically
substantially lower.
Most of the equity ties within the groups involve the group’s financial
institutions (banks and insurance companies). By contrast, equity ties between
manufacturing firms are usually low (with equity stakes that are often less than 1%).
The meaning of these ties, which are unusually stable in spite of their small size, has
been harder to interpret (see Flath 1993, Miwa and Ramseyer 2001a, and further
discussion below).
The empirical literature on Japan has often treated bank-firm relations and group
affiliation as one and the same. To a great extent, this is because the available
definitions of group affiliation focus on ties with the group’s main bank. Thus, a large
number of empirical studies actually rely on group data to suggest that long term bankfirm relationships may matter for corporate governance, mitigation of informational
asymmetries between the firm and its financiers, and the resolution of financial distress.
(On the Japanese main bank system, see Aoki and Patrick 1994, Hoshi and Kashyap
2001, especially chapter 4).

2. Reasons for Groups to Exist
The literature on corporate groups has so far not reached an agreement on the most
important reasons for the ubiquity of groups around the world. This section therefore
begins with an evaluation of “positive” explanations for the existence of groups
(viewing them as efficient solutions to various market imperfections) and their
relevance to Japan. It then proceeds to discuss “negative” views of corporate groups
(such as political rent-seeking and expropriation of minority shareholders) and to
examine their applicability to Japan.
2.1 Reducing Transaction Costs
Corporate groups may be important for reducing transaction costs associated with intragroup trade. Applying this idea to Japan, Flath (1993) argues that cross-shareholding
arrangements help reduce moral hazard risks among trading partners, thus facilitating
transaction-specific investments. Yet empirical evidence in support of this argument is
rather scarce (Flath provides some), and it appears that the volume of intra-group trade
within the bank-centered groups is rather low. Sheard (1997) estimates average intragroup sales at about 2% excluding the group’s general trading company, which account
for another 6+%. Odagiri (1992, p 182) reports that, in 1981 on average 20% of a group

firm’s sales and 12% of its purchases were within-group transactions.
By contrast, intra-group trade and transaction-specific investments may be a
major factor explaining the structure and performance of manufacturer-centered
(vertical) groups, where joint development of new products and just-in-time supply of
inputs are crucial. Indeed, there is substantial evidence that manufacturer-centered
groups combine insurance and incentives in a way that is designed to reduce hold-up
problems through long-term relations without full vertical integration (Kawasaki and
MacMillan 1987, Asanuma 1989, Fujimoto 1999).
2.2 Coordinating Investment
Groups may facilitate major investments by providing a mechanism for coordination
across firms and industries. They may therefore be of help in orchestrating a “big push.”
Thus, Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973) view the zaibatsu as an important component in
prewar Japan’s ability to absorb foreign technology, which could be spread across group
members.
Goto (1982) argues that the reason groups are observed in a market economy
like Japan is their ability to coordinate R&D and new investments. A weaker
formulation of this hypothesis is that groups share information about investment
opportunities, even if group members carry out investment decisions independently.
Although this is not impossible, this conjecture is hard to test empirically and has never
been formally examined.
Systematic evidence on joint investments and R&D among members of Japan’s
postwar groups is not available. There is little in the literature on inter-firm coordination
in R&D and technology absorption to suggest that the bank-centered groups have
played a particularly important role in this respect (although there is some evidence on
the importance of vertical groups: see Branstetter 2000, Okada 2001).
Montalvo and Yafeh (1994) find that group-affiliated firms signed more
licensing agreements to import foreign technology into Japan in the late 1970s. There
are several possible interpretations for this result, however. It is possible that groupaffiliated firms enjoyed easy access to capital from financial institutions within the
group. It is also possible that group firms signed more licensing contracts because they
were less involved in independent R&D activity, perhaps as a result of pressure by the
group’s main bank to adopt low-risk investment strategies.
Using survey data from the late 1990s, Mayer, Schoors, and Yafeh (2002) note
that venture capital funds in Japan often are owned by firms related to each other, as
part of one of the groups or otherwise. They do not discuss the impact of this
characteristic on fund performance.

2.3 Substituting for Missing Institutions
Khanna and Palepu (1999) suggest groups in India and other developing countries make
up for missing institutions, such as those enforcing property rights, as well as markets
for skilled labor, management, and capital. This, they argue, is a plausible explanation
for the evidence of superior performance of group members in India and other emerging
markets, especially when groups exceed a certain size (or diversification) threshold.
This extended suggestions in the early descriptive literature that groups made up
most notably for imperfect capital markets (for example, Leff 1978). Perotti and Gelfer
(2001) argue that Russian financial-industrial groups (FIGs) manage an internal capital
market that may add value in the face of inefficient external capital markets in that
country. In addition, there is some evidence that internal capital markets in the Korean
jaebol create value (Chang and Hong 2000).
Applied to skilled labor and management, the missing-institution argument
could perhaps be related to the zaibatsu, which trained a generation of prewar Japanese
executives, but it is more difficult to apply it to the postwar experience, and it is not
supported by in any Japan-specific study.
Applied to under-developed capital markets, the missing-institution argument is
undermined by the absence of evidence indicating efficient allocation of capital within
the Japanese corporate groups, whose growth rates and other measures of performance
have not been superior to those of non-group firms. Nevertheless, some relations
between the postwar corporate groups and certain aspects of capital markets (risk
sharing and corporate governance) are discussed below. In addition, Hoshi, Kashyap,
and Scharsfetin (1990, 1991), argue that investment decisions of group affiliated
companies are less sensitive to their cash flow positions than investment decisions of
non-group firms, and also that some unnecessary bankruptcies are prevented within the
groups. This could be viewed as evidence that groups do make up for some deficiencies
of imperfect capital markets in the allocation of capital.
2.4 Providing Mutual Insurance
One function of capital markets that has been associated with corporate groups is the
provision of mutual insurance opportunities for member firms. This idea originates in
the literature on Japanese groups, where several studies suggest that groups provide an
organizational mechanism through which risks are shared. A theoretical formulation of
this hypothesis by Aoki (1988) suggests that employees with firm-specific human
capital cannot easily protect themselves against adverse shocks and therefore appreciate
risk reduction through firm relations with other firms within a corporate group, and

especially with the group’s main bank.
Nakatani (1984) provides empirical support for the claim that Japanese corporate
groups provide a low-profit and low-volatility environment. Kashyap (1989) suggests
that the low volatility of profits documented by Nakatani is a result of intra-group trade
relations (and therefore is not a characteristic of final-good producers within the
groups).
There is evidence on a particular form of risk sharing under the auspices of the
main bank within the big-six groups, namely, assistance during financial distress. For
example, Sheard (1989) documents a variety of cases in which banks rescued ailing
clients, typically within their group and often with the assistance of other group
members. Hoshi and Kashyap (2001, chapter 5) discuss bank interventions.
Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) argue that members of bank-centered Japanese
groups adopt low-risk investment strategies, although the motivation for this behavior
is, in their view, related not to risk sharing but to the (excessive) influence that the group
bank and other creditors exert on group firms. Khanna and Yafeh (2001) conduct a
battery of risk-sharing tests among corporate groups in Japan and elsewhere, and find
consistent evidence for mutual insurance among member firms of Japanese (and
Korean) corporate groups, in contrast with most of the other countries they examine.
Thus, while there is limited evidence on other possible economic roles of
corporate groups in Japan, the risk-sharing hypothesis does enjoy some empirical
support. Further, this mutual insurance feature seems to distinguish Japanese groups
from most corporate groups in emerging markets. The sociological literature has also
emphasized risk sharing within Japan’s corporate groups (for example, Lincoln et al
1996). But, the evidence on risk sharing within corporate groups in Japan has not been
unchallenged (see Beason 1998, Kang and Stulz 2000, and Miwa and Ramseyer 2001a,
2001b). Further discussion on risk and return within groups is included below.
2.5 Corporate Governance
Another capital market function that has sometimes been associated with Japanese
corporate groups is corporate governance. For example, group members are viewed as
important in the theoretical corporate governance model of Berglof and Perotti (1994).
Yet, overall, empirical support for the special role of groups in corporate governance
appears to be limited. There is much evidence on the role of main banks, typically
within corporate groups, in disciplining managers of distressed firms, and in
restructuring their operations (Yafeh 2000, Hoshi and Kashyap 2001). There is also
some evidence on the role of large shareholders (often part of the group) in corporate
governance, again mostly with respect to poorly performing companies (Kang and

Shivdasani 1995, 1997). Yafeh and Yosha (2002) provide some evidence for the role of
large shareholders in corporate governance in companies whose performance is normal.
There is very little to suggest that corporate groups contribute to corporate governance
beyond the roles played by the group banks and by large shareholders (although it is
perhaps possible to argue that the group provides a framework in which main banks and
large shareholders operate).
2.6 Monopoly Power
The fear that groups with “deep pockets” may drive more focused (smaller) competitors
out of the market is not new, and was one of the motivations for the American
occupation authorities’ drive to dissolve the zaibatsu (Yafeh 1995). While groups in
some countries (for example, Korea) do appear to dominate markets, the general
evidence on the relation between market power and corporate groups is weak. Encaoua
and Jacquemin (1982) find little evidence of monopolization by French groups.
Lawrence (1993) argues that Japanese groups constitute a barrier to entry because they
prefer to purchase inputs from other group members, and thus restrict competition by
foreign firms. The evidence on the limited extent of intra-group trade is inconsistent
with this argument and, moreover, Lawrence’s empirical evidence in support of this
argument is not fully convincing (Saxonhouse 1993).
Weinstein and Yafeh (1995) use an industrial organization framework to
examine the relation between the intensity of competition and the market share of
Japanese bank-centered groups. They suggest that, if anything, group members tend to
compete more aggressively than other firms; although fierce competition may well
constitute a barrier to entry, there is no evidence of collusion among group members at
the expense of “outsiders.”
2.7 Political Rent Seeking
As in prewar Japan, the origins of corporate groups and their initial growth in many
countries were influenced by close ties with the government. The zaibatsu emerged in
the 1880s as part of the Matsukata privatization of government-owned assets and
expanded to a large extent through government contracts and procurement. Groups in
India emerged after independence when businessman with government ties acquired
assets that had belonged to the British. In Korea the jaebol were formed under the
auspices of the government and started off by using assets left at the end of the Japanese
colonial period. Such close government ties have prompted accusations that corporate
groups derive benefits from rent seeking and government favors, and are therefore
inefficient. Fisman (2001) finds explicit evidence for this in Indonesia.

There are no studies linking postwar Japanese groups with corruption or specific
government favors and contracts. Industrial policy was notoriously conducted at the
industry level and no firm-specific subsidies were given (Johnson 1982). Corruption
scandals have not involved group-affiliated firms more than other corporations, and
corporate groups have never been mentioned as part of any political party’s
constituency. (For the ruling LDP, these traditionally are thought of as being farmers,
small shop owners, and perhaps the construction industry).
One measure of government-business ties in Japan is the practice of amakudari,
the transfer of bureaucrats from the government to the private sector. van Rixtel (2002)
finds that firms within corporate groups are less likely to receive amakudari than other
firms.
2.8 Expropriation of Minority Shareholders
A growing literature has blamed corporate groups with the expropriation of minority
shareholders. Claessens et al. (1999) argue that groups are associated with minority
shareholder expropriation in Asia. Similarly, Johnson et al. (2000), as well as Bertrand
et al. (2002) view groups as institutions that are associated with poor protection of
property rights and enable “tunneling” of funds from minority shareholder to the
controlling party. This argument is unlikely to be particularly relevant to Japan, most
notably because Japanese groups do not have a controlling shareholder, and also
because, according to the commonly used La Porta et al. (1998) classification, the legal
protection of minority shareholders in Japan is, by international standards, not bad.
Even though some cases in which unhappy Japanese shareholders sued corrupt
corporations have been reported in the press, there is little systematic evidence to
suggest that group-affiliated firms in Japan be particularly prone to minority shareholder
expropriation.2
2.9 Summary
Much has been written on Japan’s corporate groups, and yet concrete evidence (positive
or negative) on their economic importance is surprisingly scarce. Only the groups’ role
in mutual risk sharing has received some empirical support. In addition, there is much
evidence that large shareholders (often within a corporate group), and main bank
2

Ando, Christelis, and Miyagawa (2002) observe that Japanese shareholders are in a weak position
relative to management, which, they argue, has been able to pursue non-profit maximization objectives.
The concern here is in the spirit of the “tunneling” literature (Johnson et al. 2000), focusing on how
insider, usually majority, shareholders treat other shareholders, especially within corporate groups.
According to the standard measures of statutory legal protection used in the recent finance literature,
Japanese minority shareholders enjoy many of the legal protection measures of common law countries.

relationships (also typically within a corporate group) are often important for corporate
governance, although there is little to suggest the importance of the group structure per
se. It is therefore possible to conclude that the limited evidence on Japan’s corporate
groups is (weakly) consistent with the positive views of corporate groups as substitutes
for missing (capital market and other) institutions.

3. Comparing Groups in Japan and Elsewhere
This section compares Japan’s corporate groups with groups in other countries. They, of
course, may differ substantially in structure and mode of operation but, at the same
time, have many common features (most notably cross shareholding). The main thrust
of the comparison is that Japanese groups are not unique in structure, but are perhaps
“special” in their (low) risk and (low) return characteristics. Because of data constraints,
and perhaps also because groups are less common in developed economies, most of the
countries included in this comparison are “emerging markets,” although some
comparisons will be made with Italian groups.
3.1 A First Look
Table 1 describes corporate groups in Japan and in a several emerging markets. The
fraction of firms classified as group affiliated ranges from about a fifth in Chile and
Venezuela to about two-thirds in Indonesia. In Italy more than half of all industrial
companies belong to pyramidal groups (Bianchi et al. 2001). In Japan, members of
presidents’ clubs account for fewer than 10% of listed manufacturing firms, whereas
other group definitions (for example, those of Dodwell Marketing Consultants and
Keiretsu no Kenyu) identify close to a half of all listed manufacturing firms as members.
Thus, in terms of overall prevalence groups, Japan does not seem to be different.
Table 1 also indicates that in Japan, as well as in virtually all the other countries
for which data are available (Turkey being the only exception), group affiliated firms
are larger than unaffiliated firms. Difference in median size between presidents’ clubs
members and other firms are somewhat bigger than differences in means - the mean size
of presidents’ clubs members is about seven times that of non-members. The mean size
of firms that are classified as group affiliated by Dodwell is about 50% larger than the
size of unaffiliated firms.
This pattern is very pronounced in Italy as well, where large firms are
predominantly group affiliated: over 99% of firms with over 1000 employees are group
members, as are about 89% of the firms with 500-1000 employees. By contrast, less

than 40% of small firms (fewer than 100 employees) are group members (Bianchi et al.
2001).
3.2 Group Organization and Location across Industries
Japan’s postwar corporate groups are different from groups in many other countries in
the conspicuous absence of a centralized decision-making mechanism. Without holding
companies (legally banned between the end of World War II and 1998) or other formal
joint control mechanism, it is hard to expect groups to coordinate their activities very
extensively. This is in sharp contrast with Italian groups, where an elaborate pyramid
structure guarantees centralized control; indeed, Bianchi et al. (2001) argue that the very
reason for the prevalence of groups in Italy is to generate a wedge between control and
cash flow rights.
Although the degree of cohesiveness of groups varies across countries and
across groups, in many emerging markets, including Korea, groups seem to be far more
centrally controlled than they are in Japan. Thus, the “loose” structure of Japan’s
postwar groups appears to be distinctly different than the structure of groups in many
emerging markets (and also in sharp contrast with the prewar period).
The spread of groups across manufacturing industries is displayed in Table 2.
(There are insufficient data to include services). Perhaps the most notable pattern is the
absence of a clear pattern of group location across industries, although there is some
evidence that groups in several countries tend to locate in somewhat more capitalintensive industries. This pattern is reminiscent of the zaibatsu in prewar Japan,
although it is far from universally true.
Postwar Japanese group firms seem to be evenly spread across many sectors (the
so called “one-set policy”). This pattern is not unique to Japan; for example Chilean
groups also seem to exhibit this tendency, although their structure appears to be less
“complete” than that of the Japanese groups. In terms of sales, relatively more capitalintensive sectors such as metals and chemicals seem to be particularly important for
Japan’s corporate groups in terms of both the fraction of total group assets and group
firms’ market shares. These sectors are generally important for the Japanese economy as
a whole, so this finding is hardly surprising.
The importance of services, most notably financial services, varies tremendously
among groups in different countries. Whereas in some countries groups’ entry into the
financial services industry has been restricted (for example, Korea), in other countries
services constitute the bulk of group activity. Thus, it appears that, aside from the loose
control, the structure and organization of Japan’s corporate groups is not unique.

3.3 Risk and Return
Table 3 displays simple profit rates and profit volatility statistics for group and nongroup member firms in Japan and elsewhere. In 6 of 12 countries in the table, profit
rates and profit volatility are lower for group affiliated firms, though not always in a
statistically significant manner.
Japanese corporate groups are among those characterized by low risk and low
profitability, although differences in medians appear to be small and not statistically
significant. Differences in mean profitability (3.7% for members of presidents’ clubs
versus 4.0% for other firms) are also statistically insignificant, although differences in
mean standard deviation of profitability are statistically significant (standard deviation
of operating profitability of 2.4 for Presidents’ Clubs members versus 2.9 for other
firms). Using the Dodwell definition, group firms exhibit significantly lower mean
profitability, as well as significantly lower mean and median standard deviation of
profitability relative to other firms.
The characterization of the Japanese groups as providing a low-risk and lowreturn environment is borne out in more sophisticated econometric tests of the mutual
insurance hypothesis conducted in Khanna and Yafeh (2001). They report that Japanese
corporate groups (members of presidents’ clubs) seem to provide mutual insurance for
members firms according to five of the six tests they conducted.3
This is hardly true for most groups around the world: although groups in Korea
and a few other countries also seem to provide a low-risk environment according to
these tests, groups in most emerging markets do not. Further, there seems to be little
relation between the extent of development of a country’s financial system and the
extent of mutual insurance provided by groups. In Japan too, there is little difference
3

There are six tests. 1) A benchmark OLS regression where the standard deviation of operating

profitability is regressed on a number of control variables and a group affiliation dummy. 2) A test of the
relation between the squared residuals from a regression with profitability as a dependent variable, and a
group affiliation dummy. 3) Tests of first order stochastic dominance comparing the distributions of profit
volatility among group affiliated and non-affiliated firms. 4) A test comparing whether the distribution of
profitability among group firms is more skew than among non-group firms because groups bail out
member firms in financial distress and should therefore include fewer poorly performing members. 5) A
test derived from Asdrubali, Sorensen and Yosha (1996) of the extent to which shocks to profitability are
smoothed through changes in dividends received. 6) A two-dimensional stochastic dominance test of the
hypothesis that group affiliated firms exhibit both low profitability and low profit volatility relative to
non-group firms. For Japanese groups, evidence of risk sharing (low profit volatility) was found in all of
the tests except the last.

between measures of mutual insurance within corporate groups before and after the
liberalization of Japan’s financial markets in the 1980s.
The simple profitability statistics reported in Table 3 suggest that in many cases
group-affiliated firms outperform their unaffiliated counterparts. More detailed
econometric studies (controlling for various firm and group characteristics) also confirm
that group membership is often associated with superior performance. (See Chang and
Choi 1988 for Korea; Keister 1998 for China; Khanna and Palepu 1999 and 2000 for
Chile and India.)
By contrast, the raw figures for Japan, suggesting lower profit rates for group
affiliated firms, are confirmed by a long list of empirical studies. Caves and Uekusa
(1976), Nakatani (1984), Odagiri (1992), Weinstein and Yafeh (1995, 1998), and Kang
and Shivdasani (1999) all find that members of bank-centered Japanese groups underperform otherwise comparable unaffiliated firms. Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) also point
out that growth rates among group affiliated companies were never higher than growth
rates of corresponding unaffiliated companies.
A plausible explanation for this phenomenon is that Japanese group firms do
something other than profit maximization, perhaps in accordance with the interests of
influential creditors (banks) within the group. We conclude that, in terms of risk and
return trade-offs, Japanese corporate groups appear to differ from most of the corporate
groups elsewhere.
For further discussion of the reasons for low profit rates among group firms see
Hoshi and Kashyap (2001, p 200-03). Okazaki (2001) finds that in the prewar period
firms affiliated with zaibatsu exhibited higher profit rates than comparable unaffiliated
firms, in contrast to the postwar period.

4. Long-term Changes and Prospects
This section begins with an evaluation of the impact of corporate groups on the
development of the Japanese economy in the long run. It then proceeds to a discussion
of the evolution of the groups over time, continues to discuss the relative performance
of group members in the 1990s, and concludes with an examination of the weakening of
cross-shareholding and banking ties.
4.1 Long-Run Development of Industries
One (admittedly rough) way to evaluate the impact of corporate groups on the
development of industries is to compare the growth rates of industries in Japan and the

United States, and to relate the differences to group presence. Using industry-level
growth rates (drawn from Carlin and Mayer 1999), Table 4 displays the fastest growing
and declining industries in the United States and Japan for the period 1970-95.
In terms of capital formation, the same industries lead the list in both countries;
in terms of growth of value added, there are some differences. Declining industries in
the two countries also are quite similar. For the purpose of the present discussion, there
is nothing to suggest that the growth rates of Japanese industries where group presence
is more pronounced are substantially different than in the United States. Note that it is
difficult to calculate the correlation between industry growth and group market share
because the industry definitions Carlin and Mayer used are somewhat different than the
2-digit SIC used in Table 2.
4.2 Industry Location
Group affiliation data drawn from the 1994 Keiretsu no Kenkyu suggest that group
members were spread across many sectors, with their presence more pronounced in the
chemicals, machinery, and electronics industries, much as in earlier periods. The
differences in size between group and non-group firms documented earlier seem to have
persisted into the 1990s, and, much as in earlier periods, group firms are still somewhat
more leveraged (Table 5). There is no reason to believe groups have re-organized so as
to focus more on certain industries, and there is little evidence that the structure of
Japan’s corporate groups has changed significantly in other ways, at least until the mid
1990s.
4.3 Performance in the 1990s
Table 5 suggests that small differences in ROA are still present in the 1990s, with
group-affiliated companies being somewhat less profitable than unaffiliated firms. The
table also suggests that the characterization of group members as less volatile appears to
hold for the 1990s as well.
Differences in profitability between group members and unaffiliated firms are
clearly observed in the multivariate regressions displayed in Table 6. It is also
interesting to note that while the average group-affiliated company experienced
(nominal) asset growth of about 10% between 1991 and 2000, the assets of non-group
companies grew, on average, at about 17% during the same period. Thus, risk and return
differences between group members and other companies seem to hold in the 1990s as
well.
To the extent that performance differences in earlier years were due to bank
monopoly power, leading to non-profit-maximization among group firms (see Weinstein

and Yafeh 1998), the evidence from the 1990s may attest to continued influence of
banks on remaining clients, despite on-going liberalization. Low profitability of group
members as a result of low risk strategies may still explain some of the differences in
the 1990s, as the low volatility of profits suggests. The banking crisis may have had a
negative effect on firms with ties to ailing banks and is another possible explanation for
these findings (see Kang and Stulz 2000). Finally, it is quite possible that some of the
relatively poor performance of group members in the 1990s is due to the phenomenon
of good firms ending their long-term ties with their main bank, and possibly with their
bank-centered group (see Hoshi and Kashyap 2001, p 241-48, and further discussion
below).
4.4 Cross-Shareholding
The on-going recession in Japan and the decline in share prices may have made crossshareholding arrangements costly to maintain and the weakness of the group’s main
banks may have also contributed to the disintegration of the groups. At the same time, it
is possible to argue that mutual risk-sharing arrangements within the groups are
particularly valuable in the present economic conditions.
Suzuki (1998) reports that the sale of equity stakes held by corporations for long
periods of time had not been a widespread phenomenon at the time he conducted his
research. However, Okabe (2001) shows that substantial divestment of shares has been
going on within the corporate groups since the late 1990s, especially by non-financial
corporations. His main finding is that non-financial corporations have reduced crossshareholding ties with financial institutions substantially, whereas other forms of cross
shareholding within groups (among financial institutions, between financial institutions
and non-financial corporations, and among non-financial corporations) have remained
virtually unchanged. For example, shares held by financial institutions as part of crossshareholding arrangements remained roughly unchanged between 1987 and 1997, and
then declined from about 8% of all shares to 6% in 1999. This reflects a decrease of
similar magnitude in shareholding by financial institutions in both financial and nonfinancial companies. By contrast, shareholding by non-financial corporations declined
somewhat in the early 1990s and then, during 1995-99, declined from about 9% of total
market value to 4.5%. This is accounted for primarily by a 4.1 percentage-point fall in
shares held by corporations in financial institutions (Okabe 2001, Table 2). A Nippon
Life Insurance (2001) study, which is the source of Okabe’s figures, confirms more
broadly that the reduction in cross shareholding is a phenomenon of the second half of
the 1990s, and that it is common to all major corporate groups. Some data are in Table
7.

In spite of these trends, comparisons of membership in presidents’ clubs show
little evidence of group disintegration between 1989 and 1999. It is important to note
also that these figures are somewhat sensitive to the definition of group affiliation and
cross- or stable shareholding ties.
4.5 Banking Ties and Mergers
The trend of decreasing cross shareholding ratios, especially between non-financial
corporations and banks, is likely to be exacerbated by firms deciding to discontinue
their long-term relations with the group’s main banks. There is now no doubt that this
phenomenon, which was documented initially by Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein
(1993), and more recently in Anderson and Makhija (1999) and in Miyajima and
Arikawa (2001), is of large magnitude.
The merger wave among financial institutions that cuts across traditional group
lines is another factor that is likely to destabilize the existing group structure. For
example, mergers between DKB and Fuji banks (together with the Industrial Bank of
Japan), and between Sakura (Mitsui) and Sumitomo banks, could potentially lead to
mergers of their clients firms. An early 2002 example of this is the merger talks between
the marine and fire insurance companies of the Mitsui and Sumitomo groups. Mitsui
Chemical and Sumitomo Chemical merged in 1998, and NKK, part of the Fuji group,
formed a strategic alliance with Kawasaki Steel of the DKB group. It will certainly alter
the previous situation in which no group contains two competing firms, and no bank
serves as main bank to competing companies.
4.6 Summary
It is clear that Japan’s corporate groups have been changing, and that the bank-firm
(equity and debt) ties which were at their core, have been substantially weakened. One
telling indicator of a declining importance of groups is the cessation of publication of
two main data sources on groups (Keiretsu no Kenkyu ceased publication in 1998 and
Kigyo Keiretsu Soran in 2000). This decline in corporate groups appears to be
associated with a general move towards a more market-based financial system in Japan
(Hoshi and Kashyap 1999) and may even have contributed to the decline in Japanese
stock prices. Yet it would be ridiculous to argue that the miserable stock returns are
simply due to dumping of shares formerly held within corporate groups. The unwinding
of cross shareholdings should contribute to market liquidity, although this effect is hard
to assess given the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions.
A decrease in stable shareholding within corporate groups is likely to increase
the likelihood of hostile takeovers. Indeed, a few takeovers were observed in Japan in

the late 1990s (Yafeh 2000), but none involved a core group company.

5. Conclusion
Corporate groups in Japan are undergoing significant change reflected in declining cross
shareholding, as well as in weakened main bank relationships. The consolidation of
banks across groups is likely to accelerate this trend, making former main bank
relationships obsolete. If groups were ever an impediment to structural change, perhaps
most notably as hindrances to hostile takeovers and market-based corporate governance,
they are unlikely to constitute a major obstacle in the future.4
For all the attention Japanese groups attracted in the last third of the 20th
century, not much is going to be missed from their demise, at least in terms of the
economic roles they played. Even the mutual insurance provided within corporate
groups is likely to decline in importance, as firm-specific human capital will lose some
of its value and financial markets become ever more developed.
Similarly, the corporate governance roles allegedly played by large shareholders
and financial institutions within the corporate groups are likely to be replaced by new,
perhaps more market-oriented mechanisms, guaranteeing the efficient operations of
firms. Thus, limited economic importance, combined with little political clout, suggest
that Japan’s corporate groups are unlikely to constitute an impediment to future changes
in financial markets and corporate strategy.
Despite the large literature on corporate groups in Japan and elsewhere, the
phenomenon of business groups still has many unanswered questions. Why is it that
groups are observed in so many countries in early stages of their economic
development? What is the most important reason for their existence? Why is the mutual
insurance function of groups more important in Japan and a few other countries than in
most emerging markets? How do groups evolve over time, and does their development
pattern provide any evidence on their raison d’être? Will the Japanese groups provide
the first example of groups that end their lives peacefully, or will government
intervention be needed? These are only some of the questions on corporate groups that
await further research.

4

Peek and Rosengren (2002) express a different view, arguing that loans by financial institutions within
groups impede “creative destruction” by prolonging the life of weak corporate borrowers. Although longterm bank-firm relations may prevent some bankruptcies of firms that are no longer viable, it is not clear
that corporate groups substantially exacerbate this tendency.

References
Anderson, Christopher and Anil Makhija (1999), “Deregulation, Disintermediation, and
Agency Costs of Debt: Evidence from Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics,
51: 309-39.
Ando, Albert, Dimitrios Christelis, and Tsutomu Miyagawa (2002) “Inefficiency of
Corporate Investment and Distortion of Savings Behavior,” in Magnus
Blomström, Jennifer Corbett, Fumio Hayashi, and Anil Kashyap (eds.),
Structural Impediments to Growth in Japan, forthcoming (Chicago, University
of Chicago Press).
Aoki, Masahiko (1988), Information, Incentives and Bargaining in the Japanese
Economy (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Aoki, Masahiko and Hugh Patrick (eds.) (1994), The Japanese Main Bank System: Its
Relevance for Developing and Transforming Economies (Oxford, Oxford
University Press).
Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sorensen, and Oved Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate
Risk Sharing: United States, 1963-1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111:
1081-10.
Asanuma, Banri (1989), “Manufacturer-Supplier Relationships in Japan and the
Concept of a Relation-Specific Skill,” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies, 3: 1-30.
Beason, Richard (1998), “Keiretsu Affiliation and Share Price Volatility in Japan,”
Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 6: 27-43
Berglof, Erik and Enrico Perotti (1994), “The Governance Structure of the Japanese
Financial Keiretsu,” Journal of Financial Economics, 36: 259-84.
Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2002) “Ferreting Out
Tunneling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 121-48.
Bianchi, Marcello, Magda Bianco, and Luca Enriques (2001), “Ownership, Pyramidal
Groups, and the Separation between Ownership and Control in Italy,” in
Fabrizio Barca and Marco Becht (eds.), The Control of Corporate Europe
(Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Bisson, Thomas (1954), Zaibatsu Dissolution in Japan (Berkeley CA, University of
California Press).
Branstetter, Lee (2000), “Vertical Keiretsu and Knowledge Spillovers in Japanese
Manufacturing: An Empirical Assessment,” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies, 14: 73-104.
Carlin, Wendi and Colin Mayer (1999), “Finance, Investment, and Growth,” CEPR
Discussion Paper 2223, forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Caves, Richard and Masu Uekusa (1976), Industrial Organization in Japan
(Washington DC, The Brookings Institution).
Chang, Sea-jin and Unghwan Choi (1988), “Strategy, Structure, and Performance of
Korean Business Groups: A Transaction Cost Approach,” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 37: 141-58.
Chang, Sea-jin. and Jaebum Hong (2000), “The Economic Performance of the Group
Affiliated Companies in Korea: Groupwise Resource Sharing and Internal
Transactions,” Academy of Management Journal, 43: 429-48.
Claessens, Stijn, Simon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang (1999), “The Rationale
for Groups: Evidence from East Asia,” unpublished manuscript, The World
Bank.
Encaoua, David and Alexis Jacquemin (1982), “Organizational Efficiency and
Monopoly Power: The Case of French Industrial Groups,” European Economic
Review, 19: 25-51.
Fisman, Raymond (2001), “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American
Economic Review, 91: 1095-102.
Flath, David (1993), “Shareholding in the Keiretsu: Japan’s Corporate Groups,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 75: 249-57.
Fujimoto, Takahiro (1999), The Evolution of a Manufacturing System at Toyota
(Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Gibson, Michael (1995), “Can Bank Health Affect Investment? Evidence from Japan,”
Journal of Business, 68: 281-308.
Goto, Akira (1982), “Business Groups in a Market Economy,” European Economic
Review, 19: 53-70.
Hadley, Eleanor (1970), Antitrust in Japan (Princeton NJ, Princeton University Press).
Hoshi, Takeo (1994), “Evolution of the Main Bank System in Japan,” in Mitsuaki
Okabe (ed.), The Structure of the Japanese Economy (London, Macmillan).
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap (2001), Corporate Financing and Governance in
Japan: The Road to the Future (Cambridge MA, MIT Press).
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein (1990), “The Role of Banks in
Reducing the Costs of Financial Distress in Japan,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 27: 67-88.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein (1991), “Corporate Structure,
Liquidity and Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106: 33-60.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein (1993), “The Choice between
Public and Private Debt: An Analysis of Post Deregulation Corporate Financing

in Japan,” NBER Working Paper 4421.
Johnson, Chalmers. (1982), MITI and the Japanese Miracle: The Growth of Industrial
Policy, 1925-1975 (Stanford CA, Stanford University Press).
Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman (2000), “Corporate
Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 58:
141-86.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Anil Shivdasani (1995), “Firm Performance, Corporate Governance,
and Top Executive Turnover in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 38: 2958.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Anil Shivdasani (1997), “Corporate Restructuring During
Performance Declines in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 46: 29-65.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Anil Shivdasani (1999), “Alternative Mechanisms of Corporate
Governance in Japan: An Analysis of Independent and Bank-Affiliated Firms,”
Pacific Basin Finance Journal, 7: 1-22.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Ren Stulz (2000), “Do Banking Shocks Affect Firm Performance?
An Analysis of the Japanese Experience,” Journal of Business, 73: 1-23.
Kashyap, Anil (1989), “Empirical Evidence on the Insurance Aspects of Japanese
Industrial Alliances,” unpublished PhD dissertation, MIT.
Kawasaki, Seiichi and John McMillan (1987), “The Design of Contracts: Evidence from
Japanese Subcontracting,” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies, 1: 327-49.
Keister, Lisa (1998), “Engineering Growth: Business Group Structure and Firm
Performance in China’s Transition Economy,” American Journal of Sociology,
10: 404-40.
Khanna, Tarun (2000), “Business Groups and Social Welfare in Emerging Markets:
Existing Evidence and Unanswered Questions,” European Economic Review,
44: 748-61.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu (1999), “Policy Shocks, Market Intermediaries, and
Corporate Strategy: The Evolution of Business Groups in Chile and India,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 8: 271-310.
Khanna, Tarun and Krishna Palepu (2000), “Is Group Membership Profitable in
Emerging Markets? An Analysis of Diversified Indian Business Groups,”
Journal of Finance, 55: 867-91.
Khanna, Tarun and Yishay Yafeh (2001), “Business Groups and Risk Sharing around the
World,” unpublished manuscript, Harvard Business School.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny
(1998), “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106: 1113-55.

Lawrence, Robert (1993), “Japan's Different Trade Regime: An Analysis with Particular
Reference to Keiretsu,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7: 3-19.
Leff, Nathaniel (1978), “Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship in the
Developing Countries: The Economic Groups,” Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 26: 661-75.
Lincoln, James, Michael Gerlach, and Christina Ahmadjian (1996), “Keiretsu Networks
and Corporate Performance in Japan,” American Sociological Review, 61: 67-88.
Mayer, Colin, Koen Schoors, and Yishay Yafeh (2002), “Sources of Funds and
Investment Strategies of Venture Capital Funds: Evidence from Germany, Israel,
Japan and the UK,” CEPR Discussion Paper 3340.
Miwa, Yoshiro and Mark Ramseyer (2001a), “The Fable of the Keiretsu,” Harvard Law
School Discussion Paper 316.
Miwa, Yoshiro and Mark Ramseyer (2001b), “The Myth of the Main Bank: Japan and
Comparative Corporate Governance,” University of Tokyo CIRJE Discussion
Paper F-131.
Miyajima, Hideaki (1994), “The Transformation of Zaibatsu to Postwar Corporate
Groups-From Hierarchically Integrated Groups to Horizontally Integrated
Groups,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 8: 293-328.
Miyajima, Hideaki, and Yasuhiro Arikawa (2001), “Relationship Banking and Debt
Choice: Evidence from the Liberalization in Japan,” Waseda University Institute
of Financial Studies Working Paper.
Montalvo, Jose and Yishay Yafeh (1994), “A Micro-econometric Analysis of
Technology Transfer: The Case of Licensing Agreements of Japanese Firms,”
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 12: 227-44.
Nakatani, Iwao (1984), “The Economic Role of Financial Corporate Grouping,” in
Masahiko Aoki (ed.), The Economic Analysis of the Japanese Firm (New York
NY, North Holland).
Nippon Life Insurance (2001), “The Year 2000 Survey on the State of Cross
Shareholding” (in Japanese), available at http://www.nli-research.co.jp
Odagiri, Hiroyuki (1992), Growth through Competition, Competition through Growth
(Oxford, Oxford University Press).
Ohkawa, Kazushi and Henry Rosovsky (1973), Japanese Economic Growth: Trend
Acceleration in the Twentieth Century (Stanford CA, Stanford University Press).
Okabe, Mitsuaki (2001), “Are Cross Shareholdings of Japanese Corporations
Dissolving? Evolution and Implications,” University of Oxford, Nissan Institute
Occasional Paper 33.
Okada, Yoshitaka (2001), “Cooperative Learning and Japan’s Techno-Governance

Structure: Exploratory Case Studies,” Sophia International Review, 23(1): 1942.
Okazaki, Tetsuji (2001), “The Role of Holding Companies in Prewar Japanese
Economic Development: Rethinking Zaibatsu in Perspective of Corporate
Governance,” Social Science Japan, 4: 243-68.
Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren (2002), “Corporate Affiliation and the (Mis) Allocation of
Credit,” paper presented at the NBER Strategic Alliances conference.
Perotti, Enrico and Stanislav Gelfer (2001), “Red Barons or Robber Barons?
Governance and Financing in Russian Financial-Industrial Groups,” European
Economic Review, 45: 1601-17.
Saxonhouse, Gary (1993), “What Does Japanese Trade Structure Tell Us about Japanese
Trade Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7: 21-43.
Sheard, Paul (1989), “The Main Bank System and Corporate Monitoring and Control in
Japan,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 11: 399-422.
Sheard, Paul (1997), “Keiretsu, Competition and Market Access,” in Edward Graham
and David Richardson (eds.), Global Economic Policy (Washington DC,
Institute of International Economics).
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1986), “Large Shareholders and Corporate
Control,” Journal of Political Economy, 94: 461-88.
Strachan, Harry (1976), Family and Other Business Groups in Economic Development:
The Case of Nicaragua (New York NY, Praeger Press).
Suzuki, Kazunori (1998), “Inter-Corporate Shareholding in Japan: Their Significance
and Impact of Sales of Stakes,” unpublished manuscript, London Business
School.
van Rixtel, Adrian (2002), Informality and Monetary Policy in Japan: The Political
Economy of Bank Performance (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Weinstein, David and Yishay Yafeh (1995), “Collusive or Competitive? An Empirical
Investigation of Keiretsu Behavior,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 43: 35976.
Weinstein, David and Yishay Yafeh (1998), “On the Costs of a Bank-Centered Financial
System: Evidence from the Changing Main Bank Relations in Japan,” Journal of
Finance, 53: 635-72.
Yafeh, Yishay (1995), “Corporate Ownership, Profitability, and Bank-Firm Ties:
Evidence from the American Occupation Reforms in Japan,” Journal of the
Japanese and International Economies, 9: 154-73.
Yafeh, Yishay (2000), “Corporate Governance in Japan: Past Performance and Future
Prospects,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 16: 74-84.

Yafeh, Yishay and Oved Yosha (2002), “Large Shareholders and Banks: Who Monitors
and How,” Economic Journal, (forthcoming)

Table 1
Corporate Groups: Japan and Emerging Markets
Percent Relative
in group1
Size2
Country and period
44
5.5
Argentina 1990-97
47
2.5
Brazil 1990-97
22
18.7
Chile 1989-96
33
4.4
India 1990-97
65
2.8
Indonesia 1993-95
23
5.0
Israel 1993-95
>50
..a
Italy early 1990s
51
3.9
Korea 1991-95
35
2.3
Mexico 1988-97
25
3.4
Philippines 1992-97
44
2.0
Taiwan 1990-97
62
2.3
Thailand 1992-97
52
1.0
Turkey 1988-97
29
9
39

6.8
8.5
2

Prewar Japan (largest three groups) 1932-43
Postwar Japan (Presidents’ Clubs) 1977-92
Postwar Japan (Dodwell definition) 1977-92

1 Percentage of firms affiliated with groups.
2 Median size of group-affiliated firms divided by median size of unaffiliated firms.
a

Group firms are much larger.

Sources: Khanna and Yafeh (2001), except Italy, which is from Bianchi et al. (2001).

Table 2

Country
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Indonesia
Israel
Korea

Mexico
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Prewar Japan
Postwar Japan
(1987)

Group Location across Manufacturing Industries
The groups’ most important
Industries in which group
industries
market share is largest
Oil refining and natural resource
Oil refining and natural
extraction, metals.
resource extraction, textiles,
metals.
Chemicals, Oil refining and natural
Food, lumber and wood,
resource extraction; metals.
metals
Firms spread across sectors, (lumber Food and tobacco, lumber and
and wood important).
wood, rubber and plastic.
Construction, machinery,
Firms spread across sectors, lumber
transportation equipment
and wood, construction,
transportation equipment important
Metals, Electronics, chemicals
Metals, Electronics, chemicals
Machinery, metals, transportation
Oil refining and natural
equipment
resource extraction,
transportation equipment,
rubber, many sectors.
Food and tobacco, mining
Food and tobacco,
construction, textile, mining.
Food and tobacco, oil refining and
Food and tobacco, lumber and
natural resource extraction.
wood.
Machinery, textile, chemicals.
Misc., oil refining and natural
resource extraction, lumber
and wood.
Firms spread across sectors
Metals, oil refining and natural
resource extraction, chemicals.
Firms spread across sectors
Construction, food and
tobacco, chemicals.
Heavy Industry (Hadley, 1970)
Heavy Industry (Hadley, 1970)
One set policy - firms evenly spread Metals, chemicals.
across sectors; a bit more weight in
chemicals, electronics and
transportation equipment

The sample periods, division between group and non-group firms, and sources are the
same as in Table 1.

Table 3
Risk and Return Characteristics of Corporate Groups

ROA1
-3.9**
1.5**
3.7*
2.1*
-0.5
2.4*
-0.3
2.1
3.3
-1.1
-1.5*
-1.7
-0.9
-0.2
-0.2

Standard
Deviation2
-1.2**
-1.0
0.3
0.2*
-0.6*
-0.5
-0.7*
0.5
-0.4
-0.6**
-0.6**
-2.9
-2.7
-0.1
-0.2*

Country
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
India
Indonesia
Israel
Korea
Mexico
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Prewar Japan (three largest zaibatsu)
Postwar Japan (Presidents’ Clubs)
Postwar Japan (Dodwell)

Data are for the year of maximal coverage for each country (for Japan, 1987
profitability, and standard deviation based on 1977-92), and excludes firms with profit
rates above 100 percent or below -100 percent.
1 Difference in median ROA between group and non-group firms.
2 Difference in median of standard deviation of ROA between group and non-group
firms
Significance levels for the comparisons of medians are based on Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests. Significance at the 5% level is denoted by *; at the 10% level by **.
Data sources: See Khanna and Yafeh (2001).

Table 4
Growth of Industries in Japan and the US, 1970-1995
Japan
US
Plastic
Electrical machinery
Fastest growing industries
Electrical machinery
transportation equipment
measured by capital
Non-electrical machinery
non-electrical machinery
formation
Chemicals (non industrial)
Metals
Chemicals (industrial)
Chemicals (non industrial)
Electrical Machinery
Tobacco
Fastest growing industries
AProfessional Goods@
Plastic
measured by growth of
Transportation equipment
Printing
value added
Machinery
Electrical machinery
Metals
Chemicals (non-industrial)
Iron
Wood
Slowest growing industries
Shipbuilding
Footwear
measured by capital
Tobacco
Leather
formation
Footwear
Apparel
Leather
Shipbuilding
Wood
Iron
Slowest growing industries
Footwear
Wood
measured by growth of
value added
Leather
Shipbuilding
Apparel
Textile
Shipbuilding
Furniture
Source: Carlin and Mayer (1999).

Table 5
Corporate Groups, 1991-2000
Other firms

Group
firms
Mea SD1 Mea SD1
n
n
4150
2883
Number of observations2
287* 566 191 494 Total assets (billion yen)
0.57* 0.17 0.54 0.26 Debt/assets
3.8* 3.5
4.0
4.5 ROA (%)
2.0* 1.2
2.4
1.5 Standard deviation of ROA (%)3
3.0
3.3
3.2
4.6 Operating profit as % assets
2.9
3.5
3.1
5.4 Ordinary profit as % assets4
Group affiliation is based on the 1994 Keiretsu no Kenkyu definition. Note that
the percentage of group-affiliated companies in this sample is somewhat higher than in
earlier studies.
Statistical significance at the 5% level is denoted by *.
1 Standard deviation.
2 Total number of observations over the entire period.
3 Mean (within firm) standard deviation of ROA.
4 Ordinary profit is total profit (operating and other income, including capital gains,
losses, and depreciation) after interest expenses.

Table 6

ROA
-0.38* (0.09)
-5.75* (0.51)
-5.64* (0.39)
0.56*
-0.14*

(0.06)
(0.06)

0.011 (0.004)
0.05* (0.01)
0.004 (0.005)
-0.09* (0.03)
0.29

-

Profitability Regressions, 1991-2000
Operating
Ordinary
profits/assets
profits/assets
-0.30*
(0.08)
-0.24*
(0.09)
Group dummy
-6.19*
(0.35)
-10.37*
(1.48)
Debt/assets
-5.35*
(0.40)
-6.62*
(0.40)
Fixed assets/total
assets
0.57*
(0.06)
0.69*
(0.10)
Log (sales)
-0.24*
(0.06)
-0.24*
(0.07)
Standard deviation of
ROA

0.015*
0.03*
0.002
-0.06

(0.005)
(0.01)
(0.004)
(0.03)

0.017*
0.02*
0.004
-0.09

(0.005)
(0.01)
(0.006)
(0.04)

0.28

-

0.41

-

Percentage of shares
held by:
Top-12 shareholders
Individuals
Financial institutions
Non-financial firms
R2

The dependent variables are measures of profitability and the regressions are OLS using
pooled data with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors reported in parentheses.
The group affiliation dummy equals one for firms that are classified as group members
using the 1994 Keiretsu no Kenkyu definition. In all three cases N is 7033, and year
dummies and industry dummies are used.
Statistical significance at the 5% level is denoted by *.

Table 7
Trends in Cross Shareholding of Major Groups
Average percentage of shares of a member firm cross-held by other group firms.1
Change
198 199 200 '97-'002 Group3
7
7
0
14.8 14.0 11.3
-19.3 Mitsubishi
13.4 11.3 8.9
-21.3 Sumitomo
10.2 7.6 5.1
-32.9 Mitsui
11.2 7.7 4.6
-40.3 Fuji
9.1 7.9 6.2
-21.5 Dai-Ichi
Kangyo
(DKB)
9.3 7.3 4.9
-32.9 Sanwa
1 The figures refer to cross-shareholding only, as identified by NLI, as opposed to all
“stable” shareholding within the group.
2 Percentage change in cross shareholding from 1997 to 2000.
3 Group firms as identified by NLI.
Source: NLI (2001), Table 5

