NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS MONEY OR STICKY PRICES?
Peter N. Ireland
Working Paper 9390
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9390
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

I would like to thank an anonymous referee for very helpful comments and suggestions. Some of this work
was completed while I was visiting the Research Department at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; I
would also like to thank the Bank and its staff for their hospitality.This material is also based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-0213461. Any opinions, findings,
conclusions or recommendations expressed herein are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Federal Reserve System, the National Bureau of Economic Research,
or the National Science Foundation. All data and programs used in this research are available at
http://www2.bc.edu/~irelandp. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Peter N. Ireland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

Endogenous Money or Sticky Prices?
Peter N. Ireland
NBER Working Paper No. 9390
December 2002
JEL No. E31, E32, E52
ABSTRACT
What explains the correlations between nominal and real variables in the postwar US data?
Are these correlations indicative of significant nominal price rigidity? Or do they simply reflect the
particular way that monetary policymakers react to developments in the real economy? To answer
these questions, this paper uses maximum likelihood to estimate a model of endogenous money. This
model allows, but does not require, nominal prices to be sticky. The results show that nominal price
rigidity, over and above endogenous money, plays a role in accounting for key features of the data.
Peter N. Ireland
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
irelandp@bc.edu

1. Introduction
What explains the relationships observed in the US data on nominal money stocks,
nominal interest rates, nominal price inßation, and measures of real economic activity? Do the correlations between these variables provide evidence of true causal
eﬀects running from monetary policy actions to changes in the real economy–that
is, of signiÞcant monetary nonneutralities stemming from some form of nominal
price rigidity? Or do the correlations simply reßect the particular way in which
monetary policymakers react to developments in the real economy–the workings
of what might be called an endogenous money, or reverse causation, channel that
operates even in the absence of nominal price rigidity? These questions lie at the
heart of monetary economics.
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) present what remains the most celebrated body
of evidence in support of the view that changes in the nominal money stock play
a causal role in driving ßuctuations in real output. Ball and Mankiw (1994), for
example, cite Friedman and Schwartz prominently in explaining their preference
for sticky-price models of the business cycle. And a host of recent studies, including Hairault and Portier (1993), Yun (1996), Ireland (1997, 2000a, 2001a, 2001b),
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), and Kim (2000), incorporate nominal price

rigidity into modern, dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium monetary models. All of these studies imply that monetary instability represents a potentially
important source of real instability.
Tobin (1970), by contrast, develops an early argument in support of the alternative, endogenous money view. He constructs a model in which movements in
the nominal money stock are correlated with, and even appear to lead, movements
in real output over the business cycle. But these patterns arise only because monetary policy responds systematically to nonmonetary shocks that aﬀect output;
in Tobin’s model, money has no causal role in generating real ßuctuations.
Later work advocating the endogenous money view, including King and Plosser
(1984), Freeman (1986), Freeman and Huﬀman (1991), and Freeman and Kydland
(2000), highlights the distinction between outside money–meaning the currency
and reserves created by the central bank–and inside money–meaning the highly
liquid deposits and money market mutual fund shares created by commercial
banks, savings banks, and other private Þnancial institutions. These studies develop models in which private Þnancial activity ßuctuates along with real economic
activity, giving rise to a positive correlation between deposit creation and output
even though policy-induced changes in outside money are completely neutral. The
emphasis that these studies place on the link between inside money and output is
2

motivated partly by King and Plosser’s observation that, in the US data, output
is more highly correlated with deposits than with currency or the monetary base.
On the other hand, King and Plosser do Þnd positive correlations between output
and measures of outside money, implying that models such as theirs and Freeman’s provide, at best, a partial explanation of the relationships between nominal
and real variables. Perhaps, therefore, this focus on the outside-inside money distinction also reßects some discomfort with other speciÞcations, like those found
in Greenwood and Huﬀman (1987), Bryan and Gavin (1994), Finn (1996, 1999),
and Gavin and Kydland (1999), that ignore the distinction and simply assume
that the central bank acts to increase the money supply following nonmonetary
shocks that increase output: why, in an economy in which money is fully neutral,
would the central bank want to increase the money supply whenever output rises?
Following the publication of Taylor’s (1993) inßuential essay, however, monetary economists have come to appreciate that most central banks, including the
Federal Reserve, conduct monetary policy by managing short-term nominal interest rates rather than some measure of the nominal money supply; in addition,
monetary economists have come to appreciate that most central banks, including
the Federal Reserve, systematically adjust their nominal interest rate instruments
in response to movements in output and inßation. Under nominal interest rate
3

rules like the one popularized by Taylor, all movements in the money supply
become endogenous and most, if not all, movements in nominal interest rates become endogenous as well. Thus, the observation that Federal Reserve policy can
be described by a Taylor rule makes the idea of endogenous money much more
plausible: perhaps, by adjusting short-term nominal interest rates in an eﬀort to
stabilize output and inßation, Federal Reserve policy has generated correlations
that mainly reßect how nominal variables respond to real variables, rather than
the way that real variables respond to nominal variables. It is quite curious,
therefore, that the workings of Taylor rules have been studied exclusively using
models that feature some form of nominal rigidity, such as those developed in the
chapters of Taylor (1999).
This paper, accordingly, takes a step back and asks whether a model without
nominal rigidity, but with a Taylor-type rule for monetary policy, can account
for the key correlations between nominal and real variables exclusively through
the endogenous money channel. Put another way, this paper asks whether the
assumption of nominal price rigidity is really necessary to achieve a full understanding of the postwar American business cycle, once it is recognized that Federal
Reserve policy has worked to make movements in the money supply and in nominal interest rates largely, or perhaps even wholly, endogenous.
4

More speciÞcally, the research strategy employed here begins by developing a
dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium model that allows, but does not require,
much of the variation in the nominal money supply and in the nominal interest rate
to reßect the central bank’s deliberate reaction to the nonmonetary shocks that
hit the economy. The same model also allows, but again does not require, nominal prices to adjust sluggishly following any shock–monetary or nonmonetary–
that hits the economy. The monetary policy rule–a kind of generalized Taylor
(1993) rule–provides a channel through which changes in real variables drive
movements in nominal variables. The nominal price rigidity, in turn, provides
a channel through which changes in nominal variables drive movements in real
variables. Thus, the model can potentially attribute the observed correlations
between nominal and real variables to endogenous money, sticky prices, or some
combination of the two.
The strategy proceeds by estimating the model via maximum likelihood, using
postwar US data. A constrained version of the model without nominal price rigidity is then compared to and formally tested against the unconstrained alternative
that allows for price rigidity. The results of this econometric exercise indicate
whether endogenous money can, by itself, come to grips with the action that is
found in the data, or whether nominal price rigidity is needed as well.
5

2. Connections to the Existing Literature
By asking whether a model with endogenous money can explain the postwar
US data and by comparing the empirical performance of model variants with
and without sticky prices, this paper extends several branches of the existing
literature. First, as mentioned above, Tobin (1970), King and Plosser (1984),
Freeman (1986), Greenwood and Huﬀman (1987), Freeman and Huﬀman (1991),
Bryan and Gavin (1994), Finn (1996, 1999), Gavin and Kydland (1999), and
Freeman and Kydland (2000) all ask whether models with endogenous money can
account for key facts associated with the American business cycle. None of the
models developed in any of these studies is estimated and evaluated with formal
econometric techniques, however.
Coleman (1996) estimates a model with endogenous money using a simulated
method of moments procedure; his demanding and highly rigorous approach to
model evaluation is closest to the one employed here. But Coleman’s study, like
all of the others mentioned above, considers only a ßexible-price model. So while
Coleman clearly shows that his ßexible-price model leaves some aspects of the data
unexplained, he leaves open the question of whether his model’s shortcomings
might in fact be shared by all existing models of the monetary business cycle,

6

including those with sticky prices. This paper, therefore, goes a step beyond
Coleman’s by asking: what additional features of the data, if any, can be explained
once sticky prices are introduced into a model of endogenous money?
Hairault and Portier (1993) and Ellison and Scott (2000) compare the implications of models with and without sticky prices under the assumption that money
is exogenous. King and Watson (1996), Rotemberg (1996), and Yun (1996) do the
same, while also allowing money to be endogenous. These studies uncover some
of the same strengths and weaknesses of sticky-price models that are documented
here. But, again, none of the models developed in these studies is estimated
with formal econometric techniques and, as a consequence, none can deÞnitively
say whether or not the introduction of sticky prices improves the model’s Þt in
a statistically signiÞcant way. Here, by contrast, the sticky-price model that is
estimated nests a ßexible-price variant as a special case. Thus, the econometric
exercise performed here provides a clean, formal test of the null hypothesis that
prices are fully ßexible against the alternative that prices are sticky. By reporting
the results of such a test, this paper also goes beyond the contributions of Leeper
and Sims (1994), Ireland (1997, 2001a, 2001b), Rotemberg and Woodford (1997),
and Kim (2000), each of which estimates a sticky-price model but stops short of
explicitly comparing the model’s Þt to that of a ßexible-price speciÞcation.
7

Rotemberg (1982) develops and estimates a model with quadratic costs of nominal price adjustment that represents, as explained below, a direct precursor to
the model used here. Rotemberg also tests the null hypothesis of price ßexibility,
rejecting this null in favor of the alternative that prices are sticky. Rotemberg’s
model includes a very simple demand-side speciÞcation, however, which is elaborated on in the model used here. And, more important, Rotemberg assumes that
money is exogenous, thereby leaving open the question of whether the features
of the data that his sticky-price model explains might also be accounted for by
a model with ßexible prices and endogenous money. Thus, this paper can be
viewed as an extension of Rotemberg’s that tests the null hypothesis of full price
ßexibility after allowing for endogenous money.
Finally, Roberts, Stockton, and Struckmeyer (1994), Gali and Gertler (1999),
and Sbordone (2002) also extend Rotemberg’s (1982) work by developing and estimating models in which prices can either be sticky or ßexible and by testing
for the statistical signiÞcance of parameters measuring the importance of nominal
price rigidity. These studies, however, conÞne their attention to equations governing the behavior of inßation. Here, the analysis again goes a step further by
considering a more elaborate model with implications for the behavior of money,
interest rates, output, consumption, and investment as well as for inßation.
8

Thus, monetary economists have long been interested in explaining the correlations between nominal and real variables using models with endogenous money,
price rigidity, or some combination of the two. Past eﬀorts have produced a large
body of literature, to which this paper also contributes.

3. Modeling Strategy
The model used here embeds Rotemberg’s (1982) quadratic speciÞcation for the
costs of nominal price adjustment into a more detailed, dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium model with optimizing households and Þrms and a central bank
that is allowed to systematically adjust the short-term nominal interest rate and
the money growth rate in response to changes in output and inßation. Similar models appear in Hairault and Portier (1993), Ireland (1997, 2000a, 2001a,
2001b), and Kim (2000); the variant developed here extends those from Ireland
(1997, 2000a, 2001a, 2001b) in two basic ways.
First, the model developed here builds on those from previous eﬀorts by introducing a more ßexible monetary policy rule that allows the central bank to
use the short-term nominal interest rate, the money growth rate, or any linear
combination of the two as its principal operating instrument and to adjust its
setting for this instrument in response to changes in output and inßation. This
9

more general policy rule nests, as one class of special cases, interest rate rules of
the kind proposed by Taylor (1993), according to which the nominal interest rate
is set as a function of output and inßation. It also nests, as another class of special
cases, money growth rules like those studied by Bryan and Gavin (1994), Finn
(1999), and Gavin and Kydland (1999), which call for the money growth rate to
be set as a function of output. Finally, the general rule nests, as a third class
of special cases, purely exogenous rules for money growth, like those considered
by Rotemberg (1982), Hairault and Portier (1993), and Ellison and Scott (2000).
Thus, this added ßexibility in the theoretical speciÞcation allows the data to decide on the importance of monetary endogeneity, as well as on the exact form of
monetary endogeneity, when the model is estimated via maximum likelihood.
Second, the model developed here extends those used previously by introducing
shocks to the marginal eﬃciency of investment, like those considered Þrst by
Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988) and later by Finn (1999). These
investment eﬃciency shocks are included in the model along with four others:
a more conventional productivity shock like the one in Prescott’s (1986) real
business cycle model, a preference shock like the one in McCallum and Nelson
(1999) that enters into the Euler equation linking a representative household’s
consumption growth to the real interest rate, a preference shock like the one in
10

Kim (2000) that acts like a shock to money demand, and a shock to the monetary
policy rule. Here, all Þve shocks are included for the following reason.
Kimball (1995), King and Watson (1996), Casares and McCallum (2000), and
Kim (2000) all Þnd that the introduction of adjustment costs for physical capital
helps enormously in allowing sticky-price models with optimizing agents match
key features of the data. This Þnding suggests that an adjustment cost parameter for physical capital ought to be estimated together with an adjustment
cost parameter for nominal prices in any attempt to quantify the importance of
sticky prices in the US economy. Ireland (2001a), however, discovers that data
on output, money, inßation, and interest rates are insuﬃcient to identify the capital adjustment cost parameter in a model that is quite similar to the one used
here. Accordingly, this study employs data on both consumption and investment,
as opposed to just output alone, together with data on real money balances, inßation, and the nominal interest rate, to successfully estimate adjustment cost
parameters for both capital and prices.
Since the maximum likelihood procedure uses data on Þve variables, the model
must include at least Þve exogenous shocks. For with fewer than Þve shocks, the
singularity problem discussed by Ingram, Kocherlakota, and Savin (1994) and
Ireland (2000b) arises: the model counterfactually predicts that certain linear
11

combinations of the observed variables are perfectly deterministic, so that any
attempt to apply maximum likelihood estimation automatically fails. Hence, the
introduction of the investment eﬃciency shock, along with the four others, makes
maximum likelihood estimation feasible and, more speciÞcally, helps sharpen the
estimate of the key nominal price adjustment cost parameter.

4. A Model with Endogenous Money and Sticky Prices
A representative household, a representative Þnished goods-producing Þrm, a continuum of intermediate goods-producing Þrms indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], and a central
bank operate in an economy in which time periods are indexed by t = 0, 1, 2, ....
Each intermediate goods-producing Þrm produces a distinct, perishable intermediate good; hence, intermediate goods are also indexed by i ∈ [0, 1], where Þrm
i produces good i. The model contains enough symmetry, however, to allow the
analysis to focus on the behavior of a representative intermediate goods-producing
Þrm, which produces the generic intermediate good i.
The representative household carries Mt−1 units of money, Bt−1 bonds, and
kt units of physical capital into period t. At the beginning of the period, the
household receives a lump-sum monetary transfer Tt from the central bank. Next,
the household’s bonds mature, providing Bt−1 additional units of money. The
12

household uses some of this money to purchase Bt new bonds at the cost of 1/rt
units of money per bond, where rt denotes the gross nominal interest rate between
t and t + 1. During period t, the household supplies ht units of labor and kt units
of capital to the various intermediate goods-producing Þrms, receiving Wt ht +Qt kt
units of money in return, where Wt denotes the nominal wage and Qt denotes the
nominal rental rate for capital.
The household uses its funds to purchase output at the nominal price Pt from
the representative Þnished goods-producing Þrm; the household divides its purchase up into amounts ct and it to be consumed and invested. In order to transform
invested units of the Þnished good into new units of productive capital, the household must pay an adjustment cost, measured in terms of the Þnished good and
given by
φk
2

Ã

!2

kt+1
−1
kt

kt ,

where φk ≥ 0 governs the size of the capital adjustment cost and where

kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + xt it .

In this capital accumulation constraint, the depreciation rate satisÞes 1 > δ > 0.
The disturbance xt is Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman’s (1988) shock to the
13

marginal eﬃciency of investment; it follows the autoregressive process

ln(xt ) = ρx ln(xt−1 ) + εxt ,

where 1 > ρx ≥ 0 and where the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εxt
is normally distributed with standard deviation σ x .
At the end of period t, the household receives Dt units of money in the form of
dividend payments from the various intermediate goods-producing Þrms. It then
carries Mt units of money, Bt bonds, and kt+1 units of capital into period t + 1,
subject to the budget constraint

Mt−1 + Bt−1 + Tt + Wt ht + Qt kt + Dt
φ
≥ ct +it + k
Pt
2

Ã

!2

kt+1
−1
kt

kt +

Bt /rt + Mt
.
Pt

Endowed with one unit of time per period, the representative household acts
to maximize the expected utility function

E

∞
X
t
t=0

(γ−1)/γ

β {at [γ/(γ − 1)] ln[ct

1/γ

+ et (Mt /Pt )(γ−1)/γ ] + η ln(1 − ht )},

where the discount factor and the weight on leisure satisfy 1 > β > 0 and η > 0.
The preference shock at enters into the Euler equation linking the household’s
14

consumption growth to the real interest rate; McCallum and Nelson (1999) show
that this type of disturbance resembles, in equilibrium, a shock to the IS curve
in more traditional Keynesian models. And as in Hairault and Portier (1993),
Ireland (1997, 2000a, 2001a), and Kim (2000), the preference parameter γ > 0
measures the absolute value of the interest elasticity of money demand, while the
preference shock et acts like a shock to money demand. Both preference shocks
follow autoregressive processes:

ln(at ) = ρa ln(at−1 ) + εat

and
ln(et ) = (1 − ρe ) ln(e) + ρe ln(et−1 ) + εet ,
where 1 > ρa ≥ 0, 1 > ρe ≥ 0, and e > 0 and where the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovations εat and εet are normally distributed with standard deviations
σ a and σ e .
The representative Þnished goods-producing Þrm uses yt (i) units of each intermediate good i ∈ [0, 1], purchased at the nominal price Pt (i), to produce yt
units of the Þnished good according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology

15

described by
·Z 1
0

yt (i)(θ−1)/θ di

¸θ/(θ−1)

≥ yt ,

where θ > 1. The Þrm acts to maximize its proÞts; the Þrst-order conditions for
its problem are
yt (i) = [Pt (i)/Pt ]−θ yt
for all i ∈ [0, 1], implying that −θ measures the constant price elasticity of demand
for each intermediate good. Competition drives the representative Þnished goodsproducing Þrm’s proÞts to zero; this zero-proÞt condition determines Pt as

Pt =

·Z 1
0

Pt (i)1−θ di

¸1/(1−θ)

.

The representative intermediate goods-producing Þrm hires ht (i) units of labor
and kt (i) units of capital from the representative household in order to produce
yt (i) units of intermediate good i according to the constant-returns-to-scale technology described by
kt (i)α [zt ht (i)]1−α ≥ yt (i),
where 1 > α > 0. As in Prescott (1986), the aggregate productivity shock follows

16

the autoregressive process

ln(zt ) = (1 − ρz ) ln(z) + ρz ln(zt−1 ) + εzt ,

where 1 > ρz ≥ 0, z > 0, and the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εzt
is normally distributed with standard deviation σ z .
Since intermediate goods substitute imperfectly for one another in producing
the Þnished good, the representative intermediate goods-producing Þrm sells its
output in a monopolistically competitive market: during each period t, the Þrm
sets the nominal price Pt (i) for its output, subject to the requirement that it satisfy
the representative Þnished goods-producing Þrm’s demand at that price, taking
the aggregates Pt and yt as given. And as in Rotemberg (1982), the representative
intermediate goods-producing Þrm faces a quadratic cost of adjusting its nominal
price between periods, measured in terms of the Þnished good and given by
"

#2

φp
Pt (i)
−1
2 πPt−1 (i)

yt ,

where φp ≥ 0 governs the size of the price adjustment cost and where π measures
the gross steady-state inßation rate. In the special case where φp = 0, the model

17

collapses to a ßexible-price speciÞcation.
The quadratic cost of price adjustment makes the representative intermediate
goods-producing Þrm’s problem dynamic; instead of maximizing its proÞts periodby-period, it seeks to maximize its total market value,

E

∞
X
t

β λt [Dt (i)/Pt ],

t=0

where β t λt measures the representative household’s marginal utility of consumption during period t and where Dt (i)/Pt , the real value of the Þrm’s proÞts and
dividend payment during period t, is
"

#2

Dt (i)
Pt (i)
Pt (i)yt (i) − Wt ht (i) − Qt kt (i) φp
−1
=
−
Pt
Pt
2 πPt−1 (i)

yt .

Finally, the central bank conducts monetary policy by adjusting a linear combination of the short-term nominal interest rate rt and the money growth rate
µt = Mt /Mt−1 in response to deviations of output yt and inßation π t = Pt /Pt−1
from their steady-state values, according to the policy rule

ωr ln(rt /r) − ωµ ln(µt /µ) = ω y ln(yt /y) + ω π ln(π t /π) + ln(vt ),

18

where ωr , ω µ , ωy , and ω π are response coeﬃcients chosen by the central bank and
where r, µ, y, and π are the steady-state values of rt , µt , yt , and π t . The monetary
policy shock vt follows the autoregressive process

ln(vt ) = ρv ln(vt−1 ) + εvt ,

where 1 > ρv ≥ 0 and the zero-mean, serially uncorrelated innovation εvt is
normally distributed with standard deviation σ v . As noted above, this policy rule
is considerably more general than those used in previous studies. When ω r > 0,
ω µ = 0, ω y > 0, and ωπ > 0, it becomes a Taylor (1993) rule for increasing the
nominal interest rate in response to higher output or inßation. When ω r = 0,
ω µ > 0, ω y < 0, and ω π = 0, it resembles the policy rules from Bryan and
Gavin (1994), Finn (1999), and Gavin and Kydland (1999), according to which
the central bank increases the money growth rate whenever output rises. Finally,
when ωr = 0, ω µ > 0, ωy = 0, and ω π = 0, it collapses to a purely exogenous,
autoregressive speciÞcation for money growth, like those appearing in Rotemberg
(1982), Hairault and Portier (1993), and Ellison and Scott (2000). Since each
of these special cases sets one or more of the response parameters ω r , ω µ , ω y ,
and ω π equal to zero, it is most convenient to leave each of these parameters

19

unconstrained, pinning down their absolute scale by adopting the normalization
σ v = 0.01. The policy rule thereby remains quite ßexible in terms of the extent
to which and the manner in which it allows money and interest rates to respond
endogenously to shocks that aﬀect output and inßation.
Pointing out, quite rightly, that the Federal Reserve receives economic data
with a lag, McCallum (1993) criticizes policy-rule speciÞcations like the one originally proposed by Taylor (1993) and the variant used here, insofar as they call
for an adjustment of the interest rate rt or the money growth rate µt in response
to contemporaneous changes in output yt and inßation π t . An alternative formulation, suggested by McCallum’s critique, adjusts rt or µt in response to expected
changes in output and inßation: Et−1 yt and Et−1 π t . For the purposes of the
present study, however, the rule allowing for a direct response to actual output
and inßation, yt and π t , may be more appropriate. Consider the special case of
the model used here in which φp = 0, so that prices are perfectly ßexible. In this
special case, yt and especially π t jump sharply, immediately, and unexpectedly
when shocks hit the economy; hence, a policy rule that responds only to Et−1 yt
and Et−1 π t severely limits the central bank’s ability to react to those shocks.
Thus, one should recognize that the policy rule used here implicitly assumes that
the central bank can contemporaneously observe and respond to shocks of vari20

ous kinds. But again, for the purposes of the present study, this informational
assumption seems at least as reasonable as the assumption that Þrms face costs of
nominal price adjustment. Taken together, therefore, the assumptions embedded
into the model place the ßexible-price (φp = 0) and sticky-price (φp > 0) variants
on equal footing, ex-ante, allowing the data to more convincingly discriminate
between them, ex-post.
In the model’s symmetric equilibrium, all intermediate goods-producing Þrms
make identical decisions, so that Pt (i) = Pt , yt (i) = yt , ht (i) = ht , kt (i) = kt ,
and Dt (i) = Dt for all i ∈ [0, 1]. In addition, the market-clearing conditions
Mt = Mt−1 + Tt and Bt = Bt−1 = 0 must hold. These conditions, together with
the Þrst-order conditions for the three representative agents’ problems, the laws
of motion for the Þve exogenous shocks, and the central bank’s policy rule, form
a system of nonlinear diﬀerence equations describing the behavior of equilibrium
prices and quantities. This system implies that in the absence of shocks, the
economy converges to a steady state. After the system is log-linearized around its
steady state, the methods of Blanchard and Kahn (1980) yield a solution of the
form
st = Πst−1 + Ωεt

21

and
ft = Ust .
In the solution, the vector st contains the model’s state variables, which include the capital stock kt and lagged real balances mt−1 = Mt−1 /Pt−1 as well as
the Þve exogenous shocks at , et , xt , zt , and vt ; lagged real balances enter the state
vector because prices are sticky. The vector εt contains the Þve innovations εat ,
εet , εxt , εzt , and εvt , which are assumed to be mutually uncorrelated as well as
serially uncorrelated. The vector ft contains the model’s ßow variables, which
include consumption ct , investment it , inßation πt , and the nominal interest rate
rt . Finally, the matrices Π, Ω, and U have elements that depend on the parameters describing private agents’ tastes and technologies as well as the parameters
of the central bank’s policy rule. The constraints linking the elements of Π, Ω,
and U to the underlying parameters of the theoretical model cannot be written
in closed form and must instead be derived through numerical implementation of
the Blanchard-Kahn solution procedure.

22

5. Empirical Strategy
The model’s solution takes the form of a state-space econometric model, driven
by the Þve exogenous shocks at , et , xt , zt , and vt . Hence, its parameters may
be estimated via maximum likelihood, using the methods outlined by Hamilton
(1994, Ch.13), with data on as many as Þve variables, while still avoiding the
singularity problem discussed by Ingram, Kocherlakota, and Savin (1994) and
Ireland (2000b). The Þve series used here are those for consumption, investment,
real money balances, inßation, and the short-term nominal interest rate.
As explained above, data on both consumption and investment are used, rather
than data on output alone, in hopes of obtaining the best possible estimate of the
capital adjustment cost parameter φk . Kimball (1995), King and Watson (1996),
Casares and McCallum (2000), and Kim (2000) all show that capital adjustment
costs interact strongly with nominal price adjustment costs in allowing stickyprice models with optimizing agents match key features of the data. These studies
therefore imply that data that provide a sharp estimate of the capital adjustment
cost parameter φk will also provide a sharp estimate of the price adjustment cost
parameter φp . And since the sticky-price model developed here collapses to a
ßexible-price speciÞcation when φp = 0, a sharp estimate of φp should, in turn,

23

allow for the most informative test of the null hypothesis, suggested by the strict
endogenous money view, that φp = 0.
Thus, in the US data, consumption is measured by real personal consumption expenditures, while investment is measured by real gross private domestic
investment. These two series represent the broadest measures of consumption
and investment in the National Income and Product Accounts. Real money balances are calculated by dividing the M2 money stock by the GDP deßator, and
inßation is calculated as changes in the GDP deßator. Finally, the short-term
nominal interest rate is measured by the three-month Treasury bill rate. All of
these data, except for the interest rate, are seasonally adjusted. The series for
consumption, investment, and real balances are expressed in per-capita terms by
dividing by the civilian noninstitutional population, age 16 and over. The data
are quarterly and run from 1959:1 through 2000:4.
Several data-related issues must be tackled prior to estimating the model.
First, a fundamental change in Federal Reserve policy is widely believed to have
occurred soon after Paul Volker’s appointment as Chairman in August 1979. The
idea that this regime shift worked to alter the correlations between nominal and
real variables in the US data appears both in the literature on endogenous money
(see, for example, Bryan and Gavin 1994 and Gavin and Kydland 1999) and in
24

the literature that emphasizes the importance of sticky prices (see Clarida, Gali,
and Gertler 2000). Thus, to allow for the possibility that the policy parameters
µ, ω r , ω µ , ω y , and ω π change, the full sample period is divided into two disjoint
subsamples, the Þrst running from 1959:1 through 1979:2 and the second running
from 1979:3 through 2000:4. The entire model is estimated with data from each
subsample.
Second, distinct upward trends appear in the data for consumption, investment, and real money balances per capita, reßecting the secular growth of the
US economy. The model, by contrast, implies that each of these variables ßuctuates around a constant mean. Ireland (1997) accounts for trends in data for
output and real balances by adding a deterministic trend to the productivity variable zt . The model then implies that all real variables grow at the same rate g
along a balanced growth path, where g may be estimated together with the other
parameters describing tastes and technologies. Here, the use of data on consumption and investment make this approach problematic, since in both subsamples,
investment grows at a distinctly faster rate than consumption. Moreover, the
Federal Reserve’s redeÞnition of its M2 monetary aggregate in 1996, discussed
by Orphanides and Porter (2000), together with the unusual weakness in M2
growth during the early 1990s, discussed by Mehra (1997), introduce diﬀerential
25

trends into the series for real balances as well. More speciÞcally, for the pre-1979
subsample, regressions of the logarithm of each variable on a constant and a time
trend yield slope coeﬃcients of 0.0073 for investment, 0.0055 for consumption, and
0.0046 for real balances. For the post-1979 subsample, the same regressions yield
slope coeﬃcients of 0.0084 for investment, 0.0053 for consumption, and 0.0025
for real balances. Rather than complicating the theoretical model in a way that
explains these apparent departures from balanced growth, the linearly detrended
series are used to estimate the model instead.
Third, even with data on Þve variables, several of the model’s parameters remain unidentiÞed and must therefore be Þxed prior to estimation. The parameter
η, for example, measures the weight on leisure in the representative household’s
utility and cannot be estimated without data on employment; the setting η = 1.5
implies that the household spends about one-third of its time working in the model’s steady state. The depreciation rate δ cannot be estimated without data on the
capital stock; the setting δ = 0.025 implies an annual depreciation rate of about
10 percent. Finally, the parameter θ, determining the steady-state markup of
price over marginal cost, cannot be estimated without data on wages; the setting
θ = 6 implies a steady-state markup of 20 percent.

26

6. Estimates, Tests, and Diagnostics
Table 1 presents maximum likelihood estimates of the model’s 21 remaining parameters for both the pre-1979 subsample running from 1959:1 through 1979:2 and
the post-1979 subsample running from 1979:3 through 2000:4. The standard errors, also shown in table 1, correspond to the square roots of the diagonal elements
of negative one times the inverted matrix of second derivatives of the maximized
log likelihood function.
Looking Þrst at the parameters describing tastes and technologies, the estimates of the representative household’s discount factor β exceed 0.99 for both
subsamples. The estimates of γ imply an interest elasticity of M2 demand equal
to −0.074 for the pre-1979 period and −0.035 for the post-1979 period. The estimate of α, measuring capital’s share in the production function for intermediate
goods, equals 0.20 for the Þrst subsample and 0.21 for the second subsample.
Turning next to the parameters of the monetary policy rule, the estimates of
µ translate into annualized, steady-state money growth rates of 4.5 percent before
1979 and 3.6 percent after 1979. The estimates of ω r , ω µ , and ω π are large for both
subsamples, allowing for at least two possible interpretations of Federal Reserve
policy before and after 1979. First, Federal Reserve policy can be described

27

as following a modiÞed Taylor (1993) rule that adjusts the short-term nominal
interest rate in response to deviations of money growth and inßation, instead
of output and inßation, from their steady-state values. Alternatively, Federal
Reserve policy can be characterized as one of Poole’s (1970) ”combination policies”
that adjusts a linear combination of the interest rate and the money growth rate to
achieve a target for inßation. On the other hand, the small estimates of ωy from
both subsamples contradict the endogenous money speciÞcations of Bryan and
Gavin (1994), Finn (1999), and Gavin and Kydland (1999), all of which have the
money growth rate responding directly to changes in output. Note, however, that
these small estimates of ω y need not imply that the endogenous money channel
is unimportant in explaining the correlations between money growth, interest
rates, and output since, to the extent that output is correlated with inßation, the
policy response of money growth and interest rates to inßation will also generate
reduced-form correlations between these variables and output.
The estimates of e and z allow the steady-state values of real balances and
output in the model to match the average values of detrended real balances and
output in the data. The estimates of ρa , ρe , ρx , ρz , and ρv imply that the model’s
exogenous shocks are quite persistent. And among the estimates of the standard
deviations of the innovations to the shocks, the large estimate of σ x for the post28

1979 period deserves special mention: evidently, large investment eﬃciency shocks
help the model explain the investment boom that lifted the ratio of investment
to consumption from 18 percent in 1991:2 to 29 percent in 2000:4.
Finally, consider the capital and price adjustment cost parameters φk and φp .
The estimates of both parameters rise across subsamples, suggesting the presence
of increased real and nominal rigidity in the post-1979 period, but appear quite
sizeable even for the earlier period. Of special interest here, of course, are tests of
the null hypothesis that φp = 0. In the case where φp = 0, the model collapses to
a ßexible-price speciÞcation; hence, a test of the null that φp = 0 represents a test
of whether sticky prices, over and above endogenous money, are really necessary
in allowing the model to explain the behavior of nominal and real variables in the
US data. Under the null hypothesis that φp = 0, the Wald statistic formed by
squaring the ratio of the point estimate of φp to its standard error is asymptotically
distributed as a chi-square random variable with one degree of freedom. For both
subsamples, in fact, the p-value for the Wald test of φp = 0 is less than 0.05.
Calculating the standard errors reported in table 1 involves two steps, numerically evaluating the matrix of second derivatives of the maximized log likelihood
function and inverting that large matrix having elements of varying magnitudes,
both of which may introduce approximation error into the Wald statistic described
29

above. Likelihood ratio tests, however, can be performed without reference to the
standard errors and yield, as the useful by-products displayed in table 2, parameter estimates for the ßexible-price model that results when the constraint φp = 0
is imposed. With φp = 0 imposed, the maximized value of the log likelihood
falls from 1466.7 to 1442.4 for the pre-1979 subsample and from 1568.3 to 1521.8
for the post-1979 subsample. Again under the null hypothesis that φp = 0, the
likelihood ratio statistic formed by doubling the diﬀerence between the unconstrained and constrained log likelihood functions is asymptotically distributed as
a chi-square random variable with one degree of freedom. Now, for both subsamples, the p-value for the likelihood ratio test of φp = 0 is less than 0.01. For
both subsamples, therefore, the introduction of sticky prices yields a statistically
signiÞcant improvement in the model’s ability to Þt the data.
But precisely which features of the data are explained by the unconstrained
model, with sticky prices, but not by the constrained model, with ßexible prices?
To answer this question, table 3 and Þgures 1-4 present sets of diagnostic statistics, suggested by McCallum (2001), which assist in evaluating the empirical
performance of each model variant for each subsample of data. Table 3 compares
the standard deviations of four key variables–detrended output (deÞned in both
the model and the data as the sum of detrended consumption and detrended in30

vestment), nominal money growth, inßation, and the nominal interest rate–as
implied by each of the estimated models and as seen in the US data. Figures 1-4,
meanwhile, plot the vector autocorrelation functions for the same four variables
in the models and the data. Looking at statistics for aggregate output, instead of
consumption and investment separately, and for nominal money growth, instead
of real money balances, keeps the presentation more concise and also makes the
results easier to interpret: correlations between real output and nominal money
growth, for instance, are more familiar to monetary economists than correlations
between real consumption and real money balances. In both the table and the Þgures, the statistics for the data correspond to those implied by an unconstrained,
fourth-order vector autoregression for detrended output, money growth, inßation,
and the interest rate; Fuhrer and Moore (1995) also use unconstrained vector
autoregressions to summarize the data in this way.
Table 3, containing the standard deviations, brings to light the same weakness
of the sticky-price model that is emphasized by Ellison and Scott (2000): for
both periods, the sticky-price model overstates the volatility of output. For the
pre-1979 subsample, in fact, the constrained, ßexible-price model comes closer
than the unconstrained, sticky-price model to matching the volatilities of all four
variables. For the second subsample, however, the sticky-price model does better
31

in matching standard deviations from the data, except for the case of output.
But while table 3 tells a mixed story about the empirical performance of the
sticky-price model, Þgures 1-4 show that the sticky-price model does much better
than the ßexible-price model in matching the correlations between nominal and
real variables at various leads and lags. Comparing Þgures 1 and 3 for the pre-1979
subsample, and comparing Þgures 2 and 4 for the post-1979 subsample, reveals
that the sticky-price model reproduces many more of the correlations, found in
the data, between output and lags of money growth, inßation, and interest rates.
For the pre-1979 period, for example, only the sticky-price model captures what
King and Watson (1996) call the ”inverted leading indicator” property of the
nominal interest rate, as reßected in the negative correlation between output and
lagged interest rates. And for the post-1979 period, only the sticky-price model
comes close to explaining the large positive correlations between output and lagged
money growth rates that appear in the data.
Surprisingly, perhaps, the ßexible-price model actually does better than the
sticky-price model in reproducing the degree of inßation persistence, as measured
by the correlation of inßation with its own lagged values, found in the pre-1979
data. The ßexible-price model attributes this inßation persistence to persistence
in the exogenous shocks, particularly in the preference shock at . For the post-1979
32

period, however, the inßation persistence implied by the sticky-price model comes
closer to that seen in the data. Thus, while the introduction of sticky prices does
not improve the model’s empirical performance along all dimensions, on balance
it yields a clear improvement in overall Þt.
But despite these diﬀerences in empirical performance, which lead the data to
clearly prefer the unconstrained, sticky-price model to the constrained, ßexibleprice model, some quantitative implications are shared by both versions of the
model. Tables 4 and 5, for example, break down the variances in detrended
output, money growth, inßation, and the nominal interest rate into orthogonal
components attributed to each of the models’ Þve exogenous shocks. Some of the
results of this variance decomposition diﬀer across models and subsamples. But
for both subsamples, neither the sticky-price model nor the ßexible-price model
attributes more than one percent of the variances of output and the interest rate
to the policy shock vt . Policy shocks do account for nonnegligible fractions of
the variances of money growth and inßation. But looking across results for each
model and each subsample, the percentage of the variances of money growth and
inßation explained by the policy shock never exceeds 40 percent.
Thus, both the sticky-price model and the ßexible-price model imply that virtually all of the variation in real variables, and most of the variation in nominal
33

variables, found in the postwar US data come from sources other than monetary
policy shocks. Put another way, although the sticky-price model allows nominal
disturbances to have potentially important eﬀects on real variables, the estimates
from that model also imply that monetary policy shocks have played a very small
role in driving business cycles in the postwar US economy. Similar conclusions
emerge from empirical studies, such as Leeper, Sims, and Zha (1996), that use
more conventional vector autoregressions to identify the eﬀects of monetary policy
shocks in the US data; and McCallum (2001) also emphasizes that in theoretical
models like the one used here, the systematic component of monetary policy, as
summarized by settings for the coeﬃcients ω r , ω µ , ω y , and ω π , plays a far more
important role than monetary policy shocks in shaping the dynamic behavior of
key macroeconomic variables. But here, building on these earlier insights, the results also suggest that the null hypothesis that φp = 0 is rejected, thereby lending
support to the sticky-price model, based mainly on information about the Federal Reserve’s–and more generally the US economy’s–response to nonmonetary
shocks.
Finally, Þgures 1-4 illustrate how some of the correlations between nominal
and real variables change across the pre-1979 and post-1979 subsamples. In pre1979 data, for example, detrended output is negatively correlated with lagged
34

money growth; in post-1979 data, this correlation becomes positive. And the
negative correlation between output and the lagged interest rate, emphasized as a
key stylized fact in the study by King and Watson (1996), appears here in the pre1979 data but not in the post-1979 data. Bryan and Gavin (1994) and Gavin and
Kydland (1999) focus on changing correlations such as these, attributing them
to the shift in monetary policy marked by Paul Volker’s arrival at the Federal
Reserve in August 1979. Here, the parameter estimates from tables 1 and 2 can
be used to test this hypothesis.
If the changing correlations found in the data primarily reßect changes in
Federal Reserve policy, then instability ought to appear in the estimates of one or
more of the model’s policy parameters µ, ω r , ω µ , ω y , ω π , and ρv . Thus, the Þnal
columns of tables 1 and 2 report the Wald statistic for Andrews and Fair’s (1988)
test for parameter stability in nonlinear econometric models like those estimated
here: this test statistic is formed by squaring the diﬀerence between parameter
estimates across subsamples and dividing the result by the sum of the squares
of the corresponding standard errors. Under the null hypothesis of parameter
stability, this test statistic is asymptotically distributed as a chi-square random
variable with one degree of freedom.
In both the unconstrained, sticky-price model and the constrained, ßexible35

price model, some evidence does appear of a signiÞcant change in the monetary
policy rule across the 1979 breakpoint. Using the estimates from the sticky-price
model, the p-value for the test of the null hypothesis of parameter stability is
less than 0.10 for ω µ and less than 0.05 for ρv . Using the estimates from the
ßexible-price model, the p-value for the test of stability is less than 0.05 for ω µ
and less than 0.10 for ωπ . In general, and broadly consistent with the results from
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), it appears that the Federal Reserve has more
aggressively adjusted the interest rate in response to changes in money growth
and inßation in the post-1979 period.
On the other hand, instability also appears in some of the model’s nonpolicy
parameters. In both the sticky-price and ßexible-price cases, the Wald test decisively rejects the null hypothesis of stability for the discount factor β, the capital
adjustment cost parameter φk , and several of the parameters governing the size
and persistence of the exogenous nonpolicy shocks. Thus, while estimates from
both the sticky-price and ßexible-price models attribute some of the changing correlations between nominal and real variables to shifts in Federal Reserve policy,
those estimates also suggest that other structural changes, unrelated to monetary
policy, have played an important role as well.

36

7. Conclusion
The maximum likelihood estimates, the formal statistical hypothesis tests, and
the less formal diagnostic procedures described above all indicate that the postwar
US data prefer a model featuring nominal price rigidity to one with purely ßexible
prices. These results obtain despite the fact that both the sticky-price and the
ßexible-price models attribute most of the observed variation in the money growth
rate and the short-term nominal interest rate to the Federal Reserve’s deliberate
policy response to the other, nonmonetary shocks that have hit the economy.
These results, therefore, provide deÞnitive answers to the questions posed at the
outset: evidently, the introduction of nominal price rigidity helps in allowing a
model of endogenous money to account for the correlations between nominal and
real variables found in the postwar US data.
But while the results do lend empirical support to sticky-price models of the
business cycle, it should also be noted that the maximum likelihood estimates of
the nominal price adjustment cost parameters obtained here, while large and statistically signiÞcant, are associated with rather sizeable standard errors, indicating
that considerable uncertainty remains about the absolute degree of nominal price
rigidity that is present in the US economy. In addition, although the sticky-price

37

model that is developed here potentially allows monetary policy disturbances to
have large eﬀects on the real economy, the estimated model suggests that, in practice, such shocks have played a minimal role in driving output ßuctuations over
the postwar period. Thus, these results may also explain why purely real business
cycle models such as Prescott’s (1986) successfully replicate many features of the
postwar American business cycle.
The empirical results obtained here conÞrm that important changes in the
correlations between nominal and real variables can be found in the US data,
looking across pre-1979 and post-1979 subsamples. Previous studies by Bryan
and Gavin (1994), Gavin and Kydland (1999), and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler
(2000) attribute these changes to the important shift in monetary policy that
is widely believed to have followed the appointment of Paul Volker as Federal
Reserve Chairman and, indeed, the statistical tests from above detect evidence of
instability in the parameters describing Federal Reserve policy before and after
1979. On the other hand, the same tests also detect evidence of instability in
the some of the model’s other parameters, describing private agents’ tastes and
technologies as well as the size and persistence of nonmonetary shocks.
Thus, the theoretical and empirical analyses conducted here suggest that important structural changes have taken place in the US economy since 1979–
38

changes that go beyond a shift in the way that monetary policy is conducted.
Identifying the source of these structural changes, and understanding their full
impact on the performance of the American economy, remain outstanding tasks
for future research.

8. References
Andrews, D.W.K., Fair, R.C., 1988. Inference in nonlinear econometric models
with structural change, Review of Economic Studies 55, 615-639.
Ball, L., Mankiw, N.G., 1994. A sticky-price manifesto, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 41, 127-151.
Blanchard, O.J., Kahn, C.M., 1980. The solution of linear diﬀerence models
under rational expectations, Econometrica 48, 1305-1311.
Bryan, M.F., Gavin, W.T., 1994. A diﬀerent kind of money illusion: the case of
long and variable lags, Journal of Policy Modeling 16, 529-540.
Casares, M., McCallum, B.T., 2000. An optimizing IS-LM framework with endogenous investment, Working Paper 7908, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

39

Clarida, R., Gali J., Gertler, M., 2000. Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic
stability: evidence and some theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115,
147-180.
Coleman, W.J. II, 1996. Money and output: a test of reverse causation, American Economic Review 86, 90-111.
Ellison, M., Scott A., 2000. Sticky prices and volatile output, Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 621-632.
Finn, M.G., 1996. A theory of the capacity utilization/inßation relationship,
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 82, 67-86.
Finn, M.G., 1999. An equilibrium theory of nominal and real exchange rate
comovement, Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 453-475.
Freeman, S., 1986. Inside money, monetary contractions, and welfare, Canadian
Journal of Economics 19, 87-98.
Freeman, S., Huﬀman, G.W., 1991. Inside money, output, and causality, International Economic Review 32, 645-667.
Freeman, S., Kydland, F.E., 2000. Monetary aggregates and output, American
Economic Review 90, 1125-1135.
40

Friedman, M., Schwartz, A.J., 1963. A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960 (Princeton University Press, Princeton).
Fuhrer, J., Moore, G., 1995. Inßation persistence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 127-159.
Gali, J., Gertler, M., 1999. Inßation dynamics: a structural econometric analysis,
Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.
Gavin, W.T., Kydland, F.E., 1999. Endogenous money supply and the business
cycle, Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 347-369.
Greenwood, J., Hercowitz, Z., Huﬀman, G.W., 1988. Investment, capacity utilization, and the real business cycle, American Economic Review 78, 402417.
Greenwood, J., Huﬀman, G.W., 1987. A dynamic equilibrium model of inßation
and unemployment, Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 203-228.
Hairault, J.O., Portier, F., 1993. Money, new-Keynesian macroeconomics and
the business cycle, European Economic Review 37, 1533-1568.
Hamilton, J.D., 1994. Time Series Analysis (Princeton University Press, Princeton).
41

Ingram, B.F., Kocherlakota, N.R., Savin, N.E., 1994. Explaining business cycles:
a multiple-shock approach, Journal of Monetary Economics 34, 415-428.
Ireland, P.N., 1997. A small, structural, quarterly model for monetary policy
evaluation, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 47, 83108.
Ireland, P.N., 2000a. Interest rates, inßation, and Federal Reserve policy since
1980, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, 417-434.
Ireland, P.N., 2000b. A method for taking models to the data, Manuscript,
Boston College, Department of Economics.
Ireland, P.N., 2001a. Sticky-price models of the business cycle: speciÞcation and
stability, Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 3-18.
Ireland, P.N., 2001b. Money’s role in the monetary business cycle, Working
Paper 8115, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kim, J., 2000. Constructing and estimating a realistic optimizing model of
monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 45, 329-359.
Kimball, M.S., 1995. The quantitative analytics of the basic neomonetarist
model, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27, 1241-1277.
42

King, R.G., Plosser, C.I., 1984. Money, credit, and prices in a real business cycle,
American Economic Review 74, 363-380.
King, R.G., Watson, M.W., 1996. Money, prices, interest rates and the business
cycle, Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 35-53.
Leeper, E.M., Sims, C.A., 1994. Toward a modern macroeconomic model usable
for policy analysis, in: Fischer, S., Rotemberg, J.J., eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1994 (MIT Press, Cambridge) 81-118.
Leeper, E.M., Sims, C.A., Zha, T., 1996. What does monetary policy do?,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-63.
McCallum, B.T., 1993. Discretion versus policy rules in practice: two critical
points, a comment, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
39, 215-220.
McCallum, B.T., 2001.

Analysis of the monetary transmission mechanism:

methodological issues, in: Deutsche Bundesbank, ed., The Monetary Transmission Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe. (Palgrave,
New York) 11-43.
McCallum, B.T., Nelson, E., 1999. An optimizing IS-LM speciÞcation for mon43

etary policy and business cycle analysis, Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking 31, 296-316.
Mehra, Y.P., 1997. A review of the recent behavior of M2 demand, Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 83, 27-43.
Orphanides, A., Porter, R.D., 2000. P* revisited: money-based inßation forecasts with a changing equilibrium velocity, Journal of Economics and Business 52, 87-100.
Poole, W., 1970. Optimal choice of monetary policy instruments in a simple
stochastic macro model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, 197-216.
Prescott, E.C., 1986. Theory ahead of business-cycle measurement, CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25, 11-44.
Roberts, J.M., Stockton, D.J., Struckmeyer, C.S., 1994. Evidence on the ßexibility of prices, Review of Economics and Statistics 76, 142-150.
Rotemberg, J.J., 1982. Sticky prices in the United States, Journal of Political
Economy 90, 1187-1211.
Rotemberg, J.J., 1996. Prices, output, and hours: an empirical analysis based
on a sticky price model, Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 505-533.
44

Rotemberg, J.J., Woodford, M., 1997. An optimization-based econometric framework for the evaluation of monetary policy, in: Bernanke, B.S., Rotemberg,
J.J., eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997 (MIT Press, Cambridge)
297-346.
Sbordone, A.M., 2002. Prices and unit labor costs: a new test of price stickiness,
Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 265-292.
Taylor, J.B., 1993. Discretion versus policy rules in practice, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Taylor, J.B., ed., 1999. Monetary Policy Rules (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago).
Tobin, J., 1970. Money and income: post hoc ergo propter hoc?, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 84, 301-317.
Yun, T., 1996. Nominal price rigidity, money supply endogeneity, and business
cycles, Journal of Monetary Economics 37, 345-370.

45

Table 1. Maximum Likelihood Estimates, Sticky-Price Model

Parameter

Pre-1979
Estimate

β
γ
α
φp
φk
µ
ωr
ωµ
ωy
ωπ
e
z
ρa
ρe
ρx
ρz
ρv
σa
σe
σx
σz

0.9980
0.0736
0.2022
54.0745
12.4368
1.0110
3.0296
0.9840
−0.0239
2.0070
2.7599
7034.6
0.9903
0.9497
0.6975
0.9787
0.4400
0.0064
0.0115
0.0224
0.0153

Std Error

Post-1979
Estimate

Std Error

W

0.0008
0.0620
0.0058
22.8094
3.7919
0.0098
0.3747
0.1437
0.0169
0.3761
0.7420
440.8
0.0158
0.0290
0.0904
0.0162
0.0603
0.0074
0.0017
0.0099
0.0024

0.9916
0.0345
0.2119
161.8345
32.1346
1.0088
2.2974
1.3014
−0.0157
2.2102
3.8975
7090.8
0.9026
0.9790
0.9539
0.9465
0.1984
0.0186
0.0076
0.2127
0.0202

0.0010
0.0075
0.0081
78.5783
2.5833
0.0015
0.2733
0.1244
0.0282
0.4029
0.1437
650.0
0.0304
0.0178
0.0301
0.0231
0.0894
0.0021
0.0006
0.0824
0.0048

25.9299∗∗∗
0.3907
0.9421
1.7345
18.4308∗∗∗
0.0500
2.4921
2.7870∗
0.0621
0.1360
2.2655
0.0051
6.5424∗∗
0.7413
7.2332∗∗∗
1.3135
5.0217∗∗
2.5453
4.7501∗∗
5.2535∗∗
0.8228

Notes: W denotes the Wald statistic for Andrews and Fair’s (1988) test for
parameter stability across subsamples. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate that the pvalue for the test is less than 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01.

Table 2. Maximum Likelihood Estimates, Flexible-Price Model

Parameter

Pre-1979
Estimate

β
γ
α
φp
φk
µ
ωr
ωµ
ωy
ωπ
e
z
ρa
ρe
ρx
ρz
ρv
σa
σe
σx
σz

0.9981
0.0280
0.2045
0
1.9271
1.0113
2.8129
0.4278
−0.0043
2.5318
3.3733
7038.6
0.9879
0.9456
0.9475
0.9457
0.1840
0.0134
0.0092
0.0057
0.0082

Std Error

Post-1979
Estimate

Std Error

W

0.0005
0.0166
0.0053
–
0.9925
0.0059
0.2817
0.1306
0.0218
0.2539
0.2428
363.7
0.0130
0.0279
0.0726
0.0368
0.0689
0.0035
0.0008
0.0024
0.0023

0.9913
0.0250
0.2177
0
17.4075
1.0088
2.6350
0.8219
−0.0211
3.3773
4.0382
6927.9
0.7939
0.9750
0.9478
0.9571
0.1645
0.0194
0.0075
0.0449
0.0094

0.0007
0.0064
0.0093
–
4.1013
0.0011
0.2547
0.1435
0.0401
0.3578
0.1347
247.4
0.0342
0.0187
0.0404
0.0151
0.0922
0.0018
0.0006
0.0146
0.0011

62.2476∗∗∗
0.0279
1.5125
–
13.4591∗∗∗
0.1719
0.2194
4.1265∗∗
0.1354
3.7136∗
5.7356∗∗
0.0633
28.1111∗∗∗
0.7646
0.0000
0.0827
0.0287
2.3003
3.1138∗
7.0526∗∗∗
0.2074

Notes: W denotes the Wald statistic for Andrews and Fair’s (1988) test for
parameter stability across subsamples. ∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗∗∗ indicate that the pvalue for the test is less than 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01.

Table 3. Standard Deviations, Models and Data
Pre-1979
Variable

Data

Sticky-Price
Model

Flexible-Price
Model

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

0.0427
0.0081
0.0072
0.0046

0.0790
0.0137
0.0112
0.0105

0.0519
0.0131
0.0089
0.0082

Variable

Data

Sticky-Price
Model

Flexible-Price
Model

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

0.0349
0.0082
0.0035
0.0058

0.1277
0.0099
0.0040
0.0057

0.0449
0.0112
0.0044
0.0042

Post-1979

Table 4. Variance Decompositions, Sticky-Price Model
Pre-1979

Variable

Preference
Shock at

Money
Demand
Shock et

Investment
Eﬃciency
Shock xt

Productivity
Shock zt

Monetary
Policy
Shock vt

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

1.7
53.0
81.9
86.1

0.5
7.1
3.8
5.1

1.2
0.8
0.5
0.2

95.7
18.9
7.7
8.6

0.9
20.1
6.0
0.1

Variable

Preference
Shock at

Money
Demand
Shock et

Investment
Eﬃciency
Shock xt

Productivity
Shock zt

Monetary
Policy
Shock vt

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

1.4
12.3
32.7
45.1

0.3
4.9
3.7
2.7

83.0
21.7
21.2
41.8

14.9
23.7
34.4
9.5

0.3
37.3
8.1
1.0

Post-1979

Note: Each Þgure corresponds to the percentage of the variance of each variable
attributed to each shock.

Table 5. Variance Decompositions, Flexible-Price Model
Pre-1979

Variable

Preference
Shock at

Money
Demand
Shock et

Investment
Eﬃciency
Shock xt

Productivity
Shock zt

Monetary
Policy
Shock vt

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

48.2
29.2
54.6
71.2

0.1
26.8
2.0
1.2

3.5
15.3
5.8
5.3

48.3
23.6
18.0
22.2

0.0
5.1
19.7
0.2

Variable

Preference
Shock at

Money
Demand
Shock et

Investment
Eﬃciency
Shock xt

Productivity
Shock zt

Monetary
Policy
Shock vt

Detrended Output
Money Growth
Inßation
Nominal Interest Rate

3.2
16.1
22.4
65.1

0.2
25.7
9.6
0.4

44.8
21.1
17.9
26.8

51.8
33.4
15.6
7.6

0.0
3.8
34.5
0.1

Post-1979

Note: Each Þgure corresponds to the percentage of the variance of each variable
attributed to each shock.

output, lagged output

output, lagged money growth

output, lagged inflation

output, lagged interest rate

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

money growth, lagged inflation

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

inflation, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1
8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

interest rate, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

interest rate, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged interest rate

1

8

40

-1
0

1

0

32

inflation, lagged interest rate

1

0

24

-1
0

1

-1

16

money growth, lagged interest rate

1

0

8

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

Figure 1. Vector Autocorrelation Functions, Pre-1979, Sticky-Price Model (dashed line) and Data (solid line)

32

40

output, lagged output

output, lagged money growth

output, lagged inflation

output, lagged interest rate

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

money growth, lagged inflation

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

inflation, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1
8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

interest rate, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

interest rate, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged interest rate

1

8

40

-1
0

1

0

32

inflation, lagged interest rate

1

0

24

-1
0

1

-1

16

money growth, lagged interest rate

1

0

8

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

Figure 2. Vector Autocorrelation Functions, Post-1979, Sticky-Price Model (dashed line) and Data (solid line)

32

40

output, lagged output

output, lagged money growth

output, lagged inflation

output, lagged interest rate

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

money growth, lagged inflation

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

inflation, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1
8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

interest rate, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

interest rate, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged interest rate

1

8

40

-1
0

1

0

32

inflation, lagged interest rate

1

0

24

-1
0

1

-1

16

money growth, lagged interest rate

1

0

8

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

Figure 3. Vector Autocorrelation Functions, Pre-1979, Flexible-Price Model (dashed line) and Data (solid line)

32

40

output, lagged output

output, lagged money growth

output, lagged inflation

output, lagged interest rate

1

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

money growth, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

money growth, lagged inflation

1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

inflation, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

inflation, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1
8

16

24

32

40

-1
0

interest rate, lagged output

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged money growth

8

16

24

32

40

0

interest rate, lagged inflation
1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-0.5

-1

-1

-1

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

8

16

24

32

40

interest rate, lagged interest rate

1

8

40

-1
0

1

0

32

inflation, lagged interest rate

1

0

24

-1
0

1

-1

16

money growth, lagged interest rate

1

0

8

-1
0

8

16

24

32

40

0

8

16

24

Figure 4. Vector Autocorrelation Functions, Post-1979, Flexible-Price Model (dashed line) and Data (solid line)

32

40

