                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CHANGES OVER TIME IN UNION RELATIVE
                               WAGE EFFECTS IN THE UK
                                 AND THE US REVISITED

                                         David G. Blanchflower
                                             Alex Bryson

                                           Working Paper 9395
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9395


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We thank John Addison, Dan Feenberg, Barry Hirsch, David Metcalf and Mark Wooden for helpful
discussions and John Addison also for encouraging us to write this chapter. We wish to thank the Economic
and Social Research Council for their financial assistance (grant R000223958). We thank the BSAS team
– particularly Katarina Thomson – at the National Centre for Social Research for providing the BSAS data.
We acknowledge the Department of Trade and Industry, the Economic and Social Research Council, the
Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service and the Policy Studies Institute as the originators of the 1998
Workplace Employee Relations Survey data, and the Data Archive at the University of Essex as the
distributor of the WERS data. None of these organisations or individuals bears any responsibility for the
authors’ analysis and interpretations of the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David G. Blanchflower and Alex Bryson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is
given to the source.
Changes over time in union relative wage effects in the UK and the US revisited
David G. Blanchflower and Alex Bryson
NBER Working Paper No. 9395
December 2002
JEL No. J3, J5


                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the impact of trade unions in the US and the UK and elsewhere. In
both the US and the UK, despite declining membership numbers, unions are able to raise wages
substantially over the equivalent non-union wage. Unions in other countries, such as Australia,
Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal and
Spain, are also able to raise wages by significant amounts. In countries where union wage
settlements frequently spill over into the non-union sector (e.g. France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands and Sweden) there is no significant union wage differential. The estimates from the
seventeen countries we examined averages out at 12 per cent.

       Time series evidence from both the US and the UK suggests three interesting findings.
First, the union differential in the US is higher on average than that found in the UK (18 per cent
compared with 10 per cent). Second, the union wage premium in both countries was untrended
in the years up to the mid-1990s. Third, in both countries the wage premium has fallen in the
boom years since 1994/95. It is too early to tell whether the onset of a downturn in 2002 will
cause the differential to rise again or whether there is a trend change in the impact of unions. It
is our view that most likely what has happened is that the tightening of the labor market has
resulted in a temporary decline in the size of the union wage premium. Time will tell whether
the current loosening of the labor market, that is occurring in both countries, will return the
union wage premium to its long run values of 10 per cent in the case of the UK and 18 per cent
in the case of the US.   On the basis of past experience it seems likely that they will.

David Blanchflower                                            Alex Bryson
Department of Economics                                       Policy Studies Institute
Dartmouth College                                             100 Park Village East
Hanover, NH 03755                                             London NW1 3SR
and NBER                                                      a.bryson@psi.org.uk
blanchflower@dartmouth.edu
                                                                                               1



1. Introduction

Union density has been in decline in the United States and Britain for two decades now

(Appendix Table 1). It is often asserted by commentators that trade unions are outmoded

institutions, shunned by employers and unable to reach a new generation of workers imbued with

individualist values that are at odds with the ethos underpinning unionism. But the propensity of

individuals to join unions is not simply a question of “desire” or ideological commitment. More

broadly, one can think of union membership as a good – a product or service to be purchased.

Employees derive utility from this good, as they would other services or products. In the case of

union membership, this utility can be psychological. For example, the decision to purchase

membership may be due to the desire to conform to a social norm and thus maintain one’s

reputation among co-workers. It may also be driven by instrumentalism, wherein employees

think they have something tangible to gain from membership, either in terms of better wages,

improved non-pecuniary terms of employment, or they may see it as insurance against arbitrary

employer actions. So, benefits may accrue to the individual, but they come at a cost. Employees

will purchase membership if the benefits outweigh the costs. A shift in the propensity to

purchase union membership may reflect a shift in individuals’ perceptions of the costs and

benefits attached to membership. It does appear though that the cost of union membership is

generally low. Reynolds, Masters, and Moser (1999, p. 406) estimate that the fee required for

membership is equivalent to roughly two hours’ pay per month while the cost of industrial action

accounts for less than 1 per cent of working time for the typical union worker. Neither has risen

substantially over time.

       What of the benefits of membership? Perhaps the most visible and most significant is the

union wage premium or wage gap. The most obvious way of measuring the value of union
                                                                                                2


membership to employees is to estimate the extent to which members’ wages are higher than

those of similar non-members. This union wage premium arises because unions bargain on

members’ behalf for wages that are above the market rate. In the literature what is usually

estimated is the difference between the ceteris paribus earnings of union members and those of

non-members. That is, how much would wages change if an individual moved from non-union

to union status or vice-versa, holding constant their individual and workplace characteristics.

There has been speculation that the intensification of competition since the 1980s, coupled with a

diminution of union bargaining strength, has prevented unions from obtaining the sort of wage

premium they achieved in the past. This is the issue we investigate in this chapter.

       If the costs of membership have remained constant or risen, while the wage benefits of

membership have fallen, this might help explain the reticence of employees to join unions.

However, evidence to date is only suggestive of a declining union wage premium: there are few

studies estimating the union wage premium with consistent time-series data and recent studies

use techniques which were not used in earlier analyses. This gap in the evidence is filled by the

remainder of this paper. In particular, we consider how much the premium varies by country,

across groups and through time. These issues are examined using broadly comparable time

series data for the United States and the United Kingdom1. The evidence suggests that there has

been some constancy in the premium for most of the post-war years in both countries, although

the level of the differential has been somewhat higher in the US than in the UK. We find

evidence that the union wage premium has declined steadily in both countries since the mid-

1990s as the economies entered unprecedented boom periods and labour markets tightened

dramatically2. In addition, some evidence is presented on the size of the wage premium in

seventeen other countries drawn from three continents – Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada,
                                                                                              3


Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,

Portugal, Spain and Sweden.

2. Background

There are two ways unions can affect wages in the economy (Farber, 2001). The first is the

direct effect on the wages of workers in jobs where wages are set through collective bargaining.

This may affect non-members’ and members’ wages. The second level is the impact that the

presence of unions has in the economy: this can change the level and distribution of wages

generally. In theory, these general equilibrium effects may both raise and reduce the level of

aggregate wages in the economy. Since it is not possible to observe the counterfactual (wages in

the absence of unions) this union effect is not easily estimable. The union-non-union wage

differential (the wage gap), defined as

             Wu − Wn
        ∆=           ,                                                                      (1)
               Wn

is estimable because we observe the wages of members ( Wu ) and non-members ( Wn ). Provided

differentials are small, this expression is usefully approximated by

        ∆ ≈ ∆u − ∆ n ,                                                                      (2)

which says that the measured union wage gap is approximately equal to the difference in the

proportional effects of unions on the union and non-union wage. The union wage gap in equation

(1) can be usefully approximated by the difference in log wages, implying that

       ∆ ≈ ln(Wu ) − ln(Wn ) .                                                              (3)

       The union wage gap may reflect the direct effect of unions on the wages of unionised

workers, and the offsetting effects on non-union workers. Of course, there may be endogenous

selection into union status arising for two reasons. First, there is “worker choice” in which
                                                                                                4


workers only choose membership if the union wage is greater than the wage available to the

individual outside the union. It is often assumed that workers with a lower underlying earning

capacity have more to gain from membership than higher quality workers, in which case this

selection process will understate the union wage premium. The second selection process arises

through “queuing”, since not all workers desiring union employment can find union jobs. Under

this model, union employers may choose the best of the workers among those desirous of a union

job. This employer selection implies a positive bias in the union premium but, a priori, it is not

clear whether this bias is greater or less than the negative bias implied by worker selection.

Either way, if there is endogenous selection the membership mark up estimated using standard

cross-sectional regression techniques ‘can be interpreted as the average difference in wages

between union and non-union workers, but it can not be interpreted as the effect of union

membership on the wage of a particular worker’ (Farber, 2001, p. 11).

       Causal inference is problematic because, where workers who become members differ

systematically from those who do not become members in ways which might affect their

earnings, independent of membership, we cannot infer the non-union wage for union members

simply by comparing union members’ wages with those of non-members. In the literature for

the United States, the problem of selection bias is usually tackled by modelling union status

determination simultaneously with earnings and estimating an econometric model that takes

account of the simultaneity. This usually involves a Heckman estimator where the earnings

function and union status determination function are assumed to have errors that are jointly

normal. This technique relies on untestable exclusion restrictions whereby variables assumed to

affect union status have no direct effect on earnings. In his review of the literature, H. Gregg

Lewis (1986) concluded that, because of these arbitrary functional form assumptions and
                                                                                                 5


untestable exclusion restrictions, results from these studies were unreliable. Estimates of the

union wage gap using simultaneous equation methods tend to produce large and unstable

estimates. Panel estimates, which involve making use of data on the same individuals over time

and observing how wages change as individuals alter their union status have problems of

misclassification and measurement error which tend to result in estimates of the impact of unions

that are downward biased. Lewis (1986) takes the view that the most appropriate way to

estimate the impact of unions on wages is using OLS. He suggests OLS may produce an upper

bound estimate of the true impact of unions because ‘such estimates suffer from upward bias

resulting from the omission of control variables correlated with the union status variable’ (Lewis,

1986, p. 9). The assumption is that some of the wage gap attributed to union membership is, in

fact, attributable in part to the characteristics of members, their jobs and their employers which

would give them higher wages than non-members in any case. In practice, as we note above and

as other studies indicate (Farber, 2001; Robinson, 1989), bias in cross-sectional OLS estimation

due to unobserved heterogeneity may both upwardly or downwardly bias the “true” impact3.

Here, our primary concern is with changes in the union wage premium over time. We do not

seek to control for the potential endogeneity of union membership. Rather, we adopt the

standard approach to estimation of the union-non-union wage gap using individual-level data and

estimating by OLS. That is,

       lnWit = Xitß + δUit + εit ,                                                             (4)

where subscript it indexes individuals over time, X it is a vector of worker, job and workplace

characteristics, U it is a dummy variable indicating union membership, and ε it is a random

component. The parameter δ represents the average proportional difference in wages between

union and non-union workers adjusted for worker and workplace characteristics, and it is the
                                                                                                  6


regression-adjusted analogue of ∆ . In our work, we assume that any bias in our estimates of the

δ over time arising through unobserved heterogeneity remains constant over time.

         The vast majority of work estimating the effects of union membership on relative wages

has been based on US data. The definitive empirical works in this area are by H. Gregg Lewis,

(1963, 1986), the father figure of this literature4. The first of his two books measured the effects

of unions using relatively aggregated data at the industry level, backed up by case study

evidence. In the 1986 volume, Lewis examined approximately 200 studies that had used micro-

data to estimate the effect of unions. He concluded that it was not possible to use “macro” data

to estimate the union wage gap and that methodologically estimating an Ordinary Least Squares

(OLS) equation with wages on the left, and union status on the right with a group of controls,

was probably the best way to estimate the size of the effect. Panel estimates had problems of

misclassification and measurement error while simultaneous equation methods suffered from

poor identification due to a lack of suitable instruments. Lewis (1986) found that the overall

impact of unions in the US economy was approximately 15 per cent and showed relatively little

variation across years – varying between 12 per cent and 19 per cent between 1967 and 1979.

         Subsequent work confirmed constancy of the differential until the 1990s. For example,

Hirsch and his co-authors have produced a series of papers estimating changes in the differential

over time and concluded there has been some decline in the premium in recent years (e.g. Hirsch,

Macpherson and Schumacher, 2002; Hirsch and Schumacher, 2002; Hirsch and Macpherson,

2002).    Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) examine the trend in the private sector union wage

differential in the US, 1971-99, and conclude that dispersion in the wage premium across

industries has substantially declined as the US economy has become more competitive but that

there has been only a modest decline in the average premium. Bratsberg and Ragan confirmed
                                                                                                7


the stability of the premium over time, as noted in Linneman, Wachter and Carter (1990), but did

observe some evidence of a decline in the premium at the end of the 1990s.

         There are reasons to believe that the union wage gap might vary with the business cycle.

If the union premium comes from employers sharing rents, it is plausible that the premium will

be higher when those rents are higher, in which case the wage gap would be pro-cyclical.

Alternatively, unions may insulate their members from the downward wage pressures workers in

general face in more difficult times, in which case the wage gap may be counter-cyclical. In an

interesting paper, Grant (2001) used panel data on individuals from the CPS from 1975 to 1993

to examine the cyclicality of union and non-union wages over time.       He found that the union

coefficients in the non-union sector for the two periods 1975-81 and 1983-93 were always

procyclical and generally similar in the two periods. In contrast in the union sector Grant found

strong procyclicality in the first period, confirming earlier evidence in Moore and Raisian

(1980), but weak or no procyclicality in the union sector in the second period. We come back to

this issue later since we find evidence of a counter-cyclical wage gap in the US and UK in the

1990s.

         Raphael (2000) used a sample of workers displaced by plant closings from the 1994 and

1996 Current Population Survey Displaced Workers Supplement files to estimate the effects of

union membership on weekly earnings. When models were estimated using the entire sample of

displaced workers, longitudinal estimates of the union earnings effect were found to be similar in

magnitude to estimates from cross-sectional regressions. In models estimated separately by skill

group, the author found some evidence of positive selection into unions among workers with low

observed skills and negative selection into unions among workers with high observed skills.

Finally, Wunnava and Okunade (1996) used data for men from the Panel Survey of Income
                                                                                                8


Dynamics and found an overall union wage premium of about 12 per cent for the 1980s, which is

a good deal lower than reported in most other studies and possibly driven by measurement error

in the union status variable. In response to fluctuations in local labour market conditions,

proxied by the local unemployment rate, they found a much more flexible wage-setting process

in the non-union sector relative to the union sector. The long-term effect of unemployment on

non-union real wages suggested an approximate 0.6 per cent decline for every one percentage

point increase in unemployment, but the long-term effect of unemployment on real wages of

union members was negligible. Wunnava and Okunade’s estimates of the union wage premium

ranged between 11.6 to 12.3 per cent for the sample period. Union wages were found to be

insensitive to short-run fluctuations in local labour market conditions, and counter-cyclical in

nature.

          In the UK there have been approximately thirty studies, some based on establishment

data5 and others on individual data (including some using linked employer-employee data)6. It

needs to be pointed out at the outset that industrial relations are rather more complex in Britain

than they are in the United States. For example, in Britain many more non-members work in

workplaces that are covered by union agreements and, conversely, more union members are

employed in workplaces where unions are not engaged in pay bargaining than is true for the US.

There is, correspondingly, a multi-faceted literature in the UK which has investigated the free

rider problem (see Booth and, Bryan, 2001; Hildreth, 2000) as well as the importance of union

recognition (Blanchflower, 1984; 1986), multiple unionism (Machin, Stewart and van Reenen,

1993) and closed shops (Stewart, 1987; Blanchflower, Garrett and Oswald. 1989; Metcalf and

Stewart, 1992). (There are one or two papers in the US also on the role of coverage, including

Budd and Na, 2000, and Schumacher, 1999.) Because we are interested in the benefits accruing
                                                                                                 9


to individuals through their membership, this is not the path we will follow here: our main focus

is a comparative one involving the benefits of union membership on wages.

       The recent spate of studies that have looked at the impact of union membership on wages

has been occasioned by a growing belief that the union wage premium may be falling in Britain.

Some argue that a decline in the average union premium is consistent with diminishing union

influence over pay setting. There is certainly evidence pointing in that direction. First, case

studies suggest the scope of bargaining has narrowed substantially in companies that continue to

bargain with unions (Brown et al., 1998). Second, pay settlements in the private sector during

1997/98 were no greater where trade unions were involved than in their absence (Forth and

Millward, 2000b). Third, even where managers say employees have their pay set through

workplace-level or organisation-level collective bargaining, union representatives and officials

are either not involved or are only consulted in a substantial minority of cases (Millward, Forth

and Bryson, 2001). But there is also evidence to the contrary. For example, unions continue to

have a substantial effect on pay structures, bringing up the wages of the lowest paid and thus

narrowing pay differentials across gender, ethnicity, health and occupation (Metcalf, Hansen,

and Charlwood, 2001). These studies, which indicate union effects despite substantial declines

in union density, might suggest that those unions that have survived are the stronger and, as such,

better able to command a wage premium (thus raising the “batting average” of unions). Here we

briefly review what studies to date have told us about the size of the union wage premium over

time and across workers.

       The consensus in the earlier literature was that the mean union wage gap was

approximately 10 per cent (Blanchflower, 1999). Despite the rapid decline in union density

experienced in the UK since 1979, there was evidence to suggest that the gap remained roughly
                                                                                               10


constant from 1970 – the year for which the earliest estimate is available (Shah, 1984) – to 1995

(see Blanchflower, 1999). However, there is some dispute on this question, with some studies

pointing to trends in either direction. For instance, establishment-level analyses indicated that

the union wage premium in the early 1980s was most evident where unions were strong, as

indicated by the presence of a closed shop (Stewart, 1987). This premium seems to have

declined in the second half of the 1980s, a trend which has been attributed to a decline in the

incidence and impact of the closed shop, coupled with unions’ inability to establish differentials

in new workplaces (Stewart, 1995). On the other hand, Andrews, Bell and Upward (1998) find

the bargaining coverage differential over the period 1975-1994 moved counter-cyclically, with

an underlying upward trend which they attribute to the decentralisation of pay bargaining. In

addition to cross-sectional estimates, there has been a series of papers producing estimates for

this period based on longitudinal data for Britain using the British Household Panel Survey

(Blanchflower, 1999; Hildreth, 1999; Swaffield, 2001; Machin, 2001). As noted earlier, and as

both Lewis (1986) and Freeman (1984) pointed out, these estimates tend to be below the

estimates obtained by OLS because of a downward bias induced by measurement error in the

classification of union status. As also noted earlier, OLS estimates may be upwardly biased if

unobserved heterogeneity accounts for some of wage variation attributed to union membership.

Thus, for example, in Blanchflower (1999) the OLS estimate for the years 1991-93 was 10.6 per

cent compared with 3.7 per cent when a full set of people fixed effects were included.7 As

Freeman (1984, p. 24) has suggested, it may well be that the cross-section and fixed effect or

“panel” estimates of the impact of unions on wages ‘bound the true impact of unionism’.

       Studies using individual pay data covering the first half of the 1990s also suggested that,

while the union effect was persisting, the premium declined for some workers (Blanchflower,
                                                                                                  11


1999; Hildreth, 1999). For example, Hildreth (1999, p. 7) argues that stability in the union

premium for blue-collar male workers in 1991-95 compared with a declining premium for their

white-collar counterparts may reflect their respective abilities to maintain their bargaining power.

The picture emerging from research through to 1998/99 is suggestive of a more widespread

decline in the premium.      Machin’s (2001) analysis of longitudinal data from the British

Household Panel Survey indicates that, although there was a wage gain for people moving into

union jobs in the early 1990s, this had disappeared by the late 1990s. Booth and Bryan (2001)

using linked employer-employee data for 1998 also found no significant wage premium. Bryson

(2002) finds a membership premium for covered workers, but it is much smaller than the 10 per

cent common in the literature. Furthermore, the premium is confined to employees in older

workplaces and those with high union density. Forth and Millward (2000a) find the premium

was confined to workers in workplaces with high bargaining coverage or multiple unions.

       It would be hasty to assert, on the basis of this evidence alone, that unions’ ability to

secure better than market rates for their workers has declined since the 1980s because

methodological and data differences across studies make comparisons extremely difficult

(Andrews et al., 1998). It is even more difficult to establish what has happened to the trend over

time. As Lanot and Walker (1998, p. 343) note: ‘the existing literature says little about how the

differential has changed over time there are so few studies it is difficult to take a view of whether

there is any systematic movement over time’. For instance, using standard regression techniques

deployed in most studies, Booth and Bryan (2001, p. 12) identify a membership premium of

roughly 10 per cent. Bryson reports a similar regression-adjusted premium for the private sector

(2002, p. 25). However, in both cases, the authors lay emphasis on the results they obtain
                                                                                             12


through the use of other techniques (instrumental variables in the case of Booth and Bryan and

propensity score matching in Bryson’s case).

       The disaggregated pattern of results reported by Lewis (1986) for the US appear to be

broadly repeated for the UK. The main exception is that the wage gap in the UK appears to be

larger for females than it is for males (see Blanchflower, 1999; Main, 1996). We explore this

issue in more detail below.

       In what follows a series of estimates for the union wage gap since 1973 are presented.

What is the size of the union wage gap in the UK and the US in the twenty-first century? How

much has it changed in the years since 1980, which is the end-point for Lewis’ 1986 study?

How much do the estimates vary by gender, race and across the public and private sectors? How

large is the wage gap in other countries?       In the following three sections, micro-data on

individuals are used to estimate log hourly earnings equations first for a group of seventeen

countries and then for the US and the UK. In the case of the US and the UK data are available

over time that allow us to examine the time series properties of the union wage premium.

Clearly, one would wish to examine the extent to which unions are able to influence the total

compensation package including fringe benefits. Unfortunately, relatively little is known about

the extent to which unions are able to influence fringe benefits, primarily because of a lack of

suitable data. Such literature as does exist – most of which is for the US – suggests that these

effects are large (see Freeman and Medoff, 1984, for the US; and Renaud, 1998, for Canada).

For Britain, Forth and Millward (2000a) find unions enhance pension and sick pay provision in

similar circumstances to those where they affect pay.         But our data files do not contain

information that permit us to examine this issue over time.
                                                                                              13


       Before moving to estimating union wage gaps, it is appropriate to place these results in

the wider context of the changes in the labour market experience of the two countries over the

last couple of decades; specifically, in terms of unemployment and employment; wage

inequality, real wage growth and union density. This allows for some appreciation of the climate

in which unions have been operating.

1. Unemployment was generally higher in the US than it was in the UK from 1965 to 1980. The

picture reversed itself in the later period, 1980-99. In 2000 and 2001 the unemployment rate in

the UK was below that of the United States, averaging 3.4 per cent and 4.4 per cent, respectively

(see Appendix Table 1). Both employment and the size of the labour force increased rapidly

over the period 1990-2000 in the US. Over this period, employment in the US increased by 14

per cent while the labour force increased by 12 per cent8. The UK experienced smaller growth

along both of these dimensions, with respective growth rates of 7 per cent and 3 per cent9.

2. Levels of earnings and wage inequality are high in the US and the UK compared with most

other countries, and especially so in comparison with most European countries (Blanchflower,

2000). There was substantial growth in earnings inequality in the 1970s and 1980s in the US.

Since the early 1970s earnings in the US have become much more unequal between more-skilled

and less-skilled workers as well as between workers with high and low levels of education and

those with many years of labour market experience compared to those with few. For example, in

1979 male college-educated workers earned on average 30 per cent more than male high-school-

educated workers. By 1995 this premium for college-educated workers had risen to about 70 per

cent (Blanchflower, 2000). Earnings inequality declined in the UK in the 1970s but increased in

the 1980s. Only Britain and the United States have continued to experience a rapid rise in

inequality into the 1990s, albeit at a slower rate than had occurred in the 1980s. There is much
                                                                                              14


less evidence of rising wage inequality in other countries (see the various papers in Freeman and

Katz, 1995). Blanchflower (2000), for example, found that from 1973-1994/95 at the lower part

of the distribution, the earnings of the median worker rose a lot in comparison to the worker at

the first decile only in the UK and the US from a group of fifteen countries (Australia, Austria,

Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand,

Norway, Sweden, the UK and the US). Appendix Table 2 presents four measures of inequality

for most of these countries at various points in time, using data from the Luxembourg Income

Study. The measures reported are the Gini coefficient as well as the 90/10, 80/20 and 90/50

differentials. The table confirms the high levels of inequality in the US and the UK compared to

other countries.

3. In the United States real wage growth has been much greater at the top of the earnings

distribution than at the bottom. In the hundred years to 1973, real average hourly earnings rose

by 1.9 per cent a year. Between 1973 and 1997, CPI-deflated real wages have fallen by about

0.4 per cent a year. The combination of flat average wages and rising inequality means that large

numbers of American workers have experienced stagnation or even absolute declines in their real

earnings in recent decades. And workers at the low end of the earnings distribution have

suffered the most, particularly those in the lowest decile. For example, the real hourly earnings

of high-school-educated males fell by 20 per cent from 1979 to 1993.10     In contrast, there has

been considerable growth in real earnings at the top of the earnings distribution.         Senior

managers and executives have experienced large increases in real earnings over the last couple of

decades, and especially so when total compensation including stock options are included.

       In contrast to the United States, in most OECD countries (including the UK) there has

been strong real earnings growth across the wage distribution. For only one or two countries
                                                                                              15


(New Zealand and Australia) has a rise in earnings inequality implied weak growth or even

declining real wages for workers at the bottom half of the earnings distribution11. The low-paid

in most industrial countries have experienced real earnings growth over the last two decades12.

In a comparison of seven OECD countries (Australia, Canada, France, the Netherlands, Sweden,

the UK and the US), using data from the Luxembourg Income Study for the 1980s, Gottschalk

(1993) shows that only in the US did the inequality of family income rise more than the

inequality of earnings.   In these countries, government actions through social expenditures

mitigated somewhat the impact of increasing wage inequality.

4. Union density rates declined steadily in the US from 197013. In Britain density increased in

the 1970s and then declined dramatically. Appendix Table 1 provides the background data. Since

1991, there has been a decrease in union membership of 1.3 million, a fall over the ten-year

period of 15 per cent. The fall in union membership has been steeper for men than for women

over the past decade: union density for men was 42 per cent in 1991 and 29 per cent in 2001,

whereas that for women was 32 per cent in 1991 and 28 per cent in 2001. There has been an

even more pronounced decline in unionisation in Australia, where union density was 45.6 per

cent in 1986 but only 28.1 per cent in 1998. Moreover, Australian union density continues to

fall, with the latest estimate being 24.5 per cent14.    The decline in density has also been

pronounced in Japan and Austria. Some countries, including Denmark, Finland and Sweden,

actually experienced increases in density over the period. (For a discussion, see Blanchflower

and Freeman, 1992; Blanchflower, 1996; Ebbinghaus and Visser, 1999, 2000.)

       Section 3 sets the scene by presenting evidence on the size of union wage premia in

seventeen countries. In section 4 we make use of data from the Current Population Survey

(CPS) to obtain estimates of the impact of trade unions on hourly earnings for the US. In section
                                                                                              16


5 data from the UK Labour Force and British Social Attitudes Surveys are used for direct

comparison with the US experience. Section 6 discusses the cyclical nature of the wage gap in

the US and UK, and Section 7 presents our conclusions.

3. Union wage differentials around the world

       Over the past couple of decades there has been a growing body of literature estimating

the size of the union wage gap outside the UK and the US. There are a number of studies for

Canada which suggest that the union wage gap is in the 10-15 per cent range (Doiron and

Riddell, 1994; Robinson and Tomes, 1984; MacDonald and Evans, 1981; Lemieux, 1998; Kuhn

and Sweetman, 1998, 1999; Donald, Green and Parsch, 2000; DiNardo and Lemieux, 1997).

This estimate appears to have remained fairly constant over time15. Renaud (1998) provided the

first empirical evidence of the impact of unions on benefits and total compensation in Canada

using micro data from the Canadian General Social Survey (GSS) of 1989. His results suggest

that the Canadian unions increased total compensation by 12.4 per cent, compared to an impact

of 10.4 per cent on wages. Even though the union impact on total compensation is 2 per cent

greater than the impact on wages, given that benefits comprise only about 6 per cent of total

compensation in this sample, the percentage impact of unions on benefits is estimated to be 45.5

per cent. This latter estimate implies a very substantial impact of unions on benefits in Canada,

as large or larger than estimates for the US.

       In Australia the range is generally estimated to be between 7 and 17 per cent, with most

estimates at the lower end of the range16. Blanchflower and Machin (1996) provide estimates of

union wage premia for Australia using the 1989/90 Australian Workplace Industrial Relations

Survey (AWIRS90) where the establishment is the unit of observation. They found significant

wage differentials for labourers and unskilled workers of 15.6 per cent but no evidence of
                                                                                             17


significant differentials in respect of plant and machine operators, sales and personal service

workers, clerks, tradespersons, para-professionals or professionals – along with evidence of a

negative differential for managers. More recently, Miller and Mulvey (1996) have reported

evidence that union premia in Australia are small. Using individual level data from the 1993

Survey of Training and Education, they calculate the union wage effect to be 2.6 per cent for

men and 1.6 per cent for women. Wooden (2001, p. 2) takes exception to this result and argues

that previous research has understated the impact of unions ‘by focusing on differences across

individuals rather than differences across bargaining units’. Using data on 11,840 individual

workers from 1,357 workplaces in the 1995 Australian Workplace Industrial Relations Survey

(AWIRS95), Wooden showed that simply including a union membership dummy produces

insignificant differentials for both men and women17. However, Wooden found that at those

workplaces where the majority of workers were covered by collective agreements a strong union

presence conferred a wage advantage of the order of 15 to 17 per cent to members and non-

members alike relative to workers in workplaces where collective agreements had not been

negotiated and where union wage effects were found to be small and insignificant. This does

seem to make some sense because in Australia union negotiated agreements and awards typically

apply to both members and non-members within the same workplace, and in the case of awards

to all workers within the same industry. Further, Wooden and Bora (1998) use the AWIRS95

data file and find that the wage premium associated with union membership in unionised

workplaces (compared with non-union workplaces) is as high as 7.7 per cent. They found this

was only the case where (a) all workers at the workplace were union members and (b) where the

union was relatively ‘active’. (An ‘active union’ is defined as one in which the senior delegate

from the union with most members spends one hour or more each week on union activities, and
                                                                                               18


where a general meeting of members is held at least once every six months or delegates meet

regularly with management.)

       Moll (1993) estimated the 1985 union premium in South Africa at 24 per cent for black

blue-collar workers (19 per cent for black males and 31 per cent for black females) and 13 per

cent for whites. Schultz and Mwabu (1998) found that among male African workers in the

bottom decile of the wage distribution, union membership was associated with wages that were

145 per cent higher than those of comparable non-union workers; among those in the top decile,

the differential was 19 per cent.   For South Korea, Park (1991) obtained estimates of 4.2 per

cent for men and 5 per cent for women. Wagner (1991) found significant positive union effects

for blue-collar workers in Germany, while Schmidt (1995) found small but significant wage

differentials of less than 6 per cent. Neither Schmidt (1995) nor Schmidt and Zimmermann

(1991) were able to find evidence of significant union wage gaps in Germany for male workers.

                                       (Table 1 near here)

       In Table 1 we estimate union wage gaps for seventeen countries from three continents –

Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the

Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain and Sweden18. The data used are from the

1994-99 International Social Survey Program (ISSP)19. The dependent variable is the log of

earnings/wages/income with the exact measure used being variously defined across countries but

consistent over time. Included in each equation is a restricted set of controls: age, age squared,

years of schooling, private sector, and union status. The samples are restricted to employees

only. The small number of controls will imply that the estimated union effects reported here are

biased. Given that the same controls are used in each country in each year, our best hope is that

such biases are constant over space and time. The quality and size of the data files are not
                                                                                                 19


comparable to those we use below for the US and the UK, and for that reason the reader is

warned be cautious in interpreting these cross-country results.        The (unweighted) average

differential across these countries is 12.1 per cent.

       Countries appear to fall into three groups. The first group of just two countries has a

wage differential in excess of 20 per cent, namely, Brazil (40 per cent) and Japan (29 per cent).

The second group of ten countries have more modest, but still material, differentials of around 10

per cent – Australia (13 per cent), Austria (16 per cent), Canada (9 per cent), Chile (17 per cent),

Cyprus (15 per cent), Denmark (17 per cent), New Zealand (10 per cent), Norway (8 per cent),

Portugal (20 per cent) and Spain (7 per cent). Trade unions in the final group of five countries

have no measured impact on the wage – France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden.

In these countries, the union wage gap is zero primarily due to the fact that unions are also able

to control wage outcomes in the non-union sector.

                                              (Table 2)

       Panels (a) and (b) of Table 2, which report union density rates for these countries and

chart how they have changed over time, suggest a helpful way of classifying the observed

differences in wage premia.

1. Two countries with dramatic declines in density – Austria and Japan – have estimated

differentials in double digits. (Below we shall show the UK and the US are similar.) In the case

of Austria, it seems that a big increase in inequality accompanied this decline in unionisation (see

Appendix Table 2). Australia and New Zealand have declining density and a positive union

wage differential, although it should be noted that the decline in unionisation in New Zealand is

a very recent phenomenon (see Maloney and Savage, 1996; Maloney, 1998). Portugal also has

declining unionisation rates and a sizeable wage gap (see Blanchflower, 2001).
                                                                                               20


2. The distinguishing feature of the group of countries that have union wage premia of zero –

Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden – is high levels of union coverage, and unions’

ability to influence wage setting in the non-union sector by extension of collectively bargained

rates. (France is an exception in that it has very low union membership rates but approximately

100 per cent coverage.) It is also clear from Appendix Table 2 that, with the exception of Italy,

income inequality is low in these countries.

3. Four countries with significant differentials – Canada, Denmark, Norway and Spain – have all

had constant or rising levels of union density over the last few decades20.

4. Little is known about the labour market in Cyprus or Chile. According to our ISSP files, union

density averaged 62 per cent and 10 per cent, respectively, in the two countries over the sample

years.

5. The large estimate for Brazil is based on a single year of data with few controls and less than

1,000 observations and should be interpreted with caution.

         We now turn to an examination of union wage premia in the US and the UK, for which

countries we have better quality data and more data points. The data will also permit us to

examine movements in differentials over time.

4. Union wage differentials for the United States

Table 3 presents estimates of the wage gap using separate log hourly earnings equations for each

of the years from 1973 to 1981 using the National Bureau of Economic Research’s (NBER) May

Earnings Supplements to the Current Population Survey (CPS)21 and for the years since then

using data from the NBER’s Matched Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) files of the CPS22.

The MORG data for the years 1983-1995 were previously used in Blanchflower (1999)23. For

both the May and the MORG files a broadly similar, but not identical, list of control variables is
                                                                                                 21


used, including a union status dummy, age and its square, a gender dummy, education, race and

hours controls plus state and industry dummies24.

                                        (Table 3 near here)

       The first and third columns of Table 3 report the union coefficient in log hourly earnings

equations for the total sample and the private sector, respectively. Hirsch and Schumacher

(2002) have recently shown that there is what they call a ‘match bias’ in union wage gap

estimates due to earnings imputations25. They show that this bias arises because currently 30 per

cent of workers in the Current Population Survey have earnings imputed using a “cell hot deck”

method. This means that wage gap estimates are biased downward when the attribute being

studied (e.g. union status) is not a criterion used in the imputation. They show that standard union

wage gap estimates such as reported in Blanchflower (1999) are understated by about 3 to 5

percentage points as a result of including individuals who have had their earnings imputed. By

construction, then, the individuals with imputed earnings have a union wage gap of zero; hence

omitting them raises the size of the union wage gap. Unfortunately, it is not a simple matter to

exclude those individuals with imputed earnings in a consistent way over time26. Here we follow

the procedure suggested by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002). All allocated earners are identified

and excluded for the years 1983-88 and 1996-2001 in the MORG files. For 1989-95, allocation

flags are either unreliable (in 1989-93) or not available (1994 through August 1995). For 1989-

93, the gaps are adjusted upward by the average imputation bias during 1983-88. For 1994-95,

the gap is adjusted upward by the bias during 1996-98. Because the May CPS sample files

available to us do not include allocated earnings in 1973-81, the series are adjusted upward by

the average bias (of .033) found by Hirsch and Schumacher using these May CPS data for 1979-

81. Time-consistent estimates of union wage gaps, with match bias removed, are presented for
                                                                                                22


1973-2001 in the second and fourth columns of Table 3 for the economy as a whole and for the

private sector, respectively. These estimates are larger than those reported in the first and third

columns of the table, which included individuals with imputed earnings27. In each year there are

approximately 160,000 observations for the US economy and 130,000 for the private sector in

the MORG; in the May files, sample sizes are approximately 38,000 and 31,000 respectively

until 1980 and 1981 when sample sizes fall to approximately 16,000 and 13,000, respectively, as

from that date on only respondents in months four and eight in the outgoing rotation groups

report a wage.

                                       (Table 4 near here)

       Table 4 reports the estimated wage gaps derived by taking the antilogs of the coefficients

in (the second and fourth columns of) Table 3 and deducting one. Separate results are reported

for the economy as a whole as well as the private sector. Results obtained by Hirsch and

Schumacher (2002) are also reported in the final column of the table. A number of facts emerge:

1. On average the wage differential over the period is approximately 18 per cent. This compares

with an average of just over 14 per cent when similar calculations are performed using the first

and third columns of Table 3 which include workers with imputed wages28.

2. The size of the union wage gap or mark-up is the same in the private sector as it is in the

economy as a whole.

3. There appears to be a decline in the size of the differential since 1995, as the US economy

entered a boom period. We later examine this issue in more detail as we find similar results in

the UK.

4. The private sector differentials we report in the second column of Table 4 are smaller than

those obtained by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) in the third column of the table. Why? It
                                                                                                23


appears the answer is because of the sensitivity of the union coefficient to changes in the

controls. We illustrate this by pooling the MORG files, excluding those with imputed earnings

data, for the six years 1996-2001 for the public and private sectors combined. The union

coefficient changes as follows as controls are added:

               CPS MORG: 1996-2001 (n=663,564)

               1. No controls except time                                          .321
               2. + age, age2 + male                                               .203
               3. + race (4)                                                       .202
               4. + education (15)                                                 .191
               5. + usual hours                                                    .183
               6. + organisational status (4)                                      .201
               7. + state dummies (50)                                             .169
               8. + industry dummies (50)                                          .145
               9. + 8 1-digit occupation dummies                                   .157
               10. replace 8 occupation dummies with
                   85 2-digit occupation dummies                                   .185
               11. Hirsch/Schumacher specification                                 .199
               (Age, age2, male, race (4), education (15),
               marital status (6), occupation (8), industry (9), region (8))

Only including time as a control (1996=0, 1997=1,…, etc.) produces a coefficient of .321.

Progressively adding controls that are correlated with union status reduces the coefficient to .145

in line 8, which is the specification we use in Tables 3 and 4. In row 11 we report the

specification used by Hirsch and Schumacher (2000), which includes many fewer controls than

used in our preferred specification in line 8. There is a large literature supporting the inclusion

of controls for local labour market characteristics (e.g. Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994) and

industry characteristics (e.g. Blanchflower, Oswald and Sanfey, 1998). Adding occupation

dummies, especially at the two-digit level, appears to raise the size of the differential by

approximately 4 percentage points, confirming the point made by Hirsch and Schumacher

(1998)29. Our view is that it is not appropriate to include occupation controls here as they are

likely nothing more than slices (deciles/percentiles?) of the wage distribution itself. In private
                                                                                                 24


correspondence, Barry Hirsch has disagreed with this view and argued that occupation dummies

should be included because they reflect large differences in skill not controlled for by years of

schooling and age. Given that there is a large variation in individual union status within broad

occupation groups, his view is that they may be an appropriate control. There is no simple way

to resolve this issue – it is a substantive point that does influence the level of the differential

although it appears to have little effect on the time-series properties of the differential. We have

simply agreed to disagree on this one and let the reader decide. As ever, the truth probably lies

somewhere in between!

       The results reported in Table 4 are broadly comparable to the estimates obtained by H.

Gregg Lewis (1986) in his Table 9.7, which summarised the findings of 165 studies for the

period 1967-79.       Lewis concluded that during this period the US mean wage gap was

approximately 15 per cent. His results are reported below30:

Year      # studies        mean estimate       Year       # studies       mean estimate
1967        20                 14%              1973         24              15%
1968          4                15%              1974          7              15%
1969        20                 13%              1975         11              17%
1970          8                13%              1976          7              16%
1971        20                 14%              1977          10             19%
1972          7                14%              1978           7             17%
                                                1979           3             13%

The left panel contains estimates for the six years prior to our starting point in Table 4. It does

appear that the unweighted average for this first period, 1967-72, of 14 per cent is slightly below

that of the second interval, 1973-79. The estimates for the later period are in turn somewhat

smaller than those we obtained in Table 4 – which averaged 20 per cent – but appear to have the

same time-series pattern; for example, 1979 has the lowest value in both sources. In part, the

low number Lewis obtained for 1979 is explained by the fact that the 1979 May CPS file
                                                                                                 25


included allocated earners and hence the estimates were not adjusted for the downward bias

caused by the imputation of the earnings data31.

                                       (Table 5 near here)

       Table 5 uses the same pooled MORG file as we used above to examine the sensitivity of

the union coefficient to changes in controls for the years 1996-2001, but this time to measure

disaggregated union wage gaps. The first row entry of column 1 presents the union coefficient

of .145 obtained from specification 8 above, which included a full set of controls except

occupation. The coefficient is exponentiated in column 4 giving an overall differential of 15.6

per cent. Reading down that column, estimates for males and females and the public and private

sectors are broadly the same32, and union wage effects are higher for the young and the least

educated, non-whites, part-timers, manual workers, and non-manufacturing. These results are

similar to those found by Lewis (1986), who concluded that the gap was greater for blacks than

whites; in services than in manufacturing; for construction than for other non-manufacturing; for

blue-collar workers than for white-collar; and for private- than for public-sector workers. As do

we, Lewis concluded that the estimates for men and women were approximately the same.

Further, Lewis found that the wage gap fell as years of schooling, establishment or firm size and

industry unemployment rates rose. For age, years of experience and years of seniority the gap at

first fell and then increased. The robustness of Lewis’s results were broadly confirmed by Jarrell

and Stanley (1990) using meta-analysis, although their mean estimate of the wage gap for the

period was a little lower than that obtained by Lewis. There is very little new under the sun!

       Columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 report the results of including both a union variable and a

union*time interaction term.    In all cases, the interaction term is negative and significant,

implying for all groups a significant decline in the size of the premium between 1996 and 2001.
                                                                                                 26


The penultimate two columns attempt to enumerate the scale of these declines. In the fifth

column headed ‘Wage gap 1996’ the union*time term is set to zero and the union coefficient is

exponentiated (i.e. for row 1 antilog (.167-[.012*0] minus 1=18.2%)). In the next column the

same exercise is performed for the end year of 2001 when time=5. Hence, in this case the

calculation is (i.e. for row 1 antilog (.167-[.012*5] minus 1=11.3%), implying an overall decline

of just under 7 percentage points in the differential between 1996 and 2001. The decline has

been greatest over the period among the most highly educated and in services (see the summary

results in the final column of the table). But all groups have experienced a substantial decline in

the wage premium. In 1996, the premium was above 15% for all but 3 of the 17 worker types.

In 2001, it was below 15% for all but 3 of the worker types.

        Is the relatively high differential in the US an artifact of sample selectivity?         In

Blanchflower and Freeman (1992) it was argued that this is not the correct way to interpret the

data and this is still our view. The reasons given, which are still relevant, were as follows:

1. Evidence within the US tends to reject the notion that union wage effects are large when union

density is small.    Union wage differentials tend to be greater, the greater the extent of

unionisation in the sector (see Lewis, 1986; Freeman and Medoff, 1984), presumably because

this gives unions greater bargaining power.

2. If selectivity were the major cause of the estimated large effects of unionism on wages in the

US, similar differences in other labour market outcomes should be expected, which is not the

case.

3. Third, the fact that employers as well as workers affect union density makes the direction of

the selectivity effect uncertain (Farber, 2001). One might well argue that selectivity operates to
                                                                                                   27


bias downward union wage effects as employers fight hardest against unions that have the most

potential for raising wages and accept unions when they have the least potential.

4. Massive employer opposition to unions in the US, but not elsewhere, is consistent with the

union demand for higher wages being greater in the US than in other countries.

       All of this does not deny the possibility that our estimates may be contaminated by the

reverse effects of density on wage differentials. But any such potential contamination is unlikely

to reverse the finding that union wage differentials are relatively high for similar workers in the

US relative to other countries.

       An obvious question to ask is: why has union membership and union employment been in

decline given the relative constancy of the union wage premium in the years up to 1995? The

level of the differential – at around 18 per cent – is still very high by international standards. The

United States decides union membership through an adversarial electoral process at plant level,

which has evolved into a system where management has a greater say in unionisation outcomes

than it does in other countries. The benefit to employers in removing unions from the workplace

often outweighs the costs of doing so. The costs to unions in organising recruitment drives is

high: Farber and Western (2001) estimate that in order to match the rate of union organising

seen in the 1970s unions would have to organise 374,000 private sector employees a year, which

is much more than is currently being achieved (99,000). Their lower-bound estimate of the cost

of doing so is $575.5 million per year, or about $64 per union member33.          Bender (1997) has

further argued that the loss of economies of scale in union organising is an important factor in

explaining union decline. It is much harder for employers in other countries to get rid of unions

than it is in the US. Even in the UK there are only a very few examples of union de-recognition

(Millward, Bryson and Forth, 2000). Employers are unable to hide from a union; they have no
                                                                                                28


place to go. The decline in US unionism seems to have been driven by employer opposition,

fueled by more competitive product markets, increased international trade and a favourable legal

environment, as a result of which there have been smaller economic rents to be shared with

workers than was true in the past34. Linneman, Wachter and Carter (1990, p. 51) have gone

even further and suggested that the evidence of a relatively constant aggregate union wage

premium is a ‘statistical artifact’. High premium industries, they show, have been increasing

their union wage premia and losing employment shares and hence membership of trade unions.

Union wage premia in private services, they argue, have held constant or fallen. They argue that

even though unions have been hurt by exogenous factors, which have created shifts in demand

from goods to service-producing industries, they have been hurt most by the rising wage premia.

Supporting evidence for this view is presented by Freeman (1986), who found a positive

correlation between the union wage gap and a proxy for managerial opposition to unions,

namely, the number of unfair labor practices per worker in NLRB elections. Farber (1990) also

concludes that the decline was principally a result of increased employer opposition to unions

along with lower demand for union services by workers.

       The results in this chapter suggest that the union wage differential in the US is

comparatively high, although there is now some, admittedly weak, evidence of countries with

even larger effects (see above). However, it is unclear how much weight should be placed on the

latter estimates, which are based on small sample sizes. The decline in union density in the US

does not appear to be an aberration but is structurally rooted in what unions do on the wage front.

Whereas in the 1950s and 1960s the large differentials that US unions gained were probably

economically justified given the United States’ role as world economic leader, the increased
                                                                                               29


differentials that emerged in the 1970s still appear to be a major liability to the future

development of unionism in the US.

5. Union wage differentials for the United Kingdom

Evidence to date is merely suggestive of a declining union wage premium: there are few studies

estimating the union wage premium with consistent time-series data, and recent studies use

techniques which were not used in earlier analyses35. This gap in the evidence is filled by

analyses of the union wage premium over the period 1985-2001 presented in Table 6. We use

two data sources: the Labour Force Survey (LFS) for the UK, and the British Social Attitudes

Surveys (BSAS). The LFS estimates tend to be above the BSAS estimates, but in both series

there has been a decline in the log hourly union wage premium since 1994 (with the BSAS

estimate for 1997 being an outlier, perhaps due to the much smaller sample that year).36

Although the premium remains roughly 10 per cent in the 2000 LFS, it falls to a statistically

insignificant 5 per cent in BSAS 2000, and falls even further in 2001. Both series are based on

standard specifications for each separate year (detailed in the notes to Table 6). In identifying

the union effect over time, we make what we think is the reasonable assumption that any bias in

our estimates arising through unobserved heterogeneity is constant over time.

                                   (Tables 6 and 7 near here)

       Table 7 presents log hourly wage estimates for the United Kingdom based on pooled

years from the LFS37.     It adopts the same format and methodology as the CPS estimates

presented in Table 5. The purpose is to show the variation in the membership premium across

types of worker, and how the downward trend in the premium since the mid-1990s has affected

each group. The fourth column of row 1 shows that, for the period 1993-2000, the hourly union

wage premium across the economy was 9.9 per cent (n=105,112).                   This figure is the
                                                                                                 30


exponentiated coefficient based on the point estimate of .094 in the first column. This point

estimate for the union coefficient changes as follows as controls are added:

               UK – LFS files: 1993-2000 (n=105,000)

               1.   No controls except time                          .279
               2.   +age, age2 + male                                .185
               3.   + race                                           .185
               4.   + education                                      .118
               5.   + workplace size                                 .074
               6.   + region dummies                                 .097
               7.   + industry dummies                               .094
               8.   + 1 digit occupation dummies                     .103
               9.   + 2 digit occupation dummies                     .104

       The coefficient falls with the addition of new controls, particularly at stages 2 and then at

stage 5 when workplace size is introduced. However, it rises a little in stages 6 and 7, pointing to

the fact that unobserved heterogeneity can both upwardly and downwardly bias estimates of the

union wage premium. As was found above for the US, the addition of 1- or 2-digit occupation

dummies increases the size of the estimated union effect. However, in contrast to the US, the

size of the union effect does not rise as we move from 1-digit to 2-digit occupation dummies.

       Returning to Table 7, the entries in the fourth column show that the union premium is

highest among manual workers, part-timers, and women. These are all groups with traditionally

low earnings. Conversely, the premium is lowest among the traditionally higher paid, namely,

men and the highly educated. In the same way as described for the US data in Table 5, the fifth

and sixth columns of Table 7 use the information generated by a union*time interaction – the

data are reported in columns 2 and 3 – to show the premium in 1993 and 2000 for the whole

economy and for seventeen sub-groups of employees. In the whole sample, the wage gap

dropped from 14.2 per cent in 1993 to 6.3 per cent in 2000. What is remarkable is the evidence

of a large fall in the wage premium across most types of worker, indicated by the sub-group
                                                                                              31


regressions. In 1993 only one group of employees (the highly educated) had a premium well

below 10 per cent. In 2000, all but three out of the 17 types of worker had a premium below 10

per cent. Those worse affected were manufacturing workers, men, private sector workers and

non-whites, all of whom had no significant premium by 2000.

                                       (Table 8 near here)

       Table 8 performs a similar task to Table 7, this time presenting differences in the union

wage premium for Britain, but based on pooled years from the BSAS 1985-200138. The first

column shows that, for the period 1985-2001, the hourly union wage premium across the

economy was around 9 per cent. This point estimate for the union coefficient changes as follows

as controls are added:

               BSAS files: 1985-2001 (n=17,934)

               1.   No controls except categorical time dummies           .196
               2.   + 5 age dummies + female                              .149
               3.   + 7 education dummies                                 .108
               4.   + full-time status + manual                           .111
               5.   + 6 workplace size dummies                            .068
               6.   + 6 region dummies                                    .082
               7.   + manufacturing dummy                                 .087

       The coefficient falls with the addition of new controls from stages 1 to 3, rises a little

when full-time and manual status are controlled for, then falls substantially with the workplace

size dummies, as happened with LFS. Again, as with the LFS, the coefficient rises with region

and industry dummies. The sub-group analysis in the first column of Table 8 shows that, over

the whole period, the wage premium was highest among manual workers, part-timers, those with

low or no qualifications and women, again reflecting the LFS findings.

       The simplest way to show the impact of the declining union premium across types of

worker in BSAS is to estimate the premium for each group before the decline occurred (1993-
                                                                                                32


95), and then again at the end of the period (1999-2001). These estimates are presented in the

last two columns of Table 8. In 1993-95, only two types of worker (non-manuals and the highly

qualified) had a union premium of less than 10 per cent. By 1999-2001, eleven types of worker

had a premium of less than 10 per cent. For five types of worker (men, younger workers, those

in the private sector, non-manuals, and the highly educated) the membership premium was no

longer statistically significant.

        Across the economy as a whole, the membership premium fell from 12.2 per cent in

1993-95 to 5.1 per cent in 1999-2001. What is interesting is the way that the premium collapses

for some workers. For instance, there has always been a ranking in the premium according to

educational attainment, with membership raising the wages of the least qualified most. This is

apparent in the second column for the period 1993-95. But what is striking is that, by 1999-

2001, the premium for the highly qualified is flattened. Similarly, full-timers saw their premium

plummet to a barely statistically significant (t=1.97) 3.3 per cent, while the premium held up well

for part-timers. The premium has also held up well in the public sector, among older workers,

and among manual workers, but it has all but collapsed in the private sector, among younger

workers, and among non-manuals.

        The case of male workers is unique. The table shows that, whereas the premium was

similar for men and women in the mid-1990s, it was considerably lower for men than for women

by the end of the period. However, the picture changes on introducing a public sector control.

As note c to the table points out, the public sector dummy was omitted from the results presented

because it was not available for the 1994 and 1995 surveys. However, we reran all estimates

including the public sector dummy for years where the public sector dummy was available to

check the sensitivity of our results. Calculating the premia for men and women for 1993 only
                                                                                              33


produces results similar to the 1993-95 pooled estimates but, with the public sector added to the

pooled 1999-2001 analysis the male union premium is estimated to be 6.3 per cent, while that for

women is 5.7 per cent. Thus, once the public sector control is included, men’s and women’s

membership premium is not significantly different in the later period. This is because the public

sector dummy is negative and significant in the case of men, but non-significant in the case of

women.     The explanation is straightforward.       Because public sector employment and

unionisation are highly correlated, in the absence of a public sector control the union

membership dummy is picking up the negative wage differential of public sector workers among

men. For women, the addition of the public sector control makes no difference because there is

no negative public sector wage differential among women.



6. The cyclical nature of the wage gap in the United States and the United Kingdom

       Figure 1a plots the point estimates of the union wage premium for the US, taken from the

first column of Table 4, against unemployment for 1973-2000. Figure 1b does the same for

Britain for 1985-2001, using the data from the last column in Table 6. In both countries the

premium is counter-cyclical. Regressions were then run for each of the countries with the union

premium as the dependent variable – using the data from Table 4 for the US and Table 6 for the

UK (when there were observations in a single year from both the LFS and the BSAS, the average

of the two was used) for the years 1973-2001. Each equation included a highly significant, and

positive, US dummy. The one year lag on the unemployment rate was significantly positive (t-

statistics are in parentheses) whether a lagged dependent variable was excluded (equation 5) or

included (equation 6). The level of unemployment was never significant and is excluded in the
                                                                                               34


equations below. The time trend is also not significant. When the time trend was replaced by the

union density rate that was also insignificant and the other results were the same:

       Premiumt = 6.026 + .700 Unemploymentt-1 - .055time + 8.387US                           (5)
                  (2.54) (3.10)                  (1.04)     (9.22)
                 (N=42, R2=.769)


       Premiumt = 5.452 + .248Premiumt-1 + .511 Unemploymentt-1 - .079time + 6.108US          (6)
                 (2.40) (2.24)            (2.21)                  (1.53)    (4.57)
               (N=42, R2=.797)

       These regressions support the notion that the union wage premium is counter-cyclical,

moving positively with changes in the (lagged) unemployment rate. Thus, as unemployment

falls, as it has done since 1995, the union wage premium falls; and as unemployment rises the

wage premium rises. As the economy moves into boom the differential falls, and as it moves

into recession the premium rises: unions are better for workers in slumps than they are in booms.

Further, the insignificance of the time trend implies the premium is untrended. So, contrary to

what some commentators, particularly British ones, have been suggesting, it seems the recent

decline in the union wage premium is not necessarily a secular decline, but a decline induced by

favourable labour market conditions. What this suggests is that, when demand for labour is

strong, employees are less reliant on unions to bargain for better wages because market wages

rise anyway. However, when market conditions are less favourable to workers, the premium

rises because union bargaining cushions members from market fluctuations. So, although there

are indications that the benefits of membership – as measured by the wage premium – have

declined since the mid-1990s, this may be a cyclical phenomenon. The premium may rise again

in the face of deteriorating economic conditions currently being experienced at the time of

writing (October 2002). Furthermore, although it is possible that a decline in the net benefits of

membership has induced a decline in union density, trends in the wage premium can only help
                                                                                                 35


explain falling density since the mid-1990s, since the premium was fairly stable before that

point. In the years up to 1995 this could be a batting average effect. As union density declines,

the more powerful unions are the ones that remain. The weaker batsmen are removed from the

batting order so the team's average rises. Another possibility, of course, is that a high union/non-

union wage differential provides an incentive for employers to try and reduce union power. The

fact that the differential remained more or less constant in both the UK and the US for so long is

a puzzle, particularly given the rapid declines in union membership in both countries. The

evidence is not consistent with the widely held view that union power has been emasculated.

7. Conclusions

This paper has attempted to address the question: ‘what do unions do on the wage front?’ The

answer in the cases of both the US and the UK is that, despite declining membership numbers,

unions are able to raise wages substantially over the equivalent non-union wage. Unions in other

countries, such as Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Japan, New

Zealand, Norway, Portugal and Spain, are also able to raise wages by significant amounts. In

countries where union wage settlements frequently spill over into the non-union sector (e.g.

France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden) there is, as one might expect, no

significant union wage differential. The estimates from the seventeen countries we examined

averages out at 12 per cent.

       Time series evidence from both the US and the UK suggests three interesting findings.

First, the union differential in the US is higher on average than that found in the UK (18 per cent

compared with 10 per cent). Second, the union wage premium in both countries was untrended

in the years up to the mid-1990s. Third, in both countries the wage premium has fallen in the

boom years since 1994/95. It is too early to tell whether the onset of a downturn in 2002 will
                                                                                                36


cause the differential to rise again or whether there is a trend change in the impact of unions. It

is our view that most likely what has happened is that the tightening of the labour market has

resulted in a temporary decline in the size of the union wage premium. Time will tell whether

the current loosening of the labour market, that is occurring in both countries, will return the

union wage premium to its long run values of 10 per cent in the case of the UK and 18 per cent

in the case of the US.   On the basis of past experience it seems likely that they will.
           37


Endnotes
                                                                                           38


References

Andrews, M. J., D. N. F. Bell, and R. Upward (1998), ‘Union Coverage Differentials: Some
Estimates for Britain Using the New Earnings Survey Panel Dataset’, Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, 60 (1), 47-78.

Andrews, M. J., M. B. Stewart, J. K. Swaffield, and R. Upward (1998), ‘The Estimation of
Union Wage Differentials and the Impact of Methodological Choices’, Labour Economics, 5 (4),
449-474.

Bender, K. A. (1997), ‘The Changing Determinants of U.S. Unionism: An Analysis Using
Worker-Level Data’, Journal of Labor Research, 18 (3), 403-423.

Blackaby, D. H., P. D. Murphy, and P. J. Sloane (1991), ‘Union Membership, Collective
Bargaining Coverage and the Trade Union Mark-Up for Britain’, Economics Letters, 36 (2), 203-
208.

Blanchflower, D. G. (1984), ‘Union Relative Wage Effects: A Cross-Section Analysis Using
Establishment Data’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 22 (3), 311-332.

Blanchflower, D. G. (1986), ‘What Effect Do Unions Have on Relative Wages in Great
Britain?’, British Journal of Industrial Relations, 24 (2), 196-204.

Blanchflower, D. G. (1991), ‘Fear, Unemployment and Pay Flexibility’, Economic Journal, 101
(406), 483-496.

Blanchflower, D. G. (1996), ‘The Role and Influence of Trade Unions in the OECD’, Report to
the Bureau of International Labor Affairs, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor, August.

Blanchflower, D. G. (1999), ‘Changes Over Time In Union Relative Wage Effects in Great
Britain and the United States’, in S. Daniel, P. Arestis, and J. Grahl (eds.), The History and
Practice of Economics: Essays in Honour of Bernard Corry and Maurice Peston, Volume. 2,
Northampton, Mass.: Edward Elgar, pp. 3-32.

Blanchflower, D. G. (2000), ‘Globalization and the Labor Market’, Report to The Trade Deficit
Review Commission, downloadable at http://www.ustdrc.gov.

Blanchflower, D. G. (2001), ‘Unemployment, Well-Being and Wage Curves in Eastern and
Central Europe’, Journal of Japanese and International Economies, 15 (4), 364-402.

Blanchflower, D. G., and R. B. Freeman (1992), ‘Unionism in the U.S. and Other Advanced
OECD Countries’, Industrial Relations, 31 (1), 156-179; reprinted in M. Bognanno and Morris
M. Kleiner (eds.), Labor Market Institutions and the Future Role of Unions, Oxford: Blackwell,
pp. 56-79.
                                                                                          39


Blanchflower, D. G., and S. Machin (1996), ‘Product Market Competition, Wages and
Productivity: International Evidence from Establishment Level Data’, Annales d’Economie et de
Statistique, 41/42, 220-253.

Blanchflower, D. G., and A. J. Oswald (1994), The Wage Curve, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Blanchflower, D. G., A. J. Oswald, and M. Garrett (1989), ‘Insider Power and Wage
Determination’, Economica, 57 (226), 143-170.

Blanchflower, D. G., A. J. Oswald, and P. Sanfey (1996), ‘Wages, Profits and Rent Sharing’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (1), 227-251.

Booth, A. L., and M. L. Bryan (2001), ‘The Union Membership Wage-Premium Puzzle: Is There
A Free Rider Problem?’, Working Paper, Institute for Social and Economic Research, University
of Essex.

Brook, K. (2002), ‘Trade Union Membership: An Analysis of Data from the Autumn 2001 LFS’,
Labour Market Trends, 110 (7), 343-354.

Brown, W., S. Deakin, M. Hudson, C. Pratten, and P. Ryan (1998), The Individualisation of
Employment Contracts in Britain’, Employment Relations Research Series 4, London:
Department of Trade and Industry.

Bratsberg, B., and J. F. Ragan (2002), ‘Changes in the Union Wage Premium by Industry – Data
and Analysis’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (1) October [forthcoming]..

Bryson, A. (2001), ‘Union Effects on Workplace Governance, 1983-1998’, PSI Discussion Paper
No. 8, London: Policy Studies Institute.

Bryson, A. (2002), ‘The Union Membership Wage Premium: An Analysis Using Propensity
Score Matching’, Discussion Paper No. 530, Centre for Economic Performance, London School
of Economics.

Budd, J.W., and I-G Na (2000), ‘The Union Membership Wage Premium for Employees
Covered by Collective Bargaining Agreements’, Journal of Labor Economics, 18 (4), 783-807.

Card, D. (1996), ‘The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis’,
Econometrica, 64 (4), 957-979.

Christie, V. (1992), ‘Union Wage Effects and the Probability of Union Membership', Economic
Record, 68 (200), 43-56.

Dinardo, J., and T. Lemieux (1997), ‘Diverging Male Wage Inequality in the United States and
Canada, 1981-1988: Do Institutions Explain the Difference?’, Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 50 (4), 629-651.
                                                                                            40


Doiron, D. J., and C. W. Riddell (1994), ‘The Impact of Unionization on Male-Female Earnings
Differences in Canada’, Journal of Human Resources, 29 (2), 504-534.

Donald, S. G., D. A. Green, and H. J. Paarsch (2000), ‘Differences in Wage Distributions
between Canada and the United States: An Application of a Flexible Estimator of Distribution
Functions in the Presence of Covariates’, Review of Economic Studies, 67 (4), 609-633.

Ebbinghaus, B., and J. Visser (1999), ‘When Institutions Matter. Union Growth and Decline in
Western Europe, 1950-1995’, European Sociological Review, 15 (2), 135-158.

Ebbinghaus, B. and J. Visser (2000), Trade Unions in Western Europe Since 1945, London:
Macmillan.

Farber, H. S. (1990),’ The Decline of Unionization in the United States: What Can Be Learned
from Recent Experience’, Journal of Labor Economics, 8(1), Part 2, January, pp. S75-S105.

Farber, H. S. (2001), ‘Notes on the Economics of Labor Unions’, Working Paper 452, Princeton
University Industrial Relations Section.

Farber, H. S. and B. Western (2001), ‘Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the Private
Sector, 1973-1998’, Journal of Labor Research, 22 (3), 459-486.

Farber, H. S. and B. Western (2002), ‘Ronald Reagan and the Politics of Declining Union
Organization’, British Journal of Industrial Relations [forthcoming].

Forth, J., and N. Millward (2000a), ‘The Determinants of Pay Levels and Fringe Benefit
Provision in Britain’, NIESR Discussion Paper No.171, London: National Institute for Social and
Economic Research.

Forth, J., and N. Millward (2000b), ‘Pay Settlements in Britain’, NIESR Discussion Paper
No.173, London: National Institute for Social and Economic Research.

Forth, J., and N. Millward (2002), ‘Union Effects on Pay Levels in Britain’, Labour Economics,
9(4), 547-562.

Freeman, R. B. (1984), ‘Longitudinal Analyses of the Effects of Trade Unions’, Journal of
Labor Economics, 2 (1), 1-26.

Freeman, R. B. (1988), ‘Contraction and Expansion: The Divergence of Private Sector and
Public Sector Unionism in the United States’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2 (2) 63-88.

Freeman, R. B. (1995), ‘Are Your Wages Set In Beijing?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9
(3), 15-32.

Freeman, R. B., and L. Katz (eds.) (1995). Differences and Changes in Wage Structures.
Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press for NBER.
                                                                                           41




Freeman, R. B. and J. Medoff (1984), What Do Unions Do?, New York: Basic Books.

Golden, Miriam, Peter Lange, and Michael Wallerstein (1997), ‘Union Centralization Among
Advanced     Industrial    Societies:    An Empirical Study’, dataset available at
http://www.shelley.polisci.ucla.edu/data.

Gottschalk, P. (1993), ‘Changes in Inequality of Family Income in Seven Industrialized
Countries’, American Economic Review, 83 (2), 136-142.

Grant, D. (2001), ‘A Comparison of the Cyclical Behavior of Union and Nonunion Wages in the
United States’, Journal of Human Resources, 36 (1), 31-57.

Grant, E. K., R. Swidinsky, and J. Vanderkamp (1987), 'Canadian Union-Nonunion Wage
Differentials’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 41 (1), 93-107.

Green, F. (1988), ‘The Trade Union Wage Gap in Britain: Some Recent Estimates’, Economics
Letters, 27 (2), 183-187.

Hildreth, A. K. G. (1999), ‘What Has Happened to the Union Wage Differential in Britain in the
1990s?’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 61 (1), 5-31.

Hildreth, A. K. G. (2000), ‘Union Wage Differentials For Covered Members And Non-Members
In Great Britain’, Journal of Labor Research, 21 (1), 133-147.

Hirsch, B.T. and D. A. Macpherson (2002), Union Membership and Earnings Data Book:
Compilations from the Current Population Survey (2002 Edition). Washington: Bureau of
National Affairs.

Hirsch, B. T., D. A. Macpherson, and E. J. Schumacher (2002), ‘Measuring Union and Non-
Union Wage Growth: Puzzles in Search of Solutions’, paper presented at the 23rd Middlebury
Economics Conference, Changing Role of Unions, Middlebury, Vermont, April.

Hirsch, B. T., D. A. Macpherson, and W. G. Vroman (2001), ‘Estimates of Union Density by
State’, Monthly Labor Review, 124 (7), 51-55.

Hirsch, B. T., and E. J. Schumacher (1998), ‘Unions, Wages, and Skills’, Journal of Human
Resources, 33 (1), 201-219.

Hirsch, B. T. and E. J. Schumacher (2002), ‘Match Bias In Wage Gap Estimates Due To
Earnings Imputation’, Mimeograph, Trinity University, available at www.trinity.edu/bhirsch/ or
www.ssrn.com.

Jarrell, S. B. and T. D. Stanley, (1990), ‘A Meta-Analysis of the Union-Nonunion Wage Gap’,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 44 (1), 54-67.
                                                                                          42


Katz, L., G. Loveman, and D. G. Blanchflower (1995), ‘A Comparison of Changes in the
Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries’, in R. B. Freeman and L. F. Katz (eds.)
Differences and Changes in Wage Structures, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press for
NBER, pp. 25-65.

Kaufman, B.E. (2002), ‘Models of Union Wage Determination: What Have We Learned Since
Dunlop and Ross?’, Industrial Relations, 41 (1), 110-158.

Kornfeld, R. (1993), ‘The Effects of Union Membership on Wages and Employee Benefits: The
Case of Australia’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 47 (1), 114-128.

Kuhn, P. (1998), ‘Unions and the Economy: What We Know; What We Should Know’,
Canadian Journal of Economics, 31 (5), 1033-1056.

Kuhn, P., and A. Sweetman (1998), ‘Wage Loss Following Displacement: The Role of Union
Coverage’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51 (3), 384-400.

Kuhn, P., and A. Sweetman (1999), ‘Vulnerable Seniors: Unions, Tenure, and Wages Following
Permanent Job Loss’, Journal of Labor Economics, 17 (4), 671-693.

Lanot, G., and I. Walker (1998), ‘The Union/Non-Union Wage Differential: An Application of
Semi-Parametric Methods’, Journal of Econometrics, 84 (2), 327-349.

Lemieux, T. (1998), ‘Estimating the Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality in a Panel Data
Model with Comparative Advantage and Non-Random Selection,’ Journal of Labor Economics,
16 (2), 261-291.

Levy, P. A. (1985), ‘The Unidimensional Perspective of the Reagan Labor Act’, Rutgers Law
Journal, 16 (2), 269-390.

Lewis, H. G. (1963), Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States, Chicago, Ill.:
University of Chicago Press.

Lewis, H. G. (1986), Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey, Chicago, Ill.: University of
Chicago Press.

Linneman, P. D., M. L. Wachter, and W. H. Carter (1990), ‘Evaluating the Evidence on Union
Employment and Wages’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 44 (1), 34-53.

MacDonald, G. M., and J. C. Evans (1981), ‘The Size and Structure of Union-Non-Union Wage
Differentials in Canadian Industry’, Canadian Journal of Economics, 14 (2), 216-231.

Machin, S. (2001), ‘Does It Still Pay To Be In Or To Join A Union?’ Working Paper, University
College London.
                                                                                            43


Machin, S., M. B. Stewart, and J. Van Reenen (1993), ‘The Economic Effects of Multiple
Unionism', Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 95 (3), 275-292.

Macpherson, D. A., and J. B. Stewart (1990), ‘The Effect of International Competition on Union
and Non-Union Wages’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43 (4), 434-446.

Main, B. (1996), ‘The Union Relative Wage Gap’, in D. Gallie, R. Penn and M. Rose (eds.),
Trade Unionism in Recession, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 216-243.

Main, B., and B. Reilly (1992), ‘Women and the Union Wage Gap’, Economic Journal, 102
(410), 49-66.

Main, B., and B. Reilly (1993), ‘The Employer Size-Wage Gap: Evidence for Britain’,
Economica, 60 (238), 125-142.

Maloney, T. (1997), Benefit Reform and Labour Market Behaviour in New Zealand, Institute of
Policy Studies, Victoria University, Wellington, New Zealand.

Maloney, T. (1998), Five Years After: The New Zealand Labour Market and the Employment
Contracts Act, Institute of Policy Studies, Victoria University, Wellington, New Zealand.

Maloney, T., and J. Savage (1996), ‘Labour Markets and Policy’, in B. Silverstone, A. Bollard,
and R. Lattimore (eds.), A Study of Economic Reform: The Case of New Zealand, Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science, pp. 173-213.

Mellow, W., and H. Sider (1983), ‘Accuracy of Response in Labor Market Surveys: Evidence
and Implications’, Journal of Labor Economics, 1 (4), 331-344.

Metcalf, D., and M. B. Stewart (1992), ‘Closed Shops and Relative Pay: Institutional
Arrangements or High Density?’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 54 (4), 503-516.

Metcalf, D., K. Hansen, and A. Charlwood (2001), ‘Unions and the Sword of Justice: Unions and
Pay Systems, Pay Inequality, Pay Discrimination and Low Pay’, National Institute Economic
Review, 176 (2), 61-75.

Miller, P. and C. Mulvey (1996), ‘Unions, Firms Size and Wages’, The Economic Record, 72
(217), 138-152.

Millward, N., A. Bryson, and J. Forth (2000), All Change At Work?, London: Routledge.

Millward, N., J. Forth, and A. Bryson (2001), Who Calls the Tune at Work? The Impact of
Unions on Jobs and Pay, York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.

Mishel, L., and J. Bernstein (1994), The State of Working America, 1994-95, Economic Policy
Institute series. Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.
                                                                                              44


Moll, P. (1993), ‘Black South African Unions: Relative Wage Effects in International
Perspective’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 46 (2), 245-262.

Moore, W. J., and J. Raisian (1980), ‘Cyclical Sensitivity of Union/Non-Union Relative Wage
Effects’, Journal of Labor Research, 1 (1), 115-132.

Mulvey, C. (1986), ‘Wage Levels: Do Unions Make a Difference?’, in J. Niland (ed.), Wage
Fixation in Australia, Sydney: Allen and Unwin, pp. 203-216.

Murphy, P. D., P. Sloane, and D. H. Blackaby (1992), ‘The Effects of Trade Unions on the
Distribution of Earnings: A Sample Selectivity Approach’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics, 54 (4), 517-542.

OECD (1996), Employment Outlook, Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development,
Paris, France.

Park, A., J. Curtice, K. Thomson, L. Jarvis, and C. Bromley (2001), British Social Attitudes, The
18th Report: Public Policy, Social Ties, London: Sage Publications.

Park, Y. (1991), ‘Union/Non-Union Wage Differentials in the Korean Manufacturing Sector’,
International Economic Journal, 5 (4), 79-91.

Raphael S. (2000), ‘Estimating the Union Earnings Effect Using a Sample of Displaced
Workers’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 53 (3), 503-521.

Renaud, S. (1998), ‘Unions, Wage and Total Compensation in Canada - An Empirical Study’,
Relations Industrielles - Industrial Relations, 53 (4), 710-729.

Reynolds, L., S. H. Masters, and C. H. Moser (1999), Labor Economics and Labor Relations,
11th ed., Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.

Robinson, C. (1989), ‘The Joint Determination of Union Status and Union Wage Effects: Some
Tests of Alternative Models’, Journal of Political Economy, 97 (3), 639-667.

Robinson, C., and N. Tomes (1984), ‘Union Wage Differentials in the Public and Private
Sectors: A Simultaneous Equations Specification’, Journal of Labor Economics; 2 (1), 106-127.

Schmidt, C. (1995), ‘Relative Wage Effects of German Unions’, Mimeograph, Selapo,
University of Munich.

Schmidt, C., and K. F. Zimmermann (1991), ‘Work Characteristics, Firm Size and Wages’,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 73 (4), 705-710.

Schumacher, E. J. (1999), ‘What Explains Wage Differences between Union Members and
Covered Non-Members?’, Southern Economic Journal, 65 (3), 493-512.
                                                                                              45


Schultz, T. P., and G. Mwabu (1998), ‘Labor Unions and the Distribution of Wages and
Employment in South Africa’, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 51 (4), 680-703.

Shah, A. (1984), ‘Job Attributes and the Size of the Union/Non-Union Wage Differential’,
Economica, 51 (204), 437-446.

Simpson, W. (1985), ‘The Impact of Unions on the Structure of Canadian Wages: An Empirical
Analysis with Microdata’, Canadian Journal of Economics, 18 (1), 164-181.

Stewart, M. B. (1983), ‘Relative Earnings and Individual Union Membership in the United
Kingdom’, Economica, 50 (198), 111-125.

Stewart, M. B. (1987), ‘Collective Bargaining Arrangements, Closed Shops and Relative Pay’,
Economic Journal, 97 (385), 140-156.

Stewart, M. B. (1990), ‘Union Wage Differentials, Product Market Influences and the Division
of Rents’, Economic Journal, 100 (403), 1122-1137.

Stewart, M. B. (1991), ‘Union Wage Differentials in the Face of Changes in the Economic and
Legal Environment’, Economica, 58 (230), 155-172.

Stewart, M. B. (1995), ‘Union Wage Differentials in an Era of Declining Unionisation’, Oxford
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 57 (2), 143-166.

Swaffield, J. K. (2001), ‘Does Measurement Error Bias Fixed-Effects Estimates of the Union
Wage Effect?’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 63 (4), 437-457.

Symons, E., and I. Walker (1988), ‘Union/Non-Union Wage Differentials, 1979-1984: Evidence
from the UK Family Expenditure Surveys’, Mimeograph, Keele University.

Troy, L. (2000), ‘U.S. and Canadian Industrial Relations: Convergent or Divergent?’, Industrial
Relations, 39 (4), 695-713.

Visser, J. (1996), ‘Unionisation Trends Revisited’, Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.

Wagner, J. (1991), Gewerkschaftsmitgliedschaft und Arbeitseinkommen in der Bundesrepublik
Deutschland – Eine ökonometrische Analyse mit Inividualdaten’, ifo-Studien, 37 (2), 109-140.

Wessels, W. (1994), ‘Do Unionized Firms Hire Better Workers?’, Economic Inquiry, 32 (4),
616-629.

Wooden, M. (2001), ‘Union Wage Effects in the Presence of Enterprise Bargaining’, Economic
Record, 77 (236), 1-18.

Wooden, M., and B. Bora (1998), ‘Workplace Characteristics and Their Effects on Wages:
Australian Evidence’, Australian Economic Papers, 38 (3), 276-289.
                                                                                    46




Wunnava, P. V., and A. A. Okunade (1996), ‘Countercyclical Union Wage Premium? Evidence
for the 1980s’, Journal of Labor Research, 17 (2), 289-296.

Yaron, G. (1990), ‘Trade Unions and Women’s Relative Pay: A Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis Using UK Data’, Applied Economics Discussion Paper No. 95, Oxford University:
Institute of Economics and Statistics
                                                                                                                    47




                                              Table 1
                          Union Wage Gaps for Various Countries, 1994-1999

Country                        Years             Union coefficient              N                   Comments
Australia                1994, 8 & 9                   .118*                  1,703
Austria                  1994, 5, 8 & 9                .150*                  1,404
Brazil                   1999                          .337*                  803           No education or private
Canada                   1997-9                        .083*                  1682          No private sector dummy
Chile                    1998, 9                       .159*                  951
Cyprus                   1996-8                        .137*                  1,272
Denmark                  1997-8                        .159*                  1,058
France                   1996-8                        .029                   2,738
Germany                  1994 –9                       .037                   4,115
Italy                    1994, & 8                    -.003                   578
Japan                    1994-6, 8, 9                  .258*                  2,505
Netherlands              1994 & 5                     -.006                   1,291
New Zealand              1994-9                        .099*                  2,784         No private sector dummy
Norway                   1994-9                        .073*                  4,666
Portugal                 1998-9                        .179*                  970
Spain                    1995, 7-9                     .069*                  1,490         No private sector dummy
Sweden                   1994-9                       -.002                   3,619

Notes: Dependent variable log of earnings variously defined. * indicates statistically significantly different from zero
at the .05 level or better. Controls are age, age squared, years of schooling, private sector, hours and union status.
Sample restricted to employees. Germany includes East and West.
Dependent variable defined as follows:
Australia                 Yearly income in Australian $
Austria                   Respondent’s personal net income per month in Austrian Schilling
Canada                    In what range would your own personal income fall in Canadian $
Chile                     Respondent’s monthly net income in CLP
Cyprus                   Monthly gross earnings before taxes in Cyprus Pounds
Denmark                  Respondent’s earnings per year before taxes in DKK
France                   Respondent’s monthly earnings in Francs
Germany                  Respondent’s net earnings per month after taxes and social insurance in DM
Italy                    Respondent’s net income per month in thousands of Lira
Japan                    How much did you earn yourself last year before taxes in thousands of Yen.
Netherlands              Respondent’s income after taxes in Guilder
New Zealand              Yearly income from all sources before tax in N.Z. $
Norway                   Personal gross income before taxes and allowances in 1997, incl. retirement benefits. etc.
Portugal                 Respondent’s monthly average net income in Escudos
Southern Ireland         Weekly gross income before taxes and social insurance in Pounds
Spain                    R’s monthly earnings in Pesetas
Sweden                   Approximate income per month before taxes in SEK.

Source: ISSP, 1994-99.
                                                                                                    48




                                                  Table 2

   (a) Union Density Rates in European Countries, 1950-1998 (wage and salary workers)
                    1950       1960      1970      1975      1980    1985     1990   1995      1998
Austria              62          60      57        53        52      52       47     41        39
Denmark              56          62      63        69        79      78       75     77        76
France               30          24      20        22        22      19       14     10        10
Germany (West)       38          35      32        35        35      34       32
Germany                                                                       36     29        26
Italy                45         28       37        48         50     42       39     39        38
Netherlands          43         42       37        38         35     28       24     24        23
Norway               45         52       50        52         55     56       56     55        55
Portugal                                                      52              40     30        25
Spain                                              30          8     10       12     18        17
Sweden               67         71       67        73         78     82       82     88        86

Sources: Ebbinghaus and Visser (2000); Blanchflower (1996)




                   (b) Union Density Rates in Non-European OECD countries

                                          1970               1980           1990            1993
Australia                                  44.2               49.9           40.8           35.0
Canada                                    31.0                36.1           35.8           37.4
Japan                                     34.7                30.8           25.2           24.2
New Zealand                               40.8                47.7           45.5           30.1

Source: Blanchflower (1996).
                                                                                                                 49




                                           Table 3
           Union Coefficients in a Log Hourly Wage Equation for the US, 1973-2001

                                      All sectors                                    Private sector
                            Imputed +            Non-imputed                Imputed +            Non-imputed
Year                       Non-imputed              only                   Non-imputed              Only
1973                          .132                  .165                       .120                 .153
1974                          .136                  .169                       .129                 .162
1975                          .141                  .174                       .134                 .167
1976                          .144                  .177                       .136                 .169
1977                          .174                  .207                       .168                 .201
1978                          .172                  .205                       .171                 .204
1979                          .121                  .154                       .119                 .142
1980                          .130                  .163                       .124                 .157
1981                          .116                  .149                       .118                 .151
1983                          .151                  .178                       .160                 .192
1984                          .158                  .186                       .169                 .202
1985                          .150                  .176                       .160                 .191
1986                          .151                  .172                       .160                 .183
1987                          .146                  .170                       .152                 .182
1988                          .145                  .169                       .145                 .175
1989                          .139                  .164                       .146                 .176
1990                          .133                  .158                       .132                 .162
1991                          .124                  .149                       .124                 .154
1992                          .140                  .165                       .146                 .176
1993                          .145                  .170                       .149                 .179
1994                          .135                  .170                       .126                 .168
1995                          .126                  .161                       .124                 .166
1996                          .125                  .160                       .126                 .169
1997                          .126                  .160                       .123                 .163
1998                          .113                  .147                       .105                 .149
1999                          .103                  .148                       .096                 .156
2000                          .092                  .126                       .092                 .134
2001                          .091                  .132                       .087                 .141

Notes and Sources: Dependent variable is the log hourly wage.
a) 1973-1981 May CPS, n=38,000 for all sectors, and n=31,000 for the private sector. Controls comprise age, age2,
male, union, years of education, 2 race dummies, 28 state dummies, usual hours, private sector and 50 industry
dummies. For 1980 and 1981 sample sizes fall to approx. 16,000 because from 1980 only respondents in months 4
and 8 in the outgoing rotation groups report a wage. Since the May CPS sample files available to us do not include
allocated earnings in 1973-81, the series in columns 2 and 4 are adjusted upward by the average bias of 0.033 found
by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) using these May CPS data for 1979-81.
b) Matched Outgoing Rotation Group files of the Current Population Survey (MORGs), 1983-2001. Controls
comprise usual hours, age, age2, 4 race dummies, 15 highest qualifications dummies, male, union, 46 industry
dummies, 4 organisational status dummies, and 50 state dummies. Sample is non-agricultural workers working at
the time of interview, aged at least 16 years. For 1989-95 allocation flags are either unreliable (in 1989-93) or not
available (1994 through August 1995). For 1989-93, the gaps are adjusted upward by the average imputation bias
during 1983-88 (.031 in column 3). For 1994-95 the gap is adjusted upward by the bias during 1996-98 (.046 in
column 3).
                                                                                                                    50




Table 4
                 Union Wage Gap Estimates for the United States, 1973-2001 (%)
                          (excludes workers with imputed earnings)
                                      All sectors                  Private sector                 Private sector
Year                             Blanchflower/Bryson            Blanchflower/Bryson            Hirsch/Schumacher
1973                                  17.9%                           16.5%                           17.5%
1974                                  18.4%                           17.6%                           17.5%
1975                                  19.0%                           18.2%                           19.2%
1976                                  19.4%                           18.4%                           20.4%
1977                                  23.0%                           22.3%                           23.9%
1978                                  22.8%                           22.6%                           22.8%
1979                                  16.6%                           15.3%                           19.7%
1980                                  17.7%                           17.0%                           21.3%
1981                                  16.1%                           16.3%                           20.4%
1983                                  19.5%                           21.2%                           25.5%
1984                                  20.4%                           22.4%                           26.2%
1985                                  19.2%                           21.0%                           26.0%
1986                                  18.8%                           20.1%                           23.9%
1987                                  18.5%                           20.0%                           24.0%
1988                                  18.4%                           19.1%                           22.6%
1989                                  17.8%                           19.2%                           24.5%
1990                                  17.1%                           17.6%                           22.5%
1991                                  16.1%                           16.6%                           22.0%
1992                                  17.9%                           19.2%                           22.5%
1993                                  18.5%                           19.6%                           23.5%
1994                                  18.5%                           18.2%                           25.2%
1995                                  17.4%                           18.0%                           24.5%
1996                                  17.4%                           18.4%                           23.5%
1997                                   17.4%                          17.7%                           23.2%
1998                                   15.8%                          16.1%                           22.4%
1999                                   16.0%                          16.9%                           22.0%
2000                                   13.4%                          14.3%                           20.4%
2001                                   14.1%                          15.1%                           20.0%
1973-2001 average                      18.0%                          18.4%                           22.4%

Notes: Wage gap estimates calculated taking anti-logs and deducting 1. Columns 1 and 2 are taken from Table 3.
Column 3 is taken from column 5 of Table 4 of Hirsch and Schumacher (2002).

Source: Data for 1973-81 are from the May CPS Earnings Supplements, and for 1983-2001 from the monthly CPS-
ORG earnings files. The Hirsch and Schumacher (2002) sample includes employed private sector nonagricultural
wage and salary workers aged 16 years and above with positive weekly earnings and non-missing data for control
variables (few observations are lost). The wage gap reported in column 3 is the coefficient on a dummy variable for
union membership in a regression where the log of hourly earnings is the dependent variable. The control variables
included are years of schooling, experience and its square (allowed to vary by gender), and dummy variables for
gender, race and ethnicity (3), marital status (2), part-time status, region (8), large metropolitan area, industry (8),
and occupation (12). Because the sample does not include allocated earnings in 1973-78, the “not corrected” series
are adjusted downwards by the average bias found during 1979-81 of .033 in column 3. All three columns include
only workers reporting earnings. All allocated earners are identified and excluded for the years 1973-88 and 1996-
2001. For 1989-95 allocation flags are either unreliable (in 1989-93) or not available (1994 through August 1995).
                                                                                                            51


For 1989-93, the gaps are adjusted upward by the average imputation bias during 1983-88 (.031 in column 3). For
1994-95 the gap is adjusted upward by the bias during 1996-98 (.046 in column 3).
                                                                                                                                                       52




                                                                  Table 5
                                                Disaggregated Estimates for the US, 1996-2001
                                  Union coefficient        Union         Union*Time        Wage gap         Wage gap         Wage gap         Decline
                                                                                                             1996             2001           1996-2001
All (663,564)                         .145                   .167             -.012           15.6%          18.2%            11.3%             6.90%
Male (333,188)                        .143                   .161             -.012           15.4%          17.5%            10.6%             6.90%
Female (330,376)                      .135                   .152             -.012           14.5%          16.4%             9.6%             6.80%
Age <40 (360,458)                     .160                   .179             -.013           17.4%          19.6%            12.1%             7.50%
Age >=40 (303,106)                    .128                   .142             -.010           13.7%          15.3%             9.6%             5.70%
White (514,330)                       .143                   .161             -.013           15.4%          17.5%            10.1%             7.40%
Non-white (149,234)                   .175                   .192             -.011           19.1%          21.2%            14.7%             6.50%
Public sector (116,771)               .134                   .144             -.007           14.2%          15.5%            11.5%             4.00%
Private sector (546,793)              .150                   .167             -.012           16.2%          18.2%            11.3%             6.90%
Manual worker (171,688)               .246                   .254             -.006           27.9%          28.9%            25.1%             3.80%
Non-manual worker (491,876)           .114                   .134             -.013           12.1%          14.3%             7.1%             7.20%
Manufacturing (107,562)               .093                   .105             -.009            9.7%          11.1%             6.2%             4.90%
Non-manufacturing (556,002)           .162                   .182             -.014           17.6%          20.0%            11.9%             8.10%
High education (180,106)              .086                   .115             -.019            9.0%          12.2%              2.0%           10.20%
Medium education (194,827)            .131                   .145             -.010           14.0%          15.6%            10.0%             5.60%
Low education (288,631)               .199                   .211             -.009           22.0%          23.5%            18.1%             5.40%
Full-time (496,727)                   .123                   .154             -.013           13.1%          16.6%             9.3%             7.30%
Part-time (166,837)                   .205                   .224             -.008           22.8%          25.1%            20.2%             4.90%

Notes: ‘High education’=at least a bachelor degree; ‘Medium education’= some college including an associates’ degree; ‘Low education’=high school graduate
or below. Manufacturing=SIC codes 100-392. Manual = occupation codes 503-889 + farm workers (477-489). Sample is all sectors. Controls are 46 industry
dummies, 50 state dummies, age, age squared, 15 highest qualification dummies, 4 organization type dummies, usual hours, 4 race dummies, gender dummy and
a time trend. Numbers of observations in parentheses.
                                                                                                                    53




                                               Table 6
                            Time-Series Estimates of Union Wage Gaps, UK
                                                         LFS                                      BSA
1985                                                                                              3.5%
                                                                                                  (768)
1986                                                                                             11.1%
                                                                                                 (1,418)
1987                                                                                              7.9%
                                                                                                 (1,277)
1989                                                                                              6.3%
                                                                                                 (1,329)
1990                                                                                              6.3%
                                                                                                 (1,167)
1991                                                                                              4.8%
                                                                                                 (1,097)
1993                                                     14.9%                                    11.4%
                                                     (8,391)                                  (1,032)
1994                                                     17.5%                                    13.7%
                                                     (8,301)                                  (1,345)
1995                                                     14.6%                                    13.1%
                                                     (9,008)                                  (1,359)
1996                                                     14.8%                                     7.3%
                                                     (9,029)                                  (1,432)
1997                                                     11.4%                                    17.7%
                                                    (18,227)                                    (506)
1998                                                     12.2%                                    11.0%
                                                    (18,409)                                  (1,336)
1999                                                     10.2%                                     9.5%
                                                    (17,357)                                  (1,271)
2000                                                     10.3%                                     5.0%
                                                    (16,132)                                  (1,426)
2001                                                                                               4.4%
                                                                                              (1,417)

Sources: Data in the first column are from the UK Labour Force Surveys. The controls comprise industry dummies,
region dummies, age, age squared, highest qualification dummies, workplace size dummies, usual hours, race
dummies, and a gender dummy. Data in the second column are from the British Social Attitudes Surveys. Controls
are gender, age, ethnicity, qualifications, manual worker, full-time worker, establishment size, public sector,
manufacturing, and region. The BSAS estimates for 1994 and 1995 exclude the public sector dummy because this
was not available in that year, while the 1991 estimates exclude the ethnic minority dummy due to the low number
of valid cases with ethnicity in that year. In both series, the dependent variable is the log of the hourly wage. In the
BSAS this is derived from the annual banded earnings data by taking the mid-point of the respondent’s earnings
band and dividing this by continuous hours worked. (The earnings band for the top-coded highest earners is closed
by introducing an upper ceiling which is 1.5 times the lower band.) Before 1996, the BSAS hours worked question
did not explicitly mention overtime hours. The hours denominator used here explicitly includes overtime hours from
1996 onwards. No BSAS surveys were conducted in 1988 and 1992. Numbers of observations are given in
parentheses.
                                                                                                                                                         54




                                                                   Table 7
                                                Disaggregated Estimates for the UK, 1993-2000
                                       Union coefficient       Union         Union*Time       Wage gap         Wage gap        Wage gap         Decline
                                                                                                                1993             2000          1993-2000
All (105,112)                                 .094              .133             -.009            9.9%          14.2%            6.3%             7.9%
Male (51,544)                                 .035              .090             -.013            3.6%           9.4%           -1.4%            10.8%
Female (53,568)                               .147              .168             -.005           15.8%          18.3%           13.7%             4.6%
Age <40 (56,527)                              .095              .147             -.013           10.0%          15.8%            4.4%            11.4%
Age >=40 (48,585)                             .090              .110             -.005            9.4%          11.6%            7.3%             4.3%
White (100,921)                               .094              .130             -.009            9.9%          13.9%            6.0%             7.9%
Non-white (4,191)                             .093              .189             -.022            9.7%          20.8%            1.3%            19.5%
Public sector (29,712)                        .127              .104             -.005           13.5%          11.0%            6.6%             4.4%
Private sector (75,000)                       .052              .097             -.011            5.3%          10.2%            0.9%             9.3%
Manual worker (32,569)                        .157              .200             -.010           17.0%          22.1%           12.7%             9.4%
Non-manual worker (72,490)                    .066              .124             -.008            6.8%          13.2%            6.2%             7.0%
Manufacturing (20,491)                        .041              .104             -.016            4.2%          11.0%           -2.4%            13.4%
Non-manufacturing (84,621)                    .107              .141             -.008           11.3%          15.1%            8.0%             7.1%
High education (16,237)                       .037              .054             -.004            3.8%           5.5%            2.2%             3.3%
Medium education (74,632)                     .095              .144             -.012           10.0%          15.5%            4.9%            10.6%
Low education (13,903)                        .122              .160             -.010           13.0%          17.4%            8.3%             9.1%
Full-time (76,968)                            .060              .094             -.008            6.2%           9.9%            3.0%             6.9%
Part-time (27,932)                            .148              .174             -.006           16.0%          19.0%           13.4%             5.6%

Notes: ‘High education’=at least a bachelor degree; ‘Medium education’= some qualifications below degree level; ‘Low education’=no qualifications. Sample is
all sectors. Time coded from zero in 1993 to eight in 2000. Controls comprise 61 industry dummies, 18 region dummies, age, age squared, 40 highest
qualification dummies, 6 workplace size dummies, usual hours, 8 race dummies, gender dummy and a time trend. Time coded from zero in 1996 to five in 2001.

Source: Authors’ calculations using pooled UK Labour Force Surveys, 1993-2000.
                                                                                                                55




                                                   Table 8
   Disaggregated Estimates of the Union Hourly Wage Premium in
                        Britain, 1985-2001
                                      M(1): 1985-2001             M(2): 1993-1995             M(3): 1999-2001
Whole sample                           9.1% (17,934)                12.2% (3,756)                5.1% (3947)
Men                                    6.1% (8,969)                 11.5% (1,829)                1.8% (1,898)
Women                                 11.2% (8,965)                 11.6% (1,927)                7.5% (2,049)
Age < 45 years                         9.4% (12,082)                11.6% (2,557)                2.4% (2,681)
Age 45+ years                          8.2% (5,852)                 13.0% (1,199)              10.1% (1,266)
Private sector                         7.1% (10,463)                10.1% (696)                  3.6% (2,811)
Public sector                         10.0% (4,748)                 14.7% (337)                10.6% (1,136)
Manual worker                         15.0% (6,925)                 19.2% (1,406)              11.7% (1,410)
Non-manual                             5.6% (11,009)                 8.4% (2,350)                2.0% (2,537)
Manufacturing                          9.6% (3,973)                 13.1% (742)                10.0% (770)
Non-manufacturing                      8.5% (13,961)                12.1% (3,014)                4.3% (3,177)
High education                         4.7% (5,694)                  8.5% (1,166)               -0.9% (1,443)
Medium education                       9.4% (6,545)                 10.6% (1,489)                8.1% (1,503)
Low education                         11.3% (5,536)                 17.5% (1,056)                9.0% (965)
Full-timer                             8.0% (14,237)                11.9% (2,952)                3.3% (3,065)
Part-timer                            14.6% (3,697)                 15.0% (804)                13.7% (882)

Notes:
a. Coefficients are exponentiated, depicting the difference in log gross hourly wages between members and non-
    members, expressed as a percentage of non-members’ wages. Figures in parentheses are the number of
    observations in the model.
b. The figures are derived from the union membership dummy coefficient in pooled regressions for the years
    stated. Specification M(1) pools the data for 1985-2001 and (where the sub-groups do not preclude their
    inclusion) they contain the following controls: grouped years, gender, age, qualifications, manual worker, full-
    time worker, establishment size, manufacturing, region, grouped year dummies. M(2) is the same as M(1), but
    excluding the grouped year variables, for the period 1993-95; M(3) performs the same calculation for the most
    recent period, 1999-2001.
c. Surveys in 1994 and 1995 did not collect information on sector, so M(2) for public and private sector equations
    is run for the 1993 data only. We tested the sensitivity of results to the inclusion of a public sector dummy in
    models. Where significant, these are reported in the text.
d. All estimates are based on unweighted data.
e. The dependent variable is the log of the hourly wage. Using the mid-point methodology, this is derived from the
    annual banded earnings data by taking the mid-point of the respondent’s earnings band and dividing this by
    continuous hours worked. (The earnings band for the top-coded highest earners is closed by introducing an
    upper ceiling which is 1.5 times the lower band.) Before 1996 the BSAS hours worked question did not
    explicitly mention overtime hours. The hours denominator used here explicitly includes overtime hours from
    1996 onwards.
f. No surveys were conducted in 1988 and 1992.

Source: Authors’ calculations using pooled British Social Attitudes Surveys, 1985-2001.
                                                                                            56




           Figure 1a. Movements in the Wage Premium in
                         the US, 1973-2001


23

18

13

 8

 3
 73

       75

             77

                   79

                         81

                                83

                                       85

                                             87

                                                   89

                                                         91

                                                               93

                                                                     95

                                                                           97

                                                                                 99

                                                                                       01
19

      19

            19

                  19

                        19

                              19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                      20
                             Unempl.        Blanchflower/Bryson premium
                                                                                       57



      Figure 1b. Movements in the Wage Premium in Britain, 1985-2001


20
18
16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 85

      86

           87

                88

                     89

                          90

                               91

                                    92

                                         93

                                              94

                                                    95

                                                         96

                                                              97

                                                                   98

                                                                        99

                                                                             00

                                                                                  01
19

     19

          19

               19

                    19

                         19

                              19

                                   19

                                        19

                                             19

                                                  19

                                                       19

                                                             19

                                                                  19

                                                                       19

                                                                            20

                                                                                 20
                                    BSAS           Unempl.
                                                                                                                58




                               Appendix Table 1
         Union Density and Unemployment in the UK and the US, 1964-2001
                                     Union density (%)                   Unemployment rate (%)
                                   US                UK                  US                UK
1964                               29.3             44.1                 5.2
1965                               28.9             44.2                 4.5
1966                               28.4             43.6                 3.8
1967                               28.3             43.7                 3.8
1968                               28.2             44.0                 3.6
1969                               28.0             45.3                 3.5
1970                               27.8             48.5                 4.9
1971                               27.2             48.7                 5.9              2.4
1972                               26.6             49.5                 5.6              2.7
1973                               26.6             49.3                 4.9              1.9
1974                               26.2             50.4                 5.6              1.9
1975                               24.6             51.7                 8.5              2.9
1976                               24.5             52.0                 7.7              3.9
1977                               24.1             53.6                 7.1              4.2
1978                               23.4             54.3                 6.1              4.1
1979                               24.4             54.5                 5.8              3.8
1980                               23.3             52.8                 7.1              4.8
1981                               21.7             49.9                 7.6              7.6
1982                               21.0             47.9                 9.7              9.0
1983                               20.3             46.7                 9.6              9.9
1984                               19.1             45.3                 7.5            10.1
1985                               18.2             44.0                 7.2            10.3
1986                               17.7             42.8                 7.0            10.5
1987                               17.3             42.8                 6.2              9.4
1988                               17.0             42.2                 5.5              7.6
1989                               16.6             41.5                 5.3              5.9
1990                               16.3             40.1                 5.6              5.5
1991                               16.3             38.2                 6.8              7.6
1992                               16.0             36.1                 7.5              9.2
1993                               16.0             35.4                 6.9              9.7
1994                               15.7             33.9                 6.1              8.8
1995                               15.1             32.3                 5.6              7.6
1996                               14.7             31.5                 5.4              7.0
1997                               14.2             30.4                 4.9              5.3
1998                               14.1             29.9                 4.5              4.5
1999                               14.0             29.6                 4.2              4.2
2000                               13.6             29.5                 4.0              3.6
2001                               13.5             29.1                 4.8              3.2

Notes and Sources:
a. US: The 1983–2000 Current Population Survey Outgoing Rotation Group (CPS-ORG) earnings files, the May
    1973–81 CPS earnings files, and the Directory of National Unions and Employee Associations, various years.
    Hirsch, Macpherson, and Vroman (2001). 2001 number from BLS
    (http://stats.bls.gov/news.release/union2.nr0.htm), nonagricultural wage and salary workers.

b.   UK: 1964-92, Visser (1996) and Golden, Lange, and Wallerstein (1997). From 1995, source is Brook (2002).
     Figures for 1993 and 1994 are authors' interpolations using overlap in the Visser and Brook series in 1991 and
     1992 for the UK and Britain. UK figures are union density among employees in employment. UK
     unemployment is based on the ILO definition
                                                                                  59




                           Appendix Table 2
                       Income Inequality Measures
Country         Year    Gini coefficient   Percentile   Percentile   Percentile
                                             ratio        ratio        ratio
                                            (90/10)      (90/50)      (80/20)
Australia     1981         0.281              3.93         1.86         2.48
Australia     1985         0.292              3.97         1.87         2.55
Australia     1989         0.304              4.19         1.94         2.59
Australia     1994         0.311              4.33         1.95         2.76
Austria       1987         0.227              2.89         1.62         1.98
Austria       1995         0.277              3.73         1.79         2.33
Belgium       1985         0.227              2.73         1.62         1.96
Belgium       1988         0.232              2.77         1.63         1.97
Belgium       1992         0.224              2.76         1.62         1.96
Belgium       1997         0.255              3.26         1.73         2.16
Canada        1971         0.316              4.79         1.89         2.70
Canada        1975         0.289              4.27         1.80         2.44
Canada        1981         0.284              4.05         1.83         2.42
Canada        1987         0.283              3.89         1.84         2.35
Canada        1991         0.281              3.78         1.82         2.33
Canada        1994         0.285              3.87         1.85         2.39
Canada        1997         0.291              4.01         1.86         2.45
Canada        1998         0.305              4.13         1.88         2.51
Denmark       1987         0.254              3.22         1.60         2.12
Denmark       1992         0.236              2.85         1.55         2.02
Denmark       1995         0.263              3.18         1.63         2.19
Denmark       1997         0.257              3.15         1.62         2.18
Finland       1987         0.209              2.59         1.51         1.86
Finland       1991         0.210              2.63         1.53         1.83
Finland       1995         0.226              2.68         1.59         1.90
France        1979         0.293              3.47         1.87         2.22
France        1981         0.288              3.40         1.88         2.25
France        1984         0.292              3.46         1.93         2.27
France        1989         0.287              3.46         1.82         2.24
France        1994         0.288              3.54         1.91         2.23
Germany       1973         0.271              3.22         1.81         2.12
Germany       1978         0.264              3.11         1.78         2.06
Germany       1981         0.244              2.89         1.79         2.03
Germany       1983         0.260              3.11         1.79         2.10
Germany       1984         0.249              3.01         1.71         2.06
Germany       1989         0.247              2.94         1.70         1.99
Germany       1994         0.261              3.18         1.74         2.10
Italy         1986         0.306              4.05         1.97         2.51
Italy         1991         0.289              3.76         1.85         2.49
Italy         1995         0.342              4.77         2.02         2.76
Netherlands   1983         0.260              2.94         1.86         2.10
Netherlands   1987         0.256              2.94         1.82         2.07
Netherlands   1991         0.266              3.02         1.73         2.11
Netherlands   1994         0.253              3.15         1.73         2.15
Norway        1979         0.223              2.76         1.58         1.88
Norway        1986         0.233              2.92         1.62         1.96
Norway        1991         0.231              2.79         1.58         1.90
Norway        1995         0.238              2.83         1.57         1.95
                                                                                                             60


Spain                1980                  0.318                 4.37             2.02                2.60
Spain                1990                  0.303                 3.96             1.97                2.46
Sweden               1975                  0.215                 2.73             1.53                1.92
Sweden               1981                  0.197                 2.43             1.51                1.76
Sweden               1987                  0.218                 2.71             1.51                1.89
Sweden               1992                  0.229                 2.78             1.59                1.91
Sweden               1995                  0.221                 2.61             1.56                1.76
UK                   1969                  0.267                 3.23             1.84                2.17
UK                   1974                  0.268                 3.41             1.76                2.21
UK                   1979                  0.270                 3.53             1.80                2.34
UK                   1986                  0.303                 3.79             1.94                2.53
UK                   1991                  0.336                 4.67             2.06                2.95
UK                   1995                  0.344                 4.57             2.10                2.84
US                   1974                  0.318                 4.92             1.90                2.65
US                   1979                  0.301                 4.67             1.86                2.64
US                   1986                  0.335                 5.71             2.04                3.04
US                   1991                  0.336                 5.55             2.06                3.03
US                   1994                  0.355                 5.85             2.15                3.11
US                   1997                  0.372                 5.57             2.14                3.03

Source: Luxembourg Income Study; downloadable at http://www.lisproject.org/keyfigures/ineqtable.htm
All figures relate to disposable income.
                                                                                                                 61


                                       Appendix Table 3
                       Log Hourly Earnings Equations for the US, 1996-2001
                                      (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)
                                     All          Private sector   Public sector        Men            Women
Union                                   .145              .150            .134            .143               .135
                                    (85.18)          (68.85)          (47.03)         (61.85)           (52.97)
Age                                     .045              .045            .0478           .055               .036
                                   (173.5)          (158.2)           (73.14)        (143.3)           (103.7)
Age2                                  -.0005             -.0005          -.0005         -.0006             -.0004
                                   (146.5)          (134.5)           (60.64)        (120.7)            (88.30)
Male                                    .151              .157            .123        N/a                n/a
                                   (126.0)          (116.5)           (47.33)
State government                       -.145          n/a                -.141           -.149             -.147
                                    (36.41)                           (34.01)          (25.71)           (26.58)
Local government                       -.131          n/a                -.138           -.137             -.133
                                    (34.79)                           (34.04)          (25.40)           (24.85)
Private for profit                     -.077             .080         n/a                -.031             -.120
                                    (21.04)          (30.47)                            (6.14)           (22.89)
Private non-profit                     -.165         n/a               n/a               -.222             -.157
                                    (39.94)                                            (34.81)            (6.42)
Black                                  -.009           -.012             -.009           -.015             -.004
                                     (7.20)           (7.93)            (2.99)          (7.71)            (2.09)
American Indian                        -.052           -.082              .015           -.075             -.032
                                     (9.66)          (12.25)            (1.65)          (9.51)            (4.36)
Asian or Pacific Islander              -.101           -.105             -.079           -.120             -.075
                                    (31.61)          (30.27)           (10.04)         (26.62)           (16.89)
Hispanic                               -.112           -.125             -.033           -.130             -.090
                                    (50.42)          (51.81)            (5.89)         (42.21)           (28.17)
Usual hours                             .004            .005              .002            .003              .005
                                    (76.00)          (76.70)           (11.65)         (40.77)           (63.43)

N                                   663,564          546,793          116,771         333,188          330,376
R2                                   .4655            .4609            .4546           .4581            .4436
Adjusted R2                          .4654            .4607            .4540           .4579            .4434

Notes: All equations also include time 15 schooling dummies, 50 state dummies and 50 industry dummies.
Excluded categories are federal government and white. Private sector excludes the self-employed. |t|-statistics are
given in parentheses.

Source: CPS Matched Outgoing Rotation Group (MORG) files.
union membership: an analysis of data from the autumn 2001 DAVID: D
                                                                                                                 62




                                       Appendix Table 4
                       Log Hourly Earnings Equations for the UK, 1993-2000
                                    (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)
                                    All          Private sector    Public sector         Men             Women
Union                                .094               .052              .127             .035              .147
                                  (28.07)            (11.41)         (24.54)                (7.25)       (31.73)
Age                                  .066               .068              .053             .088              .046
                                  (94.43)           (84.34)           (35.89)          (85.55)           (48.90)
Age2                                -.0007             -.0007            -.0006          -.0009            -.0005
                                  (82.43)           (73.25)           (31.91)          (74.99)           (43.10)
Male                                 .181               .195              .158         n/a               n/a
                                  (55.90)           (49.81)           (28.20)
Black Caribbean                     -.076              -.116             -.020           -.128             -.047
                                   (4.61)             (5.26)           (0.85)           (4.87)            (2.27)
Black - African                     -.191              -.189             -.186           -.272             -.134
                                   (7.67)             (5.81)           (5.17)           (7.27)            (4.12)
Black - other                       -.122              -.105             -.133           -.210             -.072
                                   (3.30)             (2.11)           (2.55)           (3.75)            (1.49)
Indian                              -.101              -.122             -.045           -.094             -.107
                                   (7.96)             (8.23)           (1.85)           (5.23)            (6.05)
Pakistani                           -.110              -.165              .067           -.143             -.043
                                   (4.94)             (6.43)           (1.57)           (4.91)            (1.28)
Bangladeshi                         -.264              -.395             -.121           -.364              .005
                                   (6.09)             (7.89)           (1.43)           (6.86)            (0.07)
Chinese                             -.033              -.018             -.067           -.076              .010
                                   (0.99)             (0.46)           (1.12)           (1.39)            (0.25)
Other race                          -.030              -.021             -.034           -.049             -.022
                                   (1.98)             (1.17)           (1.38)           (2.19)            (1.10)
11-19 employees                      .082               .076              .078            .101              .060
                                  (14.51)           (11.74)            (6.44)          (11.24)            (8.47)
20-24 employees                      .091               .083              .080            .106              .072
                                  (12.18)             (9.35)           (5.68)           (8.98)            (7.57)
Don’t know but < 25                  .040               .031              .049            .066              .003
                                   (3.38)             (2.25)           (2.06)           (3.82)            (0.16)
25-49 employee                       .118               .116              .090            .135              .096
                                  (22.34)           (18.82)            (8.32)          (16.64)           (14.05)
Don’t know but >24                   .083               .084              .049            .100              .062
                                   (6.49)             (5.37)           (2.06)           (5.66)            (3.42)
>=50 employees                       .177               .183              .127            .203              .149
                                  (43.03)           (38.83)           (13.99)          (31.93)           (28.49)
N                                 105,112           75,000            29,712            51,544           53,568
R2                                   .4537              .4524             .4256           .4487             .4273
Adjusted R2                          .4530              .4514             .4230           .4472             .4259

Notes: All equations also include time, 40 schooling dummies, 19 region dummies and 60 industry dummies.
Excluded categories are 1-10 employees and white. Private sector excludes the self-employed. |t|-statistics are given
in parentheses.

Source: Labour Force Survey files.
                                                                                                              63




                                         Appendix Table 5
                        Log hourly earnings equations for Britain, 1985-2001
                                    (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                All sectors     Private sector   Public sector      Men            Women
Union                                .087               .069           .095              .059          .106
                                 (12.30)             (6.50)         (6.69)             (6.29)       (9.88)
Age 25-34                            .272              .280             .258          .310             .239
                                 (23.83)           (19.59)          (11.27)       (19.85)          (14.37)
Age 35-44                            .363              .374             .335          .455             .276
                                 (30.61)           (24.90)          (14.41)       (28.54)          (15.76)
Age 45-54                            .370              .377             .362          .462             .281
                                 (29.73)           (23.42)          (15.22)       (27.34)          (15.43)
Age 55 or more                       .375              .384             .339          .427             .309
                                 (24.91)           (19.43)          (12.02)       (22.20)          (13.18)
Female                              -.261             -.286            -.240      n/a              n/a
                                 (34.44)           (26.98)          (18.46)
Full-time                            .126              .169             .064         .021              .127
                                 (10.99)           (10.31)           (3.46)        (0.51)          (10.38)
Manual                              -.255             -.250            -.277        -.287             -.225
                                 (29.55)           (22.53)          (16.09)       (25.38)          (16.59)
10-24 employees                      .108              .089             .081         .082              .123
                                   (7.98)           (5.35)           (2.63)        (4.34)           (6.58)
25-99 employees                      .146              .159             .063         .141              .151
                                 (12.02)           (10.48)           (2.20)        (8.28)           (8.88)
100-499 employees                    .182              .211             .097         .205              .158
                                 (14.56)           (13.46)           (3.35)       (11.85)           (8.88)
500 or more employees                .257              .317             .117         .279              .231
                                 (19.38)           (17.94)           (4.02)       (15.40)          (12.05)
Manufacturing                        .062              .047             .115         .067              .044
                                   (7.55)           (4.74)           (3.08)        (7.07)           (2.87)
N                                17,934            10,463           4,748          8,969            8,965
R2                                   .51               .53              .55          .50               .49

Notes: All equations also include 5 categorical time dummies, 7 highest qualification dummies, and 6 region
dummies. Excluded categories are aged 18-25 years and 1-9 employees. Confined to employees in employment
working 10 or more hours per week. Public/private sector status unavailable in 1994/95, so these two years are
excluded from the public and private sector equations. |t|-statistics are given in parentheses.

Source: British Social Attitudes Surveys 1985-2001.
                                                                                             64




                                             Endnotes
1
  Some of the estimates are for Great Britain which, unlike the UK, excludes Northern Ireland.
Estimates are similar whichever geographical area is chosen.
2
   We have no micro-data since 2001 when labour markets loosened and the unemployment rate
started to rise again in the United States.
3
   Wessels (1994) has cogently argued that OLS will not necessarily provide an upper limit
estimate. His argument is that, provided a union has a certain degree of bargaining power,
union-won increases in the wage that lead the firm to hire more able workers will be followed by
further union actions to raise the wage. Knowing this and given repeated bargains, the firm will
not necessarily hire more able workers.
4
  Kaufman (2002) discusses the extent to which this empirical work on union wage
determination fits the various economic models of union wage determination that have been
developed since the work of Dunlop and Ross. His conclusion is pessimistic.

5  See Blanchflower (1984, 1986), Stewart (1987), Blanchflower and Oswald (1990),
Blanchflower, Oswald and Garrett (1990), Stewart (1990, 1991, 1995), Metcalf and Stewart
(1992), Machin, Stewart, and Van Reenen (1993), Blanchflower and Machin (1996), Forth and
Millward (2000b).

6 See Stewart (1983), Shah (1984), Green (1988), Symons and Walker (1988), Blackaby, Yaron
(1990), Murphy, and Sloane (1991), Blanchflower (1991), Main and Reilly (1992), Murphy,
Sloane, and Blackaby (1992), Main (1996), Lanot and Walker (1998), Andrews et al. (1998),
Andrews, Bell and Upward (1998), Blanchflower (1999), Hildreth (1999, 2000), Forth and
Millward (2000a), Millward, Forth, and Bryson (2001), Swaffield (2001), Machin (2001), Booth
and Bryan (2001), Bryson (2002), Forth and Millward (2002).
7
  Unfortunately the BHPS data file is very small in size with only around 4,000 workers present
in consecutive waves and hence there are very few individuals that change status from year to
year. This means there are severe limitations to using BHPS to compare the sensitivity of union
wage gap estimates to differences in methodology as in Andrews et al. (1998).
8
  Source: Statistical Abstract of the US, 2002, Table no. 567 downloadable at
http://www.census.gov/prod/2002pubs/01statab/stat-ab01.html
9
 Source: UK Office of National Statistics. Downloadable from
http://www.statistics.gov.uk/statbase/TSDtimezone.asp
10
     Freeman (1995) and Mishel and Bernstein (1994) report declines of this magnitude.
11
  For more information on changes in real wages, see OECD (1996) and Katz, Loveman, and
Blanchflower (1995) for the UK, the US, France and Japan.
                                                                                             65




12
     See OECD (1996).
13
   Interestingly enough, Canada with many of the same firms and trade unions as the US has not
seen declines in density: 1970=31%, 1980=36.1%; 1990=35.8%; 1993=37.4% (see Visser,
1996).
14
     We thank Mark Wooden for providing us with these numbers.
15
  Further examples of studies for Canada are Simpson (1985), who found 11% for 1974; Grant,
Swidinsky, and Vanderkamp (1987) who reported 12-14% for 1969 and 13-16% for 1970.
16
   Australian studies include Kornfeld (1993), who found 7-10% for young people between 1984
and 1987; Mulvey (1986), who obtained estimates of 7% for women and 10% for men using a
1982 sample; Christie (1992) who obtained an estimate of 16.6% using OLS and 17.2% using
simultaneous equation methods with 1984 data; and Blanchflower and Freeman (1992) who
report 8% for the period 1985-87.
17
   In footnote 36 below we make use of individual level data from a similar survey undertaken in
the UK, namely, the 1998 Workplace Employee Relations Survey.
18
   In Blanchflower (1996) union wage gap estimates were obtained based on similar data and
specifications for the following countries (where * indicates not significantly different from
zero):
                  %
Australia        9.2
Austria         14.6
Canada           4.8*
Germany          3.4
Ireland         30.5
Israel           7.0*
Italy            7.2
Japan           47.8
Netherlands      3.7*
New Zealand 8.4
Norway           7.7
Spain            0.3*
Switzerland      0.8*

The very large estimate for Japan appears to arise because of the lack of controls for
workplace/firm size. Some of the estimates are based on only a few hundred observations and so
care has to be taken in interpreting these results.
19
   Details of the ISSP surveys, data and manuals are available at www.issp.org. The data files
are also available through ICPSR at the University of Michigan at http://www.icpsr.umich.edu.
                                                                                                    66



20
   Troy (2000) has argued that union density in Canada has remained as high as it has due to the
expanded role of the public sector and quasi-public sector organizations (particularly in health
care). Troy shows that private sector density – in contrast to that in the public sector – has
declined albeit at a somewhat slower rate than in the US.
21
 The May extracts of the CPS extracts in Stata format from 1969-1987 are available from the
NBER at http://www.nber.org/data/cps_may.html
22
   Hirsch, Macpherson, and Schumacher (2002) have compared union wage gap estimates
obtained from the BLS quarterly Employment Cost Index (ECI) constructed from establishment
surveys and from the annual Employer Costs for Employee Compensation (ECEC) with those
obtained using the CPS. They find that union/non-union wage trends in the three series ‘are
consistent neither with each other nor with the CPS’, and ultimately conclude that ‘we find
ourselves relying most heavily on results drawn from the CPS’ (Hirsch, Macpherson, and
Schumacher, 2002, p.23).
23
     There was no CPS survey with wages and union status in 1982.
24
    Following Mincer, it is more usual to include a term in potential experience rather than a
direct measure of age. We use education, however, for reasons of comparability as the CPS
Outgoing Rotation Group files from 1993 report qualifications rather than years of schooling.
25
    We do not deal here with a further problem identified by Card (1996) of misclassification of
self-reported union status in the CPS, first identified by Mellow and Sider (1983). Card
concludes that about 2.7% are false positives and 2.7% are false negatives. Given that there are
more non-union workers than union workers, this means the union density rate is biased
upwards. See Farber (2001) for a discussion and a procedure to adjust the union density rate for
error. In 1998, the observed private sector rate of 9.7% translates to an adjusted rate of 7.4% (the
figures for 1973 were 25.9% and 24.5% respectively).
26
   The number of wage observations followed by the percentage imputed in parentheses (hourly
+ non-hourly paid) in the NBER MORG are given below. Note in 1995 allocation information is
only available on one-third of wage observations, hence the small sample.

1979     171,745 (16.5%)   1986   179,147 (10.7%)   1993   174,595 (4.6%) 2000    161,126 (29.8%)
1980     199,469 (15.8%)   1987   180,434 (13.5%)   1994   170,865 (0%)    2001   171,533 (30.9%)
1981     186,923 (15.2%)   1988   173,118 (14.4%)   1995    55,967 (23.3%)
1982     175,797 (13.7%)   1989   176,411 (3.7%)    1996   152,190 (22.2%)
1983     173,932 (13.8%)   1990   185,030 (3.9%)    1997   154,955 (22.2%)
1984     177,248 (14.7%)   1991   179,560 (4.4%)    1998   156,990 (23.6%)
1985     180,232 (14.3%)   1992   176,848 (4.2%)    1999   159,362 (27.6%
27
   We thank Barry Hirsch for helpful discussions on these issues. All errors are ours of course
and not his!
28
   Bratsberg and Ragan (2002) found an average premium in the private sector of 16.8%, 1971-
99, using a set of control variables similar to those used by Hirsch and Schumacher (2002).
                                                                                               67




29
   There was essentially no difference in the results when two-digit occupation dummies were
replaced with three- digit dummies (results not reported).
30
   There is a dissonance between the estimates Lewis offers by way of summary in his
introductory chapter and those given in his Table 9.7 which are produced here (Lewis, 1986, p.
9)
31
   Lewis (1986) had 35 studies using the CPS, 1970-1979; 16 studies using the 1967 Survey of
Economic Opportunity; 25 studies using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 1967-78; 15
studies using Michigan Survey Research Center survey data other than the PSID, including the
1972-73 Quality of Employment Survey; 22 studies using the National Longitudinal Surveys of
1969-72; and 8 studies exploiting other sources.
32
   Full equations for the US as a whole as well as disaggregations by gender and broad sector are
reported in Appendix Table 3.
33
   Even activism on this scale would yield a steady state private sector unionisation rate of just
6.4% (Farber and Western, 2001, p. 27).
34
     For further discussion on this point, see Blanchflower and Freeman (1992).
35
   Blanchflower (1999) estimated union wage premia for the UK using the same methods as
used here for the period 1983-94 using data from the same sources as used here plus the British
Household Panel Survey for 1991-93 and the 1983 General Household Survey and found
evidence of a constancy of the differential at approximately 10%.
36
  Further support for the proposition that the BSAS 1997 point estimate is an outlier comes from
the authors’ calculations of the log hourly wage premium using the same methodology
(unweighted estimates of the mid-point earnings) for individual level data from the Workplace
Employee Relations Survey 1998, the fieldwork for which spanned 1997 and 1998. The raw
membership premium is .226 (25.4%). This shifts with the addition of controls as follows: +
demographics = .121; + job = .114; + establishment = .076; + geographical = .091. In short,
these estimates also point to a premium of around 10% in 1997/98.
37
  Full equations for the economy as a whole, private and public sectors, and for men and women
are reported in Appendix Table 4.
38
  Full equations for the economy as a whole, private and public sectors, and for men and women
are reported in Appendix Table 5.
