NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE, EQUITY PRICES
AND CAPITAL FLOWS
Harald Hau
Hélène Rey
Working Paper 9398
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9398
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

Deniz Igan provided outstanding research assistance. We thank Bernard Dumas, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Olivier Jeanne, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Carol Osler and Michael Woodford for very useful
dicussions and Richard Lyons, Michael Moore and Richard Portes for detailed comments on earlier
drafts. Thanks also to participants in the 2002 NBER IFM summer institute and in seminars at Columbia,
Georgetown, George Washington University and the IMF. We are both very grateful to the IMF Research
Department for its warm hospitality and its stimulating environment while writing parts of this paper.
Sergio Schmukler and Stijn Claessens provided the stock market capitalization data. This paper is part of
a research network on ‘The Analysis of International Capital Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in
the Global Economy’, funded by the European Commission under the Research Training Network
Program (Contract No. HPRN(ECT(E 1999(E00067). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Harald Hau and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is
given to the source.

Exchange Rate, Equity Prices and Capital Flows
Harald Hau and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 9398
December 2002
JEL No. F3, F31, G1, G15
ABSTRACT
We develop an equilibrium model in which exchange rates, stock prices and capital flows are
jointly determined under incomplete forex risk trading. Incomplete hedging of forex risk,
documented for U.S. global mutual funds, has three important implications: 1) exchange rates
are almost as volatile as equity prices when the forex liquidity supply is not infinitely price
elastic; 2) higher returns in the home equity market relative to the foreign equity market are
associated with a home currency depreciation; 3) net equity flows into the foreign market are
positively correlated with a foreign currency appreciation. The model predictions are strongly
supported at daily, monthly and quarterly frequencies for 17 OECD countries vis-à-vis the U.S.
Moreover, correlations are strongest after 1990 and for countries with higher market
capitalization relative to GDP, suggesting that the observed exchange rate dynamics is indeed
related to equity market development.

Harald Hau
INSEAD
Department of Finance
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
France
harald.hau@insead.edu

Hélène Rey
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hrey@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

The last 25 years have been characterized by a remarkable increase in international capital
mobility. While gross cross-border transactions in bond and equity for the U.S. were equivalent
to only 4 percent of GDP in 1975, this share increased to 100 percent in the early 1990s and has
grown to 245 percent by 2000. Furthermore, a growing proportion of these capital ßows consists
of equity as opposed to bank loans or government bonds.1 The increasing size and equity content
of current capital ßows has not yet inspired a new Þnancial market paradigm for exchange rate
theory, in which exchange rates, equity market returns and capital ßows are jointly determined.
Recently, positive exchange rate theory has advanced mostly outside the scope of traditional
macroeconomic theory, plagued with its notoriously poor empirical performance (Meese and
Rogoﬀ (1983a, 1983b)) and with widespread pessimism about the explanatory power of macro
variables in general.2 The empirical microstructure literature has examined the role of foreign
exchange (forex) order ßow deÞned as the diﬀerence between buy and sell orders. Evans and
Lyons (2001a,b), Lyons (2001), Rime (2001), Killeen et al. (2001), and Hau et al. (2001)
show that order ßow from electronic trading systems have remarkably high correlation with
contemporaneous exchange rate changes. These empirical results have been established both
for inter-dealer order ßow and for customer-dealer order ßow. Since customer-dealer order ßow
in the foreign exchange market is at least partly determined by investors’ desires for portfolio
shifts, these results suggest an important linkage between exchange rate dynamics and investor
behavior. The most comprehensive order ßow data are owned by global custodians like State
Street, which undertake a large proportion of global equity clearing. Such (proprietary) data
have been analyzed by Froot et al. (2001) and Froot and Ramadorai (2002). The results
show that the impact of investor order ßow on the exchange rate is very persistent and peaks at
horizons of about a month for major currencies. But the order ßow exchange rate linkage has not
yet been imbedded in a theoretical framework in which order ßow is derived from international
1

The London based research Þrm Cross Border Capital reports that during the period 1975-1984 bank loans
accounted on average for 39.5% of total outßows from major industrialized countries (60.3% of inßows), while
equities accounted for only 9.5% of outßows (6.1% of inßows). During the 1985-94 period these proportions were
reversed. Bank loans accounted only for 8.3% of outßows (16.3% of inßows), while equities jumped to 35.9% of
outßows (31.6% of inßows). Similarly Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002) report that the ratio of foreign assets and
liabilities to GDP has increased by 250% over the period 1984-2001. The same ratio computed only for equity
and FDI has more than tripled over the same period. See also Frankel (1994) and Obstfeld and Taylor (2002).
2
Frankel and Rose (1995) summarize the situation by saying that “... no model based on such standard
fundamentals like money supplies, real income, interest rates, inßation rates, and current account balances will
ever succeed in explaining or predicting a high percentage of the variation in the exchange rate, at least at short- or
medium-term frequencies.” More recently Devereux and Engel (2002) argue that one cannot match some stylized
facts regarding exchange rate volatility and disconnect without adding ingredients such as noise traders to the
standard models.

1

investment behavior. There is still no model that bridges the gap between foreign exchange
microstructure and macroeconomic fundamentals. To develop such a framework and explore its
empirical implications is the main objective of this paper.
Our most important structural assumption concerns incomplete forex risk trading. In complete markets, exchange rate risk hedging is a free lunch (Perold and Schulman (1988), Karolyi
and Stulz (2001)). Investors in the home country can simply swap and eliminate forex risk by
trading it with foreign investors holding the reciprocal risk. Under full forex risk hedging, the
domestic and international investment problems are alike unless we separate home and foreign
investors by asymmetric information, diﬀerent consumption opportunities or preferences. But
the evidence on forex hedging strongly suggests that market completeness represents a highly
counterfactual benchmark. We have survey evidence on mutual funds and other institutional
investors which manage a large proportion of U.S. foreign equity investments. Their lower
transaction costs and higher Þnancial sophistication make them better candidates for forex risk
trading compared to individual investors. Do they swap forex risk with their foreign counterparts? Levich et al. (1999) surveyed 298 U.S. institutional investors and found that more than
20 percent were not even permitted to hold derivative contracts in their investment portfolio.
A further 25 percent of institutional investors were formally unconstrained, but did not trade
in derivatives. The remaining 55 percent of institutional investors hedged only a minor proportion of their forex exposure. For the full sample, Levich et al. calculated that forex risk
hedging concerned only 8 percent of the total foreign equity investment.3 Portfolio managers
cited monitoring problems, lack of knowledge and public and regulatory perceptions as most
important reasons for the restricted forex derivative use. The development of the derivative
market notwithstanding, only a minor proportion of the total macroeconomic forex return risk
seems to be separately traded and eliminated. The typical foreign equity investor holds currency
return and foreign equity return risk as a bundle.
Exposure to exchange rate risk implies that the international investor generally cares about
both the volatility of the exchange rate and the correlation structure of exchange rates and
foreign equity returns. For example, higher exchange rate volatility tends to induce a home equity
bias. On the other hand, a negative correlation between foreign exchange rate returns and foreign
stock market returns reduces the return volatility in home currency terms and makes foreign
investment more attractive. Portfolio choice therefore depends on exchange rate dynamics. But
dynamic portfolio choice should simultaneously aﬀect the exchange rate. Diﬀerences in stock
market performances generate imbalances between the dividend income of home and foreign
investors. Dynamic rebalancing of equity portfolios then initiates forex order ßow, which in turn
3

We also consulted market experts in two large U.S. custodians. Independent sources at both State Street
Bank and Citibank estimated the notional forex hedge at less than 10 percent. This conÞrms the survey evidence.

2

induces exchange rate movements.
We capture this interaction between optimal portfolio choice under market incompleteness
and exchange rate dynamics in a simple model. Exchange rates, portfolio equity ßows and equity
returns are jointly and endogenously determined. For simplicity we assume that in each of the
two countries of our world economy there is a constant risk-free interest rate and an exogenous
stochastic dividend process for the equity market. Domestic and foreign investors are risk averse
and maximize a simple trade-oﬀ between instantaneous trading proÞts and their variance. They
can invest in both the domestic and foreign equity and bond markets. Dividend payments
and equity purchases are undertaken in local currency. The exchange rate is determined under
market clearing in the forex market where private investor order ßows stemming from portfolio
rebalancing and dividend repatriation meet a price-elastic forex supply of liquidity-providing
Þnancial institutions. The price-elastic forex supply simply captures the imperfect intertemporal
forex speculation.4 It implies that order ßow drives the exchange rate in accordance with the
empirical Þndings in the recent microstructure literature.
The model we develop has testable implications regarding the relative volatilities of equity
and exchange rate returns; correlations between stock index (excess) returns and exchange rate
returns; and correlations between portfolio ßows and exchange rate returns. We highlight here
the three main empirical implications of our model:
1. Market incompleteness in combination with a low price elasticity of forex liquidity supply
generates exchange rates which are almost as volatile as equity prices.
2. Higher returns in the home equity market (in local currency) relative to the foreign equity
market are associated with a home currency depreciation.
3. Net equity ßows into the foreign market are positively correlated with a foreign currency
appreciation.
We confront these model predictions with the data. Ratios of exchange rate volatility to
equity return volatility are generally smaller than one and in the range replicated by the model.
Return correlations are examined with daily, monthly and quarterly stock index and exchange
rate return data for 17 OECD countries. Strong statistical evidence is produced for a negative
correlation between excess returns on foreign over U.S. equity and returns on the foreign currency
as predicted by the model. Hence, both theory and evidence contradict the conventional wisdom
that a strong equity market comes with a strong currency. We also highlight that these Þndings
are produced at high statistical signiÞcance in contrast to the well-known failure of uncovered
4

We refer to intertemporal forex trading as speculation and not as arbitrage because such strategies involve
typically considerable risk taking.

3

interest parity for the same set of countries. The evidence for the negative correlation between
excess equity returns and exchange rate is strongest for the post-1990 period, when equity
markets became more open. Cross sectionally, we Þnd that the negative correlation is more
pronounced for countries with the most developed equity markets. Finally, we also use monthly
equity ßow data on the same OECD countries to verify the portfolio ßow implications. In
accordance with the model, the pooled regressions reveal a positive correlation between equity
ßows into the foreign market and the appreciation of the foreign currency.
The following section discusses the literature before we describe the model in section 3. In
section 4, we solve the model for two special cases, namely the case of Þnancial autarky and full
integration in a complete market setting. These two polar cases provide two benchmarks for
the general case of Þnancial integration under market incompleteness explored in section 5. We
summarize the most important testable implications in section 6 before confronting them with
the data in section 7. Conclusions follow in section 8.

2

Literature Review

It is useful to situate our analysis in the existing exchange rate literature. Our approach diﬀers
from previous studies in the following respects: (1) the emphasis on equity ßows relative to
the new open macroeconomics literature, (2) the Þnancial market incompleteness assumption
relative to the real business cycle literature, (3) the endogeneity of the order ßows relative to
the forex microstructure literature and (4) the explicit modeling of the exchange rate relative
to the Þnance literature.
Macroeconomic theory has recently emphasized better microfoundations together with a
more rigorous modelling of the dynamic current account. This approach is exempliÞed by
Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995) and surveyed in Lane (2001). But international equity markets do
not play an important role in this framework. While monopolistic proÞts occur in these models,
they typically accrue entirely to domestic residents and therefore do not give rise to any equity
ßows. In the spirit of the traditional asset market approach to exchange rates (surveyed by
Branson and Henderson (1985)), we link exchange rate movements and optimal foreign and
domestic asset holdings. We obtain sharper testable implications for the correlation structure
of forex returns, equity returns and equity ßows.
Our analysis features incomplete forex risk trading as an important structural assumption.
To the extent that real business cycle models allow for international asset trade, they typically
examine the resulting exchange rate dynamics in a complete market setting.5 In this idealized
5

Capital market incompleteness and the short sale constraint for foreign bonds set our model apart from the
Lucas (1982) model and much of the stochastic dynamic general equilibrium literature. More recently, Duarte and
Stockman (2001) develop an interesting general equilibrium model with incomplete asset markets and segmented

4

setting all beneÞts from international exchange rate risk trading are realized. We argue that
this assumption is at odds with current evidence on very low hedge ratios for foreign equity
investment as discussed above. In our view the market trades equity fairly frictionlessly across
borders, but fails to realize the full beneÞt of trading the associated forex risk. This market
incompleteness is not related to the absence of the markets (forex derivatives exist), but rather
to transaction and agency costs of using them.
This paper is inspired by the new empirical literature on the microstructure of the forex
market. Order ßow is identiÞed as an important determinant of exchange rate dynamics. We
interpret this literature as evidence for a price elastic forex supply and explore its consequences
for optimal international portfolio investment. The microstructure literature has always treated
the forex order ßows as exogenous model primitives and not itself as the object of equilibrium
analysis.6 In our model forex order ßow is derived endogenously from the optimal dynamic
portfolio policy. Also the time horizon for our analysis extends to several months unlike the
high frequency focus in many microstructure models. These models also typically involve informational asymmetries, which we omit to preserve simplicity and tractability.
Finally, our analysis relates to a recent literature on international equity ßows. Some of
this work is entirely descriptive (Bekaert and Harvey, (2000); Bekaert et al. (2002); Portes
and Rey (1999); Richards (2002)). Brennan and Cao (1997) and Griﬃn et al. (2002) also
provide a theoretical analysis of foreign investment behavior. Paradoxically, both treated foreign
investment like domestic investment by modelling only dollar returns. Instead of an exchange
rate, home and foreign investors are separated by information asymmetries (Brennan and Cao)
or by exogenous diﬀerences in return expectations (Griﬃn et al.). Unlike these models, our
framework assumes that foreign and home investors are separated by an exchange rate and
pursue investment objectives in the currency of their respective residence.

3

The Model

A world with two countries has a home and a foreign investor. Both investors are risk averse and
can invest in risky home and foreign equities and in riskless bonds. Equities pay a continuous
stochastic dividend ßow. Purchase of foreign equity is settled in foreign currency and therefore
requires a parallel purchase of foreign currency in the forex market. Increases in foreign equity
product markets. Their set-up, centered around the bond market, does not however generate enough variability in
exchange rate dynamics to match the data. Our model is not cast in a general equilibrium set up, since dividend
processes and riskless rates are exogenous.
6
Exceptions are Osler (1998) and Carlson and Osler (2000) who model the exchange rate as the price equating supply and demand on a foreign exchange market where ‘current account traders’ meet ‘rational currency
speculators’.

5

holdings therefore generate an order ßow7 in the forex market. Investors do not hold money
balances, which are dominated by investment in the riskless bond. Foreign dividend income is
either reinvested in foreign equity or repatriated for home country investment. Home investment
can occur in home equity or a riskless bond with a constant interest rate. The supply of home
and foreign equity is Þxed and its price determined by market clearing. The bond supply is
assumed to be inÞnitely price elastic. Central banks in both countries peg the interest rate.
We do not allow for short selling of foreign bonds. A short position in foreign bonds works
as a forex hedge on the foreign equity investment. We believe that incomplete hedging of
foreign investment is the more realistic benchmark compared to a world of full international
exchange-rate risk sharing. It is important to highlight that the short sale constraint is binding
in equilibrium (see proof in Appendix F). Intuitively, the home bond investment always strictly
dominates the foreign bond investment under identical foreign and home bond returns and
additional exchange rate risk on the foreign bond. Since home investors would like to hold a
short position in foreign bonds to hedge the currency risk of their foreign equity position, but are
prohibited from doing so, they can at best choose a zero position of foreign bonds. To simplify
the exposition and reduce notation, we present the model as if investors were prevented from
investing in foreign bonds altogether. This does not involve any loss of generality. Given that
the short-selling constraint is always binding in equilibrium, we can assume zero foreign bond
holdings.
The market structure is summarized as follows:
Assumption 1: Asset Market Structure
A home (h) and a foreign (f ) stock market provide exogenous stochastic dividend
ßows Dth and Dtf in local currency. Home and foreign investors can invest in both
stock markets. In addition, each investor can invest in a domestic bond providing a
riskless constant return r in the respective local currency.
Investors in our model are risk averse and their objective is to Þnd an optimal trade-oﬀ
between expected proÞt ßow of their asset position and the instantaneous proÞt risk. Each
investor measures proÞts in home currency. Formally, we assume:
Assumption 2: Investor Behavior
Home and foreign investors are risk averse and maximize (in local currency terms)
a mean-variance objective for the proÞt ßow.8 Home investors choose a portfolio of
7

We assume that when an agent purchases the foreign equity she initiates the purchase of foreign exchange,
so that our net currency ßow coincides with the conventional deÞnition of the order ßow (net of buyer over seller
initiated trades).
8
For the time horizons relevant for our exercise (1 day to several months), goods prices can be considered to
be sticky in local currency.

6

home and foreign equity, Kt = (Kth , Ktf ), and foreign investors choose a portfolio of
foreign and home equity, Kt∗ = (Ktf ∗ , Kth∗ ), so as to solve the optimization problem
Z ∞
£
¤
max{K h ,K f }
Et
e−r(s−t) dΠs − 12 ρdΠ2s ds
t
t
Zs=t
∞
£
¤
max{K f ∗ ,K h∗ } Et
e−r(s−t) dΠ∗s − 12 ρdΠ∗2
s ds,
t

t

s=t

where Et denotes the rational expectation operator. Let dRt = (dRth , dRft )T and

dRt∗ = (dRtf ∗ , dRth∗ )T denote the corresponding excess payoﬀs (in local currency

terms over the local riskless bond) for domestic and foreign investors, respectively.9
We deÞne the stochastic proÞt ßows for the domestic and foreign investors as
dΠt = Kt dRt
dΠ∗t = Kt∗ dRt∗ ,
respectively. The investor risk aversion is given by ρ, and the discount rate is given
by r.10
Both stock markets have to clear under the optimal asset demand. For simplicity we normalize the quantity of outstanding equity to one. This implies
Kth + Kth∗ = 1
Ktf + Ktf ∗ = 1

(1)

as the two asset market clearing conditions.
An additional market clearing condition applies to the foreign exchange market with an
exchange rate Et . Denoting home and foreign equity prices by Pth and Ptf , respectively, we can
measure the equity-related capital ßows dQt out of the home country (in foreign currency terms)
as
dQt = Et Kth∗ Dth dt − Ktf Dtf dt + dKtf Ptf − Et dKth∗ Pth .

(2)

The Þrst two terms capture the outßow if all dividends are repatriated. But investors can also
increase their holdings of foreign equity assets. The net purchases of foreign equity, dKtf and
dKth∗ are captured by the third and fourth terms. Let us for example denote the euro area as
the foreign and the U.S. as the home country. Then dQt represents the total net capital ßow
induced by equity trade (both dividend repatriation and net pruchases) by U.S. investors into
9

The transposed vector is marked by T .
The mean-variance objective here follows Hau (1998). It generates particularly tractable linear asset demands
by ignoring intertemporal hedging. The dynamic CARA utility framework diﬀers by an additional intertemporal
hedging demand component proportional to the covariance between asset excess return and the state variables.
Additional intertemporal hedging by investors may imply a smoother excess return dynamics but should not alter
our results qualitatively.
10

7

the euro area, in euro terms. An increase in Et (denominated in euro per dollar) corresponds to
a dollar appreciation against the euro. Any net capital ßow out of a country is, in our model,
identical to a net demand for foreign currency as all investment is assumed to occur in local
currency. We can therefore also identify dQt with the equity trade induced order ßow for foreign
currency in the foreign exchange market.11 Furthermore, the above net capital ßow out of the
home country (or forex order ßow) can be linearly approximated by
f
f
f
h∗
h
h∗
dQD
t = (Et − E)KDdt + (EKt − Kt )Ddt + (EDt − Dt )Kdt + (dKt − EdKt )P .

(3)

where the upper bar variables denote the unconditional means of the stochastic variables. The
linearization generates a linear order ßow and renders the analysis tractable.
The net forex order ßow of investors is absorbed by liquidity-supplying banks which can buﬀer
foreign exchange imbalances.12 The following assumption characterizes the liquidity supply:
Assumption 3: Price-Elastic Excess Supply of Foreign Exchange
The foreign exchange market clears for a price-elastic excess supply curve with elasticity parameter κ. For an equilibrium exchange rate Et , the excess supply of foreign
exchange is given by
QSt = −κ(Et − E)
where E denotes the steady state exchange rate level.
An increase in Et (euro depreciation) decreases the excess supply of euro balances. The
exchange rate elastic excess supply captures incomplete intertemporal speculation of risk averse
agents in the foreign exchange market, who sell dollars for euros when the dollar is high and
buy dollars when the dollar is low. Liquidity supply is provided by diﬀerent agents depending
on the time horizon under consideration. Forex market makers take positions with half-lives
measured in hours, while the half-lives of positions of proprietary trading desks, hedge funds
and non-Þnancial corporations are measured in days, weeks or months. Generally, intertemporal
speculation involves considerable risk and needs to be compensated by expected trading proÞt.
For example, if the exchange rate follows an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process reverting to a (constant) equilibrium value E, then the expected exchange rate change Et (dEt ) and the expected
instantaneous proÞt of liquidity supply Et (dΠt ) = Et (QSt dEt ) are proportional to the steady state

deviation E − Et . The liquidity supply QSt should then increase in the steady state deviation
11

Remember that there is no trade in the foreign riskless bond in equilibrium, so the forex order ßow results
only from equity trade and dividend repatriation.
12
A generalization of the model consists in allowing for additional current account imbalances given by CAt dt =
¢
¡
γ E − Et dt. The current account for the U.S. is in deÞcit when the dollar is strong and vice versa (γ is the
exchange rate elasticity of the current account). This generalization is straightforward.

8

E − Et . While it is possible to endogenize the elasticity parameter κ, we prefer the simpler
parametric representation.

Market clearing in the forex market then requires QSt = QD
t and the foreign exchange rate
is subject to the constraint
−κdEt = (Et − E)KDdt + (EKth∗ − Ktf )Ddt + (EDth − Dtf )Kdt + (dKtf − EdKth∗ )P .

(4)

The exchange rate dynamics is therefore tied to the relative dividend ßows, EDth − Dtf , the

relative level of foreign asset holdings EKth∗ − Ktf , and their relative changes EdKth∗ − dKtf .
The relative dividend ßows are exogenous, but the optimal relative foreign equity holdings are
endogenously determined and depend in turn on the exchange rate dynamics. We normalize E
to 1, because the two countries are symmetrical.
It is straightforward to express the excess payoﬀs (over the riskless asset) on a unit of home
equity over the interval dt as dRth . To characterize the foreign excess payoﬀ dRtf in home
currency we use a linear approximation around the steady state exchange rate E = 1 and the
steady state price P . Formally, excess payoﬀs are given as
dRth = dPth − rPth dt + Dth dt
dRtf

h
i
h
i
≈ −dEt P + dPtf − dEt dPtf − r Ptf − P (Et − 1) dt + Dtf − D(Et − 1) dt

for the home and foreign assets, respectively. Excess returns follow as dRth /P and dRtf /P ,
respectively. The exchange rate component of the foreign payoﬀ is given by −P dEt and the
exchange rate return by −dEt .13

Finally, we have to specify the stochastic structure of the state variables spelled out in the

following assumption:
Assumption 4: Stochastic Structure
The home and foreign dividends follow independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes
with identical variance and mean reversion (αD > 0) given by
dDth = αD (D − Dth )dt + σD dwth
dDtf

= αD (D − Dtf )dt + σD dwtf .

The innovations dwth and dwtf are independent.
13

The model is “closed” and there is no stock-ßow inconsistency. A foreign equity purchase of the home investor
is settled in foreign currency. But the foreign equity seller immediately reinvests this liquidity and holds zero
money balances. He can either exchange it in the forex market if he reinvests in equity abroad, or bring it to his
central bank at a Þxed riskless rate. Central banks thus absorb the additional liquidity at the Þxed rate r.

9

The mean reversion of all stochastic processes simplify the analysis considerably. We can now
introduce variables Fth and Ftf which denote the expected present value of the future discounted
dividend ßow,
Fth

= Et

Ftf

= Et

Z

∞

Zs=t
∞
s=t

Dth e−r(s−t) ds = f0 + fD Dth
Dtf e−r(s−t) ds = f0 + fD Dtf ,

with constant terms deÞned as fD = 1/(αD + r) and f0 = (r−1 − fD )D. The risk aversion of the

investors and the market incompleteness with respect to forex risk trading imply that the asset
price will generally diﬀer from this fundamental value.

4

Two Special Cases

It is instructive to explore two special variations of our model. First we cover the extreme case
in which no foreign asset holdings are allowed. We refer to this case as Þnancial autarky. It
provides a useful closed economy benchmark for the stock market equilibrium, in which investors
do not internationally share their domestic equity risk. The opposite extreme assumption is to
allow both the equity risk and the exchange rate risk to be fully and separately traded. This
second benchmark characterizes the international Þnancial market equilibrium with complete
risk sharing. Formally, it is identical to an economy with two freely tradeable assets. The
exchange rate is a redundant price. As empirically most relevant we consider a third case in
which equity is freely traded but the exchange rate risk is not. We analyze this case in section
5.
Solving the model always requires three steps. First, we postulate a linear solution for the
asset prices and the exchange rate. Second, we derive the optimal asset demand under the
conjectured solution. Third, we impose the market clearing conditions, show that the resulting
price functions are indeed of the conjectured form and Þnally solve for the coeﬃcients. To
provide for a more coherent exposition, we summarize our results in various propositions. All
derivations are relegated to appendices.

4.1

Equilibrium without Risk Sharing (Financial Autarky)

Under Þnancial autarky, the home investor’s foreign equity position (Ktf ) and the foreign investor’s home equity position (Kth∗ ) are assumed to be zero. All domestic assets are owned by
domestic investors, hence

Ã

Kth

Ktf

Ktf ∗ Kth∗

!

10

=

Ã

1 0
1 0

!

.

The Þnancial market equilibrium for the home and foreign equity market can be determined
separately. Proposition 1 states the result:
Proposition 1: Equilibrium under Financial Autarchy.
Assume a two-country world in which home investors hold the domestic asset and
foreign investors the foreign asset. The home and foreign stock market prices are
given by
Pth = p0 + pF Fth
Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf

with p0 = −ρσ2R /r and pF = 1. The (instantaneous) return volatility follows as

σ2R = σ2D /(αD + r)2 .

Proof: See Appendix A.
A price parameter pF = 1 implies that the asset prices are proportional to their fundamental
values Fth and Ftf , respectively. The fundamental values represent the expected discounted
future cash ßows. The risk aversion of the investors is reßected in the coeﬃcient p0 < 0, which
captures the equity risk premium as a price discount. It is proportional to the investor risk
aversion ρ and the instantaneous variance σ 2R of the excess return processes. These equilibrium
results are standard for a closed economy with a Þxed asset supply and mean-variance preferences
for the investor.

4.2

Equilibrium with Complete Risk Sharing

A second model variation consists in the full risk sharing benchmark. Forex risk can then be
fully traded either through derivative contracts or through short sales of the foreign riskless
bond. Perfect and complete risk trading results in the elimination of all exchange rate risk.
Intuitively, home and foreign investors hold exactly opposite and oﬀ-setting exchange rate risk
in their global equity portfolio. They just need to swap the forex risk and thereby eliminate it.
The resulting Þnancial market equilibrium is stated in proposition 2:
Proposition 2: Equilibrium with Complete Risk Sharing.
The home and foreign stock market prices and the exchange rate are given by
Pth = p0 + pF Fth
Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf

Et = 1
11

where we deÞne p0 = −ρσ2R /2r, and pF = 1. The (instantaneous) return volatility

follows as σ2R = σ2D /(αD + r)2 . The domestic and foreign portfolio positions of the
two investors are equal and constant with
!
Ã
Kth Ktf
Ktf ∗ Kth∗

=

Ã

1
2
1
2

1
2
1
2

!

.

Proof: An identical riskless rate in the home and foreign country under complete
markets implies a constant exchange rate, Et = 1. The complete solution is derived
in Appendix B.
First, we note that the exchange rate is constant. In a world of perfect risk sharing, the two
country model is not diﬀerent from one domestic economy with two stocks. Home and foreign
investors each hold equal and constant shares of the world market portfolio. The asset prices are
again proportional to their fundamental values, Fth and Ftf , respectively. The risk sharing across
the two investor groups implies that the asset price risk discount p0 < 0 is only half as large as in
the autarky case for the same return volatility σ 2R . This implies lower average asset returns under
market integration. Evidence that Þnancial integration indeed reduces market stock returns is
provided by Bekaert and Harvey (2000), Henry (2000) and Stulz (1999) among others. These
authors show reduced capital costs or excess returns on equity for emerging countries following
their capital market liberalization.
We further highlight that complete forex risk trading implies no particular correlation structure between exchange rate and equity returns. The exchange rate is a redundant price and
constant. This implication is of course at odds with the high exchange rate volatility observed
in practice. But it provides a useful benchmark for the following section which explores the case
of equity market integration under incomplete exchange rate risk trading.

5

Foreign Investment under Incomplete Risk-Sharing

We now treat the case in which a foreign exchange market allows investment in the foreign
equity, but exchange rate risk trading is incomplete. If the exchange rate moves stochastically,
home investors with foreign equity holdings incur an additional exchange rate risk in addition to
the risk of the stochastic dividend ßow. Foreign investors hold the opposite risk due to ownership
stakes in foreign equity. If this reciprocal exchange rate risk were tradeable, it could be perfectly
eliminated as assumed in the perfect market case discussed in section 4.2. But now we assume
that such forex risk trading does not occur.
The non-tradeability of the forex risk not only excludes derivative contracts, but also requires
that investors cannot short sell the foreign riskless asset. Short selling of foreign riskless assets
12

eﬀectively amounts to a separate trading of the exchange rate risk. As discussed before, assuming
a no short-sale constraint on the riskless foreign asset implies zero foreign bond holdings in
equilibrium. If unconstrained, investors should seek a short position in the foreign riskless asset
equivalent to their foreign equity stake. But they would not seek a long position which adds
exchange rate risk to the portfolio. The short selling constraint is binding. Setting the foreign
bond position to zero does not represent an additional restriction.

5.1

Exchange Rate Dynamics

Before we conjecture the exchange rate dynamics under incomplete markets, it is useful to
highlight two principal equilibrium forces which shape this dynamics. The Þrst equilibrium
tendency is governed by the elastic liquidity supply for forex order ßow. Forex order ßow dQD
t
in equation (3) is accommodated by Þnancial institutions which Þnance these home outßows
according to an upward-sloping supply curve. The elasticity of forex liquidity supply certainly
inßuences the impact of net order ßow on the exchange rate and indirectly the adjustment speed
towards the steady state exchange rate, E. We associate the supply-induced mean reversion
with a Þrst characteristic root (labeled z). A second important parameter for exchange rate
dynamics is the mean reversion of the dividend processes. This mean reversion αD is exogenous,
and any feedback eﬀect from the exchange rate dynamics to the dividend process is ruled out
by assumption.
An important simplifying feature of our model is its symmetry between the home and foreign
country. Symmetry implies that the exchange rate can depend only on diﬀerences between
home and foreign country variables, but not on a country-speciÞc variable itself. Otherwise
the symmetry would be broken. The symmetry requirement also implies that exchange rate
surprises can depend only on current and past relative dividend innovations, dws = dwsh − dwsf .

These relative innovations are the only exogenous source of exchange rate dynamics.

Finally, we highlight the linearity of the model structure. The forex order ßow constraint
is linearized and the exogenous dividend dynamics is linear by assumption. Moreover, we have
assumed a mean-variance utility function which translates linear dividend, price and return
processes into linear asset demands. It is therefore justiÞed to restrict our attention to the class
of linear exchange rate and price processes. The argument for two fundamental equilibrium
forces explains why we focus on two state variables ∆t and Λt , both of which depend for reasons
of model symmetry on current and past relative dividend innovations dws only.
The following proposition 3 states the conjectured exchange rate process and derives its
implications for the order ßow constraint (4).

13

Proposition 3: Exchange Rate Dynamics.
Assume that (i) equity prices P = (Pth , Ptf ) depend linearly on the exchange rate
Et and the dividend processes Dt = (Dth , Dtf ) and (ii) the exchange rate has the
following linear representation
Et = 1 + e∆ ∆t + eΛ Λt ,
with
∆t =
Λt =

Dth
Z

− Dtf

t

−∞

=

Z

t

−∞

exp[−αD (t − s)]σD dws

exp[z(t − s)]dws ,

where z < 0 and dws = dwsh − dwsf . Then it follows that the order ßow constraint

(4) is of the simple form

dEt = k1 ∆t dt + k2 (Et − 1) dt + k3 dwt ,
where k1 , k2 and k3 represent undetermined coeﬃcients.
Proof: The derivation is provided in Appendix C1. We have to show that for a linear
price and a linear exchange rate, investor utility maximization implies optimal foreign
equity demands Kth∗ , Ktf such that the expression (Kth∗ − Ktf )Ddt + (dKtf − dKth∗ )P
in equation (4) is linear in Et − 1, ∆t and dwt .

Under linearity of the price and exchange rate processes, the order ßow constraint simpliÞes
to a diﬀerential equation in only two state variables ∆t and Et −1. This allows us to characterize

the exchange rate dynamics as a system of two Þrst-order diﬀerential equations,
Ã
! Ã
!Ã
!
!
Ã
d∆t
−αD 0
∆t
σD
=
dwt .
dt +
k1
dEt
k2
Et − 1
k3
The associated characteristic polynomial follows as
¯
¯
¯ −α − λ
¯
0
D
¯
¯
¯
¯ = (−αD − λ)(k2 − λ) = 0,
¯
k1
k2 − λ ¯

(5)

with characteristic roots −αD and k2 . A stable solution requires k2 < 0. The exchange rate

solution can then be written as a linear combination e∆ ∆t + eΛ Λt of the two eigenvectors
Z t
Z t
∆t =
exp[−αD (t − s)]σD dws
and
Λt =
exp[k2 (t − s)]dws ,
−∞

−∞

as conjectured in proposition 3.
14

In order to Þnd the solution parameters, we have to impose the market clearing conditions
(1) and determine the steady state levels for the equity price, P , and the foreign equity holding,
K. Non-negative (steady state) prices (P > 0) and positive (steady state) home and foreign
equity holdings (0 < K < 1) imply further restrictions on the parameter domain of our model.
In particular we have to impose an upper bound ρ on the risk aversion and a lower bound κ on
the elasticity of the forex liquidity supply to obtain plausible steady state values.
Proposition 4 characterizes the equilibrium properties:
Proposition 4: Existence and Uniqueness of the Incomplete Risk-Sharing
Equilibrium.
Let the economy be characterized by assumptions 1 to 4. For a suﬃciently low risk
aversion of the investors ρ < ρ and a suﬃciently price-elastic forex supply κ > κ,
there exists a unique stable linear equilibrium
Pth = p0 + pF Fth + p∆ ∆t + pΛ Λt
Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf − p∆ ∆t − pΛ Λt

Et = 1 + e∆ ∆t + eΛ Λt ,
where we deÞne Fth and Ftf as the expected present values of the future home and
foreign dividend ßows, respectively (as in section 3). The variable ∆t = Dth − Dtf

represents the relative dividend ßows for the two countries and Λt a weighted average
of past relative dividend innovations decaying at an endogenous rate z < 0 as deÞned
in proposition 3. The price parameters can be signed as
p0 < 0, pF = 1, p∆ > 0, e∆ < 0, e∆ σ D + eΛ < 0.
Optimal portfolio holdings are given by
! Ã
! Ã
!
Ã
1−K K
−1 −1
Kth Ktf
1
(m∆ ∆t + mΛ Λt )
=
+
f∗
h∗
2ρ
1−K K
Kt
Kt
1
1
for the parameters m∆ < 0, and mΛ > 0 deÞned in Appendix C1.
Proof: For a derivation see Appendix C.
As in the previous full risk-sharing case, we Þnd that investor risk aversion requires an
equity risk premium in the form of a price discount p0 < 0. As before, a coeﬃcient pF = 1
implies that the equity price reßects the fundamental value of expected future dividends, F h
and Ftf , respectively. Moreover, two new stochastic terms ∆t and Λt inßuence asset prices and
the exchange rate. These additional terms reßect changes in the asset prices and exchange rate
15

dynamics induced by the incompleteness of forex risk trading. The exchange rate is no longer
constant and exchange rate volatility imply asymmetric holdings of home and foreign equity. In
addition, the optimal portfolio positions change proportionally to m∆ ∆t + mΛ Λt . The dynamic
equilibrium is characterized by constant rebalancing of the optimal portfolios. We therefore
have endogenous equity purchases and sales as a result of optimal equity risk trading under
constrained forex risk trading. The net equity ßows and the corresponding forex order ßow
in turn generate the equilibrium exchange rate dynamics under the price elastic forex liquidity
supply.

5.2

Economic Interpretation

Investors in the two countries care about nominal trading proÞts in their home currency. This
does not imply however that they only invest in home assets. Given that foreign asset investment
provides an equity risk diversiÞcation beneÞt, foreign equity ownership is desirable for the home
investor. But the foreign dividend income is repatriated at a ßuctuating exchange rate. The
exchange rate path is itself related to the relative performance of the two stock markets. For
relatively high home dividend income (∆t = Dth − Dtf > 0), the home country faces a capital
outßow approximated by the term (Dth − Dtf )Kdt in the ßow constraint (4). This creates an

excess demand for foreign currency. The value of the foreign currency should therefore be high
(i.e. the value of the domestic currency should be low) under the limited supply elasticity in
the forex market. The home stock price Pth and exchange rate Et should therefore move in

opposite directions. This explains the sign of the coeﬃcients p∆ > 0 and e∆ < 0 in proposition
4. The country with a highly productive risky asset sees a decline in its currency terms of trade
to assure the equilibrium in the forex market. We can formally summarize this eﬀect as follows:
Corollary 1: Negative Correlation of Foreign Stock and Forex Returns.
Under incomplete forex risk trading, foreign stock returns (dRft /P ) and exchange
rate returns (−dEt ) are negatively correlated, hence
−Et (dEt dRtf /P )dt = Et (dEt dRht /P )dt < 0.
Proof: Appendix E.
The negative correlation implies that the exchange rate provides a partial but automatic
hedge against foreign equity risk. When foreign stock market returns are high, the foreign
currency depreciates and vice versa. This reduces the return risk of foreign investment in
home currency terms and increases the (steady state) demand for foreign equity. Furthermore,
dividend processes are by assumption mean-reverting. When home dividends are high (∆t > 0),
they are expected to decrease and the home currency is therefore expected to appreciate. This
16

makes the home equity at date t more attractive relative to the foreign equity. It adds a price
premium (p∆ ∆t > 0) to the home equity and a price discount (−p∆ ∆t < 0) to the foreign equity.
We highlight that the exchange rate more than adjusts to accommodate imbalances in foreign
dividend income (∆t > 0). If the exchange rate just counterbalanced high dividend outßows,
the ßow constraint (4) would only consist of the terms −κdEt < 0, (Et − E)KDdt < 0 and
(Dth − Dtf )Kdt > 0. But investors adjust their optimal portfolio holdings to the exchange rate

dynamics and these equilibrium portfolio shifts inßuence the exchange rate change through
the additional terms (Kth∗ − Ktf )Ddt and (dKtf − dKth∗ )P dt in equation (4). A low home

country exchange rate (Et low) makes foreign equity holdings relatively more attractive for
the home investor since the value of foreign dividends in domestic currency is high, implying

Kth∗ −Ktf < 0 (or m∆ < 0); an expected appreciation leads to a net equity ßow into the domestic

market dKtf − dKth∗ < 0. It follows from the ßow constraint (4) that the endogenous portfolio

shifts require a larger exchange rate appreciation −κdEt ¿ 0 than is needed to eliminate the
imbalance in dividend income. In this sense the exchange rate overshoots the dividend income

imbalance. Optimal international portfolio allocations in the presence of incomplete forex risk
trading therefore tend to reinforce the exchange rate ßuctuations.
Finally, we also note that imperfect intertemporal forex speculation is a necessary condition
for these results. This can be veriÞed by examining the limiting case of a completely price-elastic
forex liquidity supply. In this case the imperfect risk trading equilibrium converges to the special
case of complete equity risk sharing:
Proposition 5 (Convergence to Complete Risk Sharing):
The incomplete risk-sharing equilibrium (characterized in proposition 4) converges to
the complete risk-sharing equilibrium (characterized in proposition 2) as the currency
supply becomes inÞnitely price elastic, that is κ → ∞.
Proof: Appendix D.
In this limiting case, the investors can always exchange foreign dividend income at the
constant exchange rate E = 1. Optimal international equity risk sharing is achieved by equally
shared ownership of the world equity portfolio. The inÞnitely elastic currency supply corresponds
to a scenario of perfect intertemporal speculation in the forex market. In practice, capital
constraints for arbitraging speculators impose limits on the amount of intertemporal speculation
(Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). A relatively small supply elasticity of currency may therefore
represent the correct benchmark.

17

6

Model Implications

We summarize the main empirical implications of our model, which concern the volatility of
the exchange rate return relative to the equity return in section 6.1, the correlation structure of
exchange rate and equity returns in section 6.2, and the correlation structure of exchange rate
return and equity ßows in section 6.3. We also discuss the eﬀect of equity market development
on the strength of our results in section 6.4.

6.1

Exchange Rate Volatility

Market completeness means that forex risk is widely and eﬃciently traded. Derivative trading
or short-selling of bonds reallocate and largely eliminate the forex risk of all international equity
investors. Moreover, a large number of market participants and their low aggregate risk aversion
imply a very price-elastic forex supply. Home and foreign currency are then close substitutes.
This limits the scope for forex order ßow to generate considerable exchange rate volatility.
Alternatively, if forex risk trading is restricted to a relatively small number of banks and hedge
funds, then we expect a less price-elastic forex liquidity supply. In the latter case, forex order
ßow may result in considerable exchange rate movements.
Our model captures the elasticity of the forex supply in the parameter κ. Portfolio ßows
in the incomplete risk-sharing setting can generate considerable exchange rate volatility if κ
becomes small. We can illustrate this eﬀect in Figure 1 by plotting the volatility ratio of the
exchange rate returns and the stock market returns (in local currency),
s
V ar(dEt )
,
V ar(dRft ∗ /P )
as a function of two fundamental model parameters, namely the investor risk aversion, ρ, and the
elasticity of the liquidity supply, κ. The riskless rate r and the three parameters governing the
dividend processes (D, αD , σD ) are held constant. The parameter range is given by 0.04 < ρ <
0.44 for the degree of risk aversion and 20 < κ < 100 for the liquidity supply parameter. A high
price elasticity of forex liquidity supply (κ large) implies a low forex volatility. A decrease in the
elasticity of the liquidity supply (lower κ) comes with substantial forex volatility as illustrated
by the parametric plot. We summarize this result as follows:
Implication 1: Exchange Rate Volatility.
Market incompleteness in combination with a low price elasticity of forex liquidity
supply can generate exchange rates which are almost as volatile as equity returns.

18

6.2

Equity Returns and Exchange Rate Returns

Market incompleteness implies a negative correlation structure between foreign equity returns
and exchange rate returns as stated in Corollary 1. Because of the symmetry of the model, it is
most convenient to state the correlation structure for diﬀerences of the foreign and home equity
returns in local currency, namely (dRft ∗ − dRth )/P . The following corollary provides the result:
Corollary 2:
Under incomplete forex risk trading, a foreign currency appreciation and foreign
excess returns (in local currency) over home market returns have a perfect negative
correlation, hence

i
h
−Corr dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P = −1.

Proof: See Appendix E.

For example, a U.S. equity market return shortfall relative to the European equity market
((dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P > 0) should ceteris paribus coincide with a dollar appreciation (dEt > 0). The
negative correlation is perfect, because we have only two exogenous stochastic processes for the

dividends which inßuence the model dynamics. For reasons of symmetry, return diﬀerences and
exchange rate returns are driven exclusively by relative dividend innovations, dwt = dwth − dwtf .

The instantaneous correlation between the local currency excess return can therefore only be

either perfectly negative or positive or zero. Our analysis shows that the correlation is perfectly
negative. Empirically, we cannot expect to Þnd a perfectly negative correlation. Shocks other
than dividend innovations and cross-country asymmetries will tend to reduce the absolute value
of the correlation. As the empirically relevant implication, we therefore retain only the sign of
the correlation:
Implication 2: Diﬀerential Equity Returns and Foreign Exchange Rate
Return
When foreign stock index returns in (local currency) are in excess of the U.S. stock
index returns (in dollars), the foreign currency depreciates.
To our knowledge, this particular correlation structure has not yet been related to Þnancial
structure in general and the incompleteness of forex risk trading in particular. We explore its
empirical validity in section 7.2.

6.3

Exchange Rate Returns and Portfolio Flows

Exchange rates in our model are determined through a price-elastic response to forex order ßow,
which in turn originates partly in equity ßows. It therefore seems appropriate to relate exchange
19

rate returns directly to equity portfolio ßows. Using the price equilibrium in proposition 4,
it is straightforward to show that the equity ßows into the foreign market by home investors,
dKtf = −dKtf ∗ , and the equity ßow into the home market by foreign investors, dKth∗ = −dKth ,
both correlate positively with the exchange rate return −dEt and dEt , respectively. Formally,
−E(dEt dKtf ) = E(dEt dKth∗ ) =

κ
(e∆ σD + eΛ )2 > 0.
P

The symmetry of the model implies that the exchange rate return has the same absolute covariance with foreign net purchases of domestic equities and with domestic net purchases of
foreign equities, but with opposite signs. We can express the net equity ßow into the foreign
country as the diﬀerence dKtf − dKth∗ . This net ßow exhibits a perfect positive correlation with
the exchange rate return. Hence the following corollary:
Corollary 3:
Under incomplete forex risk trading, a foreign currency appreciation and the net
equity ßow into the foreign country have a perfect positive correlation,
h
i
−Corr dEt , (dKtf − dKth∗ ) = 1.
Proof: See Appendix E.
Again, the correlation is perfect, because all variables for country diﬀerences or the exchange
rate are governed by stochastic innovations which are proportional to the relative dividend
innovations, dwt = dwth − dwtf . Country heterogeneity in other dimensions will certainly tend to

decrease the correlation to a value below 1. We therefore retain only the sign of the correlation
as the empirically relevant model implication and refer to the U.S. as the home country:
Implication 3: Forex Return and Net Equity Flows.
A foreign currency appreciation is positively correlated with net equity ßows into the
foreign market.

6.4

The Role of Equity Market Development

The correlation structure of equity and exchange rate returns was derived for integrated and frictionless equity markets. But equity market development and integration constitute a relatively
recent phenomenon. Only in the 1990s did international equity trading become a prominent
feature in international Þnance. Hence, we expect the empirical model implications to hold best
for OECD country data over the last decade. We therefore examine the correlation structure
separately over the entire data collection period and for two subsamples starting in 1990 and
20

1995. An increasingly negative correlation between foreign excess equity returns and the foreign
exchange rate return suggests that the correlation structure is indeed induced by increasing
equity market integration.
Moreover, the evidence should be strongest for countries with relatively developed equity
markets. Such equity market development can be crudely measured by the ratio of market
capitalization to GDP. Alternatively, we can measure the integration of a local equity market
into the world equity market by the ratio of gross equity trade to GDP. Both market development
measures should be correlated with the magnitude of the predicted correlation structure. Such
cross-sectional evidence suggests again that the exchange rate dynamics represents a Þnancial
market phenomenon.
We can summarize both the time series and cross sectional implications as follows:
Implication 4: Negative Correlation and Equity Market Development.
The magnitude of the negative correlation between foreign equity excess return and
the exchange rate return should increase in the 1990s and should be strongest for
countries with a high degree of equity market development as measured by the ratio
of market capitalization to GDP or gross equity trade to GDP.

7

Evidence

The empirical work focuses on OECD countries relative to the U.S. OECD countries tend to have
the most developed equity markets and are therefore most pertinent for the model. The U.S.
represents by far the largest source and recipient of international equity ßows. Furthermore, the
most comprehensive bilateral asset ßow data are available for the U.S. only. Within the OECD
sample, we excluded three countries for which daily exchange rate data were not available over
a suﬃciently long time period: Iceland, Greece and New Zealand. Belgium and Luxemburg are
treated as one country because of their common currency. Canada was excluded because of its
eﬀective exchange rate Þxing with the U.S.14 The remaining 17 OECD countries maintained
ßexible exchange rates relative to the U.S. and constitute our sample.
The daily equity index and exchange rate data are obtained from Datastream. We used the
MSCI series for the end of the day stock index quote and the corresponding dollar exchange
rates. Most daily price data are available since 1980. The data are screened for data outliers
and errors and do not show any abnormal entries.
Portfolio ßow data are more diﬃcult to obtain. We use the so-called TIC data produced by
the U.S. Treasury department. Available on a monthly frequency since 1987, the TIC data record
14

The same exchange rate consideration would also lead to the exclusion of Hong Kong and Singapore, which
have developed equity markets but are not considered OECD countries.

21

transactions in portfolio equities between U.S. residents and residents of foreign countries.15
They allow us to compute net purchases of foreign equities by U.S. residents (dKtf ) and net
purchases of U.S. equities by foreigners (dKth∗ ). Cross-border equity ßows have been growing
sizably in the last decade.16 Hence we have to Þnd a suitable normalization of the portfolio ßow
series. We consider a normalization for capital ßows by market capitalization and alternatively
by the average ßows over the previous 12 months (as in Brennan and Cao (1997)). Both
methods produce very similar results and we only report tables with the normalization based on
past average ßows. The stock market capitalization data come from the S&P Emerging Markets
Database.

7.1

Exchange Rate Volatility

First, we examine the volatility ratio of exchange rate returns to stock index returns. We
calculate the standard deviation of the log returns of the dollar exchange rate and the stock
index returns in local currency. Table 1 reports the ratio of the standard deviations for the
entire data sample since 1980 (column (a)), the subsample since 1990 (column (b)) and the
most recent period since 1995 (column (c)).
The volatility ratio over the full sample varies between 0.369 for Finland and 0.845 for
Switzerland with a mean for all countries of 0.6215. Our theoretical framework can explain such
high exchange rate volatility with a low price elasticity of the forex liquidity supply. Comparing
volatility ratios for the entire period since 1980 to the more recent subsamples since 1990 and
1995, we Þnd declining volatility ratios for most countries. This can mostly be attributed to a
decrease in exchange rate volatility. We can speculate that the elasticity of liquidity supply in
the forex market (parameter κ in our model) might have increased over time. This would be
consistent with increasing forex market depth in the more recent period.

7.2

Equity Returns and Exchange Rate Returns

The most important model implication concerns the negative correlation between foreign equity
returns and exchange rate returns. We calculate the return correlations based on daily returns
for various data periods. Exchange rate returns are in foreign currency per dollar and stock
index returns are measured in local currency. The correlation evidence is produced at the daily,
15

For a thorough presentation of these data see Warnock et al. (2001). We note that TIC data records
transactions based on the residency of the seller and of the buyer. For example, a German equity sold in London
by a U.S. resident to a U.K. Bank will be recorded as a sale of a foreign security by a U.S. resident to the U.K. In
our model, this transaction will therefore be interpreted as a dollar pound transaction on the forex market. This
inference can be ßawed insofar as the real operation was actually performed in euro and not in Sterling or as it
was realized on the behalf of a German equity trader.
16
See Portes and Rey (1999) for a detailed study of the properties of these ßows.

22

monthly and quarterly frequency in Tables 2, 3 and 4, respectively.
Daily correlations in Table 2 provides strong statistical evidence in favor of our correlation
hypothesis. The model prediction of a negative correlation is validated for most countries at a 1
percent statistical signiÞcance level.17 Moreover, the correlations become more negative in the
two more recent periods. The correlation in the pooled data decreases from −0.053 over the
entire period to −0.0761 for the period since 1990 and to −0.0735 for the most recent period since

1995. The correlation has grown more negative along with the equity market integration, which
has intensiÞed since the 1990s. The only countries for which the correlation is still positive after
1995 are Australia and Japan.18 Overall, our evidence strongly supports the predicted negative
correlation. Regression evidence on the pooled data sample shows a strong negative correlation
signiÞcant at the 1 percent level. The monthly return data in Table 3 provide very similar
results. In the sample period since 1995 every OECD country features a negative correlation at
the monthly frequency. Again we Þnd that the correlation became more negative in the 1990s.
For the entire data collection period from 1973 to 2002, the correlation is roughly half as strong
as in the last decade.
Table 4 conÞrms our results on quarterly data for the period 1990 to 2002. We present
regressions of exchange rate changes on return diﬀerentials for all the countries of our sample.
The correlation is again negative and strongly signiÞcant for most countries. Furthermore, the
variance of the exchange rate explained by our simple return diﬀerential variable is strikingly
high for some countries. With a single variable, namely equity return diﬀerential, we explain
30 percent of quarterly exchange rate movements in Spain, 28 percent in Sweden, 25 percent in
Germany. For the pooled data the R2 is 13 percent. These results oﬀer a sharp contrast with
the dismal performance of monetary variables in standard exchange rate models at quarterly
horizons.
The negative correlation has previously been noted by other researchers for some particular
countries. But they were mostly puzzled by the lack of a coherent theoretical explanation.
Brooks et al. (2001) for example document negative correlations between European equity excess
returns over U.S. equity and the euro-dollar exchange rate. Interestingly, they discard their
Þnding as “counter-intuitive” (p. 17), since it contradicts the popular view that a strengthening
U.S. equity market should be mirrored by a strengthening of the dollar.19 Incomplete forex
17

Standards errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and serial correlation.
We conjecture that the Australian evidence might be tainted by the role of natural resource prices. Chen
and Rogoﬀ (2001) and Cashin, Cespedes and Sahay (2002) show indeed that the Australian exchange rate is
strongly related to world commodity price ßuctuations. They underline the speciÞcity of this country in this
respect. Japan on the other hand is special because international portfolio ßows concern mostly bonds as opposed
to equity.
19
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002) also report a negative correlation between domestic real return in local
currency and the real exchange rate at the yearly horizon.
18

23

risk trading oﬀers a coherent theoretical explanation for the observed correlation structure.
From an empirical perspective, the negative correlation deserves to be highlighted because of its
strong statistical signiÞcance and increasing magnitude. Moreover, it stands out relative to the
empirical failure of uncovered interest parity for the same set of countries.20

7.3

Exchange Rate Returns and Portfolio Flows

Data on equity ßows allow for another test of our model. Model implication 3 highlights a
positive correlation between equity investment into the foreign market and the foreign currency
return. Data on bilateral equity ßows relative to the U.S. are unfortunately available only at the
monthly frequency. Table 5 summarizes the evidence on the correlation of net U.S. ßows into
the same 17 OECD countries as before and the corresponding foreign exchange rate returns.
Only France and Portugal show positive correlation at the 1 percent signiÞcance level for the
entire data period since 1987. Pooling the entire data for all countries even produces a negative,
albeit insigniÞcant, correlation. However, this picture is reversed for the more recent data period
since 1990. The correlation is now signiÞcantly positive at the 1 percent level for 6 countries.
It is positive but insigniÞcant for 4 others. The correlation for the pooled sample increases to
0.114 and is statistically signiÞcant at the 1 percent level. Overall, the evidence is supportive
of a linkage between net equity portfolio ßows and exchange rate returns. Net equity ßows into
the foreign market tend to appreciate the foreign currency.

7.4

Equity Market Development and the Correlation Structure

The evidence in Tables 2, 3 and 4 suggest that foreign equity excess returns became a more
important determinant of exchange rate behavior in the 1990s, presumably because of increased
equity market development and integration. We can test this hypothesis further by examining
the cross sectional variation of equity market development within the OECD sample. Two crude
measures of equity market development are given by the quarterly market capitalization of the
OECD country relative to its GDP and by the gross equity trade with the U.S. relative to GDP.
These measures of equity market development are highly correlated at 0.84.
Figure 2 plots the average monthy correlation between local equity excess returns (over U.S.
returns) and FX returns for the 17 countries as a function of the (log) market capitalization to
GDP ratio for the sample period 1995-2001. Countries with higher equity market development
tend to show a more negative correlation between their equity market excess return and the
20

One could theoretically oﬀer an alternative hypothesis for this negative correlation. A depreciation of the
exchange rate could be associated with higher equity returns via a competitiveness eﬀect for exporting Þrms.
Such a mechanism has failed to Þnd strong support in previous empirical studies (see in particular Bodnar and
Gentry (1993) and Friberg and Nydahl (1999)). Moreover, that alternative explanation could not account for
intertemporal increase in the correlation.

24

exchange rate return. We can analyze this link further using panel regressions reported in Table
6. We calculate quarterly realized correlations from daily returns for all 17 OECD countries and
regress those alternatively on both measures of market development and a Þxed time eﬀect for
each quarter. Both market development proxies are statistically signiÞcant at a 1 percent level.
We conclude that the correlation structure of equity and exchange rate returns is related to the
level of equity market development. The correlation is more negative for OECD countries with
the most developed equity markets.

8

Conclusion

This paper develops a new integrated analysis of exchange rates, equity prices and equity portfolio ßows. Such a framework is warranted by the increasing magnitude of international equity
ßows over the last decade. We argue that the integration of equity markets does not imply convergence to a Þnancial structure based on full exchange rate risk trading. The available evidence
from U.S. global mutual funds suggests to the contrary that forex risk in international equity
portfolios is mostly unhedged and therefore not internationally traded. The main theoretical
contribution of this paper is to explore the implications of incomplete forex risk trading for the
correlation structure of exchange rate and equity returns and exchange rate returns and net
portfolio ßows.
The theoretical analysis incorporates a stylized fact from the recent microstructure research
on exchange rates, namely that net forex order ßow tends to generate large and relatively
persistent exchange rate changes. We simply assume a price elastic forex supply curve to mimic
this exchange rate reaction. But the forex order ßow itself is tied to the endogenous portfolio
ßows which emerge under optimal dynamic investment in an incomplete market setting. The
entire exchange rate dynamics is therefore based exclusively on the Þnancial market structure
as opposed to traditional macroeconomic determinants.
We highlight three dimensions in which this parsimonious approach is successful. First, the
model can explain a large degree of exchange rate volatility if the elasticity of forex liquidity
supply is suﬃciently low. Second, we derive a negative correlation between foreign equity excess returns (in local currency) and the corresponding exchange rate returns. This correlation
contradicts the conventional belief that strong equity markets are accompanied by currency appreciation. This correlation structure has not been highlighted in the previous exchange rate
literature. Such a negative correlation decreases the risk of foreign investment in home currency terms as negative foreign equity returns tend to be compensated by positive exchange
rate returns. This automatic hedge reduces the home bias and facilitates international equity
risk sharing. We Þnd very strong empirical support for the predicted return correlation at daily,

25

monthly and quarterly horizons. Stock return diﬀerentials explain as much as 30 percent of
the variance of the exchange rate at the quarterly frequency for some countries. Moreover, the
negative correlation becomes more pronounced after 1990, perhaps because of more developed
and integrated international equity markets. The cross-sectional evidence also points to the role
of Þnancial market development. Countries with a higher equity market capitalization relative
to GDP tend to have a more negative return correlation. Third, we explore the correlation between exchange rate returns and net equity ßows. The model predicts a positive correlation since
net equity ßows are tied to forex order ßows. The period after 1990 shows a highly signiÞcant
positive correlation for the pooled data of 17 OECD countries.
Our analysis can be extended in various directions. We believe that the results are robust
to positive correlation between home and foreign dividends. Dividends were so far assumed
to be independent. But such internationally correlated equity market risk is per se devoid of
risk trading beneÞts and should not alter the allocation problem for the remaining uncorrelated
equity return risk. A more interesting extension would take account of asymmetric information
or diﬀerences in opinion concerning the international equity returns between the home and
foreign investors. This would introduce an additional and potentially important new trading
motive alongside the equity risk sharing concerns of the present framework.

26

References
[1] Bekaert, G. and Harvey, C. (2000). ‘Foreign speculators and emerging equity markets’,
Journal of Finance, 55(2), 565-613.
[2] Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and R. L. Lumsdaine (2002). ‘The dynamics of emerging market
equity ßows’, Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming.
[3] Bodnar, G. and W. Gentry (1993). ‘Exchange rate exposure and industry characteristics:
evidnce from Canada, Japan and the USA’, Journal of International Money and Finance.
44, 1755-1785.
[4] Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000). ‘Report on U.S. holdings of
foreign long-term securities’, Washington DC.
[5] Branson W., and W. Henderson (1985). ‘The speciÞcation and inßuence of asset markets’,
in Jones, R. and P. Kenen (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, North-Holland.
[6] Brennan, M. J., and H. H. Cao (1997), ‘International portfolio investment ßows’, Journal
of Finance, Vol. 52, 1851-1880.
[7] Brooks R., H. Edison, M. Kumar and T. Slok (2001). ‘Exchange rates and capital ßows’,
IMF working paper WP/01/190.
[8] Cashin, Cespedes and Sahay (2002). ‘Keynes, cocoa and copper: in search of commodity
currencies’, IMF mimeo.
[9] Carlson J. and C. Osler (2000). ‘rational speculators and exchange rate volatility’, European
Economic Review 44, February: 231-253.
[10] Chen Y. and K. Rogoﬀ (2001). ‘Commodity currencies and empirical exchange rate equations’, IMF mimeo.
[11] Chowdry B., R. Roll and Y. Xia (2002). ‘Extracting inßation from stock returns to test
Purchasing Power Parity’, Wharton mimeo.
[12] Diebold F., T. Andersen , T. Bollerslev and H. Ebens (2001). ‘The distribution of realized
stock return volatility’, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 61, No1, 43-76.
[13] Duarte M. and A. Stockman (2001). ‘Rational speculation and exchange rates’, NBER WP
8362.
[14] Devereux M, and C. Engel (2002). ‘Exchange rate pass-through, exchange rate volatility,
and exchange rate disconnect’, mimeo University of Wisconsin.
27

[15] Evans M. (2002). ‘FX trading and exchange rate dynamics’, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
[16] Evans M. and R. Lyons (2001a). ‘Order ßow and exchange rate dynamics’, (NBER WP
7317), Journal of Political Economy, 2002.
[17] Evans M. and R. Lyons (2001b). ‘Why order ßow explains exchange rate’, available at
http://haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons.
[18] Frankel J. (1994). ‘The internationalization of equity markets’, University of Chicago Press,
1-20.
[19] Frankel J. and A. Rose (1995). ‘Empirical research on nominal exchange rates’, in G. Grossman and K.Rogoﬀ (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, North-Holland.
[20] Friberg R. and S. Nydahl (1999). Openness and the exchange rate exposure of the national
stock markets, International Journal of Finance and Economics 4, 55-62.
[21] Froot, K., P. O’Connell, and M. Seasholes (2001). ‘The portfolio ßows of international
investors’, Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 151-193.
[22] Froot, K and T. Ramadorai (2002). ‘Currency returns, institutional investors ßows, and
exchange rate fundamentals’, NBER WP 9101.
[23] Griﬃn J., F. Nardari and R. Stulz (2002). ‘Daily cross-border equity ßows: pushed or
pulled?’, mimeo.
[24] Hau, H. (1998). ‘Competitive entry and endogenous risk in the foreign exchange market’,
Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 11, No. 4, 757-787.
[25] Hau, H., W. Killeen, and M. Moore (2002). ‘How has the euro changed the foreign exchange
market?’, Economic Policy 34, April, 151-177.
[26] Henry, P. B., (2000). ‘Do stock market liberalizations cause investment booms?’, Journal
of Financial Economics, 58(1-2), 301-334.
[27] Killeen, W., R. Lyons, and M. Moore, (2001). ‘Fixed versus ßoating: lessons from
the EMS order ßow’, Paper presented at the NBER IFM conference, available at
http://haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons.
[28] Lane, P. and G.M. Milesi-Ferreti (2002), ’Global Þnancial integration’, paper presented at
the 2002 IMF Research Conference.

28

[29] Levich, R. M., G. S. Hayt, and B. A. Ripston (1999), ‘1998 survey of derivative and risk management practices by U.S. institutional investors’, survey conducted by the NYU Salomon Center, CIBC World Markets, and KPMG, available at
http://www.stern.nyu.edu/~rlevich/.
[30] Lucas, R. (1982). ‘Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world’.
[31] Lyons, R. (2001). The microstructure approach to exchange rates, MIT Press.
[32] Meese R. and K. Rogoﬀ (1983a). ‘Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they
Þt out-of-sample?’, Journal of International Economics, February, 14(2), 3-24.
[33] Meese R. and K. Rogoﬀ (1983b). ‘The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange rate
models: sampling error or misspeciÞcation?’, in Jacob A. Frenkel (eds.), pp 67-105.
[34] Obstfeld M. and K. Rogoﬀ (1995).‘Exchange rate dynamics redux’, Journal of Political
Economy, 103 (June) : 624-60.
[35] Obstfeld M. and A. Taylor (2002): ’Globalization and capital markets’, NBER WP 8846.
[36] Osler, C. (1998). ‘Short-term speculators and the puzzling behavior of exchange Rates’,
Journal of International Economics 43, No. 1, June : 37-58.
[37] Portes R. and H. Rey (1999). ‘The determinants of cross-border equity ßows’, NBER WP
7336.
[38] Richards A. (2002). ‘Big Þsh in small ponds: the momentum investing and price impact of
foreign investors in Asian emerging equity markets’, mimeo.
[39] Rime D. (2001). ‘Trading in foreign exchange markets’, PhD Thesis, Norwegian School of
Management.
[40] Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny (1997), The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance, Vol. 52,
No.1, 35-55.
[41] Warnock F., B. Griever and G. Lee (2001). ‘The U.S. System for Measuring Cross-Border
Investment in Securities: A Primer with a Discussion of Recent Developments’, Federal
Reserve Bulletin, October.

29

Appendix A: Equilibrium under Financial Autarchy
Proposition 1:
Let Fth = f0 + fD Dth denote the fundamental equity value in the home country with fD = 1/(αD + r)
and f0 = (r−1 − fD )D.

We conjecture a linear price equilibrium of the form
Pth

= p0 + pF Fth

Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf .

The excess payoﬀs over the risk-less rate of home country equity follows as
dRth = dPth − rPth dt + Dth dt = αhΨ Ψht dt + bhΨ dwth
with Ψht = (1, Dth )T and coeﬃcients αhΨ = (−rp0 , 1 − pF ) and bhΨ = pF fD σD .
The optimal asset demand for investors is given by
¡
¢
Et dRth
h
Kt =
ρσ 2R dt

with σ2R dt = Et (dRth )2 . Market clearing requires Kth = 1 and implies for the price coeﬃcients
p0

= −

pF

= 1.

ρσ 2R
r

The same price parameters are obtain for the foreign stock market. The instantaneous volatility of the
excess pay-oﬀ is given by

¡ ¢2
σ 2R = bhΨ =

σ 2D
.
(αD + r)2

Appendix B: Equilibrium under Complete Risk-Sharing
Proposition 2:
We conjecture a linear price system of the form
Pth

= p0 + pF Fth

Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf

Et

= 1.

As before, we denote by Fth = f0 + fD Dth and Ftf = f0 + fD Dtf the fundamental values of the two
risky assets. The home country investor faces excess payoﬀs Rth and Rtf for home and foreign equity,
respectively. The foreign country investor (denoted by ∗ ) faces excess payoﬀs (in foreign currency) Rtf ∗
and Rth∗ for foreign and home country equity, respectively. Linear approximations allow us to write:
dRth
dRtf
dRtf ∗
dRth∗

= dPth − rPth dt + Dth dt

≈ −dEt P + dPtf − dEt dPtf − r[Ptf − P (Et − 1)]dt + [Dtf − D(Et − 1)]dt
= dPtf − rPtf dt + Dtf dt

£
¤
£
¤
≈ dEt P + dPth + dEt dPth − r Pth + P (Et − 1) dt + Dth + D(Et − 1) dt.
30

The constant exchange rate (dEt = 0) implies that payoﬀs in foreign currency terms are equal to home
currency payoﬀs, hence dRth∗ = dRth , and dRtf ∗ = dRtf . The excess payoﬀs take on the simple form
dRtj

= αjΨ Ψjt dt + bjΨ dwtj

dRtj∗

j
j∗
j
= αj∗
Ψ Ψt dt + bΨ dwt

j
j
where j = h, f denotes the country index, Ψjt = (1, Dtj )T the state variable and αjΨ = αj∗
Ψ = (α0 , αD ),

bjΨ = bj∗
Ψ coeﬃcients.
Finally, we consider the correlation structure of the payoﬀs. Let Ωdt denote the covariance matrix of
the excess payoﬀs (dRth , dRtf ) (in home currency terms) for the home investor and Ω∗ dt the corresponding covariance matrix of the excess payoﬀs (dRtf ∗ , dRth∗ ) (in foreign currency) for the foreign investor.
Symmetry of the two country model implies
Ã
!
Ω11 Ω21
∗
,
Ω=Ω =
Ω21 Ω22

−1

Ω

1
=
det Ω

∗ −1

= (Ω )

Ã

Ω22
−Ω21

−Ω21
Ω11

!

with det Ω = Ω11 Ω22 − Ω21 Ω21 .

¡
¢
For the special case of complete markets with a constant exchange rate, we have Et dEt dPth = 0,

Ω21 = 0, and Ω11 = Ω22 = σ 2R . Therefore,
Ã
Ω11
1
−1
Ω = 4
σR
0

0
Ω22

!

1
= 2
σR

Ã

1 0
0 1

The first-order condition for the asset demands is given by
!
Ã
Ã
dRth
Kth Ktf
1
=
E
t
f∗
ρdt
Kt
Kth∗
dRtf ∗

!

dRtf
dRth∗

=

1
12×2 .
σ 2R

!

Ω−1 .

(6)

Market clearing in the two stock markets (Kth + Kth∗ = 1, Ktf + Ktf ∗ = 1) implies the price coeﬃcients
p0

= −

pF

= 1.

For the optimal portfolio positions we obtain
!
Ã
Kth Ktf
Ktf ∗

Kth∗

=

ρσ 2R
2r

Ã

1
2
1
2

1
2
1
2

!

.

Hence the existence and uniqueness of the complete risk-sharing equilibrium (Proposition 2).

Appendix C: Equilibrium under Incomplete Risk-Sharing.
We prove the existence of the equilibrium under incomplete risk-sharing and its uniqueness in the
class of linear equilibria. We proceed in four steps: 1) using our guessed solutions for exchange rates
and equity prices, we derive optimal asset demands and the diﬀerential system governing the dynamics
of our model (Appendix C1, proposition 3 in the paper); 2) we impose market clearing and identify the
31

parameters (Appendix C2); 3) we show the existence and uniqueness of z (Appendix C3); 4) we show the
existence and uniqueness of all the other parameters, thereby establishing the existence and uniqueness
of the equilibrium (Appendix C4, proposition 4 in the paper).

C1. Exchange Rate Dynamics
Proposition 3 :
We assume that the exchange rate process is of the form Et = 1 + e∆ ∆t + eΛ Λt . and that equity prices
have the following representation
Pth

= p0 + pF Fth + p∆ ∆t + pΛ Λt

Ptf

= p0 + pF Ftf − p∆ ∆t − pΛ Λt .

Let j = h, f denote the country index, Ψjt = (1, Dtj , ∆t , Λt )T the state variable, dwjt = (dwtj , dwt )T =
(dwtj , dwth − dwtf )T a (1 × 2) vector of innovations. For coeﬃcients αjΨ = (αj0 , αjD , αj∆ , αjΛ ), αj∗
Ψ =
j∗
j∗
j∗
j
j
j∗
j∗
(αj∗
0 , αD , α∆ , αΛ ), bΨ = (pF fD σ D , bΨ ), bΨ = (pF fD σ D , bΨ ) we express excess payoﬀs as

dRtj
dRtj∗

= αjΨ Ψjt dt + bjΨ dwjt
j
f∗
j
= αj∗
Ψ Ψt dt + bΨ dwt

and the first-order conditions imply for the optimal asset demand
Ã
!
Ã
!
Kth Ktf
αhΨ Ψht αfΨ Ψft
1
=
Ω−1 .
Et
h
ρdt
Ktf ∗ Kth∗
αfΨ∗ Ψft αh∗
Ψ Ψt
Market clearing (Kth + Kth∗ = 1, Ktf ∗ + Ktf = 1) gives
Kth∗ − Ktf

=

dKth∗ − dKtf

=

1
[m∆ ∆t + mΛ Λt ]
ρ
1
1
[−αD m∆ ∆t dt + zmΛ Λt dt] + [m∆ σ D + mΛ σΛ ] dwt
ρ
ρ

where we define the coeﬃcients
m∆

−1
−1
= 2p∆ (αD + r)(Ω−1
12 − Ω22 ) − 2mα e∆ Ω22

mΛ

−1
−1
= 2pΛ (−z + r)(Ω−1
12 − Ω22 ) − 2mz eΛ Ω22

mα

= (αD + r)P − D

mz

= (−z + r)P − D

Finally, we replace
Λt =

1
e∆
(Et − E) −
∆t
eΛ
eΛ

and find that the term (Kth∗ − Ktf )Ddt + (dKtf − dKth∗ )P is linear in Et − E, ∆t and dwt .Substitution
in the forex order flow constraint (4) implies that the exchange rate process can be represented as:
dEt = k1 ∆t + k2 (Et − E) + k3 dwt .
The whole model is therefore amenable to equation (5) of the paper (proposition 3).

32

C2. Identification of the Parameters
Market clearing in the two stock markets (Kth + Kth∗ = 1, Ktf + Ktf ∗ = 1) implies 4 parameter
constraints (one for each element in Ψjt = (1, Dj , ∆t , Λt )T ) given by

p0
pF
p∆
pΛ

−ρ det Ω − Et (dEt dPtf )(−Ω12 + Ω11 )
r(Ω11 − 2Ω12 + Ω22 )
= 1
mα (Ω21 + Ω11 )
= −e∆
(αD + r)Ω
mz (Ω21 + Ω11 )
= −eΛ
(−z + r)Ω
=

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

where we define Ω = Ω11 + 2Ω21 + Ω22 . The forex order flow constraint (4) implies an additional 3
constraints (for ∆t , Λt , dwt ) given by
¢
¡
¢
1¡
= −K
e∆ KD − καD + m∆ D + αD P
ρ
¢
¢
¡
1¡
eΛ KD + κz + mΛ D − zP
= 0
ρ
1
1
e∆ κσD + eΛ κ − m∆ P σ D − mΛ P = 0.
ρ
ρ

(11)
(12)
(13)

These 7 equations determine the 7 parameters p0 , pF , p∆ , pΛ , e∆ , eΛ , z as a function of P , Λ and K as
well as the parameters of the dividend process (αD , D, σ D ), the elasticity of the forex liquidity supply, κ,
and the investor risk aversion ρ. Moreover, steady state levels P > 0, Λ and 0 < K < 1 are equal to:
D
D
+ pΛ Λ = p0 +
r
r
ρ [Ω11 − Ω21 ] − Et (dEt dPtf )
ρ (Ω11 − 2Ω21 + Ω22 )

P

= p0 +

K

=

Λ = 0.
The covariances are given by
Ω11

= (fD σ D )2 + 2[p∆ σD + pΛ ]2 + 2fD σ D [p∆ σ D + pΛ ]

Ω12

= −2(p∆ σD + pΛ )2 − [2(p∆ σ D + pΛ ) + fD σ D ] P (e∆ σ D + eΛ ) − 2(p∆ σ D + pΛ )fD σ D

Ω22

2

= (fD σ D ) + 2[P (e∆ σ D + eΛ ) + p∆ σ D + pΛ ]2 + 2fD σ D [P (e∆ σ D + eΛ ) + p∆ σ D + pΛ ]

and furthermore
2

Ω = 2 (fD σD ) + 2[P (e∆ σ D + eΛ )]2 ,

(14)

where Ω(z) = Ω11 + 2Ω21 + Ω22 > 0 represents the instantaneous excess pay-oﬀ variance of the total
market portfolio of all domestic and foreign equity.

33

C3. Existence and Uniqueness of Parameter z
Combining equations (12), (10) and the definition of Ω(z) we obtain an expression which characterizes
the root z of the system as

¢
ρ¡
KD + κz Ω = f (z)
2
¡
¢
for a function f (z) = [(−z + r)P − D] D − zP .

(15)

The function f (z) represents a convex parabola. It has two intersects with the x-axes at z1 =
¢
¡
−D/P + r ≤ 0 and z2 = D/P ≥ 0. Since ρ2 KD + κz Ω is upward sloping (dΩ/dz > 0), and positive for

z = 0, it intersects the parabola at least once and at most twice. The first intersection is negative and
the second one, if it exists, is positive (and therefore discarded for stability reasons). Hence there always
exists a unique value z < 0 such that the solution is stable.

C4. Existence and Uniqueness of Parameters p0 ,p∆ ,pΛ ,e∆ ,eΛ
Proposition 4 (Existence and Uniqueness of the Incomplete Market Equilibrium):
We now have to prove that for such a solution z, the parameters p0 , p∆ , pΛ , e∆ , eΛ exist and are
uniquely defined. We first derive useful intermediate results for e∆ and p∆ .
Assume that the forex supply is suﬃciently price elastic with κ > κ = KDP /(D−rP ) = KDP /(−rp0 ).
¢
¡
Then ρ2 KD + κz Ω(z) intersects the x-axis to the right of z1 = −D/P + r and the root z is confined
to the interval z ∈ [−D/P + r, −KD/κ]. This implies (−z + r)P − D < 0. Moreover, we require that

−αD < −D/P + r or (αD + r)P − D > 0. The latter condition can be rewritten as αD P > −rp0 , where
p0 represents the risk discount on the asset price. We can make p0 suﬃciently close to zero by setting an

upper threshold value for the investor risk aversion, hence requiring ρ1 > ρ. It is then easy to show that
for any ρ < ρ1 and κ > κ, we have e∆ < 0 and p∆ > 0. It also follows using equation (11) that m∆ < 0.
Equation (15) can be rewritten as:
¡
¢
[(−z + r)P − D] D − zP
¢
¡
>0
Ω = 2 (fD σ D ) + 2[P (e∆ σ D + eΛ )] =
ρ
2 KD + κz
2

2

A necessary condition for the existence of a real solution for e ≡ e∆ σ D + eΛ is
¡
¢
[(−z + r)P − D] D − zP
2
¡
¢
V (ρ, κ) =
− (fD σD ) ≥ 0.
ρ KD + κz

This condition is satisfied only if ρ (fD σ D )2 is suﬃciently small or risk aversion is below a certain threshold
ρ < ρ2 . We now take ρ < min(ρ1 , ρ2 ) = ρ. It is possible to show that e ≡ e∆ σ D + eΛ < 0 (see Appendix
E, corollary 2). Therefore we can rewrite equation (15) in linear form as
1p
e∆ σ D + eΛ = −
V (ρ, κ).
P

We define a vector e = (e∆ , eΛ , m∆ , mΛ )T and matrices

σD
1
0
¢
¢
¡
 ¡
1
 KD − καD
0
ρ D + αD P

A=
¢
¡
KD + κz
0
0

κσ D

κ

− ρ1 P σ D

34

0






¢
¡

1
D
−
zP

ρ
1
−ρP
0

(16)





b=



− P1


p
V (ρ, κ)


−K


0

0

so that the linear system Ae = b summarizes the 4 equations (11), (12), (13) and (16). We check that
det(A) 6= 0 in general. Hence there exists a unique solution for e given by e = A−1 b.

We now show that this implies a unique solution for the price coeﬃcients p = (p∆ , pΛ )T . Note that
Ω11 + Ω12 = (fD σ D )2 − [2(p∆ σ D + pΛ σ Λ ) + fD σ D ] P (e∆ σ D + eΛ )

is linear in p for a fixed vector e. The equations (9) and (10) are therefore of the form Cp = d, where
we define

C = 2P (e∆ σ D + eΛ )

Ã

c∆ σ D

c∆

cΛ σ D

cΛ

!

−

Ã

1 0
0 1

!

,

d =d0

Ã

c∆
cΛ

!

2

with d0 = (fD σ D ) − fD σ D P (e∆ σ D + eΛ ) , and additional parameters
c∆ =

e∆ [(αD + r)P − D]
,
(αD + r)Ω

cΛ =

eΛ [(−z + r)P − D]
.
(−z + r)Ω

We check that det(C) 6= 0 in general. We can therefore invert C and obtain a unique solution for

p. Finally, the coeﬃcient p0 < 0 is uniquely determined by equation (7) and e∆ and eΛ are uniquely
determined by (11) and (12). Hence the uniqueness of the incomplete market equilibrium for all ρ < ρ
and κ > κ (proposition 4).

Appendix D: Infinitely Elastic Supply and Complete Risk Sharing
Proposition 5:
For a completely price elastic currency supply (κ → ∞), the exchange rate is constant at E = 1. This

requires that e∆ = eΛ = 0. It follows that c∆ = cΛ = 0 and Cp = d implies p∆ = pΛ = 0. The latter
implies m∆ = mΛ = 0. Moreover, since Et (dEt dPtf ) = 0, and Ω21 = 0, we obtain steady state equity
holdings

K=

[Ω11 ]
1
= ,
(Ω11 + Ω22 )
2

which correspond to full equity risk sharing as in proposition 2.

Appendix E: Correlation Structure
Corollary 1:
The symmetry of the model implies Et (dEt dRth ) = −Et (dEt dRtf ∗ ). Furthermore,
Et (dEt dRth )dt = (e∆ σ D + eΛ ) [fD σ D + 2 (p∆ σ D + pΛ )] < 0
amounts to showing that e ≡ e∆ σ D + eΛ < 0 and fD σ D + 2 (p∆ σ D + pΛ ) > 0. We note that the latter
follows for some κ > κ since p∆ σ D + pΛ → 0 for κ → ∞ (see proposition 5) and fD σD > 0. To simplify
notations we define

m=

(KD − αD κ)P
,
(D + αD P )

35

n=

(KD + zκ)P
.
(D − zP )

Clearly, m < 0 and n < 0 under the parameter constraints of proposition 4. Moreover, m−n < 0, because
(for αD > −z) we find

£
¤
(D − zP )(KD − αD κ) − (D + αD P )(KD + zκ) = −(αD + z) Dκ + P KD < 0.

Substituting equations (11) and (12) into (13) implies

e∆ σ D [κ + m] + eΛ [κ + n] =

−KP σD
< 0.
(D + αD P )

Subtracting the term e∆ σ D (m − n) > 0 (because e∆ < 0) from the left hand side implies e∆ σD [κ + n] +

eΛ [κ + n] < 0 . Therefore

e∆ σ D + eΛ < 0,
since κ + n > 0 is trivially fulfilled (for κ > κ, K > 0, D > 0, P > 0). Hence Et (dEt dRth ) < 0.
Corollary 2:
The home and foreign excess pay-oﬀ processes (in local currency) and the exchange rate returns are
dRth
dRtf ∗
dEt

= αh0 dt + αhD Dth dt + αh∆ ∆t dt + αhΛ Λt dt + pF fD σ D dwth + (p∆ σ D + pΛ )dwt
= αf0 ∗ dt + αfD∗ Dtf dt + αf∆∗ ∆t dt + αfΛ∗ Λt dt + pF fD σ D dwtf − (p∆ σ D + pΛ )dwt
= −e∆ αD ∆t dt − eΛ αD Λt dt + (e∆ σ D + eΛ )dwt

and the relative payoﬀ follows as
dRtf ∗ − dRth = 2p∆ (αD + r)∆t dt + 2pΛ (−z + r)Λt dt − [fD σD + 2p∆ σ D + 2pΛ ] dwt .
Hence, we obtain a perfect negative return correlation,
h
i
−Corr dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P = −1 < 0.
Corollary 3:
The net foreign equity inflows are given by
dKtf − dKth∗ =

1
1
[αD m∆ ∆t dt − zmΛ Λt dt] − [m∆ σ D + mΛ σ Λ ] dwt .
ρ
ρ

Et (dEt , dKtf − dKth∗ ) = −
Hence

2κ
(e∆ σ D + eΛ )2 dt
P

h
i
−Corr dEt , (dKtf − dKth∗ ) = 1 > 0.

Appendix F: Binding Short-Sale Constraint
Define xt = (xh , xf , xb ) as the (1 × 3) vector of holdings in home equity, foreign equity, and foreign

bonds, respectively. Denote by dRt = (dRh , dRf , dRb ) the corresponding (1 × 3) excess pay-oﬀ vector.

E(dRth ), E(dRtf ) are given in Appendix C and E(dRtb ) ≈ −P dEt . We call Σ = E(dRTt dRt ) the (3 × 3)
36

covariance matrix of the excess payoﬀs. We show that the unconstrained maximization produces an
interior solution with xb < 0. This implies that the short sale constraint on foreign riskless bonds is
always binding in equilibrium.


σ pp


Σ = E(dRTt dRt ) = 
 −P σ pe + σ f h

2

−P σ pe + σ f h

P σ ee + 2P σ pe + σ pp
2

−P σ pe

P σ ee + P σ pe



−P σ pe


2
P σee + P σ pe 
 dt,
2
P σ ee

where we define E(dRth dRth ) = σ pp dt, E(dEt dRth ) = σpe dt, E(dRtf dRth ) = σ f h dt and E(dEt dEt ) = σ ee dt.

Inverting the symmetric covariance matrix allows us to compute the optimal unconstrained portfolio
holdings xt = (xh , xf , xb ).
In particular for symmetric steady state holdings xt = (1 − K, K, xb ) we obtain
2

2

2

2

2

ρ det Σ = [−P σ ee σ f h − 2P σ 2pe + P σ ee σ pp ](D − rP )dt + [P σ ee σ pp − P σ 2pe ]P σ pe dt
2

2

2

ρxb det Σ = [P σ f h σ ee + 2P σ 2pe − P σ pp σ ee ](D − rP )dt
2

2

+[−P σ pp σ ee − P σ pe σ pp + P σ 2pe − P σ f h σ pe ]P σ pe dt.

and taking the sum (σ pp + σ f h > 0) implies :
2

ρ(K + xb ) det Σ = −(σ pp + σ f h )P σ 2pe dt < 0.
Since Σ is positive semi-definite, ρK det Σ ≥ 0. It follows that xb < 0. Hence, the constraint xb ≥ 0 is in
fact binding and investors hold zero foreign bonds in the steady state.

37

Table 1:
Volatility Ratios of Exchange Rate and Stock Market Index Returns

Reported are volatility ratios of daily (log) exchange rate returns and daily (log) foreign stock market
index returns (in local currency) for various sample periods. The exchange rate Et is expressed in foreign
currency per dollar (dEt > 0 corresponds to a dollar appreciation), and the index f represents one of the
17 foreign OECD countries. The last row provides the result for the pooled data.

s

V ar(dEt )
V ar(dRtf ∗ /P )

1/1/80-12/31/01

1/1/90-12/31/01

1/1/95-12/31/01

(a)

(b)

(c)

Australia

0.5850

0.6494

0.7070

Austria

0.8205

0.6272

0.6270

Belgium-Luxembourg

0.8386

0.8053

0.6770

Denmark

0.6951

0.6351

0.5540

Finland

0.3690

0.3388

0.2472

France

0.6081

0.5450

0.4785

Germany

0.6211

0.5537

0.4721

Ireland

0.5968

0.5921

0.5361

Italy

0.4901

0.4688

0.4198

Japan

0.6279

0.5444

0.5855

Netherlands

0.6555

0.6553

0.5196

Norway

0.4517

0.4937

0.5023

Portugal

0.6423

0.6530

0.5980

Spain

0.5920

0.5156

0.4478

Sweden

0.4664

0.4424

0.3766

Switzerland

0.8450

0.7241

0.6441

U.K.

0.6599

0.6037

0.4747

Mean

0.6215

0.5793

0.5216

Std. Dev.

0.1328

0.1111

0.1159

Pooled Data

0.4780

0.4754

0.4116

38

Table 2:
Daily Correlations of Exchange Rate and Foreign Stock Market Excess Returns
Reported are correlations of daily (log) exchange rate returns, −dEt , and the daily (log) foreign stock

market index returns (in local currency) relative to the U.S. market index return (in dollars), (dRtf ∗ −

dRth )/P , for various sample periods. The exchange rate Et is expressed in foreign currency per dollar
(dEt > 0 corresponds to a dollar appreciation). The index f represents one of 17 OECD countries and
h the U.S. market. The model predicts −Corr(dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P ) < 0. We test if the correlation is

significantly diﬀerent from zero using robust standard errors and denote by ∗ ,∗∗ and

∗∗∗

significance at a

10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. The last row provides the result for the pooled data.

h
i
−Corr dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P

Australia
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Pooled Data

1/1/80-12/31/01

1/1/90-12/31/01

1/1/95-12/31/01

(a)

(b)

(c)

∗∗∗

∗

0.0242

−0.0291

−0.0201

0.0304

0.0558

−0.0186
∗∗∗

∗∗

−0.0388

−0.0438

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

−0.0368

−0.0495

−0.1026∗∗∗

−0.1638∗∗∗

−0.0954∗∗∗
−0.0805∗∗∗
−0.1003∗∗∗

−0.1847∗∗∗

−0.1021∗∗∗

−0.1448∗∗∗

∗∗

−0.0385

−0.0353

0.0636∗∗∗

−0.0452∗

−0.1263∗∗∗

−0.0883∗∗∗

∗∗∗

−0.0226

0.0723∗∗∗

−0.1760∗∗∗
−0.0739∗∗∗

−0.0539∗∗
0.0587∗∗

−0.1674∗∗∗

−0.2194∗∗∗

−0.2052∗∗∗

−0.0253

∗

−0.0140

−0.0629∗∗∗

−0.0956∗∗∗
−0.0339

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

−0.0645

−0.1301

−0.0677∗∗∗

−0.0510∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

−0.1632

−0.1240

−0.0128

−0.1116∗∗∗

−0.0163

−0.1655∗∗∗

−0.0173

−0.1024∗∗∗

−0.0545

−0.0780

−0.0746

−0.0530∗∗∗

−0.0761∗∗∗

−0.0735∗∗∗

0.0586

0.0728

39

−0.1042∗∗∗

0.0792

Table 3:
Monthly Correlations of Exchange Rate and Foreign Stock Market Excess Returns
Reported are correlations of monthly (log) exchange rate returns, −dEt , and the daily (log) foreign
stock market index returns (in local currency) relative to the U.S. market index return (in dollars),

(dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P , for various sample periods. The exchange rate Et is expressed in foreign currency per
dollar (dEt > 0 corresponds to a dollar appreciation). The index f represents one of 17 foreign OECD

countries and h the U.S. market. The model predicts −Corr[dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P ] < 0. We test if the

correlation is significantly diﬀerent from zero using robust standard errors and denote by ∗ ,∗∗ and

∗∗∗

significance at a 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. The last row provides the result for the pooled
data.

h
i
−Corr dEt , (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P

Australia
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Pooled Data

1/80-12/01

1/90-12/01

1/95-12/01

(a)

(b)

(c)

∗∗∗

0.0102

−0.1020

−0.1998∗∗

−0.1415

0.1796

∗∗∗

−0.2508

∗∗∗

−0.2179

−0.1580∗∗
−0.1230∗∗
−0.1409∗∗

−0.2710∗∗∗

−0.1308∗∗

0.6590

∗∗∗

−0.2569

∗∗∗

−0.3358∗∗∗

−0.3473∗∗∗

−0.3118∗∗∗

−0.2805∗∗∗

−0.2996∗∗∗

−0.2570∗∗∗
−0.2871∗∗∗
−0.1312

∗∗∗

−0.1761

∗

−0.1755∗∗

∗∗

−0.0264

−0.0763

−0.2287∗∗∗

−0.3679∗∗∗

−0.2810∗∗∗

∗

−0.1250

−0.1794∗∗

−0.0276

−0.3689∗∗∗

∗∗

−0.1352

−0.2934

−0.3403∗∗∗

−0.0936

−0.1507

−0.1787

−0.1341

∗∗∗

−0.2183

−0.2862∗∗∗
∗∗∗

−0.2318

−0.3059∗∗∗

−0.0669

−0.2090∗∗

−0.0930
−0.1376

∗∗∗

−0.2530∗∗∗

−0.1009

−0.2169

−0.2041

−0.1232∗∗∗

−0.2119∗∗∗

−0.1901∗∗∗

−0.1187

0.2248

40

−0.2778

0.1059

0.1012

Table 4:
Regressions of Quarterly Exchange Rate on Foreign Stock Market Excess Returns
Reported are regressions of quarterly (log) exchange rate returns on the quarterly (log) foreign stock
market excess return (in local currency) relative to the U.S. stock market return (in dollars) for the
period 1990-2002:
−dEt = α + β × (dRtf ∗ − dRth )/P + t .
The exchange rate Et is expressed in foreign currency per dollar (dEt > 0 corresponds to a dollar
appreciation). The index f represents one of 17 foreign OECD countries and h the U.S. market. The
model predicts β < 0. We denote by ∗ ,∗∗ and

∗∗∗

significance at a 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.

Newey West adjusted standard errors are reported in parentheses. The last row provides the result for
the pooled data.

Coeﬃcients (1/90-12/01)
α
Australia
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
Mean
Std. Dev.
Pooled Data

−0.0092

−0.0113

(0.0064)
(0.0078)

−0.0078

(0.0073)

−0.0089

(0.0087)

−0.0065
−0.0068

(0.0067)

(0.0068)

−0.0126

(0.0081)

−0.0004

−0.0052

−0.0091
−0.0116
−0.0113
−0.0095

(0.0070)

0.0030

(0.0014)

−0.0081

(0.0057)

0.0659

(0.0780)

0.2294

−0.0734

(0.0451)

0.0340

∗∗∗

(0.0783)

0.2447

∗∗∗

(0.0656)

0.2467

∗∗∗

(0.0604)

0.2646

−0.1423

(0.0972)

0.0462

−0.0530

(0.1483)

0.0151

−0.5273∗∗∗

(0.1121)

0.2677

∗∗∗

(0.0562)

0.0998

∗∗

(0.0740)

0.1226

∗∗∗

(0.0659)

0.3029

∗∗∗

(0.0969)

0.2809

∗∗

(0.1377)

0.1305

∗∗

(0.1348)

0.0587

−0.2523

(0.0947)

0.1477

0.1237

(0.0339)

0.1096

−0.2083∗∗∗

(0.0426)

0.1261

−0.2847

(0.0082)

(0.0075)

(0.1430)

∗∗∗

−0.1831

(0.0063)

−0.0083

−0.2613∗

−0.1646

(0.0069)

(0.0073)

0.1535

−0.3372

(0.0119)

−0.0045

0.0215

(0.0825)

−0.3385

(0.0066)

(0.0083)

(0.1336)

−0.3999

(0.0069)

−0.0009

−0.1124

−0.2046∗∗
−0.3266

(0.0065)

−0.0080
−0.0090

Adj R2

β

−0.2698

−0.3368
−0.2738

41

Table 5:
Correlation of Exchange Rate Returns and Net Foreign Equity Inflows
Reported are correlations of the exchange rate return, −dEt , and net foreign stock ownership increase

by U.S. residents, dKtf − dKth∗ , for various sample periods. Net foreign stock ownership increase (or net
foreign inflow) is defined as net U.S. purchases of foreign equities minus net foreign purchases of U.S.
equities, and normalized as a proportion of the average absolute level of net foreign stock ownership
increase by U.S. residents over the previous twelve months. The theory predicts −Corr(dEt , dKtf −

dKth∗ ) > 0. We test if the correlation is significantly diﬀerent from zero using robust standard errors and
denote by ∗ ,∗∗ and

∗∗∗

significance at a 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively. The last row provides the

result for the pooled data.

−Corr(dEt , dKtf − dKth∗ )

Australia
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Denmark
Finland

1/80-12/01

1/90-12/01

1/95-12/01

(a)

(b)

(c)

0.0112
−0.1155∗∗∗

−0.0478

−0.0010

0.2051∗∗∗

0.2740∗∗∗

0.1208

0.2541∗∗∗

0.3846∗∗∗

−0.0938∗∗

−0.0174

−0.0295

∗∗

∗∗

0.1814∗∗
0.1210

−0.0002

−0.0194

0.0473

France

0.1400

0.1539

Germany

−0.0872

−0.0412
0.1461

0.0769

−0.0071

0.0824

0.1936∗∗

0.0382

0.0292

−0.0745

−0.0265

−0.0620

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

0.1971

0.1582∗∗∗

Ireland
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal

0.0445

−0.0162

0.1844

0.0033

−0.0279
−0.0125

Spain

0.0586

0.1521∗∗∗

0.1939∗∗∗

Sweden

0.0235

0.0701

0.3620∗∗∗

0.1061∗

0.1608∗

0.3052∗∗∗

U.K.

0.0775

−0.0197

0.0716

Mean

0.0274

0.0754

0.1316

Std. Dev.

0.0824

0.1004

0.1413

−0.0026

0.0665∗∗∗

0.1145∗∗∗

Switzerland

Pooled Data

42

Table 6
Correlation Structure and Stock Market Development

Reported are the panel regressions of the quarterly realized correlations (QRCorrit ) between
foreign stock market excess returns and exchange rate returns on two alternative measures
of stock market development and fixed time eﬀects Dt for each quarter of the sample period
1990-2002:
I:
II:

QRCorrit = α + β × log(M Capit /GDPit ) +γDt +
QRCorrit = α + β × log(T V olit /GDPit )

+γDt +

it
it

Quarterly realized correlations are calculated based on daily equity market excess returns
for 17 OECD countries (i = 1, 2, ...17) relative to the U.S. equity market return and daily
exchange rate returns of the respective dollar exchange rate. Market development is alternatively measured by the ratio of quarterly capital market capitalization (M Capit ) to GDP
or the ratio of quarterly cross border equity trading volume with the U.S. (T V olit ) to GDP.
We report in parenthesis robust standard errors (Newey-West) and allow for first order serial
autocorrelation of the error. Fixed eﬀects are not reported.

Coeﬃcients (n = 724)
Specification
I:
II:

α
−0.0080
∗∗∗

0.1046

Adj R2

β
(0.0384)
(0.0403)

−0.0715∗∗∗
∗∗∗

−0.0199

43

(0.0231)

0.292

(0.0051)

0.295

Figure 1: The equity returns is plotted for investor risk aversion parameters 0.04 to 0.44 and an elasticity
of forex liquidity supply ranging from 20 to 100. The riskless rate is r = 0.05 and the parameters of the
dividend process are D = 1, αD = .25 and σ D = 0.1.

44

Figure 2: Plotted are the average monthly realized correlation of excess equity returns (defined as local
index returns over U.S. index returns) and the corresponding foreign exchange return (in dollar terms) as
a funtion of the log average market capitalization to GDP ratio for 17 OECD countries over the period
1995-2001.

45

