                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY

                                            Aubhik Khan
                                           Robert G. King
                                        Alexander L. Wolman

                                         Working Paper 9402
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9402


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




The authors thank Bernardino Adao, Orazio Attanasio, Isabel Correia, Bill Dupor, Chris Erceg, Steve
Meyer, Pedro Teles, Julia Thomas and Michael Woodford for useful conversations and comments. In
addition, we have benefited from presentations at the June 2000 Banco de Portugal Conference on
Monetary Economics; the NBER Summer Institute, the Society for Economic Dynamics meeting, the
Federal Reserve System Committee, Rutgers University, and the University of Western Ontario. The
views expressed here are the authors’ and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia or Richmond, the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Aubhik Khan, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including, © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy
Aubhik Khan, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman
NBER Working Paper No. 9402
December 2002
JEL No. E5

                                           ABSTRACT

        Optimal monetary policy maximizes the welfare of a representative agent, given frictions in
the economic environment. Constructing a model with two sets of frictions -- costly price adjustment
by imperfectly competitive firms and costly exchange of wealth for goods -- we find optimal
monetary policy is governed by two familiar principles. First, the average level of the nominal
interest rate should be sufficiently low, as suggested by Milton Friedman, that there should be
deflation on average. Yet, the Keynesian frictions imply that the optimal nominal interest rate is
positive. Second, as various shocks occur to the real and monetary sectors, the price level should
be largely stabilized, as suggested by Irving Fisher, albeit around a deflationary trend path. Since
expected inflation is roughly constant through time, the nominal interest rate must therefore vary
with the Fisherian determinants of the real interest rate. Although the monetary authority has
substantial leverage over real activity in our model economy, it chooses real allocations that closely
resemble those which would occur if prices were flexible. In our benchmark model, there is some
tendency for the monetary authority to smooth nominal and real interest rates.

Aubhik Khan                    Robert G. King                 Alexander L. Wolman
Research Department            Department of Economics        Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank           Boston University              Federal Reserve Bank
of Phildelphia                 270 Bay State Road             of Richmond
10 Independence Mall           Boston, MA 02215               P.O. Box 27622
Philadelphia, PA 19106         and NBER                       Richmond, VA 23261
aubhik.khan@phil.frb.org       rking@bu.edu                   alexander.wolman@rich.frb.org
1         Introduction
Three distinct intellectual traditions are relevant to the analysis of how optimal mon-
etary policy can and should regulate the behavior of the nominal interest rate, output
and the price level.
     The Fisherian view: Early in this century, Irving Fisher [1923,1911] argued that
the business cycle was “largely a dance of the dollar” and called for stabilization
of the price level, which he regarded as the central task of the monetary authority.
Coupled with his analysis of the determination of the real interest rate [1930] and
the nominal interest rate [1896], the Fisherian prescription implied that the nominal
interest rate would fluctuate with those variations in real activity which occur when
the price level is stable.
     The Keynesian view: Stressing that the market-generated level of output could
be ineﬃcient, Keynes [1936] called for stabilization of real economic activity by fiscal
and monetary authorities. Such stabilization policy typically mandated substantial
variation in the nominal interest rate when shocks, particularly those to aggregate
demand, buﬀeted the economic system. Prices were viewed as relatively sticky and
little importance was attached to the path of the price level.
     The Friedman view: Evaluating monetary policy in a long-run context with fully
flexible prices, Friedman [1969] found that an application of a standard microeco-
nomic principle of policy analysis — that social and private cost should be equated —
indicated that the nominal interest rate should be approximately zero. Later authors
used the same reasoning to conclude that the nominal interest rate should not vary
through time in response to real and nominal disturbances, working within flexible
price models of business fluctuations.1
     There are clear tensions between these three traditions if real forces produce ex-
pected changes in output growth that aﬀect the real interest rate. If the price level is
constant, then the nominal interest rate must mirror the real interest rate, violating
Friedman’s rule. If the nominal interest rate is constant, as Friedman’s rule suggests,
then there must be expected inflation or deflation to accommodate the movement
in the real rate, and thus Fisher’s prescription cannot be maintained. The variation
in inflation and nominal interest rates generally implied by Keynesian stabilization
conflicts with both the Friedman and Fisherian views.
     We construct a model economy that honors each of these intellectual traditions
and study the nature of optimal monetary policy. There are Keynesian features to the
economy: output is ineﬃciently low because firms have market power and fluctuations
reflect the fact that all prices cannot be frictionlessly adjusted. However, as in the
New Keynesian research on price stickiness that begins with Taylor [1980], firms are
forward-looking in their price setting and this has dramatic implications for the design
of optimal monetary policy. In our economy, there are also costs of converting wealth
into consumption. These costs can be mitigated by the use of money, so that there are
    1
        Chari and Kehoe [1999] survey these developments.


                                                  1
social benefits to low nominal interest rates as in Friedman’s analysis. The behavior
of real and nominal interest rates in our economy is governed by Fisherian principles.
    Following Ramsey [1927] and Lucas and Stokey [1983], we determine the alloca-
tion of resources which maximizes welfare of a representative agent given the resource
constraints of the economy and additional constraints that capture the fact that the
resource allocation must be implemented in a decentralized private economy. The
staggered nature of price-setting in our economy means that there are many imple-
mentation constraints that must be respected.2 We assume that there is full commit-
ment on the part of a social planner for the purpose of determining these allocations
and find that two familiar principles govern monetary policy in our economy.

   1. The Friedman prescription for deflation. The average level of the nominal
      interest rate should be suﬃciently low that there should be deflation on average,
      as suggested by Milton Friedman. Yet, the Keynesian frictions generally imply
      that there should be a positive nominal interest rate.

   2. The Fisherian prescription for eliminating price-level surprises. As shocks occur
      to the real and monetary sectors, the price level should be largely stabilized, as
      suggested by Irving Fisher, albeit around a deflationary trend path. (In modern
      language, there is only a small “base drift” for the price level path). Since
      expected inflation is relatively constant through time, the nominal interest rate
      must therefore vary with the Fisherian determinants of the real interest rate.
      However, there is some tendency for nominal and real interest rate smoothing
      relative to the outcomes in a flexible price economy.

    By contrast, we find less support for Keynesian stabilization policy. Although the
monetary authority has substantial leverage over real activity in our model economy,
it chooses allocations that closely resemble those which would occur if prices were
flexible. When departures from this flexible price benchmark occur under optimal
policy, they are not always in the traditional direction: in one example, a mone-
tary authority facing a high level of government demand chooses to contract private
consumption relative to the flexible price outcome, rather than stimulating it.
    The organization of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we outline the main
features of our economic model and define a recursive imperfectly competitive equi-
librium. In section 3, we describe the nature of the general optimal policy problem
that we solve, which involves a number of forward-looking constraints. We outline
how to treat this policy problem in an explicitly recursive form. Our analysis thus ex-
emplifies a powerful recursive methodology for analyzing optimal monetary policy in
richer models that could include capital formation, state dependent pricing and other
frictions such as eﬃciency wages or search. In section 4, we identify four distortions
   2
     Ireland [1996], Goodfriend and King [2001] and Adao, Correia and Teles [2001] use a similar
approach to study models with pre-set prices. These models contain only one or two implementation
constraints.


                                               2
present in our economic model, which are summary statistics for how its behavior
can diﬀer from a fully competitive, nonmonetary business cycle model. In section 5,
we discuss calibration of a quantitative version of our model, including estimation of
a money demand function.
    In section 6, we discuss the results which lead to the first principle for monetary
policy: the nominal interest rate should be set at an average level that implies de-
flation, but it should be positive. We show how this steady-state rate of deflation
depends on various structural features of the economy including the costs of transact-
ing with credit, which give rise to money demand, and the degree of price-stickiness.3
In our benchmark calibration, which is based on an estimated money demand function
using post-1958 observations, the extent of this deflation is relatively small, about
.75%. It is larger (about 2.3%) if we use estimates of money demand based also on
observations from 1948-1958; this longer sample includes intervals when interest rates
and velocity were both low, which Lucas [2000] argues are important for estimation
of the demand for money and the calculation of associated welfare cost measures. In
addition, a smaller degree of market power or less price stickiness make for a larger
deflation under optimal policy.
    In section 7, we describe the near-steady state dynamics of the model under
optimal policy. Looking across a battery of specifications, we find that these dynamics
display only minuscule variation in the price level. Thus, we document that there is
a robustness to the Fisherian conclusion in King and Wolman [1999], which is that
the price level should not vary greatly in response to a range of shocks under optimal
policy. In fact, the greatest price level variation that we find involves less than a 0.5%
change in the price level over twenty quarters, in response to a productivity shock
which brings about a temporary but large deviation of output from trend, in the sense
that the cumulative output deviation is more than 10% over the twenty quarters.
Across a range of experiments, output under optimal policy closely resembles output
which would occur if all prices were flexible and monetary distortions were absent. We
refer to the flexible price, nonmonetary model as our underlying real business cycle
framework. Although the deviations of quantities under optimal policy from their real
business cycle counterparts are small, because these deviations are temporary, they
give rise to larger departures of real interest rates from those in the RBC solution.
We relate the nature of these departures to the nature of constraints on the monetary
authority’s policy problem. Section 8 concludes.


2       The model
The model incorporates elements from two important strands of macroeconomic re-
search. First, money is a means of economizing on the use of costly alternative media
    3
     By the steady state, we mean the point to which the economy converges under optimal policy
if there is no uncertainty.



                                              3
as in the classic analyses of Baumol [1952] and Tobin [1956].4 Second, firms are im-
perfect competitors facing infrequent opportunities for price adjustment as in much
recent New Keynesian research beginning with Taylor [1980] and Calvo [1983]. To
facilitate the presentation of these mechanisms, we view the private sector as divided
into three groups of agents. First, there are households which buy final consumption
goods and supply factors of production. These households also trade in financial
markets for assets, including a credit market, and acquire cash balances which can be
exchanged for goods. Second, there are retailers, which sell final consumption goods
to households and buy intermediate products from firms. Retailers can costlessly ad-
just prices.5 Third, there are producers, who create the intermediate products that
retailers use to produce final consumption goods. These firms have market power and
face only infrequent opportunities to adjust prices.
    The two sources of uncertainty are the level of total factor productivity, a, and the
level of real government purchases, g, which is assumed to be financed with lump-sum
taxes. These variables depend on an exogenous state variable ς, which evolves over
time as a Markov process, with the transition probability denoted Υ (ς, ·). That is, if
the current state is ς then the probability of the future state being in a given set of
states B is Υ (ς, B) = Pr {ς 0 ∈ B | ς = ς}. We thus write total factor productivity as
a (ς) and real government spending as g(ς).
    In this section, we describe a recursive equilibrium, with households and firms
solving dynamic optimization problems given a fixed, but potentially complicated,
rule for monetary policy that allows it to respond to all of the relevant state variables
of the economy, which are of three forms. Ignoring initially the behavior of the
monetary authority, the model identifies two sets of state variables. First, there
are the exogenous state variables just discussed. Second, since some prices are sticky,
predetermined prices are part of the relevant history of the economy. These variables,
s, evolve through time according to a multivalent function Γ where s0 = Γ (s, p0 , π),
with p0 and π being endogenous variables further described below. We allow the
monetary authority to respond to ς and s, but also to a third set of state variables
φ, which evolves according to φ0 = Φ(ς, s, φ). In a recursive equilibrium, p0 and
π are functions of the monetary rule, so that the states s evolve according to s0 =
Γ (s, p0 (ς, s, φ), π(ς, s, φ)) ; we will sometimes write this as s0 = Γ(s, φ, ς). Hence, there
is a vector of state variables σ = (s, φ, ς) that is relevant for agents, resulting from
the stochastic nature of productivity and government spending; from the endogenous
dynamics due to sticky prices; and, potentially, from the dynamic nature of the
monetary rule.
   4
     More specifically, money economizes on credit costs as in Prescott [1987], Dotsey and Ireland
[1996] and Lacker and Schreft [1996].
   5
     The retail sector can be eliminated, but including it simplifies the presentation of the model.




                                                 4
2.1      Households
Households have preferences for consumption and leisure, represented by the time-
separable expected utility function,
                                            ∞
                                     Et           β j u(ct+j , lt+j )                                 (1)
                                            j=0

The period utility function u(c, l) is assumed to be increasing in consumption ct and
leisure lt , strictly concave and diﬀerentiable as needed. Households divide their time
allocation — which we normalize to one unit — into leisure, market work nt , and
transactions time ht so that nt + lt + ht = 1.
    Accumulation of wealth: Households begin each period with a portfolio of claims
on the intermediate product firms, holding a previously determined share θt of the
per capita value of these firms.6 This portfolio generates current nominal dividends
of θt Zt and has nominal market value θt Vt , where Vt is measured on a pre-dividend
basis for reasons that will be discussed further below.7 They also begin each period
with a stock of nominal bonds left over from last period which have matured and
have market value Bt . Finally, they begin each period with nominal debt arising
from consumption purchases last period, in the amount Dt . So, their nominal wealth
is θt Vt + Bt − Dt − Tt , where Tt is the amount of a lump sum tax paid to the
government. With this nominal wealth and current nominal wage income Wt nt , they
may purchase money Mt , buy current period bonds in amount Bt+1 , or buy more
claims on the intermediate product firms, each unit of which costs them (Vt − Zt ).
Thus, they face the constraint
                       1
            Mt +           Bt+1 + θt+1 (Vt − Zt ) ≥ θt Vt + Bt − Dt − Tt + Wt nt .
                    1 + Rt
We convert this nominal budget constraint into a real one, using a numeraire Pt . At
present this is simply an abstract measure of nominal purchasing power but we are
more specific later about its economic interpretation. Denoting the rate of inflation
between period t − 1 and period t as π t = PPt−1
                                              t
                                                 − 1, the real flow budget constraint is

                   1                                      bt     dt
         mt +          bt+1 + θt+1 (vt − zt ) ≤ θt vt +       −       − τ t + wt nt ,
                1 + Rt                                  1 + πt 1 + πt
   6
     Since this is a representative agent model, there are many equivalent ways of setting up the
financial markets in which households can trade. One possibility would be to specify that households
can trade Arrow-Debreu securities which pay oﬀ a real unit in a single state of the world. If
the probability-normalized real price of such a security on future state σ 0 is ρ(σ, σ 0 ) in state σ,
then a household would value the cash flows of the ith firm according to the recursion v(i, σ) =
z(i, σ) + E{ρ(σ, σ 0 )v(i, σ 0 )}. It would therefore be possible, as Michael Woodford has stressed to us,
to derive rather than impose the firm valuation equations that we use in this paper.
   7
     Zt and Vt are aggregates of the dividends and values of individual firms in a sense that we will
also make more precise below.


                                                      5
with lower case letters representing real quantities when this does not produce nota-
tional confusion (real lump sum taxes are τ t = PTtt ).8
    Money and transactions: Although households have been described as purchasing
a single aggregate consumption good, we now reinterpret this as involving many
individual products — technically, a continuum of products on the unit interval — as
in many studies following Lucas [1980]. Each of these products is purchased from a
separate retail outlet at a price P t . Each customer buys a fraction ξ t of goods with
credit and the remainder with cash. Hence, the households’ demand for nominal
money satisfies Mt = (1 − ξ t )P t ct . Nominal debt is correspondingly Dt+1 = ξ t P t ct ,
which must be paid next period. Following our convention of using lower case letters
to define real quantities, define pt ≡ PPtt . The real money demand of the household
takes the form mt = (1 − ξ t )pt ct and similarly dt+1 = ξ t pt ct .
    We think of each final consumption good purchase having a random fixed time
cost, which must be borne if credit is used. This cost is known after the customer
has decided to purchase a specific amount of the product, but before the customer
has decided whether to use money or credit to finance the purchase. Let F (·) be
the cumulative distribution function for time costs. If credit is used for a particular
good, then there are time costs ν and the largest time cost is given by ν̄ t = F −1 (ξ t ).
                                    F −1 (ξ t )
Thus, total time costs are ht = 0               ν dF (ν) . The household uses credit when its
time cost is below the critical level given by F −1 (ξ t ) and uses money when the cost
is higher.

2.1.1    Maximization Problem
Although the household’s individual state vector can be written as its holdings of each
asset (θ, b, d), it is convenient here — as in many other models — to aggregate these
                                             b−d
assets into a measure of wealth $ = vθ + 1+π     − τ . We let U be the value function, the
indirect lifetime utility function of a household. The recursive maximization problem
is then
  8
    For example mt = M  Pt and vt , zt and wt are similarly defined. The two exceptions are the
                         t


predetermined variables Bt and Dt , where bt = PBt−1
                                                  t
                                                     and dt = PDt
                                                               t−1
                                                                   .




                                              6
                   U ($; σ) =         max              {u (c, l) + βEU ($0 ; σ 0 ) |σ}      (2)
                                ξ,c,l,n,m,θ0 ,b0 ,d0

                                             subject to
                                  1 0
                            m+       b + θ0 (v − z) ≤ $ + wn                                (3)
                                 1+R
                                     n=1−l−h                                                (4)
                                                  F −1 (ξ)
                                    h=                       ν dF (ν)                       (5)
                                              0
                                          m = (1 − ξ)pc                                     (6)
                                            d0 = ξpc                                        (7)

The right-hand side of (3) is financial wealth plus labor income ($ + wn); the left-
hand side is purchases of money, discount bonds, and shares (the net cost of stock is
its ex-dividend price). The household is assumed to view w, v, R, z, p, π and τ = T /P
as functions of the state vector, σ. The conditional expectation βEU ($0 ; ς 0 , s0 , φ0 ) |σ}
is equal to U ($0 ; ς 0 , s0 , φ0 ) Υ (ς, dς 0 )}, taking as given the laws of motion s0 = Γ(σ)
                                                                             0 −d0
and φ0 = Φ(σ) discussed above and the definition $0 = v 0 θ0 + b1+π                   0
                                                                                 0 − τ . We will

return to the discussion of the determinants and consequences of inflation later.

2.1.2    Eﬃciency conditions
We consolidate the household’s constraints (3) - (7) into a single constraint, by elim-
inating hours worked, as is conventional. We also substitute out for money, using
m = (1 − ξ)pc, and future debt, using d0 = ξpc to simplify this constraint further. Let
λ, which has the economic interpretation as the shadow value of wealth, represent
the multiplier for this combined constraint. Then, we use the envelope theorem to
derive D1 U ($, ; σ) = λ.9 We can then state the household’s eﬃciency conditions as

                                                                          p
                      c : D1 u(c, l) = λ (1 − ξ) p + βE[λ0                     ξ]|σ         (8)
                                                                        1 + π0
                                                                     p
                     ξ : λpc = λwF −1 (ξ) + βE[λ0                         c]|σ              (9)
                                                                   1 + π0
                      l : D2 u(c, l) = wλ                                                  (10)
                             1                 1
                     b0 :       λ = βE[λ0            ]|σ                                   (11)
                          1+R             1 + π0
                     θ0 : (v − z)λ = βE [λ0 v 0 ] |σ                                       (12)
  9
    We use “envelope theorem” as short-hand for analyses following Benveniste and Scheinkman
[1979], which supply value function derivatives under conditions that ensure diﬀerentiability.




                                                        7
as well as (3)-(7). Condition (8) states that the marginal utility of consumption must
be equated to the full cost of consuming, which is a weighted average of the costs
of purchasing goods with currency and credit. Condition (9) equates the marginal
benefit of raising ξ to its net marginal cost, the latter being the sum of the current time
cost and the future repayment cost. Condition (10) is the conventional requirement
that the marginal utility of leisure is equated to the real wage rate times the shadow
value of wealth. The last two conditions specify that holdings of stocks and bonds
are eﬃcient.

2.2     Retailers
Retailers create units of the final good according to a constant elasticity of substitu-
tion aggregator of a continuum of intermediate products, indexed on the unit interval,
i ∈ [0, 1].10 Retailers create q units of final consumption according to
                                                                     ε
                                                     ε−1            ε−1
                                   q=         q(i)    ε    di             ,                 (13)

where ε is a parameter. In our economy, however, there will be groups of intermediate
goods-producing firms which will all charge the same price for their good within a
period and they can be aggregated easily. Let the j-th group have fraction ω j and
charge a nominal price Pj . Then the retailer allocates its demands for intermediates
across the J categories, solving the following problem:
                                                             J−1
                                       min (1 + R)                   ω j pj qj              (14)
                                         qj
                                                             j=0
                                       subject to
                                        J−1
                                                       ε−1      ε
                               q = (          ω j qj    ε    ) ε−1 ,                        (15)
                                        j=0

              P
where pj = Pj is the relative price of the j-th set of intermediate inputs. Retailers
view R and {pj }J−1
                 j=0 as functions of σ. The nominal interest factor (1 + R) aﬀects the
retailer’s expenditures because, as is further explained below, the retailer must borrow
to finance current production. This cost minimization problem leads to intermediate
input demands of a constant elasticity form

                                         qj = p−ε
                                               j  q̄,                                       (16)

where q is the retailer’s supply of the composite good. Cost minimization also implies
a nominal unit cost of production — an intermediate goods price level of sorts — given
  10
    Note that this continuum of intermediate goods firms is distinct from the continuum of retail
outlets at which consumers purchase final goods.

                                                 8
by
                                        J−1
                                                   (1−ε)     1
                                 P =[         ω j Pj       ] 1−ε .                   (17)
                                        j=0

This is the price index which we use as numeraire in the analysis above. As the retail
sector is competitive and all goods are produced according to the same technology, it
follows that the final goods price must satisfy P = (1 + R (σ))P and that the relative
price of consumption goods is given by

                                   p (σ) = 1 + R (σ) .                               (18)
Since they have no market power or specialized factors, retailers earn no profits.
Hence, their market value is zero and does not enter in the household budget con-
straint. At the same time, they are borrowers, making their expenditures at t and
receiving their revenues at t+1. That is: for each unit of sales, the retail firm receives
revenues in money or credit. Each of these are cash flows which are eﬀectively in date
t+1 dollars. If the firm receives money, then it must hold it “overnight.” If the firm
takes credit, then it is paid only at date t+1 with no explicit interest charges, as is
the practice with credit cards in many countries.

2.3    Intermediate goods producers
The producers of intermediate products are assumed to be monopolistic competitors
and face irregularly timed opportunities for price adjustment. For this purpose, we
use a general stochastic adjustment model due to Levin [1991], as recently exposited
in the Dotsey, King and Wolman [1999] analysis of state dependent pricing. In this
setup, a firm which has held its price fixed for j periods will be permitted to adjust
with probability αj . With a continuum of firms, the fractions ω j are determined
by the recursions ω j = (1 − αj )ω j−1 for j = 1, 2, ...J − 1 and the condition that
ω 0 = 1 − J−1j=1 ω j .
    Each intermediate product i on the unit interval is produced according to the
production function
                                     y(i) = an(i),                                (19)
with labor being paid a nominal wage rate of W and being flexibly reallocated across
sectors. Nominal marginal cost for all firms is accordingly W/a. Let p (i) ≡ PP(i) be
the i−th intermediate goods producer’s relative price and w = WP
                                                                 , the real wage, so
that real marginal cost is ψ = w/a.
    Intermediate goods firms face a demand given by

                                   y(i) = p(i)−ε q(σ),                               (20)

with the aggregate demand measure being q (σ) = c (σ) + g(ς), i.e., the sum of
household and government demand.

                                               9
2.3.1   Maximization Problem
Intermediate goods firms maximize the present discounted value of their real monopoly
profits given the demand structure and the stochastic structure of price adjustment.
Using (19) and (20), current profits may be expressed as

                                                                      w(σ)
          z (p (i) ; σ) = p (i) y (i) − w (σ) n (i) = p (i)−ε q (σ) p (i) − .      (21)
                                                                      a(ς)
All firms that are adjusting at date t will choose the same nominal price, which we
call P0 , which implies a relative price p0 = PP0 . The mechanical dynamics of relative
prices are simple to determine. Given that a nominal price is set at a level Pj , then
the current relative price is pj = Pj /P . If no adjustment occurs in the next period,
then the future relative price satisfies
                                                pj
                                     p0j+1 =         .                             (22)
                                             1 + π0
A price-setting intermediate goods producer solves the following maximization prob-
lem:
                                            λ(σ 0 )
     v 0 (σ) = max [z (p0 ; σ) + E{β                α1 v 0 (σ 0 ) + (1 − α1 )v 1 (p01 , σ0 ) }|σ],      (23)
                   p0                       λ(σ)
                                                                    P0
with the maximization taking place subject to p01 = P10 = PP0 PP0 = p0 /(1 + π 0 ). A few
comments about the form of this equation are in order. First, the discount factor used
by firms equals households’ shadow value of wealth in equilibrium, so we impose that
requirement here. Second, as is implicit in our profit function, the firm is constrained
by its production function and by its demand curve, which depends on aggregate
consumption and government demand. Third, the firm knows that at date t + 1, with
probability α1 it will adjust its price and the current pricing decision will be irrelevant
to its market value (v 0 ). With probability 1 − α1 it will not adjust its price and the
current price will be maintained, resulting in a market value v 1 . Our notation is that
the superscript j in v j indicates the value of a firm which is maintaining its price fixed
at the level set at date t − j, i.e., Pj,t = P0,t−j . Thus, we have for j = 1, . . . , J − 2,

                                      λ(σ 0 )
   v j (pj , σ) = z (pj ; σ) + E{β            [αj+1 v 0 (σ 0 ) + (1 − αj+1 )v j+1 (p0j+1 , σ 0 )]}|σ,   (24)
                                      λ(σ)
               p
with p0j+1 = 1+πj
                  0 . Finally, in the last period of price fixity, all firms know that they

will adjust for certain so that

                                                  λ(σ 0 ) 0 0
                        v J−1 (pJ−1 , σ) = z (pJ−1 ; σ) + E{β
                                                         [v (σ )]}|σ.                  (25)
                                                  λ(σ)
These expressions imply that the aggregate portfolio value and dividends, denoted
vt and zt in the household’s problem, are determined as vt = J−1           j
                                                                  j=0 ω j v (pj,t , σ) and


                                                    10
       J−1
zt = j=0   ω j z(pj,t , σ). Our decision to earlier write the stock market portfolio in pre-
dividend value terms was based on having a ready match with the natural dynamic
program for the firm’s pricing decisions.

2.3.2      Eﬃciency conditions
In order to satisfy (23), the optimal pricing decision requires p0 to solve

                                              λ0                                1
                 0 = D1 z (p0 ; σ) + βE          (1 − α1 )D1 v 1 (p01 ; σ 0 )          |σ.        (26)
                                              λ                               1 + π0

From (21), marginal profits are given by

                                                                   w(σ) −ε−1
                       D1 z (pj ; σ) = q (σ) (1 − ε) p−ε
                                                      j +ε             p     .                    (27)
                                                                   a(σ) j

The optimal pricing condition (26) states that, at the optimum, a small change in
price has no eﬀect on the present discounted value. The presence of future inflation
reflects the fact that p01 = p0 /(1 + π 0 ), so that when the firm perturbs its relative
price by dp0 , it knows that it is also changing its one period ahead relative price by
 1/(1 + π 0 ) dp0 .11 Equations (24) imply


                                              λ0                                      1
       D1 v j (pj ; σ) = D1 z (pj ; σ) + βE      (1 − αj+1 )D1 v j+1 (p0j+1 ; σ 0 )          |σ   (28)
                                              λ                                     1 + π0

for j = 1, . . . , J − 2, while (25) implies

                                D1 v J−1 (pJ−1 ; σ) = D1 z (pJ−1 ; σ) .                           (29)

2.4       Defining the state vector s
We next consider the price component of the aggregate state vector. The natural state
is the vector of previously determined nominal prices, [P1,t P2,t ... PJ−1,t ]. Given these
predetermined nominal prices and the nominal price P0,t set by currently adjusting
                                                 1
                                          (1−ε) 1−ε
firms, the price level Pt is [ J−1
                                 j=0 ω j Pj,t  ] . However, our analysis concerns (i)
households and firms that are concerned about real objectives as described above; and
(ii) a monetary authority who seeks to maximize a real objective as described below.
Accordingly, neither is concerned about the absolute level of prices in the initial period
  11
    An individual firm chooses p0 (i) taking as given the actions of all other firms — including other
adjusting firms — as these aﬀect the price level, aggregate demand and so forth. Specifically, firm i
views the actions of other adjusting firms as p0 (σ), with a law of motion for σ described earlier. In
an equilibrium, there is a fixed point in that the decision rule of the individual firm p(i, σ) is equal
to the function p0 (σ).


                                                   11
of our model (i.e., the time at which the monetary policy rule is implemented). For
this reason, we opt to use an alternative real state vector that captures the influence
of predetermined nominal prices, but is compatible with any initial scale of nominal
prices.
    There are a variety of choices that one might make in defining this real state
vector, with the decision based on how completely one seeks to cast the optimal
policy problem in terms of real quantities and computational considerations.12,13 In
the current analysis, we instead use the simplest and most direct state vector: a
vector of lagged relative prices.
    The relative prices that will prevail in the economy at date t are p0,t , p1,t , ..., pJ−1,t .
Since nominal prices are sticky (Pj,t = Pj−1,t−1 ), it follows that

                                          Pj,t   Pj−1,t−1 Pt−1   pj−1,t−1
                                 pj,t =        =               =          ,                         (30)
                                          Pt      Pt−1 Pt         1 + πt
for j = 1, 2, ...J − 1. Accordingly, given current inflation, we can account for the
relative prices of sticky prices goods so long as we know pj,t−1 for j = 0, 1, 2, ...J − 2.
These J − 1 lagged relative prices thus are chosen to be our real state vector, so that
st−1 = [p0,t−1 ....pJ−2,t−1 ].

2.5        Monetary policy
Monetary policy determines the nominal quantity of money. However, just as we
normalized lagged nominal prices by the past price level, it is convenient to similarly
deflate the money stock. With this normalization, we denote the policy rule by
M (σ t ) , and the nominal money supply is given by

                                               Mt = M (σ t ) · Pt−1 .                               (31)
                                                         Pt−1       M(σ t ) 14
Real balances are given by mt = M (σ t ) ·                Pt
                                                                =   1+π t
                                                                           .
  12
     For example, King and Wolman [1999] use a state vector that is a vector of lagged real demand
ratios, cj,t−1 /cj+1,t−1 for j = 0, 1, ...J − 3, in order to cast the monetary authority’s problem as
solely involving real quantities.
                                                                                                      J−2
  13
       Computational considerations might lead one to (i) make the state vector st−1 = Pj,t /Pt
                                                                                                      j=1
                                          1
                  1     J−1        (1−ε) 1−ε
where Pt =    [ 1−ω 0   h=1   ω j Pj,t ]   is an index of the predetermined part of the price level; and
(ii) use related manipulations to eliminate the inflation rate as a current decision variable for the
monetary authority. The computational advantage derives from the fact that there are then only
J − 2 elements of the state vector, whereas there are J − 1 elements with the approach presented in
the text.
   14
      It is clear from (31) that if the policy rule involves no response to the state, then this generally
does not make the nominal money supply constant, because a constant M () implies Mt = M · Pt−1 ,
meaning that the path of the money supply is proportional to the past price level. If the monetary
authority makes the nominal money supply constant, it must make the past price level part of the
state vector, because a constant money supply M implies M (σ t ) = M/Pt−1 .


                                                        12
    With the general function M (σ t ) we are not taking a stand on the targets or
instruments of monetary policy. This notation makes clear, however, that the mon-
etary authority’s optimal decisions will depend on the same set of state variables as
the decisions of the private sector.

2.6     Recursive equilibrium
We now define a recursive equilibrium in a manner that highlights the key elements
of the above analysis.15
    Definition. For a given monetary policy function M (σ), a Recursive Equilibrium
is a set of relative price functions λ (σ), w (σ), {pj (σ)}J−1
                                                           j=0 , and p (σ); an interest rate
function R (σ); an inflation function π(σ); aggregate production, q (σ); dividends,
z (σ); intermediate goods producers’ profits {zj (σ)}J−1  j=0 ; value functions U (·) and

{v j (·)}J−1
         j=0 ; household decision rules         ξ (σ) , c (σ) , l (σ) , n(σ), m (σ) , θ0 (σ) , b0 (σ) ,
                                                                    J−1
d0 (σ) ; intermediate goods producers’ relative quantities, {qj (σ)}j=0 ; intermediate
                                            J−1
goods producers’ relative prices, {pj (σ)}j=0   and a law of motion for the aggregate
state σ = (ς, s, φ), ς ∼ Υ (ς, ·), s = Γ(σ) and φ0 = Φ(σ) such that: (i) households
                      0              0

solve (2) - (7), (ii) retailers solve (14) - (15), (iii) price-setting intermediate goods
producers solve (22) - (25), and (iv) markets clear.
    While this definition describes the elements of the discussion above that are im-
portant to equilibrium, it is useful to note that a positive analysis of this equilibrium
can be carried out without determining the value functions U (·) and {v j (·)}J−1j=0 , but
by simply relying on the first-order conditions. We exploit this feature in our analysis
of optimal policy.


3      Optimal policy approach
Our analysis of optimal policy is in the tradition of Ramsey [1927] and draws heavily
on the modern literature on optimal policy in dynamic economies which follows from
Lucas and Stokey [1983]. In this paper, as in King and Wolman [1999], we adapt this
approach to an economy which has real and nominal frictions. Here those frictions
are monopolistic competition, price stickiness and the costly conversion of wealth
into goods, with the cost aﬀected by money holding. The outline of our multi-stage
approach is as follows. First, we have already determined the eﬃciency conditions
of households and firms that restrict dynamic equilibria, as well as the various bud-
  15
      The household’s real budget constraint (3) is not included in the equations that restrict equi-
librium, as in many other models, since it is implied by market clearing and the government budget
constraint. In equilibrium, θ = 1, b − d = 0, and τ = g so that $ = v − g. Thus, current inflation,
π t , does not enter into the household’s decisions. Howevever, it does enter into the dynamics of
relative prices.



                                                 13
get and resource constraints. Second, we manipulate these equations to determine
a smaller subset of restrictions that govern key variables, in particular eliminating
M (σ t ) so that it is clear that we are not taking a stand on the monetary instrument.
Third, we maximize expected utility subject to these constraints. Fourth, we find
the absolute prices and monetary policy actions which lead these outcomes to be the
result of dynamic equilibrium.16

3.1       Organizing the restrictions on dynamic equilibria
We begin by organizing the equations of section 2 so that they are a set of constraints
on the policy maker. To aid in this process and in the statement of the optimal
monetary policy problem as an infinite horizon dynamic optimization problem in the
next subsection, it becomes useful to reintroduce time subscripts throughout this
section.

3.1.1      Restrictions implied by technology and relative demand
                                                                                       J−1
The first constraint is associated with production. Since nt =                         j=0   ω j nj,t , (19) gives
                                                 J−1
                                     at nt = (         ω j p−ε
                                                            j,t )(ct + gt ).                                (32)
                                                 j=0

The second constraint is associated with the aggregation of intermediate goods in
(13),
                                                 J−1
                                                                   1
                                         1=[           ω j p1−ε
                                                            j,t ]
                                                                  1−ε .                                     (33)
                                                 j=0


3.1.2      Restrictions implied by state dynamics
With staggered pricing, the dynamics of the states is just given by (30). Defining
the state vector st = [p0t .... pJ−2,t ], we can write its dynamic equation in the form
discussed above, st = Γ(st−1 , p0t , π t ) where Γ takes the form

                        s1t                                      s1,t−1            1
                        s2,t                                     s2,t−1            0
                                          0        0
                         .       =      1                           .          +   .    p0,t
                                       1+π t
                                               · I 00
                         .                                          .              .
                      sJ−1,t                                   sJ−1,t−1            0

where I is an identity matrix with J − 2 rows and columns and 0 is a row vector with
J − 2 elements
 16
      We rule out policies that involve randomization, in contrast to Bassetto [1999] and Dupor [2002].


                                                       14
3.1.3   Restrictions implied by household behavior
The household’s decision rules are implicitly restricted by the equations (3) - (7)
and (8) - (12). A planner must respect all of these conditions, but it is convenient
for us to use some of them to reduce the number of choice variables, while retaining
others. In particular, combining (8), (11) and (18), we find that the household requires
that the marginal utility of consumption is equated to a measure of the full price of
consumption, which depends on λt as is conventional, but also on Rt and ξ t because
money or credit must be used to obtain consumption:

                            D1 u (ct , lt ) = λt [1 + Rt (1 − ξ t )] .                  (34)

Combining (9), (10), (11) and (18), the eﬃcient choice between money and credit as
a means of payment is restricted by

                                                D2 u(ct , lt ) −1
                        Rt ct = wt F −1 (ξ t ) =              F (ξ t ) ,             (35)
                                                    λt
which indicates how credit use is related to market prices and quantities. Since
ξ = 1 − PMc , this restriction implicitly defines the demand for money, PMc = 1 − F ( Rc
                                                                                      w
                                                                                         ),
as a function of a small number of variables, which is the basis for our empirical work
below.
    The nominal interest rate enters into each of these equations but, since it is an
intertemporal price, it also enters in the bond eﬃciency condition (11),
                                     1                  1
                             λt          = βEt [λt+1           ],                       (36)
                                  1 + Rt             1 + π t+1

which is a forward-looking constraint, reflecting the intertemporal nature of (11).
   Combining equations (4) and (5) to eliminate transactions time, we can write
                                             F −1 (ξ t )
                       nt = 1 − lt −                       νdF (ν) = n(lt , ξ t ),      (37)
                                         0
so that only lt and ξ t are choices for the optimal policy problem.
    We do not ignore the other household conditions, but rather use them to construct
variables which do not enter directly in the optimal policy problem, but are relevant
for the decentralization, such as real money demand as mt = (1−ξ t )pt ct = m(ct , lt , ξ t )
and real transactions debt as dt+1 = ξ t pt ct = d(ct , lt , ξ t ).

3.1.4   Restrictions implied by firm behavior
Price-setting behavior of intermediate good producers is captured by the marginal
value functions (26) - (29) which we rewrite by multiplying by λt ω j pj,t . This yields



                                                   15
                         0 = ω 0 x(p0,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) + βEt χ1,t+1                 (38)
                      χj,t = ω j x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) + βEt χj+1,t+1               (39)
                            χJ−1,t = ω J−1 x(pJ−1,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ),                 (40)

where (39) holds for j = 1, 2, ...J − 2. In these expressions, the x function is defined
as
                                                                           D2 u (ct , lt ) −ε
        x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) = (ct + gt ) λt (1 − ε) p1−ε
                                                                   j,t + ε                pj,t , (41)
                                                                               at
and the χj,t are defined as

                                   χj,t = ω j λt pj,t D1 v j (pj,t ) .

Note that the function x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) is simply shorthand while, by contrast,
the variables χj,t actually replace the expression ω j λt pj,t D1 v j (pj,t ).

3.2     The optimal policy problem
The monetary policy authority maximizes (1) subject to the constraints just derived,
which include a number of constraints that introduce expectations of future variables
into the time t constraint set. One way to proceed is to define a Lagrangian for
the dynamic optimization problem, with the result being displayed in Table 1. In
this Lagrangian, dt is a vector of decisions that includes real quantities, some other
elements, inflation (π t ) and the nominal interest rate (Rt ). Similarly, Λt is a vector
of Lagrange multipliers chosen at t. This problem also takes the initial exogenous
(ς 0 ) and endogenous states s−1 = (sj,−1 )J−2   j=1 as given. Finally, it embeds the various
definitions above, including x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) etc.
      In Table 1, there are two types of constraints to which we attach multipliers.
The first three lines correspond to the forward-looking constraints: (36), the Fisher
equation, and (38) - (40), which are the implementation constraints arising from
dynamic monopoly pricing. We stress these constraints by listing them first in Table
1 and in other tables below. The remainder are conventional constraints which either
describe point-in-time restrictions on the planner’s choices or the evolution of the real
state variables that the planner controls.
      One can then find the first order conditions to this optimization problem. Because
the problem is dynamic and has fairly large dimension at each date, there are many
such conditions. Further, as is well-known since the work of Kydland and Prescott
[1977], such optimal policy problems under commitment with forward-looking con-
straints are inherently nonstationary. As an example of this aspect of the policy
problem, consider the first order condition with respect to χj,t for some j satisfying



                                                   16
0 < j < J − 1 which would arise if uncertainty is momentarily assumed absent. At
date 0, this condition takes the form

                                          0 = −φj,0

but for later periods, it takes the form

                                    0 = {φj−1,t−1 − φj,t }

Notice that the diﬀerence between these two expressions is the presence of a lagged
multiplier, so that they would be identical if φj−1,−1 were added to the right-hand
side of the former.

3.2.1    A stationary reformulation of the optimal policy problem
We now introduce lagged multipliers corresponding to the forward-looking constraints
in the initial period. In doing so, we generalize the Lagrangian to that displayed in
Table 2, eﬀectively making the problem stationary.
    The Fisher equation (36): For each date s, λs appears in period s − 1 via the
                              1                                         1
expression −Es−1 ϕs−1 1+π       s
                                  λs and then in period s as βEs ϕs 1+R   s
                                                                            λs . By contrast, no
such first term is attached to λ0 . To make the first order conditions time invariant,
                                  1
we therefore add −βϕ−1 1+π          0
                                      λ0 , which introduces the lagged multiplier ϕ−1 into our
problem.
    Implementation constraints arising from intermediate goods pricing (38 - 40):
There are a number of implications of the constraints involving optimal price-setting
by the intermediate goods firms.
    First, χ1,s typically appears in period s − 1 as βEs−1 φ0,s−1 χ1,s and in period s as
Es φ1,s χ1,s . The exception is χ1,0 which does not have the first term. We therefore
append the term, βφ0,−1 χ1,0 to the optimization problem, which introduces another
lagged multiplier, φ0,−1 .
    Second, for each j = 2, . . . , J−2, χj,s enters the problem twice, in βEs−1 φj−1,s−1 χj,s
and in −Es φj,s χj,s . Again, an exception is χj,0 which does not have the first term.
We add these terms, βφj−1,−1 χj,0 for j = 2, . . . , J − 2. This introduces the lagged
multipliers φ1,−1 , . . . , φJ−3,−1
    Finally, χJ−1,s usually enters the problem twice, in βEs−1 φJ−2,s−1 χJ−1,s and in
−Es φJ−1,s χJ−1,s . As above, an exception is χJ−1,0 which does not have the first term.
We add the term βφJ−2,−1 χJ−1,0 to our problem and, hence, introduce the lagged
multiplier φJ−2,−1 .
    It is important to stress that the problem in Table 2 contains that in Table 1 as
                                                                    J−2
a special case: if we set the lagged multipliers [ϕ−1 , φj,−1 j=0 ] all to 0, then we have
exactly the same problem as before. Accordingly, we can always find the solution to
the Table 1 problem from the Table 2 problem. However, the first-order conditions
to Problem 2 are a system of time-invariant functions because of the introduction of
the lagged multipliers, which is convenient for the analysis of optimal policies.

                                              17
    Before turning to this topic, note that in Table 2 we define U ∗ (s−1 , φ−1 , ς 0 )
as the value of the Lagrangian evaluated at the optimal decisions, where φ−1 =
                  J−2
[ϕ−1 , φj,−1 j=0 ]. This value function for the optimal policy problem has two impor-
tant properties. First, it depends on the parameters of the problem, which here are
s−1 , φ−1 , ς 0 . Second, it is the solution to the problem of maximizing the objective (1)
subject to the constraints discussed above, so we use the notation U ∗ to denote the
planner’s value function.

3.2.2     The fully recursive form of the policy problem
Working on optimal capital taxation under commitment, Kydland and Prescott [1980]
began the analysis of how to solve such dynamic policy problems using recursive meth-
ods. They proposed augmenting the traditional state vector with a lagged multiplier
as above and then described a dynamic programming approach. Important recent
work by Marcet and Marimon [1999] formally develops the general theory necessary
for a recursive approach to such problems. In our context, the fully recursive form
of the policy problem is displayed in Table 3. There are a number of features to
point out. First, the state vector for the policy problem is given by ς t , st−1 and
                       J−2
φt−1 ≡ [ϕt−1 , φj,t−1 j=0 ]. That is: we have now determined the extra state variables
to which the monetary authority was viewed as responding in section 2 above. Sec-
ond, we can write the optimal policy problem in a recursive form similar to a Bellman
equation; Marcet and Marimon [1999] label this recursive form as a saddlepoint func-
tional equation. Third, as Et U ∗ (st , φt , ϕt+1 ) summarizes the future eﬀects of current
choices, there is a simplification of the problem in that explicit future constraints are
eliminated.

3.3      FOCs, Steady States, and Linearization
Given the policy problem as described in Table 2 or 3, it is straightforward to deter-
mine the first order conditions that characterize optimal policy.17 These first order
conditions may be represented as a system of equations of the form

                                  0 = Et {F(Y t+1 , Y t , X t+1 , X t )},

where Y t is the vector of all endogenous states, multipliers, and decisions and X t is a
                                                                                                            J−1
vector of exogenous variables. In our context, Y t = [η t , ς t , , ct , lt , ξ t , π t , (pj,t )J−1
                                                                                                 j=1 , χj,t j=0 ,
st−1 , φt−1 ]0 and X t = [at , gt ]0 .
    Our computational approach involves two steps. First, we calculate a stationary
point defined by F(Y , Y , X, X) = 0. Second, we log-linearize the above system and
  17
    Either the augmented Lagrangian of Table 2 or the recursive approach of Table 3 can be used to
analyze the optimal policy problem. These two expressions lead to identical first-order conditions,
after envelope-theorem results are derived for the problem in Table 3.


                                                    18
calculate the local dynamic behavior of quantities and prices given a specified law of
motion for the exogenous states ς, which is also taken to be log-linear.


4        Four distortions
Our macroeconomic model has the property that there are four readily identifiable
routes by which nominal factors can aﬀect real economic activity.

4.1        Defining the distortions
We discuss these four distortions in turn, using general ideas that carry over to a
wider class of macroeconomic models.
    Relative price distortions: In any model with asynchronous adjustment of nominal
prices, there are distortions that arise when the price level is not constant. In our
model, the natural measure of these distortions is
                                                     J
                                       at nt
                              δt =              =[     ω j (Pj,t /Pt )−ε ].            (42)
                                     (ct + gt )    j=0

If all relative prices are unity, then δ takes on a value of one. If relative prices deviate
from unity, which is the unconstrained eﬃcient level given the technology, then δ t
measures the extent of lost aggregate output which arises for this reason.
    The markup distortion: If all firms have the same marginal cost functions, then we
can write Wt = Ψt at . Here W is the nominal wage, Ψt is nominal marginal cost and
at is the common marginal product of labor. If we divide by the perfect (intermediate
good) price index, then this expression can be stated in real terms as

                                              wt = ψ t at                              (43)

so that real marginal cost ψ t acts like a sales tax shifter.
     Some recent literature has described this second source of distortions in terms
of the average markup µt ≡ Pt /Ψt , which is the reciprocal of real marginal cost ψ t ,
stressing that the monetary authority has temporary control over this markup tax
because prices are sticky, enabling it to erode (or enhance) the markups of firms with
sticky prices.18 According to this convention, which we follow here, a higher value of
the markup lowers real marginal cost and works like a tax on productive activity.
     Since movements in δ t and µt (or ψt ) are not necessarily related closely together,
it is best to think about these two factors from the standpoint of fiscal policy — which
can generate separate shocks to the level of the production function and its marginal
products — rather than the standpoint of productivity shocks which traditionally shift
both in RBC analysis.
  18
       See Woodford [1995], King and Wolman [1996] and Goodfriend and King [1997].

                                                   19
     Ineﬃcient shopping time: The next distortion is sometimes referred to as “shoe
leather costs.” But in our model, it is really “shopping time costs,” as in McCallum
and Goodfriend [1988], since it is in units of time rather than goods. In (37) above,
              F −1 (ξ t )
it is ht = 0              νdF (ν). Variations in ht work like a shock to the economy’s
time endowment. Continuing the fiscal analogy begun above, this is similar to a
conscription (lump sum labor tax).
     The wedge of monetary ineﬃciency: In transactions-based monetary models,
there is also an eﬀect of monetary policy on the full cost of consumption, which
occurs in (34) above, D1 u (ct , lt ) = λt [1 + Rt (1 − ξ t )]. The wedge of monetary inef-
ficiency in this equation is the product of the nominal interest rate and the extent
of monetization of exchange (1 − ξ t ). Pursuing our fiscal policy analogy, it is like a
consumption tax relative to the non-monetary model.

4.2     Selectively eliminating one or more distortions
Since the four distortions all enter into our model, it can be diﬃcult to determine
which distortion is giving rise to a particular result. In our analysis below, we selec-
tively eliminate one or more distortions. In doing so, we are imagining that there is
a fiscal authority which can oﬀset the distortions in the following ways.
    Eliminating variations in relative price distortions. This modification involves re-
solving the model with δ (ct + gt ) = at nt replacing δ t (ct + gt ) = at nt . Since relative
price distortions aﬀect the constraint δ t (ct + gt ) = at nt but do not aﬀect the marginal
costs of firms or the wages of workers, they can be interpreted as an additive pro-
ductivity shock—relative to a benchmark level of δ—with an eﬀect of (1/δ t − 1/δ)at nt .
Accordingly, the elimination of relative price distortions can be understood as involv-
ing a fiscal authority which decreases its spending by an amount gt = (δ −1 − δ −1   t )at nt ,
where δ is a benchmark level of distortions with δ = 1 corresponding to no distortions.
Total government spending would then be gt − gt .
    Eliminating variation in the markup distortion. This involves re-solving the model
with wt = ψat replacing wt = ψt at = µ1 at . Using the idea that the markup is like a
                                           t
sales tax, we can think of this as involving a fiscal authority which adjusts an explicit
sales/subsidy tax on intermediate goods producers so that (1+τ it ) µ1 = (1+τ i ), where
                                                                         t
(1 + τ i ) = ψ is a benchmark level of the net tax on intermediate goods producers
from the two sources.
    Eliminating variations in ineﬃcient shopping time. Eliminating variations in the
resources used by credit involves holding the right hand side of lt + nt = 1 − ht fixed.
A fiscal interpretation of this alteration is that a fiscal authority varies the amount of
its lump sum confiscation of time similarly to the changes in lump sum confiscation
of goods discussed for relative price distortions.
    Eliminating variations in the wedge of monetary ineﬃciency. This modification
involves holding (1 + (1 − ξ t )Rt ) fixed at a specified level. A fiscal interpretation is
that there is a consumption tax rate which is varied so that (1 + (1 − ξ t )Rt )(1 + τ ct )

                                              20
is held constant at a specified level.

4.3    Distortions under “neutral” policy
One possible choice for the monetary authority of real outcomes is sometimes de-
scribed as neutral policy, as in Goodfriend and King [1997]. It involves making the
path of the price level constant through time, thus minimizing relative price distor-
                                        ε
tions but leaving the markup at µ = ε−1    and allowing variations in the two monetary
distortions as the real economy fluctuates over time in response to variations in the
real conditions gt and at . Under this regime, real activity fluctuates in a manner
which is identical to how it would behave if prices were flexible and if the monetary
authority stabilized the price level. In its essence, this is the Fisherian proposal for
eliminating business fluctuations via price stabilization.
    At least after a brief startup period associated with working oﬀ an inherited
distribution of relative prices, such an outcome is always feasible for the monetary
authority in our economy. To the extent that the monetary authority chooses to
depart from these neutral outcomes, it is because it is responding to the distortions
identified in this section. As one example, a monetary authority might choose a
lower average rate of inflation, to reduce time costs, as suggested by Friedman. As
another example, a monetary authority might choose to stabilize the fluctuations in
real economic activity that would occur under neutral policy, changing the extent to
which the markup distortion is present in booms and contractions. Such stabilization
policy would be of the general form advocated by Keynes.


5     Choice of parameters
Given the limited amount of existing research on optimal monetary policy using the
approach of this paper and given the starkness of our model economy, we have chosen
the parameters with two objectives in mind. First, we want our economy to be as
realistic as possible, so we calibrate certain parameters to match certain features of
the U.S. economy as discussed below. Second, we want our economy to be familiar
to economists who have worked with related models of business cycles, fiscal policy,
money demand, and sticky prices. Our benchmark parametric model is as follows,
with the time unit taken to be one quarter of a year.

5.1    Preferences
We assume the utility function is logarithmic, u (c, l) = ln c+3.3 ln (l), with the weight
on leisure parameter being set so that agents work approximately 0.20 of available
time. We assume also that the discount factor is such that the annual interest rate
would be slightly less than three percent (β = 0.9928). This choice of the discount
factor is governed by data on one year T-bill rates and the GDP deflator.

                                           21
5.2     Monopoly power
We assume that the demand elasticity, ε, is 10. This means that the markup would be
11.11% over marginal cost if prices were flexible. Hall [1988] argues for much higher
markups, whereas Basu and Fernald [1997] argue for somewhat lower markups. Our
choice of ε = 10 is representative of other recent work on monopolistically competitive
macroeconomic models; for example, Rotemberg and Woodford [1999] use ε = 7.88.
We also explore the implications of a lower elasticity of demand which implies a higher
markup.

5.3     Distribution of price-setters
A key aspect of our economy is the extent of exogenously imposed price sticki-
ness. We use a distribution suggested by Wolman [1999], which has the following
features. First, it implies that firms expect a newly set price to remain in eﬀect
for five quarters. That is: the expected duration of a price chosen at t, which is
α1 1 + (1 − α1 )α2 2 + (1 − α1 )(1 − α2 )α3 3 + ... is equal to 5. This estimate is consistent
with the recent empirical work on aggregate price adjustment dynamics by Gali and
Gertler [1999] and Sbordone [2002]. Second, rather than assuming a constant hazard
αi = α as in the Calvo [1983] model, our weights involve an increasing hazard, which
is consistent with available empirical evidence and recent work on models of state
dependent pricing. The particular adjustment probabilities αi and the associated
                                                                            J−1
distribution are given in Table 4; the average age of prices is j=0             jω j = 2.3 for
the benchmark parameterization. We explore some implications of assuming greater
price flexibility below

5.4     Credit costs and money demand
Our model establishes a direct link between the distribution of credit costs and the
demand for money, which was highlighted above in (35). Our money demand function,

                               Mt                        Rt ct
                                      = 1 − ξt = 1 − F (       )                         (44)
                               P t ct                     wt
embodies the negative eﬀect of the interest rate and the positive eﬀect of a scale
variable — consumption expenditure — stressed in the transactions models of Baumol
[1952] and Tobin [1956] as well as the positive eﬀect of the wage rate stressed by
Dutton and Gramm [1973]. That is, the fraction of goods purchased with credit is
higher when the interest cost Rc is greater or when the wage rate w is lower: the ratio
Rc/w is the time value of interest foregone by holding money to buy consumption.




                                              22
5.4.1     Estimating the demand for money
We use the following procedure to estimate the demand for money. First, we posit
that the distribution of credit costs is of the following “generalized beta” form:
                                                      x
                                       F (x) = ξ + ξB( ; b1 , b2 )                                       (45)
                                                      κ
for 0 < x ≤ κ. The basic building block of this distribution is the beta distribution,
y = B(z; b1 , b2 ), which maps from the unit interval for z into the unit interval for y. It
is a flexible functional form in that the parameters b1 , b2 can be used to approximate a
wide range of distributions.19 In the general expression (45), we allow for the standard
beta distribution’s independent variable to be replaced by x/κ, which essentially
changes the support of the distribution of costs to (0, κ). In addition, we make it
possible for some goods to be pure cash or pure credit goods: ξ is a mass point
at zero credit costs, allowing for the possibility that there are some goods that will
always be purchased with credit; ξ ≤ 1 − ξ similarly allows for goods for which money
will always be used.
    We use quarterly economic data to construct empirical analogues to our model’s
variables: a measure of the nominal stock of currency; a measure of nominal con-
sumption expenditures per capita; a measure of the nominal interest rate; and a
measure of the hourly nominal wage rate.20 The ratios PMt ctt and ( Rwt ct t ) are shown in
Figure 1.21 Since there is not too much low frequency variation in ( wctt ), the Figure
mainly reflects the fact that the velocity of money and the nominal interest rate move
together. Figure 1 highlights the fact that we explore two sample periods. First, we
look at the sample 1948.1 through 1989.4. Our choice of the endpoint of this “long
sample” is based on the evidence provided by Porter and Judson [1996] that an in-
creasing portion of currency was held outside of the U.S. during the 1990s. The key
feature of this longer sample period is that there is an initial interval of low nominal
interest rates which makes the opportunity cost of money holding (Rc/w) quite low.
  19
     See Casella and Berger [1990], pages 107-108, for a discussion of the beta distribution. The beta
                      x
cdf takes the form [ 0 (z)b1 −1 (1 − z)b2 −1 dz]/β(b1 , b2 ), where β(b1 , b2 ) = Γ(b1 )Γ(b2 )/[Γ(b1 + b2 )] is
the beta function, which is in turn based on the gamma function as shown.
  20
     The basic data used is a three month treasury bill rate; the FRB St. Louis’s currency series;
real personal consumption expenditures (billions of chained 1996 dollars); the personal consumption
expenditures series chain-type price index (1996=100); civilian noninstitutional population and av-
erage hourly earnings of production workers in manufacturing. The ratio m/c is formed by taking
the ratio of currency to nominal consumption expenditures, which is itself a product of real expen-
ditures and the data. The ratio Rc/w is formed by multiplying the quarterly nominal treasury bill
rate by nominal per capita consumption expenditures and then dividing by nominal average hourly
earnings.
  21
     The wage rate in the model is a wage per quarter, with the quantity of time normalized to one.
The wage rate in the data is an hourly wage rate. Assuming that the time endowment per quarter is
16 hours per day, 7 days per week and 13 weeks per quarter, there are then 1456 hours per quarter.
We therefore divide the data series Rc/w by this number of hours to get a measure that conforms
to the theory.


                                                     23
Second, we look at 1959.1-1989.4 since some analysts have argued that the earlier
period is no longer relevant for U.S. money demand behavior.
    Two estimated money demand functions are displayed in Figure 1, one for the
shorter sample and one for the longer sample. Each money demand function is
estimated by selecting the parameters [ξ, ξ, κ, b1 , b2 ] so as to minimize the sum of
squared deviations between the model and the data.22

5.4.2         Implications of the money demand estimates.
We stress three implications of the money demand estimates.
    The estimated cost distribution: The parameter estimates over the two sample
periods also imply distributions of credit costs, which are displayed in panel A of
Figure 2. The first point to note is that the two costs cdfs are very similar for
opportunity cost measures exceeding .002, as were the money demand functions in
Figure 1. Below this point, the two functions diﬀer substantially. The short sample
period suggests that there are many goods (about two-thirds) that have zero credit
costs. The longer sample period suggests that there are many more goods with small,
but non-neglible transactions costs.
    This figure anticipates the results presented below, by indicating not only the
lowest interest rate data point as ‘o’ but also the optimal level of the nominal interest
rate as ‘*’. For the short sample, the optimal nominal interest rate happens to be
virtually identical to the minimum value in the sample, while for the longer sample
the optimum is slightly above the minimum value.
    The money demand elasticities: Given the cost distribution (45), there is not a
single “money demand elasticity”. But we can still compute the relevant elasticity at
each point, producing panel B of Figure 2. For the long sample period, the money
demand elasticity is less (in absolute value) than one-half and for the short sample
period, it is less than one-third. The triangle in panel B indicates the money demand
elasticity at the mean interest rate for the sample in question.
    Bailey-Friedman calculations. Positive nominal interest rates lead individuals in
this model to spend time in credit transactions activity that could be avoided if
the nominal interest rate were zero. Given the estimated money demand function,
with its associated distribution of credit costs, we can calculate this time cost as
       (Rc/w)
h= 0          νdF (ν), which is the area under the inverse money demand function.23
If all goods were purchased with credit, the short (long) sample money demand
    22
         The nonlinear regression chooses the five parameters to minimize the sum of squared errors,
1        T      Mt                 2           Rt ct                      xt
T        t=1 [ P c − (1 − F (xt ))] with xt = ( wt ) and F (xt ) = ξ + ξB( κ ; b1 , b2 ). The point estimates
               t t
for the short sample are [ξ = .6394, ξ = .1155, κ = .0127, b1 = 2.8058, b2 = 10.4455] and those for
the long sample are [ξ = .0658, ξ = 0.6859, κ = .0126, b1 = 0.4824, b2 = 7.1304].
  23
     The “generalized beta” distribution makes this a particularly simple calculation be-
                                                                         y
cause the truncated mean of a beta distribution is [ 0 z(z)b1 −1 (1 − z)b2 −1 dz]/β(b1 , b2 ) =
Γ(b1 +1)Γ(b1 +b2 )                              Γ(b1 +1)Γ(b1 +b2 )    (Rc/w)
Γ(b1 )Γ(b1 +b2 +1) B(y; b1 + 1, b2 ), so h = κξ Γ(b1 )Γ(b1 +b2 +1) B(   κ    ; b1 + 1, b2 ).



                                                       24
estimates imply that individuals would spend approximately 0.03% (0.05%) of their
time endowment in credit transactions.24 While our estimates are small relative to
those which other researchers have found using aggregate U.S. data, we note that they
are less unusual taken in the larger context of money demand studies. For example,
using microeconomic data and a diﬀerent methodology, Attanasio, Jappelli and Guiso
[2002] also find relatively low welfare costs of inflation.


6      Optimal policy in the long run
There are two natural reference points for thinking about optimal policy in the long
run. The first reference point is Friedman’s [1969] celebrated conclusion that the
nominal interest rate should be suﬃciently close to zero so that the private and social
costs of money-holding coincide. At this point, the economy minimizes the costs of
decentralized exchange. The second reference point is an average rate of inflation of
zero, which minimizes relative price distortions in steady state. In this section, we
document the intuitive conclusion that the long-run inflation rate should be negative
— but not as negative as suggested by Friedman’s analysis — when both sticky price
and exchange frictions are present.

6.1     The four distortions at zero inflation
If there is zero inflation in the benchmark economy—which uses the credit cost tech-
nology with parameters set from the short sample estimates—then it is relatively easy
to determine the levels of the four distortions. With zero inflation, the nominal and
real interest rates are each equal to 2.93 percent per annum. The parameters of the
credit cost technology imply that 65.6 percent of transactions are financed with credit
(ξ = .656) and that the ratio of real money to consumption is about 34 percent.
    The markup is equal to that which prevails in the static monopoly problem, µ =
  ε
ε−1
     = 1.11, so that price is roughly eleven percent higher than real marginal cost in
the steady-state.
    There are no relative price distortions — all firms are charging the same, unchang-
ing price — so that δ = 1. Further, marginal relative price distortions are also small.
    The wedge of monetary ineﬃciency is positive, but relatively small in this steady
  24
     While this number may seem implausibly small to some readers, reference to Figures 1 and
2 helps understand why it is not given our transactions demand for money. As seen in Figure 1,
the largest amount of credit use — implying a rate of money to consumption of about .25 — begins
to take place when the opportunity cost is about .005, which translates to an annualized interest
rate of just under 10% as seen in Figure 2. With the estimated money demand over the short
sample, the money demand curve cuts the axis at less than m/c = .4, implying an increase in m/c
of .15 = .4 − .25. Using a triangle to approximate the integral, we find that the approximate cost
saving is 12 (.005) ∗ .15 = .000375 or .0375%.




                                               25
state. It is calculated from the above discussion as
                   (1 + (1 − ξ) ∗ R) = (1 + (1 − .656) ∗ .0072) = 1.0025,
where the calculation of the wedge uses the quarterly nominal interest rate .0072.
    Time costs associated with use of credit are quite small, approximately .004%
of the time endowment. Recall that the maximal time costs - associated with using
credit for all purchases - are about 0.03%. At zero inflation, time spent on credit
transactions involves only 14% of the maximum time that could be spent on credit
transactions.

6.2     The benchmark result on long-run inflation
Even though the distortions associated with money demand are small at zero inflation,
a monetary authority maximizing steady-state welfare would nonetheless choose a
lower rate of inflation, for the reasons stressed by Friedman [1969]. When we solve
the optimal policy problem for the benchmark model using the short-sample estimates
displayed in Figure 1 above, we find that the asymptotic rate of inflation — the steady
state under the optimal policy — is negative 76 basis points (−0.76% at an annual
rate). Given that we assume a steady state real interest rate of 2.93% percent (as
determined by time preference), the long-run rate of nominal interest is 2.17%.
    This result raises two sets of questions. First, how do the four distortions isolated
earlier in the paper contribute to this finding? Second, how do variations away from
the benchmark parameter values aﬀect the optimal long-run inflation rate? Each of
these questions is addressed in Table 5 and in the discussion below.

6.3     Optimal inflation with fewer distortions
We now alter the monetary authority’s problem — relative to the benchmark case —
by selectively eliminating one or more distortions. Table 5 shows the eﬀect of various
modifications of the mix of distortions.25

    Why is disinflation desirable? Starting with the zero inflation steady state
rate of inflation, the Table shows that both the wedge of monetary ineﬃciency and
time costs play a role in reducing the inflation rate from zero to the benchmark
level of -.76%. Table 5 shows that the wedge of monetary ineﬃciency has a moderate
influence on the optimal long-run rate of inflation. If it is eliminated by itself, then
the inflation rate rises from -.76% to -.54%, so that the wedge accounts for almost
30% of the deviation from zero inflation. It also shows that if we only eliminate time
costs, then the inflation rate rises further, from -.76% to -.28%, so that time costs
alone account for almost 65% of the deviation from the zero inflation position.26
  25
     The table also presents results of the sensitivity analysis to be discussed below.
  26
     Time costs and the wedge interact nonlinearly in determining the long run inflation rate. There-
fore, adding up the contributions of the two eﬀects in isolation does not yield the long run inflation

                                                 26
    Why is there less deflation than at the Friedman Rule? If prices are
flexible, then the Friedman rule is optimal even though there is imperfect competition.
In fact, Goodfriend [1997] notes that a positive markup makes the case stronger in a
sense because the additional labor supply induced by declines in the wedge and time
costs yield a social marginal product of labor which exceeds the real wage.
    To evaluate why there is a benchmark rate of inflation of -.76% per annum — as
opposed to a Friedman rule level of -2.93% per annum — it is necessary to eliminate
variations in either the relative price distortion or the markup distortion. We suppose
that the markup distortion is fixed at the zero inflation level, i.e., µ = ε−1
                                                                            ε
                                                                               = 1.11. In
this case, Table 5 shows that there is a slightly more negative rate of inflation than
with a variable markup, a finding which is consistent with the facts that in this model,
the average markup (i) is decreasing in the inflation rate near zero inflation; and (ii)
does not respond importantly to variations in the inflation rate near zero inflation.
The first fact explains why eliminating the distortion makes the optimal inflation
rate more negative, since the monetary authority does not encounter an increasing
markup in the modified problem as it lowers the inflation rate from a starting point
of zero. The second fact explains why the eﬀect is a small one quantitatively.

6.4     Sensitivity Analysis
We now explore the sensitivity of the steady-state rate of inflation to two aspects of
the model. First, holding the parameters of money demand fixed at the benchmark
levels, we explore the consequences of various structural features of the model. These
results are presented in panel A of Table 5. Second, we discuss the long-run rate
of inflation using the parameter estimates from the long sample. These results are
presented in panel B of Table 5.

6.4.1    Changing features of the model
We explore the consequences of changing the degree of monopoly power and the
extent of price stickiness.
    Monopoly power: Decreasing the demand elasticity (ε) to 6 leads to a larger defla-
tion, 1.34% per year, because this lowers the costs of relative price distortions. The
money demand distortions become relatively more important, pushing the optimum
closer to the Friedman rule.
    Price stickiness: we change the distribution of prices (ω) to [0.3, 0.28, 0.25, 0.2, 0.1].
With this distribution, the expected duration of a newly adjusted price is 3.8 quarters.
The inflation rate in the long run under optimal policy is −1.21%. Optimal policy
comes closer to the Friedman rule in this case because the relative price distortions
associated with deviations from zero inflation are smaller the more flexible are prices.
rate from the benchmark case with both eﬀects present.




                                              27
6.4.2    Credit costs based on the long sample
If we solve the optimal policy problem with the longer sample estimates, Panel B
shows that there is much more deflation, reflecting the increased gains from substi-
tution away from costly credit at low interest rates. The asymptotic rate of deflation
is −2.30%, implying a nominal interest rate of only 0.63%. The other structural
features continue to aﬀect the long-run inflation rate in the manner described above.


7       Dynamics under optimal policy
We now discuss the nature of the dynamic response of the macroeconomy under op-
timal policy. In any model with predetermined prices and monopoly distortions, the
monetary authority will face an initial incentive to stimulate output. Our analysis
does not concern these initial “start up” dynamics, but rather describes how the mon-
etary authority will respond to shocks in the stochastic steady state which prevails
when the economy has long been operating under an optimal policy.27 Instead, we
study the nature of macroeconomic activity when shocks arise near the economy’s
steady state. In terms of economics, this approach involves considering how macro-
economic activity will respond when an optimal policy regime has been in place for
some time. It is analogous to the real business cycle approach of studying the response
of an economy to fluctuations near the steady-state path rather than concentrating
on the economy’s transitional dynamics.
    The reference point for this discussion is the response of real quantities if prices
are flexible and there are no money demand distortions. After discussing this case, we
begin by studying optimal responses in a situation in which there are distortions from
imperfect competition and sticky prices, but there are no money demand distortions.
We contrast the eﬀects of shocks to productivity and demand. We then turn to
analyzing the eﬀects of these same shocks when the monetary authority is confronted
with money demand distortions as well.

7.1     The real business cycle solution
If intermediate goods firms have market power but can flexibly adjust their prices and
if there are no money demand distortions, then the log-linear approximate dynamics
of consumption and leisure are
                                    a                  g
                      log(ct /c) =      log(at /a) −        log(gt /g)
                                   a−g               a−g
                                    g
                      log(lt /l) =     [log(at /a) − log(gt /g)]
                                   a−g
  27
    See King and Wolman [1999] for a description of the behavior of inflation and real activity
during these initial periods, in a staggered pricing model similar to that considered in section 7.2
below.


                                                28
with the approximate dynamics of the real interest rate given by rt −r = Et [log(ct+1 /c)−
log(ct /c)], where r = β −1 − 1.28 The consumption dynamics then imply that
                   a                                    g
       rt − r =       Et (log(at+1 /a) − log(at /a)) −     Et (log(gt+1 /g) − log(gt /g)).
                  a−g                                  a−g

    This real business cycle (RBC) solution is the benchmark for our subsequent analy-
sis. We study impulse responses to productivity and government purchase shocks,
under the assumption that each is first order autoregressive with a parameter ρ. Under
this assumption, all of the macro variables in the RBC solution have simple solutions.
For example, assuming that log(at /a) = ρ log(at−1 /a) + eat , the impulse response of
                                                                              a
the level of consumption to a productivity shock is just log(ct+j /c) = a−g     ρj eat and
                                                  a
that of the real interest rate is just rt − r = a−g (ρ − 1)ρj eat . Since ρ < 1, the real
interest rate is low when the level of consumption is high, because consumption is
expected to fall back to its stationary level.

7.2       Optimal policy without money demand distortions
In this section, we explore dynamic responses to productivity and government demand
shocks in variants of our model with the money demand distortions eliminated, which
is the case previously studied in King and Wolman [1999]. Here and below, our
procedure is to make two uses of the first order conditions from the optimal policy
problem.29 First, we solve these conditions for a stationary point, which is the long run
limit that will occur under optimal policy. Second, we study the response to shocks
near this stationary point, working also under the assumption that these shocks occur
in the stationary distribution that obtains under optimal policy. As stressed above,
we do so because we are interested in how the monetary authority will respond to
shocks when it has long been operating under an optimal rule, rather than early in a
monetary policy regime, when the monetary authority might exploit pre-determined
prices.30
    Without money demand distortions, the long run limit involves a zero inflation
steady state. One focal point of our discussion, here and below, is on the response of
the price level to our two shocks under optimal policy.
  28
      Derivation of approximate dynamics is facilitated by recognizing that without money demand or
relative price distortions, our model is governed by ct + gt = at (1 − lt ) , wt = ψat with ψ = ε−1  ε and
wt D1 u(ct , lt ) = D2 u(ct , lt ). With u(c, l) = log(c) + θ log(l), there is an exact closed form solution
        ψ
ct = ψ+θ   (at − gt ) and lt = ψ+θ  θ
                                      ( ata−g
                                            t
                                              t
                                                ).
   29
      Above, we wrote the planner’s first order conditions as 0 = Et {F(Y t+1 , Y t , X t+1 , X t )}. The
first step involves finding 0 = F(Y , Y , X, X). The second step involves solving the linear rational
expectations model near this stationary point.
   30
      Technically, we set all lagged multipliers equal to their certainty steady state values before
examining the economy’s response to shocks.




                                                    29
7.2.1   Productivity shocks
Figure 3 displays the response of economic activity under optimal policy when there
are persistent variations in productivity (the autoregressive coeﬃcient is set equal to
.95). For the purpose of discussing this figure and the others below, we use the RBC
solution as the reference point. Optimal policy here is to exactly replicate the RBC
solution for quantities and this involves holding the path of the price level exactly
constant through time.
    Turning to the details of the graph, it is constructed under the assumption that
there are no government purchases in the steady state, so that consumption moves
one-for-one with the productivity shock and labor is predicted to be constant. The
level of the productivity shock is 1.0% and the expected growth rate of consumption
at date 0 is then (ρ − 1) = −.05. We state the real interest rate in annualized terms,
so that the impact eﬀect on the real and nominal interest rate is −.20 or a decline of
20 basis points relative to the steady state level of the rate.
    In this setting, then, there is no Keynesian stabilization policy: the government
does not choose to smooth out the fluctuations that would occur if prices were flexible,
even though there are monopoly distortions present in the economy which make
output ineﬃciently low. At the same time, in order to bring about this flexible price
solution, it is necessary for policy to be activist. For example, if the interest rate is
the policy instrument, then it must move with the underlying determinants of the
real interest rate.

7.2.2   Government purchase shocks
Figure 4 displays the response of economic activity under optimal policy when there
are persistent variations in government purchases (the autoregressive coeﬃcient is
again set equal to .95). In this setting, the response of economic activity deviates
from the flexible price solution, in a manner that is particularly evident in the path
of interest rates.
    Under the RBC solution, the basic mechanism is that there is a persistent, but
ultimately temporary, drain on the economy’s resources. In response to this drain,
the representative agent consumes fewer market goods and takes less leisure, so that
work eﬀort rises. The real interest rate again reflects the response of consumption
growth: it rises because consumption is expected to grow back toward the steady
state as the government purchase shock disappears.
    Under optimal policy, this basic picture is overlaid with an initial interval dur-
ing which labor input and consumption are reduced relative to the levels that would
prevail if prices were flexible. There is an important sense in which this is counterin-
tuitive from a traditional perspective on stabilization policy: the monetary authority
works to increase the variability of consumption stemming from a real shock rather
than mitigate it. Working with pre-set pricing model of the sort developed by Ireland
[1996] and Adao, Correia and Teles [2001], Goodfriend and King [2001] argue that

                                           30
the key to understanding the eﬀects of government purchases is to recognize that
optimal policy selects a state contingent pattern of consumption taking into account
its influence on the contingent claims price λ(c, l) = D1 u(c, l). Relative to the RBC
solution, the government will want to have less consumption when government pur-
chases are high because this increases the contingent claims value of g, making it
easier to satisfy the implementation constraint. Our staggered pricing model displays
a similar incentive, but a dynamic one: the monetary authority wants to depress the
consumption path to an extent while there are predetermined prices. In line with this,
Figure 4 shows that the optimal plan involves consumption which is transitorily low
relative to the RBC solution. Because consumption is expected to grow toward the
RBC path in these periods, the real interest rate — which continues to be described by
rt − r = Et [log(ct+1 /c) − log(ct /c)]—is high relative to the RBC path. The magnitude
of this interest rate variation is substantial relative to the RBC component, because
there is a temporary initial consumption shortfall, which implies rapid growth.
    In our setting, then, it is not desirable for the government to stabilize consumption
in the face of government purchase shocks, even though it is feasible for it to do so.
Rather, the optimal policy is to somewhat reinforce the negative eﬀects that g has on
consumption, thus attenuating the eﬀects on employment and output. But, since the
implied movements in real marginal cost are temporary, they have little consequence
for the path of the price level.

7.3     Optimal policy in the benchmark model
We now calculate the response of the economy to productivity and government de-
mand shocks in the benchmark model, in which we restore the two monetary distor-
tions discussed in section 6. In each case, we find that the solutions involve some
interest rate smoothing, in both real and nominal terms.

7.3.1   Productivity shocks
Figure 5 shows the response of the economy to a productivity shock. On impact,
consumption is slightly lower than the RBC response and then subsequently exceeds
this level very slightly. But small diﬀerences in consumption paths translate into
larger diﬀerences in growth rates and interest rates: rather than falling by 20 basis
points on impact, the nominal and real interest rates decline by a good bit less (the
nominal rate falls by 7 basis points and the real rate by 8 basis points).
    The dynamic behavior of real and nominal interest rates is of some interest. The
real interest rate is smoothed relative to the RBC solution, but only during the first
few quarters, presumably because this is the interval when the eﬀects of pre-existing
prices are important for the trade-oﬀs that the monetary authority faces. Afterwards,
the real interest rate closely tracks the underlying real interest rate associated with
the RBC response. There is a small amount of expected inflation, which makes the
nominal interest rate even less responsive to the productivity shock than the real rate.

                                           31
    Yet the total eﬀect on the price level is very small: it is about 0.25% over fifteen
quarters, while productivity is inducing a cumulative rise in consumption of about
11%.31 Even though they are not exactly those of the flexible price solutions, the real
responses are quite close, indicating that the monetary authority does not make much
use of the leverage that it has over real activity to undertake stabilization policy.
    The motivation for interest rate smoothing in this economy involves the money
demand distortions, as a comparison of the results of this section with those of (7.2.1)
above makes clear. More specifically, we have found that it is the time cost distortion,
as opposed to the wedge of monetary ineﬃciency, which accounts for most of the
interest rate smoothing. It is interesting to note that maximal time costs which seem
to be quite small can motivate the monetary authority to deliver significant smoothing
of nominal interest rates. On the other hand, this smoothing results in only small
variations in the price level, so the costs in terms of relative price distortions are
small.32

7.3.2    Government purchases
Figure 6 shows the response of economic activity to a change in government purchases
in the benchmark model. In contrast to the analysis of section (7.2.2), the response of
the economy under optimal policy now much more closely resembles that in the RBC
benchmark. That previous analysis indicated that optimal policy sought to increase
the variability of real and nominal interest rates in response to a government purchase
shock, but this incentive is now curtailed by the eﬀect of such interest rate changes
on the monetary distortions, especially the time cost. More specifically, the interest
rate smoothing motivation approximately cancels out the earlier eﬀects, leading to
outcomes that closely resemble the flexible price solution.

7.4     Robustness
In Figure 7, we summarize the interest rate and price level responses to productivity
and demand shocks in the benchmark model in the left hand column; we record
these same responses for a version of the model using the long-sample money demand
estimates in the right hand column. While there are diﬀerences across shocks and
money demand specifications, the Figure illustrates that the optimal policy responses
involve very small variations in the price level. While real interest rate behavior under
optimal policy can deviate somewhat from the RBC solution, significant deviations
are transitory, lasting only a few periods.
                                                                                    16
  31
     That is: the total eﬀect on productivity over fifteen quarters is given by 1−(.95)
                                                                                 1−.95  = 11. 2 and
                                           1
over the infinite horizon it is given by 1−.95 = 20.
  32
     In ongoing research, we are exploring the determinants of interest rate smoothing using a dy-
namic version of the method of eliminating selective distortions. Woodford [1999] discusses optimal
interest rate smoothing in a related model.



                                                32
8    Summary and conclusions
Optimal monetary policy depends on the nature of frictions present in the economy.
In this analysis, we have described a modern monetary model which has a range of
frictions — imperfect competition, sticky prices and the costly exchange of wealth for
consumption — and explored the nature of economic activity under optimal monetary
policy. We initially developed a recursive equilibrium for a model economy with
these three frictions. We then described how to calculate optimal allocations using
the approach pioneered by Ramsey [1927], but also placed this analysis in recursive
form. To derive quantitative results, we estimated a model of money demand, which
determined the extent of transactions cost-savings, and we calibrated other aspects
of the model in ways consistent with much recent research on imperfect competition
and sticky prices.
    As suggested by Friedman [1969], we found that deflation was one feature of an
optimal monetary policy regime. The extent of this deflation was small (about 0.75%)
if we used estimates of money demand based on a sample that focused on post 1950
observations. It was larger (about 2.3%) if we used estimates of money demand based
on a longer sample that included earlier observations when interest rates and velocity
were both low. However, because of the presence of relative price distortions that are
increasing in the rate of inflation or deflation, it is not optimal to set the nominal
rate equal to zero.
    We studied the dynamic responses of economic activity under optimal policy
to productivity and government purchase shocks, using three diﬀerent assumptions
about money demand. These dynamic responses are anchored by the dynamics of the
underlying real business cycle model, so that real activity under optimal monetary
policy always generally resembles these RBC solutions. At the same time, depending
on the nature of the shocks and the details of money demand, there can be interesting
departures of real interest rates and real activity from their counterparts in the real
business cycle model. Yet, in all cases, optimal monetary policy involves very little
“base drift” in the path of the price level, relative to the deflationary steady state
path.




                                          33
References
 [1] Adao, Bernardino, Isabel Correia and Pedro Teles, (2001), “Gaps and Triangles,”
     Working Paper 2001-13, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

 [2] Attanasio, Orazio P., Luigi Guiso and Tullio Jappelli (2002), “The demand for
     money, financial innovation and the welfare cost of inflation: An analysis with
     household data” Journal of Political Economy 110 (2): 317 - 351.

 [3] Bassetto, Marco, “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Heterogenous Agents,”
     http://www.econ.umn.edu/~bassetto/research/opttax/opttax.pdf.

 [4] Basu, Susanto, and John G. Fernald (1997), “Returns to Scale in U.S. Produc-
     tion: Estimates and Implications,” The Journal of Political Economy, 105(2),
     249-283.

 [5] Baumol, William, (1952), “The Transactions Demand for Cash,” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics, 67(4), 545-556.

 [6] Benveniste, Lawrence and Jose Scheinkman (1979), ”On the Diﬀerentiability of
     the Value Function in Dynamic Models of Economies,” Econometrica 47, 727-
     732.

 [7] Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983). “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Frame-
     work”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 383-398.

 [8] Casella, George and Roger L. Berger, (1990), Statistical Inference, Belmont,
     California: Duxbury Press.

 [9] Chari, V.V. and Patrick J. Kehoe (1999), ”Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Pol-
     icy,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. III, edited by John Taylor and Michael
     Woodford, Elsevier, 1999.

[10] Dotsey, Michael and Peter N. Ireland (1996), “The Welfare Cost of Inflation in
     General Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(1), 29-47.

[11] Dotsey, Michael, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman (1999). “State De-
     pendent Pricing and the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[12] Dupor, Bill (2002). “Optimal Monetary Policy with Nominal Rigidities,” manu-
     script, http://finance.wharton.upenn.edu/~dupor/dice_apr02.pdf.

[13] Dutton, Dean S., and William P. Gramm (1973), “Transactions Costs, the Wage
     Rate, and the Demand for Money,” American Economic Review, 63(4), 652-665.
[14] Fisher, Irving (1896), “Appreciation and Interest,” in Publications of the Amer-
     ican Economic Association, volume XI. New York: Macmillan.

[15] Fisher, Irving (1911), The Purchasing Power of Money, New York, Macmillan.

[16] Fisher, Irving (1923). “The Business Cycle Largely a ‘Dance of the Dollar”’,
     Journal of the American Statistical Association 18 (144), 1024-1028.

[17] Fisher, Irving (1930), The Theory of Interest, New York, Macmillan.

[18] Friedman, Milton (1969), “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in The Optimum
     Quantity of Money, and Other Essays, Aldine Publishing Company: Chicago.

[19] Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999), “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econo-
     metric Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44(2), 195-222.

[20] Goodfriend, Marvin (1997), “A Framework for the Analysis of Moderate Infla-
     tions,” Journal of Monetary Economics 39(1), 45-65.

[21] Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King (1997), “The New Neoclassical Syn-
     thesis and the Role of Monetary Policy,” in Bernanke, Ben S. and Rotemberg,
     Julio J., eds. NBER macroeconomics annual 1997. Cambridge and London: MIT
     Press, 1997, pages 231-83.

[22] Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert G. King (2001), “The Case for Price Stability,”
     in Why Price Stability? Proceedings of the ECB First ECB Central Banking
     Conference. Frankfurt European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
     2001, pages.53-94. Available as NBER Working Paper 8423.

[23] Hall, Robert E. (1988), “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
     Industry,” Journal of Political Economy 96, 921-947

[24] Ireland, Peter N. (1996), “The Role of Countercyclical Monetary Policy,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 104,704-723.

[25] Keynes, John Maynard (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest
     and Money, reprinted as a Harbinger Edition (1964), Harcourt, Brace and Jo-
     vanovich.

[26] King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1999), “What Should the Monetary
     Authority Do When Prices are Sticky?” in Taylor, John B., ed., Monetary Policy
     Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 349-398.

[27] King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman (1996), “Inflation Targeting in a St.
     Louis Model of the 21st Century,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 78,
     83-107.
[28] Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion:
     the Inconsistentncy of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy 85(3): 473-
     491.
[29] Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott (1980), “Dynamic Optimal Taxation,
     Rational Expectations and Optimal Control,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
     and Control 2: 79-91.
[30] Lacker, Jeﬀrey M., and Stacey Schreft (1996), “Money and Credit as Means of
     Payment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(1), 3-23.
[31] Levin, Andrew (1991), “The Macroeconomic Significance of Nominal Wage Con-
     tract Duration,” University of California, San Diego Discussion Paper 91-08.
[32] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., (1980), “Equilibrium in a Pure Currency Economy,” Eco-
     nomic Inquiry, 18(2), 203-220.
[33] Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (2000), “Inflation and Welfare,” Econometrica 68(2), 247-
     274.
[34] Lucas, Robert E. Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey (1983), “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
     Policy in an Economy without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics 12 : 55-
     93.
[35] Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon (1999), “Recursive Contracts,” manuscript.
[36] McCallum, Bennett T, and Marvin S. Goodfriend (1988), “Theoretical Analysis
     of the Demand for Money,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review,
     74(1), 16-24.
[37] Porter, Richard D., and Ruth A. Judson (1996), “The Location of U.S. Currency:
     How Much Is Abroad?” Federal Reserve Bulletin 82(10), 883-903.
[38] Prescott, Edward C. (1987), “A Multiple Means-of-Payment Model,” in Bar-
     nett, William A., and Singleton, Kenneth J. eds., New approaches to monetary
     economics, Cambridge; New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press,
     42-51.
[39] Ramsey, Frank P. (1927), “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic
     Journal 37: 47-61.
[40] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford [1999], “Interest Rate Rules in an
     Estimated Sticky Price Model,” in Taylor, John B., ed., Monetary Policy Rules,
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 57-119.
[41] Sbordone, Argia M. (2002), “Prices and Unit Labor Costs: A New Test of Price
     Stickiness,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(2), 265-292.
[42] Taylor, John B. (1980), “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal
     of Political Economy, 88: 1-24.

[43] Taylor, John B. (1993), “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.

[44] Tobin, James (1956), “The Interest Elasticity of the Transactions Demand for
     Cash,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 38(3), 241-247.

[45] Wolman, Alexander L. (1999), “Sticky Prices, Marginal Cost and the Behavior of
     Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 85(4), 29-45.

[46] Woodford, Michael, (1995), “Comment on, ‘The Quantitative Analytics of the
     Basic Neomonetarist Model”’, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27, 1278-
     1289.

[47] Woodford, Michael (1999), “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” NBER Working
     Paper 7261.
                                     Table 1:
                  Standard Lagrangian for optimal policy problem33

                              ∞
          min max E0 {             β t Et [u (ct , lt )
        {Λt }∞        ∞
             t=0 {dt }t=0
                             t=0


                                               λt                     λt+1
                                      + ϕt (          − βEt (                     ))
                                             1 + Rt                 1 + π t+1
                                      + φ0,t (ω 0 x(p0,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) + βEt χ1,t+1 )
                                           J−2
                                      +             φj,t (ω j x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) + βEt χj+1,t+1 − χjt )
                                           j=1

                                      + φJ−1,t (ω J x(pJ−1,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at ) − χJ−1,t )

                                                                            J−1
                                      + η t (at n(lt , ξ t ) − (                  ω j p−ε
                                                                                       j,t )(ct + gt ))
                                                                            j=0
                                                              J−1                    1
                                      + γ t (1 − (                  ω j pj,t 1−ε ) 1−ε )
                                                              j=0
                                           J−2                pj−1,t−1
                                      +             ζ j,t (            − pjt )
                                           j=1                 1 + πt
                                      + ϑt (D1 u(ct , lt ) − λt (1 + Rt (1 − ξ t )))
                                      + %t [λt Rt ct − D2 u(ct , lt )F −1 (ξ t )]]}


                                                                          J−1
 33
      In this table, dt =   ct , lt , ξ t , λt , (pj,t )J−1
                                                        j=0 , χj,t        j=1
                                                                                , Rt , π t   is a vector of decisions at date t.
                            J−1                           J−2
Further, Λt =      ϕt, φj,t j=0   , η 1t , η 2t ,   ζ j,t j=1       , ϑt , %t   is a vector of Lagrange multipliers chosen
at t.
                                 Table 2:
             An augmented Lagrangian for optimal policy problem34



                                                  U ∗ (s−1 , φ−1 , ς 0 ) =

                                                                    ∞
                                     min max E0 {                        β t Et [u (ct , lt )
                                    {Λt }∞        ∞
                                         t=0 {dt }t=0
                                                                   t=0


                                                                                              λt            λt
                                                                                   + ϕt            − ϕt−1
                                                                                            1 + Rt        1 + πt
                                                                             J−1
                                                                       +           φj,t ω j x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at )
                                                                             j=0
                                                                                 J−1
                                                                             +         (φj−1,t−1 − φjt )χj,t
                                                                                 j=1


                                                                                                           J−1
                                                                             + η t (at n(lt , ξ t ) − (           ω j p−ε
                                                                                                                       j,t )(ct + gt ))
                                                                                                            j=0
                                                                                             J−1                    1
                                                                             + γ t (1 − (           ω j pj,t 1−ε ) 1−ε )
                                                                                             j=0
                                                                                 J−2             pj−1,t−1
                                                                             +         ζ j,t (            − pjt )
                                                                                 j=1              1 + πt
                                                                         + ϑt (D1 u(ct , lt ) − λt (1 + Rt (1 − ξ t )))
                                                                         + %t (λt Rt ct − D2 u(ct , lt )F −1 (ξ t ))]}


                                                                        J−1
 34
      In this table, dt =    ct , lt , ξ t , λt , (pj,t )J−1
                                                         j=0 , χj,t     j=1
                                                                               , Rt , π t    is a vector of decisions at date t.
                             J−1                           J−2
Further, Λt =     ϕt, φj,t   j=0
                                   , η 1t , η 2t , ζ j,t   j=1
                                                                 , ϑt , %t     is a vector of Lagrange multipliers chosen
at t.
                                      Table 3:
                  Fully recursive form of optimal policy problem35


                                                U ∗ st−1 , φt−1 , ς t =

                              min max{u (ct , lt ) + βEt U ∗ (st , φt , ς t+1 )
                              {Λt } {dt }



                                                                                          λt            λt
                                                                                + ϕt           − ϕt−1
                                                                                        1 + Rt        1 + πt
                                                                      J−1
                                                                  +             φj,t ω j x(pj,t , ct , lt , λt , gt , at )
                                                                      j=0
                                                                                J−1
                                                                            +          [φj−1,t−1 − φj,t ]χj,t
                                                                                 j=1


                                                                                                        J−1
                                                                       +η t (at n(lt , ξ t ) − (              ω j p−ε
                                                                                                                   j,t )(ct + gt ))
                                                                                                        j=0
                                                                                        J−1                    1
                                                                    +γ t (1 − (                ω j pj,t 1−ε ) 1−ε )
                                                                                         j=0
                                                                            J−2               pj−1,t−1
                                                                       +            ζ j,t (            − pjt )
                                                                            j=1                1 + πt
                                                                    + ϑt [D1 u(ct , lt ) − λt (1 + Rt (1 − ξ t ))]
                                                                    +%t [λt Rt ct − D2 u(ct , lt )F −1 (ξ t )]}


                                                                      J−1
 35
      In this table, dt =   ct , lt , ξ t , λt , (pj,t )J−1
                                                        j=0 , χj,t    j=1
                                                                                , Rt , π t     is a vector of decisions at date t.
                           J−1                            J−2
Further, Λt =     ϕt, φj,t j=0    , η 1t , η 2t ,   ζ j,t j=1   , ϑt , %t       is a vector of Lagrange multipliers chosen
at t.
                       Table 4:
            Price adjustment probabilities
         and the associated distribution weights
α1    α2    α3     α4     α5     α6    α7    α8    α9
0.014 0.056 0.126 0.224 0.350 0.504 0.686 0.897    1
ω0    ω1    ω2     ω3     ω4     ω5    ω6    ω7    ω8
0.198 0.195 0.184 0.161 0.125 0.081 0.040 0.013    0.001
                                     Table 5:
                      Eﬀect of eliminating various distortions
                      on the long-run optimal inflation rate36
                   A. Short-sample money demand specification


                                          Benchmark Sensitivity Analysis
                                                      Decrease      Increase
                                                      Demand        Price
                Eliminate                            Elasticity    Flexibility
           1                              -0.76     -1.34         -1.21
           2    Wedge                     -0.54     -0.78         -0.84
           3    Time Costs                -0.28     -0.86         -0.59
           4    Wedge, Time Costs         0         0             0
           5    Markup                    -0.81     -1.48         -1.27


                    B. Long-sample money demand specification


                                         Benchmark Sensitivity Analysis
                                                     Decrease      Increase
                                                     Demand        Price
                  Eliminate                         Elasticity    Flexibility
            1                            -2.30     -2.84         -2.80
            2    Wedge                   -2.03     -2.53         -2.61
            3    Time Cost               -0.21     -0.62         -0.42
            4    Wedge, time cost        0         0             0
            5    Markup                  -2.41     -2.93         -2.82




  36
     The benchmark model is in row 1, i.e., all distortions are present; the wedge of monetary
ineﬃciency is eliminated in row 2; shopping time costs are eliminated in row 3; and both forms of
monetary distortion are eliminated in row 4. In row 5, the markup is fixed at the zero inflation level
ε/ (ε − 1). The columns are as follows: benchmark calibration discussed in section 5; (b) demand
elasticity for the diﬀerentiated products set to 6 instead of 10;.(c) the distribution of firms (ω) is
modified from that in table 1 to ω = 0.3, 0.28, 0.25, 0.2, 0.10. In this case, no firm goes more than
five periods with the same price, and the expected duration of a price is 3.8 quarters instead of 5.0
quarters as in the benchmark case.
                                  Figure 1. Velocity and the opportunity cost of holding money


                          0.01
                                                                                                    1948.1-1958.4
                                                                                                    1959.1-1989.4
                         0.009                                                                      1959.1-1989.4
                                                                                                    1948.1-1989.4

                         0.008


                         0.007
opportunity cost: Rc/w




                         0.006


                         0.005


                         0.004


                         0.003


                         0.002


                         0.001


                            0
                            0.2   0.25   0.3    0.35       0.4      0.45      0.5      0.55   0.6       0.65        0.7
                                                       ratio of money to consumption
                                Figure 2. The Money Demand Estimates



                                                   A. Implied cost cdf
             0.8


             0.6                                                                           1959.1-1989.4
                                                                                           1948.1-1989.4

             0.4
  ξ




             0.2


               0
                    0   0.001   0.002    0.003     0.004     0.005       0.006     0.007     0.008    0.009   0.01
                                                             R*c/w

                                         B. Implied money demand elasticities
               0

             -0.1

             -0.2
elasticity




             -0.3

             -0.4

             -0.5
                    0    0.02     0.04      0.06        0.08       0.1           0.12      0.14      0.16     0.18
                                                         annualized R
                                                                               Figure 3. Model without money demand distortions
                                                                              Response to a productivity shock under optimal policy

                                                                   A. Consumption and the shock                                                                    B. Labor input
                                                   1.2                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                    0.6




                                                                                                                    % deviation from steady state
                  % deviation from steady state




                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                    0.2

                                                   0.6                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                    -0.2
                                                   0.4                                                                                              -0.4
                                                                                                                                                    -0.6
                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                    -0.8

                                                        0                                                                                            -1
                                                            0            5     10         15      20           25                                          0   5       10       15   20   25
                                                                                   Quarters                                                                              Quarters




                                                            C. Rates: Nominal interest, real interest,
                                                                                                                                                                   D. Price level
                                                                        and inflation
                                                   2                                                                                                 0.5

                                                                                                                                                     0.4
basis point deviation from steady state rate




                                                   -2
                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                        % deviation from trend




                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                   -6
                                                                                                                                                     0.1

                                                  -10                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                    -0.1
                                                  -14                                                                                               -0.2

                                                                                                                                                    -0.3
                                                  -18
                                                                                                                                                    -0.4

                                                                                                                                                    -0.5
                                                  -22
                                                        0            5        10         15       20       25
                                                                                                                                                           0   5        10      15   20   25
                                                                                Quarters                                                                                 Quarters
                                                                inflation rate (steady state = 0.0%)
                                                                nominal interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                                real interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                                          Figure 4. Model without money demand distortions
                                                                     Response to a government purchase shock under optimal policy


                                                             A. Consumption and the shock                                                                       B. Labor input
                                               1.2                                                                                           3.8


                                               0.8                                                                                           3.4
% deviation from steady state




                                                                                                             % deviation from steady state
                                                                                                                                               3
                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                             2.6
                                                 0
                                                                                                                                             2.2
                                               -0.4
                                                                                                                                             1.8

                                               -0.8
                                                                                                                                             1.4

                                               -1.2                                                                                            1
                                                      0          5        10      15        20       25                                             0    5        10       15       20   25
                                                                           Quarters
                                                                                                                                                                   Quarters
                                                              consumption under optimal policy                                                          under optimal policy
                                                              consumption in RBC model
                                                              path of the shock                                                                         in RBC model


                                                      C. Rates: Nominal interest, real interest,
                                                                  and inflation                                                                               D. Price level
                                               60                                                                                            0.5

                                                                                                                                             0.4
basis point deviation from steady state rate




                                               50
                                                                                                                                             0.3
                                               40
                                                                                                          % deviation from trend




                                                                                                                                             0.2

                                                                                                                                             0.1
                                               30
                                                                                                                                               0
                                               20
                                                                                                                                             -0.1

                                               10                                                                                            -0.2

                                                                                                                                             -0.3
                                                 0
                                                                                                                                             -0.4

                                               -10                                                                                           -0.5
                                                      0          5       10       15       20        25                                             0     5       10           15   20   25
                                                                             Quarters                                                                               Quarters
                                                          inflation rate (steady state = 0.0%)
                                                          nominal interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                          real interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                          real interest rate in RBC model
                                                                                         Figure 5. Full Model
                                                                         Response to a productivity shock under optimal policy


                                                             A. Consumption and the shock                                                                        B. Labor input
                                                 1                                                                                           0.02

                                               0.9                                                                                           0.01
      % deviation from steady state




                                                                                                             % deviation from steady state
                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                0
                                               0.7
                                                                                                                                             -0.01
                                               0.6
                                                                                                                                             -0.02
                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                             -0.03
                                               0.4

                                               0.3                                                                                           -0.04

                                               0.2                                                                                           -0.05
                                                     0          5        10       15        20          25                                           0   5          10          15   20   25
                                                                          Quarters                                                                                   Quarters
                                                             consumption under optimal policy                                                                under optimal policy
                                                             path of the shock                                                                               in RBC model
                                                             consumption in RBC model


                                                         C. Rates: Nominal interest, real interest,
                                                                                                                                                               D. Price level
                                                                     and inflation
                                                8                                                                                            0.5

                                                4
                                                                                                                                             0.4
basis point deviation from steady state rate




                                                                                                                                             0.3
                                                0
                                                                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                             % deviation from trend




                                                -4                                                                                           0.1

                                                -8                                                                                             0

                                                                                                                                             -0.1
                                               -12
                                                                                                                                             -0.2
                                               -16
                                                                                                                                             -0.3

                                               -20                                                                                           -0.4

                                                                                                                                             -0.5
                                               -24
                                                     0          5        10       15        20          25                                           0   5         10       15       20   25
                                                                             Quarters                                                                                Quarters
                                                         inflation rate (steady state = -0.76%)
                                                         nominal interest rate (steady state = 2.17%)
                                                         real interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                         real interest rate in RBC model
                                                                                               Figure 6. Full Model
                                                                           Response to a government purchase shock under optimal policy


                                                                A. Consumption and the shock                                                                      B. Labor input

                                                1.2                                                                                                  4


                                                0.8                                                                                                3.4
       % deviation from steady state




                                                                                                                  % deviation from steady state
                                                                                                                                                   2.8
                                                0.4
                                                                                                                                                   2.2
                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                   1.6
                                               -0.4
                                                                                                                                                     1

                                               -0.8
                                                                                                                                                   0.4

                                               -1.2                                                                                               -0.2
                                                         0             5        10     15       20        25                                             0    5       10       15   20   25
                                                                              Quarters                                                                                 Quarters
                                                               consumption under optimal policy                                                              under optimal policy
                                                               consumption in RBC model                                                                      in RBC model
                                                               path of the shock



                                                             C. Rates: Nominal interest, real interest,
                                                                         and inflation                                                                            D. Price level
                                               28                                                                                                 0.5

                                                                                                                                                  0.4
basis point deviation from steady state rate




                                               22
                                                                                                                                                  0.3
                                               16
                                                                                                               % deviation from trend




                                                                                                                                                  0.2

                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                               10
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                4                                                                                                 -0.1

                                                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                  -0.3
                                                -8
                                                                                                                                                  -0.4

                                                                                                                                                  -0.5
                                               -14
                                                     0             5           10      15       20        25                                             0    5       10      15    20   25
                                                                                Quarters                                                                               Quarters
                                                         inflation rate (steady state = -0.76%)
                                                         nominal interest rate (steady state = 2.17%)
                                                         real interest rate (steady state = 2.93%)
                                                         real interest rate in RBC model
                                                                Figure 7. Real Interest Rate and Price-level Behavior

                                                                     A. Real Interest Rate Response to Productivity Shock

                                               A1. Short-sample money demand                                                           A2. Long-sample money demand
                                 2                                                                                          2
                                 -2                         full model                                                      -2                          full model




                                                                                                   basis point deviation
basis point deviation




                                                            no money demand distortions                                                                 no money demand distortions
                                 -6                         RBC model                                                       -6                          RBC model

                                -10                                                                                        -10

                                -14                                                                                        -14

                                -18                                                                                        -18

                                -22                                                                                        -22
                                      0                3             6            9           12                                 0              3              6          9            12
                                                                  Quarters                                                                                 Quarters


                                                                 B. Real Interest Rate Response to Government Purchase Shock
                                               B1. Short-sample money demand                                                             B2. Long-sample money demand

                                 60                                                                                        60
                                                                full model                                                                               full model
                                 50                             no money demand distortions                                50                            no money demand distortions
        basis point deviation




                                                                                                   basis point deviation



                                                                RBC model                                                                                RBC model
                                 40                                                                                        40
                                 30                                                                                        30
                                 20                                                                                        20
                                 10                                                                                        10
                                  0                                                                                         0
                                          0             3             6           9           12                                 0             3               6          9            12
                                                                  Quarters                                                                                 Quarters


                                                           C. Price Level Responses to Productivity and Government Purchase Shocks
                                               C1. Short-sample money demand                                                             C2. Long-sample money demand

                                  0.25                                                                                      0.25
                                   0.2                                                                                       0.2
                                  0.15                                                                                      0.15
                                   0.1                                                                                       0.1
        % deviation




                                                                                                   % deviation




                                  0.05                                                                                      0.05
                                     0                                                                                         0
                                 -0.05                                                                                     -0.05
                                  -0.1                                                                                      -0.1
                                 -0.15                                                                                     -0.15
                                  -0.2                                                                                      -0.2
                                 -0.25                                                                                     -0.25
                                              0             3             6        9          12                                     0              3              6      9            12
                                                                    Quarters                                                                                Quarters
                                              productivity shock                                                                     productivity shock
                                              productivity shock, no money demand distortions                                        productivity shock, no money demand distortions
                                              government purchase shock                                                              government purchase shock
                                              govt. purchase shock, no money demand distortions                                      govt. purchase shock, no money demand distortions
