NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGERIAL INCENTIVES AND THE INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF PRODUCTION
Gene M. Grossman
Elhanan Helpman
Working Paper 9403
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9403
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Pol Antras, Oliver Hart and Jean Tirole for helpful discussions and
to the National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed here are the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.

Managerial Incentives and the International Organization of Production
Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 9403
December 2002
JEL No. L22, F23, D23
ABSTRACT
We develop a model in which the heterogeneous firms in an industry choose their
modes of organization and the location of their subsidiaries or suppliers. We assume that the
principals of a firm are constrained in the nature of the contracts they can write with suppliers or
employees. Our main result concerns the sorting of firms with different productivity levels into
different organizational forms. We use the model to examine the implications of falling trade costs
for the relevant prevalence of outsourcing and foreign direct investment.

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Ehelpman@harvard.edu

Gene M. Grossman
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
Grossman@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

The term “globalization” applies most aptly to a description of the modern manufacturing processes in many industries. Rather than specializing in the production
of diﬀerent goods from start to finish, countries increasingly contribute bits of value
added to goods that end up being quite multinational in their origin. The process of
vertical specialization lies behind the rapid growth in international trade of intermediate inputs, components, and specialized producer services, which has far outpaced in
recent years the growth of world trade in final goods.1
Vertical specialization takes two primary forms. Firms may procure specialized
components or services from arms-length providers under contractual arrangements, or
they may undertake the various production and assembly activities within the boundaries of a single firm by engaging in foreign direct investment (FDI). Borga and Zeile
(2001) and Hanson et al. (2001, 2002) document and analyze the substantial rise in
intra-firm trade in intermediate inputs that has taken place within multinational corporations. Contractual dealings are more diﬃcult to isolate in the trade data, but the
business press is replete with stories about foreign outsourcing.
In this paper, we develop a model that can be used to study the underlying causes
of the growth of vertical specialization in trade and especially the form that such trade
takes in diﬀerent industries. We model the endogenous choice of organizational form
by principals who are unable to monitor all of the actions undertaken by their agents.
We consider an industry with many firms distinguished by their potential productivity.
Each principal that enters the industry acquires the technology to produce a diﬀerentiated consumer good. But production requires the cooperation of a skilled agent
who has the know-how to produce an essential component or service. The principal
may hire the agent to manage a “parts division” or else contract with an entrepreneur
to serve as independent supplier. The principal also faces the choice of whether to
engage the agent as manager or supplier in its home country or to seek to import the
intermediate inputs from a subsidiary or supplier located in a foreign land.
Our model incorporates several important trade-oﬀs that a firm faces in its choice of
location and organizational form. First, a principal who operates a vertically-integrated
1

A burgeoning empirical literature documents the rapid growth of world trade in intermediate
inputs and the increasing extent of vertical specialization. See, for example, Campa and Goldberg
(1997), Feenstra (1998), Hummels et al. (1998), Hummels et al. (2001), Feenstra and Hanson (2002),
Borga and Zeile (2001), Yeats (2001), and Hanson et al. (2001, 2002).

1

firm may be better able to monitor her partner than one who deals at arms length. We
capture this notion by assuming that a principal can observe a manager’s eﬀorts on
some fraction of tasks, but she cannot monitor the eﬀorts of an independent contractor
at all. Moreover, the ability to monitor may vary with proximity. We assume that a
principal is able to observe a manager’s eﬀorts in a larger fraction of tasks when the
manager’s division is located near to the firm’s headquarters as compared to when it
is located across national borders.
Second, the contracts that the principal can use to motivate her agent may diﬀer
in the alternative organizational forms. We do not attempt to derive the restrictions
on contracting from first principals, but rather we imbue the alternative contractual
relationships with realistic diﬀerences. In particular, we assume that a principal cannot
ask an employee to post a bond which will be forfeited in case his eﬀorts to serve the
principal fail. Nor can the principal ask an employee to front the costs of inputs
that will be put at risk in the production-sharing relationship. Rather, the principal
structures a contract for the manager that pays him a non-negative wage provided that
he performs satisfactorily on tasks that the principal can monitor and a bonus that he
receives if the project succeeds. In an outsourcing relationship, the principal similarly
cannot fine an entrepreneur for failing to deliver acceptable components (or, at least,
the size of any bond that can be posted by a supplier is limited). The supply contract
specifies a payment by the principal that will be paid no matter how the project turns
out (for example, to defray the entrepreneur’s expense for investing in the project and
to compensate his eﬀorts), and an amount that will be paid in return for delivery
of acceptable components. An important diﬀerence between the organizational forms
arises from the assumption that the principal bears the cost of labor, capital, and
material inputs in an integrated firm, whereas the entrepreneur pays these costs at
least initially when he operates a legally distinct entity.
Our model bears a familial relationship to previous research on the organization of
the firm and optimal design of contracts for managers. This is a large literature, so
we mention only two of many related papers. Holmström and Milgrom (1991) have
modeled the choice of organizational form in a setting in which an agent must perform
multiple tasks for the principal, some of which can be better observed than others. But
their emphasis is on externalities in contract design; that is, on how the incentives provided for one task reflect the diﬃculty of measuring performance on others. They apply
their reasoning to asset ownership, and show that “high-powered incentives” should be

2

more common when the agent owns the productive asset (outsourcing relationship)
than when the principal owns the asset (employment relationship). In our model too
the optimal contract for a potential supplier often provides higher-powered incentives
than the optimal contract for a manager, but this has more to do with the restrictions
we place on payments from the agent to the principal and on our assumptions about
who initially bears the cost of labor, capital, and material inputs.
Like us, Horn et al. (1995) study the design of optimal incentive contracts for
managers in a world of international trade. However, they do not consider the choice
between vertical integration and arms-length dealing. Rather, they focus on whether
international trade, by increasing the degree of competition in product markets, brings
welfare gains that can be associated with increased eﬀort by the manager and improved
internal eﬃciency of the firm.
The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we consider
the choice of organizational form by a principal with a given potential productivity.
The principal can manufacture a fixed quantity of final goods if she can obtain the
necessary intermediate inputs. The inputs must be produced by a skilled partner, who
may manage a division of the principal’s firm or head an independent supplier. The
ability of the partner to deliver suitable inputs is not assured, but depends on the
partner’s eﬀorts in a variety of tasks. If the principal hires the agent as an employee,
she can monitor the agent’s eﬀorts in a fraction of these tasks. If the agent is hired
as an independent contractor, no monitoring is possible. In either case, the principal
designs an optimal contract subject to the constraints described above, and oﬀers it to
an agent with given outside opportunities on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.
Our main result in Section 2 – which allows for no choice of location – concerns the
relationship between the principal’s potential revenues and her preferred organizational
form. We show that outsourcing is preferred by principals who have very high or
reasonably low potential revenues, whereas vertical integration may oﬀer the greatest
expected profits to a principal whose potential revenues fall in an intermediate range.
In Section 3, we illustrate our result from Section 2 for a special case in which
there is a piecewise linear relationship between eﬀort on a task and its contribution to
the probability of success of the venture. Then we introduce the locational dimension
of the principal’s decision problem and show that among firms that opt for vertical
integration, those that elect to keep their parts division close to their headquarters
have higher potential revenues than those that engage in FDI.

3

We close the model in Section 4 by specifying demand for the group of competing
outputs and by allowing for endogenous entry into the industry at a given cost. Principals who pay the entry fee draw a productivity level from a known distribution of
potential productivities. In equilibrium, each entrant has expected operating profits
equal to the fixed entry cost. The distribution of productivities and the endogenous
choice of organizational form together determine the market shares of suppliers, of foreign aﬃliates of multinational corporations and of integrated producers in the North.
In the succeeding sections, we study the determinants of these market shares. In
Section 5, we show how improvements in the ability to monitor distant managers result
in an increased market share for multinational corporations, and declines in the market
shares of components produced by independent suppliers and by vertically integrated
producers in the home country. Section 6 analyzes the eﬀects of falling trade costs.
There we show that trade liberalization or improvements in transportation may boost
the prevalence of outsourcing or of FDI, depending on whether the industry is one in
which most outsourcing is undertaken by firms that are highly productive or by firms
that are the least productive among those active in the industry. A concluding section
contains a summary of our results.

2

Organization of the Firm

In this section, we develop a theory of the firm based on the alternative means that a
principal has to address the problems caused by imperfect observability of a manager’s
actions. The principal owns the technology for producing a particular product. But,
to manufacture the good, she needs the cooperation of a skilled partner who can oversee
the production of an essential component. The principal can hire a partner to work
as a division manager, in which case she must provide the manager with the inputs
needed to produce the components and structure a suitable incentive contract for him.
Alternatively, she can turn to an arms-length supplier of components. Such suppliers
are led by “entrepreneurs” with skills similar to those of the managers. For now, we
ignore issues to do with the location of the potential parts division or supplier; later
we shall allow for a choice between a local manager and one who operates in a foreign
subsidiary, and between domestic and foreign outsourcing. We focus here on the
decisions of a single principal, but in Section 4 we shall embed the individual’s choice
in a model of industry equilibrium in which firms characterized by diﬀerent productivity
4

levels manufacture competing products.
We assume that the principal can only operate a firm of a given (maximum) size.2
If the principal succeeds in acquiring suitable components either from a subsidiary or
an external supplier, her output will be θ, where θ indexes the potential productivity of
her firm. If she fails to acquire components, output is zero. Output generates revenue
R(θ), with R(0) = 0 and limθ→∞ R(θ) = ∞. For now, we suppress the potential
interactions with other firms in the industry.
The production of components requires “eﬀort” on the part of the skilled partner
– be he a manager or an entrepreneur heading a supplier firm – in a variety of
tasks. Let e(j) be the eﬀort exerted by the manager or entrepreneur on task j. Then,
R1
with probability 0 h[e(j)]dj, the attempt to manufacture the requisite components
“succeeds,” and the resulting components can be used by the principal to produce the
R1
final good. But with probability 1 − 0 h[e(j)]dj the project fails, and the plans to
manufacture the final good must be aborted.3 We impose the following properties for
the h(·) function:
Assumption 1 There exists a finite E > 0 such that (a) 0 ≤ h(e) ≤ 1 for all
e ≥ 0; (b) h0 (e) > 0 and h00 (e) ≤ 0 for all e < E; and (c) h0 (e) = 0 for all e > E.
For simplicity, we assume that the principal cannot monitor at all the activities
of an entrepreneur who operates a legally distinct firm. However, if the principal
hires a division manager, it will be possible for her to observe the manager’s eﬀort on
a fraction δ of the tasks. All else equal, the ability to monitor eﬀort on some tasks
gives an advantage to in-house production relative to outsourcing. Later, we shall
distinguish the fraction of tasks that can be monitored in a local plant from those that
can be monitored in a foreign subsidiary. Presumably, monitoring is more diﬃcult in a
remote plant than in one that is geographically proximate to the firm’s headquarters.
The production of components requires additional inputs. Some of these may be
fixed costs, independent of the scale of component production. Others may be variable
costs. However, with a fixed scale of operation for the final producer, the number of
components that can be processed is given, and the fixed and variable costs for the parts
2

In the appendix, we show how the model can readily be extended to allow for variables scale of
production.
3
This is an extreme assumption that is used to simplify the algebra. The flavor of the analysis
would be preserved if the manager’s eﬀorts were to determine the productivity of the plant that
manufactures components.

5

manufacturer need not be distinguished.4 We denote the cost of the inputs needed to
produce the requisite quantity of components by c. These costs are paid initially by
the principal in the case of in-house production and by the entrepreneur in a supplier
relationship.
The manager or entrepreneur bears a private cost of eﬀort of e(j) on task j. The
R1
total utility cost of eﬀort is 0 e(j)dj. Since marginal returns to eﬀort on a single task
are non-increasing and all tasks contribute similarly to the success of the venture, the
optimal supply contract induces an equal eﬀort from the entrepreneur on all tasks; call
it eo . Similarly, an optimal employment contract for a division manager generates the
same level of eﬀort em on all monitorable tasks, and the same level of eﬀort en on nonmonitorable tasks. All agents are risk neutral, and income and eﬀort are separable in
the entrepreneur’s or manager’s utility function. Therefore, an entrepreneur achieves
expected utility of Io −eo , where Io is the expected profits net of input costs that accrue
to the supplier under an outsourcing contract. A manager enjoys an expected utility
of Im − δem − (1 − δ)en , where Im is the expected income that accrues to the manager
under an employment contract. Skilled individuals have an outside option to achieve
utility s̄ elsewhere in the economy. Thus, any outsourcing or employment contract
must provide the entrepreneur or manager with at least this level of well-being.
We assume that the principal tenders a take-it-or-leave-it oﬀer to the pool of skilled
individuals, subject to some constraints. First, if the principal hires a skilled individual
as a manager, the total compensation paid to the manager cannot be negative in any
state of nature. In other words, a manager cannot be asked to post a bond as a
condition of employment.5 Second, if the principal seeks a supplier in an outsourcing
relationship, the supply contract cannot require a net payment from the supplier to the
principal in any state of nature. Again, the entrepreneur cannot be asked to post a
bond that is forfeited in case the attempt to produce components fails. We do not try
to justify these restrictions on contracting from first principles, but rather take them
to approximate realistic institutional and legal constraints that exist in many modern
economies. At most, the principal can design a contract that entails a zero payment
to the manager or entrepreneur in case of poor performance or an unlucky outcome;
penalties or fines are not allowed.6
4

In the appendix, where we allow for variable production of final goods, we distinguish the fixed
costs k from the variable costs .
5
See Katz (1986) for a discussion of the theoretical and practical diﬃculties that inhibit the use of
performance bonds for employees.
6
We do not actually need the limit on the smallest payment in case of an unsuccessful project

6

With these restrictions on the feasible contracts, we see a second diﬀerence between in-house production and outsourcing. When components are manufactured in
a wholly-owned subsidiary, the principal pays the costs of the primary inputs. Then,
if the project fails, the principal stands to lose this investment. In contrast, in an
outsourcing relationship it is the entrepreneur who fronts the cost of the inputs, unless
the principal chooses to include a fixed payment for this purpose in the contract oﬀer.
This means that an entrepreneur may have more at stake than a manager and it opens
the possibility that higher-powered incentives can be oﬀered under this arrangement.
Also, in case the principal finds it optimal to design a contract that leaves (expected)
rents to her skilled partner, the ability to shift input costs to a supplier but not to
a manager may aﬀect the relative attractiveness to the principal of the alternative
organizational forms. When suppliers and managers cannot be asked to post bonds,
the fact that the supplier pays the up-front cost of the inputs into parts production
tends to favor outsourcing relative to in-house production from the perspective of the
principal. This cuts against the advantage of in-house production that stems from the
opportunity it aﬀords the principal to monitor some of the manager’s actions.
We proceed now to derive the (constrained) optimal contracts under each organizational form. An outsourcing contract is characterized by an amount s that the
principal promises to pay the entrepreneur whether or not the project succeeds and
an amount po that the principal will pay in case the supplier is able to provide the
components that are needed for production of the final good. The payment of s allows
for the possibility of (endogenous) cost sharing, while our restriction constrains the
contract to have s ≥ 0.
An employment contract is characterized by a level of eﬀort em that the manager is
expected to exert on all tasks that can be monitored by the principal, a wage payment
w that the manager will receive irrespective of the outcome of the project provided
that he has exerted at least the indicated level of eﬀort on the monitorable tasks, and
a bonus b that he will receive in case the project succeeds. Our restriction requires
w ≥ 0.
In deriving the optimal oﬀers, we will make use of the optimal responses of an
entrepreneur or manager to the incentives that are provided in his contract. An entrepreneur chooses eo to maximize his expected utility, s + po h(eo ) − eo . A manager
to be zero; a small enough finite negative number would suﬃce to yield qualitatively similar results.
Note too that the exogenous restrictions on the negative payments would not be needed if we were to
assume that managers and entrepreneurs are risk averse.

7

chooses ẽm and en to maximize w + b[δh(ẽm ) + (1 − δ)h(en )] − δẽm − (1 − δ)en , subject
to the constraint that the level of eﬀort on the monitorable tasks ẽm must be at least
as great as the eﬀort em specified in the contract. The reader may verify later that the
manager has no incentive to exert “extra” eﬀort on the monitorable tasks. So we set
ẽm = em in this problem. Then note that the payment po that must be provided to an
entrepreneur to induce an eﬀort e on all tasks is the same as the bonus b that is needed
to induce that same level of eﬀort from a manager on the monitorable tasks. We will
use the function φ(e) to denote the smallest size of the incentive needed to induce an
eﬀort level e on an unobservable task; then po = φ(eo ) and b = φ(en ). We can now
regard the principal as if she were choosing the eﬀorts exerted by an entrepreneur or
a manager subject to the constraint that these choices must be incentive compatible.
Note that φ(0) = 0 and φ(e) = 1/h0 (e) for 0 < e < E.7

2.1

Operating Profits under Outsourcing

Suppose the principal chooses to outsource the production of components.
principal must choose s and eo to maximize
Πo = h(eo )R(θ) − s − h(eo )φ(eo ) ,

Such a

(1)

the diﬀerence between her expected revenues and her expected total payments to her
parts supplier. The principal’s choices are constrained by the requirements that s ≥ 0
and
(2)
s + h(eo )φ(eo ) − c − eo ≥ s̄ .
The latter is a participation constraint, ensuring that the entrepreneur’s expected utility
(equal to his expected income less the cost of the primary inputs and the utility cost
of his eﬀorts) is no less than the utility he could attain elsewhere in the economy. Of
course, the principal could always choose not to engage with any supplier or to produce
any output, in which case her operating profits will be equal to zero.
7

Consider the problem
max zh(e) − e ,
e>0

0

which has the first-order condition zh (e) ≤ 1 and the complementary-slackness condition [zh0 (e) −
1]e = 0. Denote the solution by e∗ (z). The solution has e∗ = 0 for low values of z whenever h0 (0) is
finite. It is an increasing function of z whenever 0 < e∗ < E. The reward function φ(e) is zero for
e = 0, it is the inverse of e∗ (·) whenever 0 < e∗ (·) < E, and it is equal to the smallest value of z for
which e∗ (z) = E for e = E. Note that φ(e) is discontinuous at e = 0 whenever h0 (0) is finite.

8

Let us ignore the non-negativity constraint on s for a moment. Without this
constraint, the principal’s operating profits would be maximized by a choice of s that
would make the participation constraint (2) hold as an equality and the choice of eo
that maximizes h(eo )R − eo . We denote the eﬀort level that maximizes h(e)R − e by
e∗ (R). Note that e∗ (0) = 0 and that e∗ (R) is a non-decreasing function for all R < RoE ,
where RoE is the lowest value of R for which e∗ (R) = E.8 If, when eo = e∗ (R), the
value of s that makes (2) hold as an equality is positive, then the principal will set
eo = e∗ (R) and s equal to
s∗ (R) = c + s̄ + e∗ (R) − h[e∗ (R)]φ[e∗ (R)].
Indeed, the non-negativity constraint does not bind for low values of R, since s∗ (0) =
c + s̄ > 0 and s∗ (·) is continuous at R = 0.9 But s∗ (R) is a non-increasing function of
R for R < RoE .10 It follows that the non-negativity constraint on s may bind for a
range of higher values of R. Since the analysis is more interesting when this is so, we
adopt
Assumption 2 h(E)/h0 (E) − E > s̄ + c > h(0)/h0 (0).
The first inequality in Assumption 2 ensures the existence of an Rs between 0 and RoE
with the property that s∗ (R) ≥ 0 for all R ≤ Rs and s∗ (R) < 0 for all R > Rs .
Now consider again the problem facing the principal who has chosen to deal with
an arms-length supplier If the firm’s productivity θ is such that R(θ) ≤ Rs , the
principal chooses eo = e∗ (R) and s = s∗ (R). At small values of R(θ) such that the
optimal contract induces no eﬀort from the entrepreneur, Πo (R) must be negative by
the second inequality in Assumption 2.11 For larger values of R that imply above8

The diﬀerence h(e)R − e may be maximized by e∗ = 0 for a range of small values of R. When
0 < e∗ (R) < E, e∗ (·) is the inverse of the function φ(·). Using the first-order condition, it is easy to
verify that
1 + φ0 (E)h(E)
RoE =
,
h0 (E)
where the derivatives in this expression are interpreted as left-hand-side derivatives.
9
The function s∗ (·) may be discontinuous only at the single point where R = 1/h0 (0); i.e., the
point where eﬀort turns positive and the bonus may jump.
10
ds∗ /dR = −(hφ0 )(de∗ /dR), which is zero or negative for R < RoE .
11
We do not need the second inequality in Assumption 2 for any of our substantive results. Without
this assumption, there is the possibility that an outsourcing operation may be profitable with no eﬀort
from the entrepreneur; this just adds another (uninteresting) case to the analysis. Note that the second
inequality in Assumption 2 will be satisfied if the probability of success of a venture is small when the
entrepreneur invests no eﬀort, or if the marginal productivity of the first bit of eﬀort is large.

9

minimum eﬀort, e∗ (·) is the inverse of the bonus function φ(·). But this means that
po = φ[e∗ (R)] = R and therefore that Πo (R) = −s∗ (R) ≤ 0. It follows that outsourcing
cannot be profitable for any R ≤ Rs under Assumptions 1 and 2.
Accordingly, we can limit our attention to firms with productivity levels such that
R(θ) > Rs . These firms set s = 0. Then the participation constraint for the entrepreneur implies h(eo )φ(eo ) − eo ≥ c + s̄. The maximization of operating profits Πo (R)
subject to this constraint requires
Rh0 (eo ) = 1 + (1 − λ)φ0 (eo )h(eo )
and
λ[h(eo )φ(eo ) − eo − c − s̄] = 0,
where λ ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the participation constraint. It follows that
for R between Rs and Roλ , eo = e∗ (Rs ), where
Roλ =

1 + φ0 [e∗ (Rs )]h[e∗ (Rs )]
h0 [e∗ (Rs )]

(3)

is the largest value of revenues for which the participation constraint binds (λ > 0). In
other words, in the range between Rs and Roλ , the eﬀort expected of the entrepreneur
is constant at the (unique) level that leaves him with the same utility as he could
attain elsewhere. For higher levels of revenue than Roλ , it is optimal for the principal
to leave some rents for the entrepreneur in order to induce a higher level of eﬀort than
e∗ (Rs ). Note that Roλ < RoE , so there always exists a range of revenues for which the
participation constraint does not bind.
Figure 1 depicts the operating profits for a firm that chooses to outsource its parts
production, as a function of R (and implicitly of θ). For R < Rs , these profits are
negative, as we have already noted. A firm with potential revenues in this range
prefers to shut down than to contract with an outsourcing partner, considering the
cost of such a contract and the prospects for success. At R = Rs , the revenues just
cover the operating costs, i.e., Πo (Rs ) = 0. Then, for a range of revenues between Rs
and Roλ , eﬀort is constant, and operating profits are a linear function of R given by
Πo (R) = Rh [e∗ (Rs )] − φ [e∗ (Rs )] h [e∗ (Rs )] .
For R between Roλ and RoE , the participation constraint does not bind, eﬀort increases
10

Πo( R )

0

Rs

Roλ

RoE

R

Figure 1: Expected Operating Profits from Outsourcing
with R, and operating profits are a convex function of R given by
Πo (R) = max[R − φ(e)]h(e).
e≥0

Finally, the first inequality in Assumption 2 ensures that the principal will induce an
eﬀort of E for R ≥ RoE . For these highly productive firms, operating profits again are
a linear function of R given by
Πo (R) = [R − φ(E)]h(E).

2.2

Operating Profits under Vertical Integration

Now suppose that the principal chooses instead to manufacture her own components
by hiring a manager to oversee a parts division. The principal must choose a contract
for the manager that specifies a wage, an expected level of eﬀort on monitorable tasks,
and a bonus for success. Equivalently, we can think of the manager as choosing w, em
and en to maximize
Πv (R) = [δh(em ) + (1 − δ)h(en )][R − φ(en )] − w − c ,

11

(4)

subject to
[δh(em ) + (1 − δ)h(en )]φ(en ) + w − δem − (1 − δ)en ≥ s̄.

(5)

Here, the operating profits are the expected revenues net of the expected bonus payment, the cost of the inputs, and the wage of the manager. The constraint ensures
that the welfare of the manager is at least as great as what he could attain by working
elsewhere. The principal also is constrained to oﬀer a non-negative wage rate (w ≥ 0)
and to choose non-negative levels of eﬀort for both monitorable and non-monitorable
tasks.
As with outsourcing, the principal will not be constrained by the requirement that
wages be non-negative if the firm’s productivity, and thus the potential revenues, are
very low. For small values of R(θ), it is optimal for the principal to design the employment contract so that em = en = e∗ (R) and w = w∗ (R), where
w∗ (R) = s̄ + e∗ (R) − h[e∗ (R)]φ[e∗ (R)].
As long as the implied wage is not negative, this contract achieves the first-best for the
principal, with an eﬃcient level of eﬀort by the manager on all tasks and a compensation
package that leaves him with no rents.
We can define a revenue level Rw that is analogous to Rs ; Rw is the largest level of
revenues at which the principal achieves the first-best outcome. Note that Rw ≤ Rs ,
because w∗ (R) = s∗ (R) − c and so if w∗ (R) is non-negative, s∗ (R) certainly is nonnegative. The principal can attain the first-best outcome with outsourcing for a wider
range of revenue levels than with in-house production, because the outsourcing payment
compensates the manager not only for his eﬀorts and the opportunity cost of his time,
but also for the cost of the inputs that he uses to manufacture components.
It follows immediately that outsourcing is more profitable than in-house production
for potential revenues near Rs . With outsourcing, the principal induces an eﬃcient
level of eﬀort at Rs and pays the entrepreneur just enough to satisfy the participation
constraint. In an integrated firm, the wage at Rs that would leave a manager who exerts
the eﬃcient level of eﬀort on all tasks indiﬀerent between working for the principal and
pursuing an outside option is negative. So the principal must either pay rents to
the manager or sacrifice eﬃciency on at least some tasks. Note that Πo (Rs ) = 0, so
Πv (Rs ) < 0.
When potential revenues are suﬃciently greater than Rs , the principal can achieve

12

Πo ( R )
Πv ( R )

Rw
0

Rs

R1 Roλ

RoE R2 RvE

R

Figure 2: Outsourcing versus In-House Production
positive expected profits with in-house production. The optimal contract is one that
maximizes (4) subject to (5) and w ≥ 0. If potential revenues are very high, the
principal will opt to have the manager exert maximal eﬀort on all tasks. In the event,
the manager will capture positive rents. For more moderate levels of revenues, the
principal will tailor the contract so as to induce em > e∗ (R) > en , and will accept an
ineﬃcient allocation of the manager’s eﬀort across tasks. The participation constraint
binds whenever em < E, for otherwise the principal could demand a higher level of
eﬀort on the monitorable tasks at no cost to herself.
We are now ready to compare the expected operating profits under the alternative
organizational forms. Figure 2 depicts this comparison for diﬀerent levels of revenue
and thus, implicitly, for diﬀerent productivity levels of the final-good producer. For
revenue levels below Rs , outsourcing and in-house production both generate expected
operating losses. A principal that anticipates such a low level of potential revenues
prefers to shut down than to engage an agent as either a supplier or a manager.
A more productive principal, whose potential revenues slightly exceed Rs , can earn
slightly positive expected profits by contracting with an external supplier, but would
lose most of the input costs c by employing a manager. Such a principal, and indeed
any one with potential revenues between Rs and R1 , prefers outsourcing to in-house
production. Outsourcing also yields higher expected profits to firms with very high

13

levels of productivity. Consider, for example, R ≥ RvE , where RvE is the smallest
level of revenue at which it is optimal for the principal to induce maximal eﬀort on all
tasks of the manager.12 It is easy to show that RvE > RoE , i.e., when the principal
would induce maximal eﬀort on all tasks in an integrated firm, the optimal outsourcing
contract would also induce maximal eﬀort by the entrepreneur. With maximal eﬀort
and in-house production, the expected operating profits for the principal are
Πv (R) = [R − φ(E)]h(E) − c.
This is less than what the principal could achieve by outsourcing; the diﬀerence is
simply the cost of the inputs needed to manufacture the components. In each case,
when eﬀort is maximal, the skilled partner captures some rents. But the rents are
smaller with outsourcing than with an integrated production unit, because the input
costs can be shifted to the partner when the components are produced by a separate
firm but not when they are produced in house.
For intermediate levels of productivity, the principal may prefer vertical integration
to arms-length dealing. Figure 2 shows this to be the case, as it must be when δ is close
to one. Consider the potential operating profits under the alternative organizational
forms when the firm’s productivity is such that R = RoE . Under outsourcing, the
principal induces the entrepreneur to provide eﬀort at level E, and operating profits
are given by Πo (RoE ) = [RoE − φ(E)]h(E). If the principal were to hire a manager
instead, she could insist on an eﬀort level of E on the tasks that can be monitored
while allowing zero eﬀort on tasks that cannot be monitored. Such an eﬀort profile
would require no bonus payment from the principal (since φ(0) = 0), but would require
that the manager be paid a wage of at least s̄ + δE to match his outside option. By
choosing a contract with em = E, w = s̄ +δE and b = 0, the principal would achieve
an expected operating profit of RoE [δE + (1 − δ)h(0)] − δE − c − s̄. Of course, this
contract might not be optimal, which means that Πv (RoE ) is at least as large as this
amount. It follows that
12

It is optimal for the principal to induce maximal eﬀort on the tasks that cannot be monitored
when (1 − δ)[Rh0 (E) − 1] − h(E)φ0 (E) ≥ 0, or when
R ≥ RvE =

1 − δ + h(E)φ0 (E)
.
(1 − δ)h0 (E)

14

Πv (RoE ) − Πo (RoE ) ≥ h(E)φ(E) − δE − c − s̄ − (1 − δ)[h(E) − h(0)].
But Assumption 2 ensures that the right-hand side of this inequality is positive for δ
close to one. In short, if the manager can be monitored in a large enough fraction of
tasks, then the benefits of vertical integration outweigh the costs for some intermediate
range of productivity levels.
To summarize, we have shown that a principal prefers to buy components from
an independent parts supplier when her productivity is suﬃciently high or rather low.
Between these extremes there may be a range of productivity levels for which vertical
integration is the preferred mode of organization. The advantage of outsourcing at high
levels of productivity comes from the opportunity it aﬀords a principal to reduce the
rents that must be granted to the agent in a situation in which it is optimal for her to
tolerate some rent sharing in order to induce maximal eﬀort. Outsourcing cuts into the
agent’s rents, because the cost of the inputs used to produce the parts can be shifted to
the supplier.13 For low levels of productivity, outsourcing is advantageous for a diﬀerent
reason. Here, the eﬃcient level of eﬀort is relatively low and the agent captures no
rents. But for any level of eﬀort, the contingent payment under outsourcing that leaves
the entrepreneur without rents is larger than the bonus payment to a manager that
similarly drives him to his reservation level of utility. This is because a contingent
payment po must compensate an entrepreneur for the cost of the inputs as well as the
disutility of his eﬀort, while a bonus payment b repays only the eﬀort. It follows that
a principal can induce greater eﬀort from an entrepreneur than from a manager for a
given expected outlay. Put diﬀerently, an entrepreneur who bears the cost of the inputs
has more at stake in a project than a manager who does not. When the principal brings
the former to utility level s̄, the resulting incentives have higher power than those that
would bring a manager to the same level of expected utility.
The possible advantage of vertical integration for an intermediate range of productivity levels stems from the opportunity it aﬀords the principal to monitor some of the
manager’s actions. On tasks that can be monitored, the principal can induce a high
level of eﬀort without having to leave rents to the manager. She can do so simply by
paying a wage that compensates the manager for his eﬀort on these tasks, and de13

We show in the appendix that when the principal can vary her scale of operation, she leaves no
rents to the entrepreneur even when potential revenues are high. However, the comparison between
outsourcing and in-house production at diﬀerent levels of potential revenue is qualitatively the same
as what we describe in the main text.

15

manding that the eﬀort be made. If enough tasks can be monitored, the principal can
achieve as high a probability of success with integration as with outsourcing without
having to share rents.

3

Choice of Location

In the first part of this section, we develop a special case of the model in Section 2
in which the contribution of eﬀort on a task to the probability that the project will
succeed is a piecewise linear function of the eﬀort level. By using this simple, special
case we are able to address the principal’s location problem most clearly. In the latter
part of the section, we allow for outsourcing in two regions distinguished by costs
and also allow an integrated firm to operate a local subsidiary which aﬀords relatively
better opportunities for monitoring the manager or a remote subsidiary which aﬀords
relatively worse such opportunities.

3.1

A Special Case: Piecewise Linearity

In this section, we take the h(·) function to be piecewise linear, with E = 1 and h(e) = 1
for e ≥ 1. We define h0 , h1 , and e1 such that h(0) = h0 and h(e1 ) = h1 , as shown in
Figure 3. The marginal productivity of eﬀort is constant for eﬀorts between 0 and e1 ,
and also constant for eﬀorts between e1 and E = 1. Assumptions 1 and 2 place certain
restrictions on the parameter values, which we write as
Assumption 10 (h1 − h0 )/e1 > (1 − h1 )/(1 − e1 )
and
Assumption 20 (h1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ) > s̄ + c > e1 h0 /(h1 − h0 ).
When the h(·) function is piecewise linear, the bonus function φ(·) is discontinuous
at both e = 0 and e = e1 . To induce an eﬀort of e1 from the entrepreneur on any task,
or from the manager on a task that cannot be monitored, the principal must reward
a success with a contingent payment of e1 /(h1 − h0 ). To induce the higher eﬀort of
e = 1, the payment must be (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ).14
The potential operating profits from outsourcing are depicted by the solid, kinked
curve in Figure 4. At very low levels of productivity such that R(θ) < Ra = (s̄ + c +
e1 )/h1 , the principal prefers to leave the market than to engage a supplier or a manager
14

Recall that φ (e) is defined as the smallest bonus that induces the eﬀort e.

16

h

1

h1

h0
0

e1

e=E=1

e

Figure 3: Piecewise Linear Productivity of Eﬀort
and thereby suﬀer negative expected profits. For operating profits to be positive,
potential revenues must be at least as great as Ra . At this revenue level, the principal
oﬀers an incentive payment of e1 /(h1 − h0 ), thereby inducing the entrepreneur to exert
an eﬀort of e1 on all tasks. The principal makes a fixed payment to the entrepreneur of
s = s̄ + c + e1 − e1 h1 /(h1 − h0 ) to ensure that the entrepreneur is willing to accept the
contract.15 The project succeeds with probability h1 and the principal earns expected
operating profits of Πo (Ra ) = 0.
For a range of revenue levels above Ra , it remains optimal for the principal to write
a contract that induces eﬀort e1 by the entrepreneur. In this range, expected operating
profits are given by Πo (R) = Rh1 − e1 − s̄ − c. But when productivity is such that
R(θ) ≥ Rc = [(1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 )2 ] − [(s̄ + c + e1 )/(1 − h1 )], the principal prefers to induce
the maximal eﬀort level of E = 1 by oﬀering a contingent payment of (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ).
Here, the non-negativity constraint for s binds. The principal sets s = 0 and achieves
expected operating profits of Πo (R) = R − (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ).
If the principal opts for in-house production of components, it is never optimal
for her to induce the manager to work harder on the tasks that cannot be monitored
than on those that are observable. We focus therefore on strategies that involve em ≥
en . There are now several possibilities to consider. We can rule out em = en = 0,
15

Note that s > 0 in light of the second inequality in Assumption 20 .

17

Πo (R)
Πv (R)

0

Ra

Q
•
Rb

Rc

R

Rd

_

Ra = ( s + c + e1 ) / h1
Rb = (1 − e1 ) /(1 − h1 )

Figure 4: Outsourcing vs. In-House Production: A Special Case
because with these levels of eﬀort, expected operating profits are always negative under
Assumptions 10 and 20 . Also, by choosing em = e1 and en = 0, the principal earns lower
expected profits in an integrated operation than she does by outsourcing for all revenue
levels at which expected profits under this integration strategy are positive.16 We can
therefore disregard this strategy as well.
Another possible strategy has em = en = e1 . This requires a bonus oﬀer of b =
e1 /(h1 − h0 ) and may or may not require a positive wage payment in order that the
contract satisfies the participation constraint. If s̄ > e1 h0 /(h1 − h0 ), then w > 0 when
em = en = e1 , and the principal attains expected operating profits of Rh1 − e1 − s̄ − c.
For revenue levels between Ra and Rc , these profits are exactly the same as what she can
earn by outsourcing. Recall from Section 2 that generically there exists a range of low
productivity levels at which the principal prefers outsourcing to in-house production.
Since this preference is only a weak one when s̄ > e1 h0 /(h1 − h0 ), we instead adopt
Assumption 30 s̄ < e1 h0 /(h1 − h0 ).
Under Assumption 30 , the manager of a parts division captures rents when em = en =
e1 , b = e1 /(h1 − h0 ), and w = 0. The associated operating profits for the principal are
16

With em = e1 and en = 0, the principal sets b = 0 and w = s̄ + δe1 . Operating profits are
Πv (R) = R[δh1 + (1 − δ)h0 ] − δe1 − s̄ − c, which is positive when R > (s̄ + c + δe1 )/[δh1 + (1 − δ)h0 ].
But for such values of R, the principal can earn profits of Rh1 −e1 − s̄−c from outsourcing by inducing
eﬀort of e = e1 . Assumptions 20 ensures that these profits are higher.

18

Rh1 − (h1 e1 )/(h1 − h0 ) − c, which is less than what she could earn by outsourcing.
In-house production also yields lower expected profits than outsourcing when the
principal would set em = en = 1. To induce an eﬀort of e = 1 on tasks that cannot be
monitored, the principal must oﬀer a bonus payment of b = (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ). But then
the non-negativity constraint on the wage binds, and the principal must leave rents to
the manager. The resulting profits are R − [(1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 )] − c, which is less than
what the principal could earn by outsourcing and inducing an eﬀort level of e = 1 on
all tasks.
The possible attractiveness of in-house production to the principal comes when the
optimal contract entails em = 1 and b = e1 /(h1 − h0 ), so that en = e1 . This can happen
for an intermediate range of revenue levels, which is in line with our more general
findings in Section 2. When em = 1 and en = e1 , the non-negativity constraint on
the manager’s wage may or may not bind. In either case, in-house production may
yield higher operating profits to the principal than outsourcing for some values of R.
However, to avoid a taxonomy, we shall focus on the case in which the principal pays
a positive wage w > 0 in order to satisfy the manager’s participation constraint. This
case arises when
¶
µ
e1
− δ − (1 − δ)e1 .
(6)
s̄ > [δ + (1 − δ)h1 ]
h1 − h0
Then vertical integration with em = 1 and en = e1 yields expected operating profits to
the principal of Πv (R) = R[δ + (1 − δ)h1 ] − [δ + (1 − δ)e1 ] − s̄ − c. These profits are
depicted by the dotted line in Figure 4.17
We see in the figure that in-house production dominates outsourcing from the
principal’s perspective for R between Rb and Rd . It is easy to calculate that Rb =
(1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ), which is to the right of Ra and independent of δ. It follows that when
inequality (6) is satisfied, there always exists a range of revenue levels for which the
17

An alternative strategy for in-house production is for the principal to require em = 1, pay a wage
w = s̄ + δ, and oﬀer no bonus. Facing such a contract, the manager would make no eﬀort on tasks
that are not monitored and would be indiﬀerent between participating in the contract and not. The
alternative strategy yields expected profits for the principal of R [δ + (1 − δ) h0 ] − δ − s̄ − c, which –
for all R ≥ Ra – is strictly less than the profits of R [δ + (1 − δ) h1 ] − [δ + (1 − δ) e1 ] − s̄ − c that she
earns by pursuing the strategy described in the text. However, when inequality (6) is violated, the
strategy of accepting en = 0 may be the best option available to the principal for some revenue levels.
Then the figure would look somewhat diﬀerent from what we have drawn in Figure 4, but the main
conclusion about the choice of organizational form for firms with diﬀerent productivity levels would
remain the same.

19

principal prefers in-house production to outsourcing. This range is larger the greater
is δ, because an increase in δ causes the dotted line to rotate in a counterclockwise
direction around point Q.
Figure 4 reproduces the general pattern that we identified in Section 2. Firms with
productivity such that R(θ) < Ra cannot achieve positive expected operating profits
by either mode of organization, and so they exit the industry. Firms with potential
revenues between Ra and Rb and those with potential revenues greater than Rd prefer
to outsource; all others prefer to produce their components in house.

3.2

Choice of Location for Parts Production

At last, we are ready to address the principal’s problem about where to locate the
parts production. The are two regions, North and South, with associated variables
represented by subscripts N and S, respectively. The principal has her headquarters in
the North. If she chooses to outsource the production of components, she may choose
a supplier in the North or in the South. We assume that input costs are lower in the
South (cS < cN ) and that the outside options for those with the skills needed to head
a production unit are no better there (s̄S ≤ s̄N ).18 The principal might also create a
subsidiary to produce components in either the North or the South, with such a plant
managed by a local employee. We assume that the principal is able to monitor the
manager’s eﬀorts in a greater fraction of tasks when the production unit is located in
the North than when it is located in the distant South (δ N > δ S ).
Note that our model gives no advantage to outsourcing in the North to compensate
for the higher costs there. We might, for example, have allowed the principal to
monitor some (small) fraction of an entrepreneur’s actions, with greater opportunities
for this in the North than in the South. Then outsourcing in the North might have
become viable for some productivity levels. Or we might have allowed for diﬀerences
in the “thickness” of the markets for components or in the completeness of enforceable
contracts in the alternative legal environments. The role that these latter diﬀerences
play in the location of outsourcing activity was the focus of Grossman and Helpman
(2002). Here we prefer to keep matters simple, and so we accept that outsourcing in
the North is a dominated option in this setting.
However, foreign direct investment (FDI) and in-house production of parts in the
North both may be viable options for some parameter values and some productivity
18

Actually, our qualitative results require only that cS + s̄S < cN + s̄N .

20

levels. The former aﬀords an opportunity for monitoring some of the manager’s eﬀorts
without giving up the advantage of low costs. The latter provides still better opportunities for monitoring, but costs are higher. Our next task is to compare the three
options of outsourcing (in the South), home production and FDI for diﬀerent levels
of productivity. We can readily show that vertical integration in location j can only
compete with outsourcing when the principal would choose emj = 1 for the manager’s
eﬀort on tasks that can be monitored in location j and enj = e1 for tasks that cannot
be monitored. So we limit our attention to these strategies.
First note that for low levels of R at which foreign outsourcing is only marginally
profitable, outsourcing is the preferred mode of organization for the principal. The
comparison between foreign outsourcing and FDI is the same as we conducted in Section
3.1; the former dominates at low levels of productivity and revenues, because the
principal can structure higher-powered incentives for an entrepreneur who must front
the cost of inputs than she can for a manager who must be paid a non-negative wage
no matter what the outcome of the project. The principal in turn prefers FDI to home
in-house production when inequality (6) is satisfied for (at least) all revenue levels
R ≤ Rb = (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ). To see this point, recall that an increase in δ rotates
the line representing profits under vertical integration around the point Q in Figure
4. This means that the fraction of monitorable tasks has no bearing on operating
profits under vertical integration when R = Rb . But the lower costs in the South
give FDI a clear advantage over in-house production in the North at R = Rb ; in fact,
ΠvS (Rb ) − ΠvN (Rb ) = (s̄N + cN ) − (s̄S + cS ) > 0.
Figure 5 shows the maximal expected operating profits for a firm with potential revenues R. Implicitly, this figure reveals the optimal choice of organization and location
for each value of R. For R < Ra = (s̄S + cS + e1 )/h1 , expected operating profits must
be negative for each of the three organizational forms, and so exit is the best available
strategy. For R = Ra , outsourcing in the South achieves zero expected profits. Next
comes a range of revenue levels between Ra and Rb for which outsourcing is profitable
and the best of the three alternatives. As we just described, outsourcing oﬀers low
costs to the principal and aﬀords the opportunity for her to structure high-powered
incentives for the entrepreneur without sharing rents. When R = Rb , the expected
profits for FDI match those for outsourcing and exceed those available to a firm that
produces its own components in the North. In the range between Rb and Rv , the
principal chooses FDI over outsourcing, because she values the ability to monitor the

21

Π
exit outsourcing

0

Ra

in-house
production

FDI

Rb

Rv

Rk

outsourcing

R

_

R a = ( s S + c S + e 1 ) / h1
R b = (1 − e1 ) /( 1 − h1 )
_

_

R v = R b + ( s N + c N − s S − c S ) /( δ N − δ S )( 1 − h1 )

Figure 5: Expected Profits for Piecewise Linear Productivity of Eﬀort
manager on a fraction δS of the tasks. But in this range, the benefit of lower costs
still outweighs the cost of less monitoring in the comparison between FDI and in-house
production at home.
The figure shows Rv = Rb + [(s̄N + cN ) − (s̄S + cS )]/[(δ N − δ S )(1 − h1 )] to be the
revenue level at which FDI and in-house production in the North yield equal expected
profits. At R = Rv , the cost savings that favor FDI are matched by the benefits from
closer monitoring of the manager’s eﬀorts. Since potential revenues are reasonably
high in the range above Rv , the principal places great importance on achieving a high
probability that the project will succeed. She is willing to pay more for inputs and to
compensate the manager more handsomely in order to mitigate the damage caused by
the manager’s moral hazard.
Finally, highly productive principals prefer foreign outsourcing to in-house production in the North and to FDI. Specifically, when θ is such that R(θ) > Rk , where
Rk =

1−e1
1−h1

− [δ N + (1 − δ N )e1 − (s̄N + cN )]
,
1 − [δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ]

the principal achieves higher expected operating profits by outsourcing than by opening

22

a local subsidiary.19 The reason is that when very large revenues are at stake the
principal will do whatever is necessary to ensure maximal eﬀort by the entrepreneur
or manager and a high probability of success. To induce an eﬀort of e = 1 on all tasks,
the principal must share rents with the entrepreneur or manager. But the principal
foregoes fewer rents with outsourcing than with (any form of) in-house production,
because the input bill that is initially paid by the entrepreneur serves as a tax on his
take of rents.
To summarize, we have shown that the firms in an industry have diﬀerent incentives
to open foreign subsidiaries and to engage in foreign outsourcing depending on their
productivity levels. Our model suggests that the least and most productive firms will
turn to external suppliers for the component needs, while the firms that operate foreign
subsidiaries will be less productive than those that manufacture their own components
in a plant nearer to their headquarters.

4

Industry Equilibrium

In this section, we embody our model of a firm’s choice of organizational mode and
location in a setting of industry equilibrium. We assume that principals can enter the
industry by bearing a fixed entry cost of f . Those that pay this cost draw a productivity
level from a known distribution G(θ), just as in Melitz (2002) and Helpman, Melitz and
Yeaple (2002). The firms then choose their organizational form (including location)
and design an optimal purchase or employment contract in the light of their decision.
Firms that are successful in acquiring components manufacture diﬀerentiated products
that compete for consumers’ spending.
We assume a world populated by many consumers, each with the utility function
u = y0 +y η /η, where y0 is consumption of a homogenous good and y is an index of consumption of the varieties of the diﬀerentiated product.20 The elasticity of demand for
the group of diﬀerentiated products (with respect to an ideal price index) is 1/ (1 − η),
where η < 1. We aggregate consumption of individual varieties using the familiar, CES
19

There is no guarantee that Rk > Rv for all parameter values. If δ N is not very much larger than
δ S or if cN + s̄N is very much greater than cS + s̄S , then there will be no values of R for which the
principal prefers in-house production in the North to both FDI and foreign outsourcing.
20
This measure of utility does not include the sebarable component of utility loss associated with
the eﬀort that an individual exerts on her job.PNote that we could accomodate many industries with
η
diﬀerentiated products by assuming u = y0 + l ω l yl l /η l ; then our analysis here would apply to any
industry l.

23

preference function
y=

·Z

α

y (j) dj

¸1/α

, 0<α<1,

where y (j) is consumption of variety j. With this specification, 1/ (1 − α) is the
elasticity of demand for variety j and a higher value of α implies greater substitution
across varieties and a higher demand elasticity for each brand. We assume α > η,
so that the varieties substitute more closely for one another than does the group of
diﬀerentiated products substitute for the numeraire good.21
We normalize the measure of consumers to equal one. Then the aggregate world
demand for variety j is described implicitly by the first-order condition
y η−α y (j)α−1 = p (j) ,
where p (j) is the price of brand j. A firm’s revenue from selling brand j is y η−α y (j)α .
If a firm with productivity θ is successful in obtaining components, it can produce
θ units of output and accrue revenue of
R (θ) = y η−α θα .

(7)

Clearly, a firm’s potential revenue is the product of two components; a component that
depends on aggregate industry characteristics, summarized by y, and an idiosyncratic
component, θ. The cumulative distribution function of θ, G (θ), induces a cumulative
distribution on R.
Equation (7) can be used to map each revenue cutoﬀ level in Figure 5 into a productivity cutoﬀ level. For example, since Rv is the revenue level at which a principal is
1/α
just indiﬀerent between in-house production in the North and FDI, θv = Rv y (α−η)/α
is the productivity level that generates such indiﬀerence. And similarly for the revenue
levels Ra , Rb , and Rk , and the corresponding productivity levels θa , θb , and θk . Since
α > η, all of these productivity cutoﬀ levels are increasing in the index of industry
consumption.
We can now calculate the expected operating profits facing a principal prior to
entry, i.e., before she learns her productivity level. Let Πij (R) denote the operating
profits for a firm with revenue R that operates with mode of organization i (i = o or
21

The discussion in this section does not require specific functional forms for the utility function.
α
We use these forms for convenience only. An exponential function y (j) is, however, needed in the
next section to derive closed-form solutions for the market shares.

24

v) and locates parts production in country j (j = S or N). If a principal draws a
1/α
productivity level below θa = Ra y (α−η)/α , she will forego the opportunity to engage
a supplier or hire a manager and earn zero operating profits. If her productivity level
falls between θa and θb , she will choose to buy components from a supplier in the South
(as we know from our earlier discussion) and earn operating profits of ΠoS (y η−α θα ).
If productivity falls between θb and θv , FDI will be the chosen mode of organization,
with expected profits of ΠvS (y η−α θα ). In-house production in the North is indicated for
productivity levels between θv and θk , with resulting expected profits of ΠvS (y η−α θα ).
Finally, for high levels of productivity above θk , the principal opts for outsourcing in
the South and earns expected profits of ΠoS (y η−α θα ). In equilibrium, the expected
operating profits for a principal prior to entry match the entry cost, f . We write the
free-entry condition as
Z

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rb

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Ra

+

Z

¡
¢
ΠoS y η−α θα dG (θ) +

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rk

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rv

Z

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rv

1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rb

¡
¢
ΠvN y η−α θα dG (θ) +

Z

¡
¢
ΠvS y η−α θα dG (θ)

∞
1/α (α−η)/α
y

Rk

¡
¢
ΠoS y η−α θα dG (θ) = f .

(8)

Expected operating profits for a potential entrant are a strictly decreasing function
of y, which means that there is a unique index of industry consumption that delivers
expected profits equal to the entry cost.
We are interested in how falling trade costs (and other changes in the production
environment) aﬀect the relative prevalence of the diﬀerent modes of organization. For
this, we need to define measures of relative prevalence. We could measure this in
terms of the numbers of components produced by diﬀerent sorts of entities, by the
output of final goods that embody components produced in diﬀerent entities, or by the
revenues collected by firms of the diﬀerent types. Fortunately, all of these measures
yield similar answers to the questions of interest, so we can focus on just one. We
shall measure relative prevalence in the industry by the shares of components that are
manufactured by arms-length suppliers, by foreign subsidiaries, and by in-house parts
divisions located in the North.
We let X denote the total output of components manufactured by producers of all
types and let n denote the number of principals that enter the industry. A fraction

25

G(θb ) − G(θa ) of the entrants draw productivity levels between θa and θb , which means
that they engage in outsourcing. Of these, a fraction h1 is successful in acquiring
components, because principals with productivity levels in the indicated range induce
their outsourcing partners to exert eﬀort of e1 . It follows by the law of large numbers
that n[G(θb ) − G(θa )]h1 units of components are produced by the supplier firms of
principals with productivities in this range. Southern subsidiaries of multinational
corporations produce a total of n[G(θv ) − G(θb )][δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ] units of components,
because a fraction G(θv ) − G(θb ) of principals draw productivity levels that make
hiring a Southern manager the optimal strategy, and these managers are induced to
exert maximal eﬀort on tasks that can be monitored and intermediate eﬀort of e1 on
tasks that are not observable. By similar reasoning, n[G(θk ) − G(θv )][δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ]
is the number of units of components produced in-house by firms with a parts division
located in the North. Finally, a fraction 1 − G(θk ) of entrants draw productivity levels
above θk . These firms engage in outsourcing and all succeed in acquiring the needed
components by inducing their partners to exert maximal eﬀort. The resulting number
of components is n[1 − G(θk )]. The total output of components is the sum of these
numbers, or
X = n[G(θb ) − G(θa )]h1 + n[G(θv ) − G(θb )][δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ]
+n[G(θk ) − G(θv )][δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ] + n[1 − G(θk )].

(9)

We can now readily compute the shares of components produced under the different modes of organization. Let σ o represent the share of components produced by
outsourcing partners, σ vS represent the share produced by firms that engage in FDI,
and σvN represent the share produced in-house in the North. Then
σo =

n
{[G(θb ) − G(θa )]h1 + [1 − G(θk )]} ,
X

(10)

σvS =

n
{[G(θv ) − G(θb )][δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ]} ,
X

(11)

and

n
{[G(θk ) − G(θv )][δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ]} .
(12)
X
Notice that the market shares do not depend on the number of principals that enter,
σvN =

26

because n/X is independent of n.22

5

Improved Monitoring in the South

In this section, we show how the model can be used to investigate the eﬀects of changes
in the production environment on the relative prevalence of diﬀerent modes of organization. We consider an increase in δ S , which is the fraction of tasks undertaken by a
division manager in the South that can be monitored by the principal in the North.
Such a gain in monitoring possibilities may result from improvements in communications technology or perhaps from changes in the legal system.
In order to derive specific results, we need to make additional assumptions about
the distribution of productivity levels among potential entrants. There is evidence
to suggest that this distribution is well approximated by a Pareto distribution, so
rather than derive suﬃcient conditions for G(·) under which certain results may hold,
we choose to work with this simple functional form.23 We henceforth assume that
G(θ) = 1−θ−β , for θ ≥ 1 and β > 1. With this distribution, the minimum productivity
level for a potential entrant is one and there is no limit on the maximum productivity
level.
As we have noted previously, an increase in δ S rotates the dotted line in Figure
4 in a counterclockwise direction around point Q. It therefore has no eﬀect on Rb ,
the level of potential revenue at which outsourcing and FDI yield the same expected
profits. It does, however, cause Rv to rise, which means that the principal prefers FDI
to in-house production in the North for a wider range of potential revenues. As δS
increases, there is no change in Ra or Rk , as the ability to monitor managers in the
South has no bearing on the profitability of outsourcing in the South or on the relative
profitability of outsourcing versus in-house production in the North.
For given y, an improvement in a principal’s ability to monitor managers in the
South must increase the expected operating profits of potential entrants, the term on
22

The equilibrium number of entrants n can be solved using the definition of y, the equilibrium output of diﬀerentiated products of the various types, and the free-entry condition (8), which determines
a unique equilibrium level of y.
23
See, for example, Axtell (2001), who provides evidence that the Pareto distribution fits well the
distribution of sales by firm in the United States. Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2002) have shown
how a Pareto distribution of firm sizes will emerge from a Pareto distribution of productivity levels.
They also verify that Axtell’s aggregate results hold for all but a handful of the 52 industries in their
data set.

27

the left-hand side of (8). This means that additional principals will enter the industry
(n rises), causing y to grow as well. However, the induced growth in the number of
entrants and the consumption index have no direct eﬀect on the market shares.
The growth in y will also cause an upward shift in all of the cutoﬀ productivity
levels, i.e., in θa , θb , θv , and θk . This is because, with greater industry competition as
measured by the index of industry output, a given firm must have higher productivity
itself to achieve the same level of revenues as before. However, all of the cutoﬀ productivity levels appear similarly in the numerators and denominators of the expressions for
market share; each such term is raised to the power of −β. It follows that the aggregate
output of a component type (the numerators in the market share expressions) and the
aggregate output of all components (the denominators in the market share expressions)
grow by the same proportion as y increases and thus the aggregate consumption index
has no indirect eﬀect on the market shares as well.
We are left with two eﬀects of an increase in the fraction of tasks that can be monitored in the South. An increase in δ S generates an increase in the probability that any
given parts division in the South will be successful in producing components, because
managers of Southern subsidiaries devote more eﬀort to tasks that are monitored than
to those that are not. And an increase in δ S causes a wider range of principals to
locate their parts divisions in the South, as Rv rises. The former eﬀect tends to increase
X/n, the average number of components produced per entrant, while the latter eﬀect
tends to reduce it (since parts divisions in the South succeed less often than those in
the North). On net, however, the former eﬀect dominates with a Pareto distribution
of productivity levels, and so the average output of components per entrant rises.24
Now we are ready to discuss the shifts in the market shares. Consider first the
market share of components produced by arms-length suppliers, σ o . There is no eﬀect of
a change in δ S on the cutoﬀ productivity levels at which principals choose to outsource
their components beyond what results from the change in y, which we know does not
aﬀect the market shares. So the term in curly brackets in (10) does not change for
given y. But we have just noted that X/n rises for given y, due to the dominant eﬀect
of the improved productivity of Southern parts divisions. It follows that the relative
prevalence of outsourcing falls.
£
¤
To justify this claim, we totally diﬀerentiate I/ ny β(η−α)/α with respect to δ S , taking account
of the fact that Rv = Rb + (s̄N + cN − s̄S − cS ) / (δ N − δ S ) (1 − h1 ). The sign of this derivative is the
same as the sign of q −β/α − 1 − (1 − q) β/α, where q = Rb /Rv < 1. Since q −β/α is convex in q, this
derivative must be positive.
24

28

The fraction of components emanating from integrated firms with a parts division in
the North falls by an even greater percentage than σ o . From (12) we see that σ vN falls,
because the term in curly brackets falls for given y as Rv rises and also because X/n
grows. The growing productivity of subsidiaries in the South means that a subsidiary
with given productivity will generate a higher average output of components and it
also spells a shift away from in-house production in the North in favor of FDI. For
both reasons, the market share of Northern parts divisions falls.
Finally, the three market shares sum to one. Since σ o and σ vN both fall, it must
be that σ vS rises, i.e., the output of components by Southern subsidiaries grows by
more than the aggregate output of components. Thus, an increased ability to monitor
managers in the South makes in-house production in the South a more attractive option
relative to both of the alternative modes of organization.
Our results in this section are broadly consistent with some recent empirical evidence on the determinants of the form of foreign investment and the extent of vertical
specialization in multinational firms. For example, Lin and Png (2002) examine the
form of FDI undertaken by 148 Taiwanese firms that made investments in China between 1987 and 1991. They consider the firms’ decision whether to structure the FDI
as a joint venture or as a wholly-owned subsidiary, taking distance from Hong Kong as
a proxy for the principal’s ability to monitor the local agent. A joint venture is more
like outsourcing in our model, inasmuch as the local entrepreneur has a greater stake in
the project than does the local manager of a wholly-owned subsidiary. Lin and Png find
that joint ventures are more likely to be chosen as distance from Hong Kong increases,
which is in keeping with our finding that the range of (low-productivity) firms that
choose outsourcing over FDI expands as δ S declines. In related work, Hanson et al.
(2002) examine the determinants of the extent of foreign aﬃliate processing of inputs
imported from a parent U.S. firm. After controlling for trade barriers and transportation costs between the parent and subsidiary, they find that the extent of such vertical
specialization is decreasing in the distance between parent and subsidiary, is greater
for subsidiaries located in English speaking countries than those that are not, and is
higher in Mexico and Canada then would be predicted based on distance (and the other
variables) alone. All of these findings can be viewed as consistent with our prediction
that an increase in δS (proxied by distance, common language, and adjacency) raises
the relative profitability of FDI compared to other modes of organization.25
25

Hanson et al. (2002) also find that the cost share of intermediate inputs imported by a foreign

29

6

Falling Trade Costs

In this section, we study how falling trade costs aﬀect the international organization
of production. Both trade liberalization and declining transportation costs have contributed in recent years to the globalization of economic activity. We are interested in
whether and under what circumstances a decline in trade costs will favor one mode of
organization over another.
To examine this issue, we first must extend our model to include trade costs. We
assume that transporting a component from South to North entails a per unit cost of τ .
This cost may reflect a shipping charge, or it may result from an import tariﬀ imposed
by the government of the North. The same cost applies whether the component is
traded within the firm (as when the part is produced in a foreign subsidiary) or at
arms-length (as when a firm arranges for delivery of parts from a Southern supplier).
In case of foreign outsourcing, the contract term po now refers to the amount that is
paid to the foreign entrepreneur in the event that he delivers suitable components to
the principal’s assembly plant in the North.26
The presence of trade costs modifies the relationship between expected operating
profits and potential revenues. Consider first a principal with low productivity for
whom foreign outsourcing will be the preferred mode of organization if she chooses
to operate at all.27 Such a principal designs a contract under which the expected
utility of the foreign entrepreneur is just equal to s̄S , the utility he could achieve by
pursuing his outside option. This means that the incidence of the trade costs falls on
the principal. Since we have normalized the number of components she can process
to equal one, τ is the total trade cost she will bear in the event that the foreign
entrepreneur is able to deliver the components. Thus, expected operating profits from
outsourcing are ΠoS (R) = (R−τ )h1 −e1 −(s̄S +cS ) for R ≤ Rb . The minimum potential
revenues necessary for such a principal to enter into any contract with a supplier are
Ra = τ + (e1 + s̄S + cS )/h1 .
At Rb , the principal is indiﬀerent between outsourcing and engaging a manager to
aﬃliate from its U.S. parent for further processing is decreasing in the wage of unskilled labor in the
host country. This too is consistent with the comparative static properties of our model, i.e., that the
market share of FDI falls with cS .
26
Alternatively, the principal might choose to make the account payable upon delivery of components
in the foreign country. It can be shown, however, that at al productivity levels, a principal prefers
(at least weakly) to set a c.i.f. price rather than a f.o.b. price.
27
We assume that the trade costs are not so large as to make domestic outsourcing a more attractive
option than foreign outsourcing.

30

head a subsidiary in the South. In the event of FDI, the principal bears any trade
costs that arise. Expected operating profits in this mode of organization and with the
optimal employment contract for the manager are ΠvS (R) = (R − τ )[δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ] −
[δ S + (1 − δS )]e1 − (s̄S + cS ), for R between Rb and Rv . From ΠoS (Rb ) = ΠvS (Rb ) we
find that Rb = τ + (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ) in the presence of trade costs.
Costs that arise from importing components do not aﬀect the potential profitability
of in-house production in the North for a given R. Thus ΠvN (R) = R[δ N +(1−δ N )h1 ]−
[δ N + (1 − δ N )]e1 − (s̄N + cN ) for R between Rv and Rk , as before. We calculate the
new value of potential revenues that makes the principal indiﬀerent between in-house
production in the South and in the North, and find
Rv =

1 − e1 (s̄N + cN ) − (s̄S + cS ) − τ [δ S + (1 − δS )h1 ]
.
+
1 − h1
(δ N − δ S )(1 − h1 )

Finally, when potential revenues are suﬃciently great, a principal will find it optimal
to outsource the production of components. Moreover, she will opt to provide suﬃcient
incentives for the foreign entrepreneur to exert maximal eﬀort, thereby creating rents
for the entrepreneur. The trade costs, like the cost of the inputs used to produce
the components, are borne initially by the foreign entrepreneur, since the contingent
payment po is made only when the goods are delivered to the principal in the North.
When the entrepreneur capture rents, the incidence of the trade costs falls on him. This
means that the principal achieves the same profits from outsourcing as when trade costs
are zero; namely ΠoS (R) = R − (1 − e1 )/(1 − h1 ) when R ≥ Rk . The potential revenues
Rk at which in-house production in the North and foreign outsourcing yield equal
expected profits also is the same as before.
We consider now the eﬀects of a fall in trade costs τ . In Figure 6, the dotted line
indicates that when τ declines, operating profits rise for firms that outsource in the
South and for those that undertake FDI. The point at which principals elect to engage
a supplier rather than exit the market shifts from Ra to Ra0 , because principals are able
to make positive operating profits for a wider range of revenue levels when trade costs
are lower. The level of potential revenues at which principals are indiﬀerent between
FDI and outsourcing also falls (from Rb to Rb0 ). This reflects the fact that a fall in trade
costs boosts ΠvS (·) by more than it does ΠoS (·) at a given level of potential revenues,
inasmuch as a multinational achieves a higher probability of successfully producing
components than does an arms-length supplier; thus, the expected cost savings is

31

Π

0

Ra' Ra

Rb' Rb

Rv Rv'

Rk

R

Figure 6: Fall in Trade Costs
greater for the former than the latter.28 The fall in trade costs makes the South a
relatively more attractive location for in-house production of components, so Rv rises.
Note again that Rk is unaﬀected.
It follows readily from this discussion that the market share of components produced by vertically integrated firms in the North falls.29 It is hardly surprising that
a reduction in trade costs increases the market share of imported components. But it
remains to be seen whether this reflects an expansion in the share of components purchased from supplier firms, the share produced by foreign subsidiaries of multinational
28

The probability of success for a multinational firm operating in the South is δ S +(1−δ S )h1 , which
exceeds h1 , the probability of success for an independent supplier.
1/α
29
Using (9), (12), G(θ) = 1 − θ−β and θi = Ri y (α−η)/α for i = a, b, v, and k, we can write the
market share of components produced in-house in the North as
´
³
−β/α
−β/α
− Rv
[δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ]
Rk
σ vN =
Ω
where
Ω =

³
³
´
´
−β/α
−β/α
Ra−β/α − Rb
− Rv−β/α [δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ]
h1 + Rb
³
´
−β/α
−β/α
+ Rk
− Rv−β/α [δ N + (1 − δ N )h1 ] + Rk
.

Then, the fact that dRa /dτ = dRb /dτ > 0, dRv /dτ < 0, and dRk /dτ = 0 implies dσ vN /dτ > 0.

32

corporations, or both. We will now show that the answer to this question depends sensitively on the characteristics of the firms that engage in outsourcing, and in particular
on whether these are predominantly low-productivity firms that outsource so as to generate higher-powered incentives for their partners or predominantly high-productivity
firms that outsource to conserve on the rents that they pay to their partners.
To make this point, we consider two extreme cases. Suppose first that h1 =
(e1 + s̄S + cS )/(1 + s̄S + cS ), so that Ra = Rb . Then, there are no firms with low
productivity that outsource the production of components; all outsourcing takes place
among the firms with the very highest levels of productivity.30 The fall in import costs
confers no direct benefit to these firms, because such trade costs are borne in any case
by the foreign entrepreneurs. It follows that there is no direct spur to outsourcing in
this case, and thus no change in the term in curly brackets in (10). But X/ny β(η−α)/α
grows as τ shrinks, because in-house production of components in the South expands
by more than in-house production in the North contracts.31 Therefore, the relative
prevalence of outsourcing falls. Even the absolute volume of outsourcing might fall
under these circumstances, because the firms that outsource garner no benefit from
the fall in trade costs but face greater competition from multinationals and from new
entrants to the industry.
In this case where σ vN and σ o both decline, the market share of components produced by foreign subsidiaries of multinational corporations must rise. These firms
benefit directly from the fall in trade costs, which expands the range of potential revenue levels for which FDI takes place at both the upper and lower ends. The rise in
output (given n and y) outpaces the rise in total output of components, because output
by integrated firms in the North contracts.
Now suppose that δ S does not diﬀer much from δ N and that both are very close
to one. We also assume for the purposes of this example that s̄N + cN > s̄S + cS +
τ [δ S + (1 − δ S )h1 ]. In this case, both Rv and Rk are very large, which means that virtually all outsourcing takes place among firms with relatively low levels of productivity.
Moreover, in this situation, virtually all components are produced in the South.32
30

The relative weight of low productivity firms also declines when the distribution G (θ) shifts to
the right. For example, the Pareto distribution can be extended to 1 − (γ/θ)β , where γ > 0. In this
case the support is θ ≥ γ. An upward shift in γ shifts the distribution to the right.
£
¤
−β/α−1
−β/α−1
31
We find that d I/ny β(η−α)/α /dτ = (β/α)(Rv
− Rb
) < 0.
32
Now the weight of the high productivity firms falls when the distribution G (θ) shifts to the left.
With G (θ) = 1 − θ−β , this happens when β rises. A higher β reduces the weight on the tail of the
distribution.

33

A little algebra suﬃces to show that as trade costs fall under these diﬀerent conditions, the relative prevalence of outsourcing must increase.33 But since firms that
outsource and those that engage in FDI share virtually the entire market when Rv
and Rk are large, the fraction of components produced by multinationals must fall. As
we have noted, a fall in trade costs causes Rb to fall, which means that the volume
of components produced by foreign subsidiaries rises. But the growth in FDI is more
than matched in percentage terms by the growth in outsourcing (associated with the
decline in Ra ), which occurs because some principals with low productivity now find
it profitable to engage a supplier rather than to exit the industry. And the number of
low productivity principals is larger than the number of high productivity principals
when G (θ) is a Pareto distribution.
We conclude that the eﬀects of falling trade costs on the mode of organization
and the nature of international trade will vary across industries. Trade liberalization
tends to favor multinational activity in industries in which outsourcing is conducted
predominantly by high productivity firms that are seeking to minimize the rents they
must share with the head of a parts division in order to induce high levels of eﬀort.
In contrast, trade liberalization spurs arms-length trade with suppliers when most
outsourcing is undertaken by relatively low productivity firms that are seeking to boost
the power of the incentives they can provide to their component producers. In the
former case, the fall in trade costs does little to increase the profitability of outsourcing,
but firms that engage in FDI realize an immediate cost savings. In the latter case, the
principal benefits under either mode of organization involving trade, but outsourcing
receives a greater boost because it can expand at the extensive margin.

7

Conclusions

We have developed a model in which the heterogeneous firms in an industry choose their
modes of organization and the location of their subsidiaries or suppliers. We assume
that the principals of a firm are institutionally or legally constrained in the nature of
the contracts they can write with suppliers and employees. In particularly, a supplier
cannot be asked to post a (large) bond that will be forfeited in the event that the
firm’s eﬀorts to produce suitable components prove unsuccessful. Similarly, a manager
33

By diﬀerentiating the definition of σ o , we find that the sign of dσo /dτ is the same as the sign
−β/α−1
−β/α−1
−β/α
−β/α
−β/α
of Rb (Rb
− Ra
) + (Ra
− Rb
) = Ra
(1 − Rb /Ra ), which is negative, because
Rb > Ra .

34

cannot be asked to pay a fine if his division performs poorly, nor can he be asked to
pay personally for the inputs used by his division. In such an institutional setting, the
contracts that principals can write with their suppliers and division managers may not
induce eﬃcient levels of eﬀort on all relevant tasks.
We identified two reasons why a principal may benefit from engaging an external
supplier to manufacture components in a setting like this. First, the principal can
confront an agent with higher-powered incentives when the agent has more at stake. A
supplier can be made to front the cost of the inputs needed to manufacture components
and so can be given a greater stake in the project than a manager. Second, when a
principal finds it desirable to induce a very high level of eﬀort from her agent, the cost
to the principal of providing the necessary incentives is less for an outside supplier
than for an employee. Again, the input costs play a key role in this. In the main
text, we showed that principals who are capacity constrained must leave rents to their
agents when they induce the highest level of eﬀort. But the rents are smaller for an
entrepreneur than for a manager, because the principal can pass along input costs to
the former but not the latter. In the appendix, we relaxed the assumption of a fixed
firm size and found a similar mechanism at work. With variable scale, the rents that
might potentially go to an entrepreneur can be fully taxed away by a principal in a
supplier relationship. The principal who wants high eﬀort oﬀers a large bonus, but
also demands a large delivery of components, thereby minimizing the net cost of the
incentive contract.
Against the benefits of outsourcing, there is an advantage to in-house production
that stems from the greater opportunity it aﬀords the principal to monitor the actions
of her agent. We assume that the ability to monitor an agent declines with distance; a
vertically integrated firm is able to observe a division manager’s actions on more tasks
when the division is located near the headquarters than when it is located in a diﬀerent
country. Thus, FDI suﬀers the disadvantage of lesser monitoring compared to in-house
production near the headquarters, but the possible advantage of lower costs.
Our main result concerns the sorting of firms in an industry into diﬀerent organizational forms. The least productive firms that are active in equilibrium choose to
subcontract the production of components to suppliers in the South. For these firms,
the ability to oﬀer higher-powered incentives with outsourcing weighs most heavily.
Firms with intermediate levels of productivity opt for vertical integration, with the
less productive of these undertaking foreign investment in the South and the more

35

productive operating a parts division in the North. FDI does not appeal as much to
the more productive firms, because the ability to monitor a manager’s eﬀorts becomes
more valuable as potential revenues rise. Finally, outsourcing is the preferred option
for the most productive firms in an industry, because the principals of these firms who
want to induce a high level of eﬀort are able to pass along input costs to a supplier but
not to a manager.
We used our model to examine the implications of falling trade costs for the relative
prevalence of the diﬀerent organizational modes. An important observation is that
trade liberalization may promote mostly FDI or mostly outsourcing, depending on
the characteristics of an industry. In particular, the market share of imports from
suppliers will expand as trade costs fall if most of the outsourcing is undertaken by low
productivity firms in which the principals are motivated by a desire to give their agents
a greater stake in the venture. But the market share of imports from suppliers will
contract as trade costs fall if most outsourcing is undertaken by high productivity firms
in which the principals are motivated by a desire to minimize the rents captured by
their agents. The equilibrium sorting of firms by productivity level plays an important
part in delivering these conclusions.

36

References
[1] Axtell, Robert L. (2001), “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, 293,
1818-1820.
[2] Borga, Maria and Zeile, William J. (2002), “Foreign Outsourcing and the Intrafirm
Trade of U.S. Multinational Corporations,” U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis,
manuscript.
[3] Campa, José and Goldberg, Linda (1997), “The Evolving External Orientation of
Manufacturing: A Profile of Four Countries,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Economic Policy Review, 4, 53-81.
[4] Feenstra, Robert C. (1998), “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production
in the Global Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, 31-50.
[5] Feenstra, Robert C. and Hanson, Gordon H. (2002), “Global Production Sharing
and Rising Inequality: A Survey of Trade and Wages,” in J. Harrigan (ed.), Handbook of International Trade (London: Basil Blackwell Publishers), forthcoming.
[6] Grossman Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (2002), “Outsourcing in the Global
Economy,” NBER Working Paper No. 8728.
[7] Hanson, Gordon H., Mataloni, Raymond J. and Slaughter, Matthew J. (2001),
“Expansion Strategies of U.S. Multinational Corporations,” Brookings Trade Forum 2001, 245-294.
[8] Hanson, Gordon H., Mataloni, Raymond J. and Slaughter, Matthew J. (2002),
“Vertical Specialization in Multinational Firms,” University of California, San
Diego, manuscript.
[9] Helpman, Elhanan, Melitz, Marc and Yeaple, Stephen (2002). “Exports vs. FDI,”
manuscript, Harvard University.
[10] Holmström, Bengt and Milgrom, Paul (1991), “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law,
Economics and Organization 7, 24-52.

37

[11] Horn, Henrik, Lang, Harald, and Lundgren, Stefan (1995). “Managerial Eﬀort,
Incentives, X-ineﬃciency and International Trade”, European Economic Review,
39, 117-138.
[12] Hummels, David, Rapoport, Dana, and Yi,Kei-Mu (1998), “Vertical Specialization
and the Changing Nature of World Trade,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Economic Policy Review, 79-99.
[13] Hummels, David, Ishii, Jun, and Yi,Kei-Mu (2001), “The Nature and Growth of
Vertical Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 54,
75-96.
[14] Katz, Lawrence F. (1986), “Eﬃciency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1, 235-275.
[15] Lin, Chu-Chia S. and Png, Ivan (2002), “Monitoring Costs and the Mode of
International Investment,” National University of Singapore, manuscript.
[16] Melitz, Marc (2002) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations on
Aggregate Industry Productivity,” NBER Working Paper No. 8881.
[17] Yeats, Alexander J. (2001), “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” in S.W.
Arndt and H. Kierzkowski, eds., Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the
World Economy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

38

8

Appendix: Variable Scale of Production

In the main text, we assumed that the principal can only operate a firm of a given size.
In this appendix, we allow the principal to choose her scale of production. We take the
output of components in a successful venture to be proportional to the inputs of labor
and materials, and normalize the unit variable cost of a component to equal one. The
production of components may also entail a fixed cost, which we denote by k.
Once again, principals are distinguished by their potential productivity. A principal
with productivity θ can produce θ units of output from components and collect
revenues of R(θ ). A principal who attempts to produce components in house will
choose v directly, and will bear the fixed and variable costs of this operation. The
probability that such a venture succeeds depends on the eﬀorts of a manager in a
continuum of tasks. If the principal chooses instead to contract with an independent
supplier, she will specify the size of her order, o . We assume that she can verify whether
the entrepreneur purchases the inputs that are needed to make the production of o
units of the component possible. But the principal cannot observe the eﬀorts exerted
by the entrepreneur on any of the tasks that determine the probability that usable
components will result from the project.
As in Section 2, we neglect the locational component of the principal’s decision
to focus instead on the choice of organizational mode. Consider first a principal with
productivity θ who opts to outsource the production of components. Such a principal
chooses a (non-negative) guaranteed payment s, an order size o , and a payment for
delivery po to maximize expected profits. Recognizing again that the principal can
induce eﬀort eo with a payment po = φ(eo ), the principal’s problem is to maximize
Πo = h(eo )R(θ o ) − s − h(eo )φ(eo )
subject to s ≥ 0 and

s + h(eo )φ(eo ) −

o

− k − eo ≥ s̄.

(A1)

(A2)

We assume (in place of Assumption 2) that h(E)/h0 (E) − E > s̄ + k; i.e., if the
principal elects to induce the highest level of eﬀort E with the incentive payment
φ(E) = 1/h0 (E), the entrepreneur would be willing to purchase some positive quantity
of the inputs that are necessary for the production of components.
Observe first that the participation constraint (A2) always binds in this problem.
Were it not to bind, the principal could expand her order of components (i.e., increase
39

o)

and raise expected profits at no cost to herself. Note too that if the constraint s ≥ 0
does not bind, the principal can choose the eﬀort level eo and the order size o that
maximizes joint welfare for herself and the entrepreneur. But since the entrepreneur
would achieve only his reservation level of utility s̄, this outcome would be first-best for
the principal. We denote by e∗ = ς e (θ) the entrepreneur’s eﬀort level in the principal’s
first-best, and by ∗ = ς (θ) the corresponding order size . For an exponential revenue
function with exponent between zero and one – such as arises for the CES utility
function described in Section 4 – both e∗ and ∗ are increasing functions of θ as long
as e∗ < E. Moreover, there exists a finite productivity level θE such that ς e (θ) < E
and ς (θ) < E ≡ ς (θE ) for all θ < θE and ς e (θ) = E and ς (θ) = E for all θ ≥ θE .
Next consider a principal with productivity θ who chooses to manufacture components in house. Such a principal will choose a wage w, an eﬀort level em on observable
tasks, an eﬀort level en (and associated bonus payment) on non-observable tasks, and
a scale of operation v to maximize
Πv = [δh(em ) + (1 − δ)h(en )] [R(θ v ) − φ(en )] − w −

v

−k

subject to w ≥ 0 and
w + [δh(em ) + (1 − δ)h(en )] φ(en ) − δem − (1 − δ)en ≥ s̄.
We compare now the maximum expected profits under the alternative organizational forms for diﬀerent values of θ. For the moment, we disregard the possibility that
for certain very low levels of productivity, the principal may opt to exit the industry
rather than to engage either a manager or a supplier.
For low values of θ, the constraint s ≥ 0 does not bind in the problem to maximize
Πo , nor does the constraint w ≥ 0 bind in the problem to maximize Πv . For such
levels of productivity, the principal achieves her first-best with either organizational
form. In doing so, the guaranteed payment for outsourcing is s∗ (θ) and the base wage
of a manager is w∗ (θ). We note that s∗ (θ) > w∗ (θ), because the former includes
compensation for the input costs k and lo , whereas the latter does not.34
With an exponential revenue function, both s∗ (θ) and w∗ (θ) decline as θ rises. But
34

More specifically,
s∗ (θ) = s̄ + k + ς (θ) + ς e (θ) − h[ς e (θ)]φ[[ς e (θ)]

and
w∗ (θ) = s̄ + ς e (θ) − h[ς e (θ)]φ[[ς e (θ)] .

40

w∗ declines faster than s∗ , because s∗ (θ) = w∗ (θ) + k+ o (θ), and 0 increases with
θ. It follows that the non-negativity constraint on w will bind for some low levels of
productivity at which s∗ (θ) > 0. For these values of θ, the principal can achieve her
first-best level of operating profits by contracting with an outside supplier but not by
hiring a manager to produce components in house. Outsourcing is the preferred mode
of production for productivity levels in this range.35
Next we show that a principal with very high productivity also prefers to outsource.
For high levels of productivity, the constraint that s ≥ 0 may or may not bind. If it
does not bind, then outsourcing gives the principal her first-best level of expected
profits while in-house production does not. Clearly, outsourcing is preferred in this
case. Suppose, instead, that the principal cannot achieve her first-best outcome by
outsourcing for values for θ above some θs . As θ grows large, the optimal contract for an
in-house manager induces eﬀort of E on all tasks. This leaves the manager with positive
rents under our assumption that h(E)/h0 (E) − E > s̄ + k ≥ s̄. With em = en = E, the
principal chooses a scale of production that satisfies h(E)θR0 (θ v ) = 1. If the principal
were instead to oﬀer an external supplier a contract with eo = E, o = lv (θ), and
s = v (θ), the entrepreneur would willingly accept it.36 But such a contract, which is
not necessarily the optimal oﬀer to an external supplier, yields higher expected profits
than in-house production by the amount k.
Finally, we show that if δ is close enough to one and if there exists a θs such that the
principal cannot achieve her first-best outcome by outsourcing for θ ≥ θs , then there
also exists an intermediate range of productivity levels at which a principal prefers inhouse production to outsourcing. To see this, suppose that a principal could monitor
all of the activities of a manager of an in-house division. Such a principal could achieve
the first-best level of expected profits by specifying em = ς e (θ) and v = ς (θ) and by
setting a bonus payment that just leaves the manager indiﬀerent between accepting
the contract and not. With perfect monitoring, in-house production clearly would be
preferred to outsourcing in situations where the latter organizational form does not
achieve the first best. But expected profits for an integrated firm are a continuous
35

Note that, as before, Πo (θ) = 0 for the smallest value of θ such that s∗ (θ) = 0. Therefore, the
principal will not engage a supplier or manager for lower levels of productivity than this.
36
Under this contract,
s + h(E)φ(E) − E −

v

which exceeds s̄ + k by assumption.

41

= h(E)/h0 (E) − E,

function of δ. It follows that if δ is close enough to one and θ is such that outsourcing
does not achieve the first best, then in-house production will be the preferred mode of
organization for the principal.
We conclude that the sorting of firms by productivity level is qualitatively the same
with a variable scale of production as when the scale is fixed. The least productive
firms opt to exit the industry. Those with low productivity above a certain threshold
can make positive expected profits by outsourcing but not by in-house production.
Thus, there is a range of low productivity levels for which outsourcing is the preferred
mode of organization for the principal. Outsourcing also is preferred by the principal
when productivity is suﬃciently high. For an intermediate range of productivity levels,
the principal will opt for in-house production if δ is suﬃciently large.

42

