NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAMS AND
RETIREMENT AROUND THE WORLD:
MICRO ESTIMATION
Jonathan Gruber
David A. Wise
Working Paper 9407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9407
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002
Introduction and Summary of papers by:
A. Dellis, R. Desmet, A. Jousten, and S. Perelman, Belgium
M. Baker, J. Gruber, K. Milligan, Canada
P. Bingley, N.D. Gupta, and P.J. Pedersen, Denmark
D. Blanchet and R. Mahieu, France
A. Börsch-Supan, S. Kohnz, and R. Schnabel, Germany
A. Brugiavini and F. Peracchi, Italy
T. Oshio, A Oishi, and N. Yashiro, Japan
M. Boldrin, S. Jimenez-Martin, and F. Peracchi, Spain
M. Palme and I. Svensson, Sweden
R. Blundell, C. Meghir, and S. Smith, United Kingdom
C. Coile and J. Gruber, United States

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice,
is given to the source.

Social Security Programs and Retirement Around the World: Micro Estimation
Jonathan Gruber and David A. Wise
NBER Working Paper No. 9407
December 2002
ABSTRACT
This is the introduction to and summary of the second stage of a international research
project to study the relationship between social security provisions and retirement. The project
relies on the analyses of a large group of economists in 12 countries who conduct the analysis for
each of their countries. In the first stage we documented the enormous disincentives for continued
work at older ages in many countries. The introduction to the first volume from the project
concluded with a striking graph showing a strong relationship across countries between social
security program incentives to retire and the proportion of older persons out of the labor force.
The results in this volume show the large magnitude of these effects. Across 12 countries
with very different social security programs and labor market institutions, the results consistently
show that program incentives accord strongly with retirement decisions. The magnitude is
illustrated by the simulations reported in each country paper. Considering the average across all
countries, a reform that delays benefit eligibility by three years would likely reduce the proportion
of men 56 to 65 out of the labor force between 23 and 36 percent, perhaps closer to 36 percent in
the long run.
On the other hand, an illustrative “common reform”-- with early retirement at age 60,
normal retirement age 65, and actuarial reduction in benefits between 65 and 60--has very disparate
effects across the countries, depending on the provisions of the current program in each country.
There is a strong correspondence between the simulation results and a priori expectations.
The results leave little doubt that social security incentives have a strong effect on retirement
decisions. And the estimates show that the effect is similar in countries with very different cultural
histories, labor market institutions, and other social characteristics. While countries may differ in
many respects, the employees in all countries react similarly to social security retirement incentives.
The simulated effects of illustrative reforms reported in the country papers make clear that changes
in the provisions of social security programs would have very large effects on the labor force
participation of older employees.
Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-355
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

David A. Wise
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02135
dwise@nber.org

SOCIAL SECURITY PROGRAMS AND RETIREMENT
AROUND THE WORLD: MICRO ESTIMATION
INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
by
Jonathon Gruber and David A. Wise
If they aren’t paid, people don’t work. This fundamental economic principle is
dramatically demonstrated by social security provisions and retirement. The social
security programs in most developed countries are financed on a pay-as-you-go basis.
Under this arrangement, most countries have accumulated large unfunded liabilities and
in many countries face looming financial burdens. The aging of the populations in
almost all countries is often cited as the reason for the financial burdens faced by the
social security programs. Many of the programs are very generous and thus are
increasingly costly as the population ages–with a greater proportion of the population
retired and collecting benefits, relative to the fraction of the population in the labor force
and paying for the benefits. Perhaps just as important, although not as widely
appreciated, is that the provisions of the programs themselves typically encourage
retirement by reducing pay for work. This penalty on work induces older employees to
leave the labor force early and thus magnifies the financial burden caused by population
aging.
This volume represents the second stage of a research project to study the
relationship between social security provisions and retirement. The first stage of the
project is reported in Gruber and Wise (1999a, 1999b). In that volume, we documented
the enormous disincentives for continued work at older ages in many countries. The
analysis also revealed a strong correspondence across countries between social
security program incentives to retire early and the proportion of older persons that has
left the labor force. The weight of the evidence suggested that this relationship was
largely causal. The results of the second phase strongly affirm the causal relationship
between retirement and social security incentives to quit work.
In this second stage, we turn to country-by-country analysis of retirement
behavior based on micro data. The research teams in each of 12 countries, compiled
comprehensive large data bases of individuals. The data in each country match
Page 1

information on retirement decisions to the retirement incentives inherent in the social
security provisions of each country. Retirement models were estimated, based on the
micro data. The results show the enormous effect of social security incentives on
retirement. And, the uniformity of findings is striking. In every country, the quantitative
magnitude of the program incentive effects on retirement is very large.
The key advantage of this micro estimation approach is that in each country the
effects on retirement of changes in social security provisions can be predicted. To
demonstrate the effect of such changes, the country papers in this volume include
simulations of the effects of two illustrative reforms: One illustrative reform delays the
benefit eligibility ages in each in each country. A second illustrative reform assumes
common provisions in each of the countries--reducing retirement incentives in some
countries and increasing incentives in other countries. Under the first reform, the
simulations show a large reduction in retirement in each country, and a corresponding
increase in the labor force participation of older workers in each country. Under the
second reform, the simulations show an increase in retirement in some countries and a
decrease in other countries, in accordance with the relationship between the current
country provisions and the common reform provisions.
In short: the findings confirm the conclusions based on the first stage of this
ongoing project, and, in addition, illustrate the enormous magnitude of the effect that
changes in social security provisions would have on retirement and thus the labor force
participation of older people.
Like the first stage, this second stage of the project relies on the analyses of a
large group of economists who conduct the analysis for each of their countries. The
authors of the individual country papers in this volume are:
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
United States

A. Dellis, R. Desmet, A. Jousten, and S. Perelman
Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, Kevin Milligan
Paul Bingley, Nabanita Datta Gupta, and Peder J. Pedersen
Didier Blanchet and Ronan Mahieu
Axel Börsch-Supan, Simone Kohnz, and Reinhold Schnabel
Agar Brugiavini and Franco Peracchi
Takashi Oshio, Akiko Oishi, and Naohiro Yashiro
Arie Kapteyn and Klaas de Vos
Michele Boldrin Sergi Jimenez-Martin, and Franco Peracchi
Mårten Palme and Ingemar Svensson
Richard Blundell, Costas Meghir, and Sara Smith
Courtney Coile and Jonathan Gruber

The central feature of the project is the presentation of comparable analysis in
each of the countries. Each of the country studies follows essentially the same format,
although country-specific issues important for a given country are often discussed as
part of the analysis done for that country.
Page 2

A.

BACKGROUND: THE FIRST STAGE

The goal of the first stage of the project was to describe the incentives inherent in
the social security provisions in the project countries and to relate the incentives to the
labor force participation of older workers. Each of the studies in the first volume begins
with a description of the historical evolution of labor force participation and then
presents data on the current age-specific activities and income sources of men and
women. Each of the papers presents data for men and women on: (1) Labor force
participation rates by age interval between 1960 and the present. (2) The proportion of
employees covered by the public pension system and the proportion of persons over 55
receiving public pensions, from 1960 to the present. (3) Replacement rates under the
public pension system from 1960 to the present. (4) Current labor force participation
rates by age. (5) Labor force status – employed, unemployed, disability, retired. (5)
Proportion receiving various public “pensions” -- e.g. old age, disability, survivor – by
age. (6) Proportions receiving employer-provided pensions, by age. (7) Source of
household income by age. (8) Retirement and public pension hazard rates by age.
Each paper then describes the institutional features of the country’s social security
system, highlighting any interactions with other public and private programs that might
also influence retirement behavior. The core of each paper is a detailed analysis of the
retirement incentives inherent in the provisions of that country’s retirement income
system. By making the same analytic calculations and by presenting the same
simulations in each of the countries, the individual studies provide a means of
comparing the retirement incentives among the countries.
Because it provides the background and the motivation for the continuing project,
we summarize here the key results from the first stage of the project. The decline in the
labor force participation of older persons is perhaps the most dramatic feature of labor
force change over the past several decades. The decline has been striking in all but
one of the countries studied here. The labor force participation rates of men aged 60 to
64 for the years 1960 to 1996 are shown for each of the eleven countries in Figure 1,
which for ease of exposition is presented in two panels. (Denmark was added to the
project after the first stage was completed.) The decline was substantial in each of the
countries, but was much greater in some countries than in others. In the early 1960s,
the participation rates were above 70% in each of the countries and above 80% in
several countries. By the mid 1990s, the rate had fallen to below 20% in Belgium, Italy,
France, and the Netherlands. It had fallen to about 35% in Germany and 40% in Spain.
Although United States analysts have often emphasized the “dramatic” fall in that
country, the U.S. decline from 82% to 53% was modest in comparison to the much
more precipitous decline in these European countries. The decline to 57% in Sweden
was also large, but modest when compared to the fall in other countries. Japan stands
out with the smallest decline of all the countries, from about 83% to 75%. Each of the
country papers presents completely parallel labor force and other data for men and
women, including current labor force participation and labor force departure rates by
age, which are key components of the analysis in this volume.
Page 3

By considering the labor force participation rates by age in each country it is
possible to calculate the proportion of person in a given age interval who were out of the
labor force. These “unused productive capacity” measures for all of the countries are
shown in Figure 2, for men in the age range 55 to 65. For the entire age range from 55
to 65, unused capacity ranges from 67 percent in Belgium to 22 percent in Japan. The
goal was then to consider how this measure of labor force participation was related to
the provisions of the social security programs in the countries.
The incentive measure calculated in this first volume was the implicit social
security tax on work. To understand that measure it is useful to think of wage
compensation for working an additional year in two components. The first is wage
earnings. The second component is the “increase” in the expected present discounted
value of promised future social security benefits, know as the accrual in Social Security
Wealth (SSW) = SSWt+1 - SSW t . It is natural to think of this difference as positive, or at
least not negative. That is, if a person works for an additional year and thus forgoes
one year of benefits, it might be expected that benefits begun one year later would be
increased enough to offset the fact that they are received for one fewer years. This is
true, for example, for the typical worker in the United States: if a worker forgoes
claiming benefits at the earliest possible age (62) and works another year, subsequent
benefits are increased by 6.67 percent to account for the fact that benefits will be
received for one fewer years.
In most of the countries studied in this project, however, the accrual is
significantly negative. This is a consequence in large part of not increasing benefits
enough if the age of benefit receipt is delayed--benefits are not “actuarially fair.” Thus
what the worker gains in wage earnings is partially, or even largely, offset by a loss in
future social security benefits. We call the ratio of this loss to wage earnings (after tax)
the social security implicit tax on earnings. In many countries this tax can be 80 percent
or more at certain ages. Suppose that the tax rates for each of the years from the early
retirement to age 69 are summed. We call this the tax force to retire. It is shown for all
the countries in Figure 3.
The relationship between the (logarithm of the) tax force to retire and the
proportion of men age 55 to 65 that is out of the labor force (unused capacity) is shown
in Figure 4. There is a striking correspondence between the two series, showing a clear
relationship between the social security tax on work and departure from the labor force.
A number of examples in the previous volume, some of which are replicated below,
suggest that the relationship is largely causal. We concluded in the introduction to that
volume that:
It is clear that there is a strong correspondence between the age at which
benefits are available and departure from the labor force. Social security
programs often provide generous retirement benefits at young ages. In addition,
the provisions of these programs often imply large financial penalties on labor
earnings beyond the social security early retirement age. Furthermore, in many
Page 4

countries disability and unemployment programs effectively provide early
retirement benefits before the official social security early retirement age. We
conclude that social security program provisions have indeed contributed to the
decline in the labor force participation of older persons, substantially reducing the
potential productive capacity of the labor force. It seems evident that if the trend
to early retirement is to be reversed, as will almost surely be dictated by
demographic trends, changing the provisions of social security programs that
induce early retirement will play a key role.
B.

THE SECOND STAGE ANALYSIS AND ISSUES

The first stage of this project established two key results: (1) that the social
security systems in many countries provide enormous incentives to leave the labor force
at older ages; and (2) that there is a strong correspondence between social security
incentives to retire and the withdrawal of older workers from the labor force. The
implication is that social security incentives to retire are likely an important cause of the
low labor force participation of older workers in many countries. The relationships in the
first volume, however, do not provide a means of estimating the magnitude of the effect
on labor force participation of changes in plan provisions.
Thus, in this second stage of the project, we undertake analysis to estimate how
much the retirement age would change if social security provisions were changed,
based on within-country analysis of the determinants of retirement. The analysis is
based on the micro data within each country, considering the relationship between
retirement and the incentives faced by individual employees. That is, rather than
considering system-wide incentives for representative persons (such as those with
median earning histories), and comparing these incentives with aggregate labor force
participation across countries, we now turn to micro-econometric analyses within
countries. The results of these analyses are based on differences in individual
circumstances within a given country.
This approach has two key advantages. First, the analyses in this volume show
that social security retirement incentives have very similar effects on labor force
participation in all countries. In particular, the results strongly confirm that the
relationship between labor force participation and retirement across countries is not the
result of cultural differences among countries, that could yield different norms, or “taste”
for work, at older ages. That is, the within country analyses show similar responses to
retirement incentive effects, even though the counties differ with respect to cultural
histories and institutions.
Second, the analysis of micro data also allows consideration of several feature of
social security systems, as well as individual attributes, that may simultaneously affect
retirement decisions. In particular, we can consider jointly the age at which benefits are
first available and the incentive to retire once benefits are available. Both of these
Page 5

features were shown in the first stage of the project to be important determinants of
retirement.
The importance of benefit eligibility ages presents a particular challenge for the
analyses in this volume. We believe that much of the impact of social security
provisions is likely to be through the choice of benefit eligibility ages, which in some
instances may tend to establish social norms for retirement. For example, a common
finding of many of the analyses in this volume is that even very detailed models of
retirement incentives cannot explain the large jumps in retirement rates at normal and
early entitlement ages. As a result, the retirement effects of major system reforms (like
raising the early entitlement age) may be greatly understated by comparisons among
individuals within a given retirement income system, who all face the same eligibility
ages. In addition, small private saving may limit the option of most persons to retire
before pension benefits are available (many people are “liquidity constrained”), and
such effects may not be captured by retirement models. We discuss below how we
deal with this critical issue.
In addition, as emphasized in the first volume, unemployment and disability
benefits often provide early retirement income before the nominal social security normal
retirement age. Thus in many countries, to estimate the effect of the plan provisions on
retirement, it is necessary to consider all three programs jointly, which is done in the
micro-econometric analyses in this volume .
Considered jointly, we believe that the analyses in this volume provide
overwhelmingly confirmation that the provisions of social security programs play a key
role in the determination of retirement decisions. This result complements the
conclusion from the first stage of the analysis. In addition, the estimates in this volume
allow prediction of the effects on retirement of changes in program provisions–and the
effect of changes on program costs, which will be taken up in the next stage of the
project.
As in the first volume, the analysis in each country is follows a template, so that
results can be compared across countries. The micro analysis in each country is
based on a sample of individuals. In some cases, the data come largely from
administrative records. In other cases, the data were obtained from special surveys.
The coverage is not precisely the same in each country. For example, the data for Italy
pertain to private sector workers only, excluding public sector employees. Nonetheless,
it has been possible to estimate the same models in each country, even though the
population covered by the country data sets may differ in some respects.
In this section B, we first describe the “incentive measures” used in the analysis,
as well as other features of the model specifications. The alternative incentive
measures are constructed economic variables that describe the financial gain or loss
from continuing to work. Then we discuss the method used to obtain estimates when
there are multiple routes to retirement. Next we briefly summarize the parameter
Page 6

estimates obtained in the analyses across the 12 countries.
In the section C, we discuss a key empirical regularity that strongly influences the
analyses undertaken in this volume: the correspondence between benefit eligibility
ages and retirement decisions.
In section D. we describe the simulations undertaken to summarize the
implications of the estimated models, and discuss the simulation results.
The simulations describe the effect of illustrative “policy changes.” The goal is to
provide an understanding of the nature of the findings, focusing on selected portions of
the analyses described in detail in the country papers. The simulations demonstrate the
implications of the retirement model estimates.
As part of this discussion, we take some care to explain the different methods of
simulation that are used in the analysis and why certain features of the simulation
methods are of key importance. A central aspect of the analysis is experimentation with
various approaches to estimation, and to simulations based on the estimates. The aim
is to determine the most reliable methods to use in the subsequent stages of the
project.
Some of the discussion is necessarily somewhat technical. We believe,
however, that it is important to present an overview of the critical features of the
analysis so that readers can approach the individual country papers with a broad
understanding of the issues and rational behind the approach taken in the country
analyses. Thus in the text of this introduction we have explained the main features of
the analysis and have included some additional more technical detail in an appendix.
1.

The Estimation Models: Incentive Measures and Control Variables

The goal of the analysis in the country papers is to estimate the probability of
retirement, based on the provisions of the country social security systems–which
provide differential incentives depending on individual employee circumstances--and on
other individual attributes of employees. The focus of the analysis is the plan
provisions. In particular, how the incentives to retire, inherent in plan provisions, are in
fact related to the retirement choices that individuals make. There are several ways that
the incentives might be measured. All of the measures describe the financial gain or
loss from continuing work. The specifications used in the country papers are
summarized in the table below. The most important variable in each specification is the
“incentive measure,” which is noted across the top of the table. In addition to these
measures, the models control for various other variables (covariates).
The specifications are summarized in Table 1 below. Each of the specifications
includes social security wealth (SSW). The expectation is that, all else equal, persons
with greater social security wealth are more likely to retire. In principle, total wealth
should be controlled for, but in most countries the data do not provide measures of
Page 7

other forms of wealth.
Table 1. Estimation Method (Incentive Measure) and Variables
Estimation Method (Incentive Measure)
Variables

Single Year
Accrual

Peak Value

Social security wealth (SSW)

X

X

X

X

X

X

Linear age

X

--

X

--

X

--

Individual age indicators

--

X

--

X

--

X

Earnings

X

X

X

X

X

X

Sector

X

X

X

X

X

X

Demographics

X

X

X

X

X

X

Option Value

The focus of the analysis is on forward-looking measures of the incentive for
retirement, or for continued work. A natural starting point is a measure that looks ahead
only one year, the single year accrual measure. This measure captures the effect of
another year of work on future benefits. Thus, as a base for comparison the country
analyses present the single-year accrual incentive measure.
However, it has been shown in other contexts,1 as well as in the first volume of
this project, that the financial gain from continuing to work may vary from year to year.
That is, the gain from working one more year may be large, for example, but once that
single additional year is worked, the gain from working one more year may be small, or
even negative. Likewise, the gain from one more year may be small, but might then be
followed by a year of large gain. In this case, a person who decides to retire based on
looking forward just one year, would forego the gain in pension wealth that would be
gained by continuing to work for two years. Thus a key principle of the approach
followed here is that the estimation should account for the pension accrual not just in
the next year, but many years into the future.
The benchmark approach for considering the entire future path of accruals is the
“option value” model.2 To summarize, this model evaluates the expected present

1

See for example, Lazear (1983), Kotlikoff and Wise (1985,1989), Coile and
Gruber (2000a).
2

See Stock and Wise (1990a, 1990b).
Page 8

discounted value of incomes for all possible future retirement ages, and then measures
the “value” of retirement today versus the value at the optimal date (perhaps today but
more likely in the future). If looking ahead suggests gains from work at some time in the
future, there is an incentive for the person to remain in the labor force to take advantage
of these gains.
The relationship between the measures can be explained briefly. As described
above, the social security accrual from one year to the next is given by
(1)

SSWt + 1 − SSWt

That is, this measure describes the change in promised future social security benefits
from working one additional year.
A simplified version of the option value measure at age t can be described by:

Simplified " OV "t ( r * )
  discounted   discounted  
 discounted

 
 

=  future wages  +  benefits if  −  benefits if  

 
 

 through age r *  retire at r *  retiree at t  
(2)

 discounted



=  future wages  + [ Peak Value]


 through age r *

In this formulation, a person considering whether to retire at age t considers the present
value of benefits if he retires now (at age t), with the benefits if he retires at some later
time. If the person retires at some later age he will gain from future wage earnings, and
from any gain in future pension benefits. The gain in wage earnings is represented by
the first bracket and the gain in pension benefits by the difference between the terms in
the second bracket. The age at which the total of the two components is the greatest is
denoted by r*. The option value prescription is that the person will continue to work if
this option value is positive.

Page 9

Notice that the option value approach as set out above combines both of the
components of compensation from working: one component is wage earnings, the other
is the change in promised future social security benefits. We label this second
component the “peak value”.3 It includes only social security benefits, and not wage
earnings. The peak value occurs at the age that gives the greatest discounted value of
social security benefit. That age need not be at r*, although for simplicity the two are
assumed to be the same in this description. A more precise discussion of the
differences in the measures is presented in the appendix.
As emphasized above, a crucial issue in the analyses in this volume is
identification–that is, determination of the separate effect of each variable on retirement,
as distinct from each of the other variables. A key goal is to determine the effect of plan
incentives on retirement. But other individual attributes also influence the decision to
retire. For example, persons are more likely to prefer retirement to work as they age. A
linear age variable will potentially capture this effect, but only if preferences for leisure
evolve linearly with age. Individual wage differences may also proxy for differences in
the preference for work versus retirement. A wage earning covariate may help to
control for this form of heterogeneity among individuals. But both age and wage
earnings also determine in part the value of the incentive measures. Thus including age
and wage covariates may make it more difficult to accurately determine the effect of the
incentive measures–or to accurately isolate the program incentive effects from the effect
of worker heterogeneity. To put it another way: the importance of controlling for
differences in “taste” for work may suggest the inclusion of the wage and age variables,
separate from their incorporation in the option value. But there is a countervailing
consideration. Much of the estimated effect of these variables is likely to reflect the
influence of financial incentives and not individual heterogeneity. Thus the full effect of
the program incentives may be understated when the separate age and earnings
controls are included.
The issue of identification also arises in considering the option value as
compared with the peak value incentive measures. If individual heterogeneity were not
a concern, the option value measure would be the most parsimonious incentive
measure to use, as it captures the full financial incentive on retirement of both future
wage earnings and retirement benefits combined. But, to the extent that wages proxy
for the taste for work, the option value variation across individuals may reflect in part
this wage proxy for heterogeneity, rather than the financial retirement incentive. The
peak value measure recognizes this possibility by measuring the retirement incentive by
the future stream of retirement benefits only, without including the future stream of wage
earnings. But to the extent that future wage earnings have an important incentive
influence on retirement, the peak value approach understates the full effect of financial
incentives on retirement.

3

As proposed by Coile and Gruber (2000a, 2000b).
Page 10

Perhaps the most important identification issue arises when age-specific
variables are included to estimate the retirement effect of program eligibility ages. It is
common to find that the retirement rate at certain ages is larger (or smaller) than would
be predicted on the basis of an incentive measure alone. For example, in the United
States the retirement rate at 65 is noticeably higher than is predicted based on financial
incentives alone. Perhaps this is due to a “customary retirement age” effect. Since age
65 is the normal retirement age, many employees may think that age 65 is “the age to
retire.” In addition, in virtually no instance in any country do employees typically retire
before some form of retirement benefits are available. The retirement rate at the early
retirement age–the age at which a person is first eligible for benefits--is typically
substantially greater than would be predicted on the basis of financial measures alone.
This empirical regularity likely reflects a “liquidity constraint”; most employees have not
saved enough to retire without receiving public social security or employer-provided
pension benefits. To capture this effect, some of the specifications allow an indicator
variable for each age. These indicator variables allow retirement to jump or decline at
each age, after controlling for the financial incentive measures. But the inclusion of
these age indicator variables in particular raises the identification question: here the
issue is whether the effect of the financial incentive measures can be distinguished from
the effect on retirement of plan eligibility ages. This is a critical issue and is discussed
in more detail below.
There is no “right answer” to these identification dilemmas. The country analyses
in this volume follow what is perhaps a conservative as well as a flexible approach. All
of the specifications control for background variables, including sex, education, industry
of employment, and both current and average lifetime earnings. This is the
conservative part. The flexibility is reflected in the different incentive measure
specifications, each estimated using linear age and then again using indicator variables
for each age. In this way the sensitivity of the findings to different incentive measures
and to the controls that are included in the analysis can be assessed.
One additional note on estimation: The option value model as set out by Stock
and Wise, and in several subsequent applications, was estimated by maximum
likelihood methods to obtain the relevant behavioral parameters. In this cross-country
context, however, we concluded that that approach would likely pose numerical
complexities that would best be avoided for this comparative analysis over a large
number of countries. Thus the estimation undertaken in the papers in this volume is
typically based on a regression counterpart to the option value model, as well as two
other approaches, as explained above. In some countries, however, the option value
parameters in the Stock and Wise specification have been estimated by a grid search,
and in other instances the Stock and Wise option value parameter estimates have been
used to calculate the option value that is used in the regression. In at least one country,
the option value model was estimated by maximum likelihood.
2.

Multiple retirement options
Page 11

In some countries, like the United States, social security is the single public
program that provides retirement benefits to the vast majority of retirees. The only
retirement decision is then at what age to choose to retire under this program. (A small
fraction of persons retire under the public disability program and many employees are
covered by employer-provided pension plans.) In other countries, however, there are
two or more programs under witch a person can retire. Germany is a good example.
Figure 5 shows paths to retirement for men in Germany between 1960 and 1995.
The figure shows clearly the changes in the pathways to retirement after the 1972
reform, discussed below. Here, we draw attention to the multiple paths to retirement.
All persons are eligible to retire at age 65, the social security program normal retirement
age. But only a small proportion of employees work until that age. A large fraction of
employees retires under the disability program before age 60. Others retire under the
social security disability program available after age 60. Some can retire under the
social security system unemployment program after age 60. Still others are eligible to
retire at age 63 under the “flexible” retirement program that allows persons with long
service to retire at that age–essentially the early retirement age. In addition to these
programs, liberal interpretation of unemployment plan provisions allows persons to
retire with unemployment benefits before age 60. Whether a given person is eligible for
a program depends on specific plan provisions, like eligibility for flexible retirement at
age 63. Eligibility for other programs, like disability or unemployment, is uncertain.
In Germany, the approach is to assign (predict) eligibility probabilities for each of
the programs at each age, depending on the empirical probabilities of retirement under
each of the programs at that age. Then the incentive measures are weighted averages,
with the weights given by the probabilities. This instrumental variable method is
described in more detail in the appendix, using the situation in Denmark as an example.
3.

Parameter Estimates

We do not attempt in this introduction to provide a detailed discussion of the
estimates. Rather, we rely on the simulations based on the parameter estimates to
indicate the implications of the estimated models. The simulations are discussed below.
Here we highlight the striking common finding in virtually all the country papers: the
retirement incentives inherent in most social security programs are strongly related to
early retirement.
The estimation results are summarized in Table 2 below. For each incentive
specification, the table shows the sign and the statistical significance (at the five percent
level denoted by “*”) of the estimated effect of the incentive measure. The table also
shows the sign and the statistical significance of social security wealth. For each
incentive measure, the sign and significance level are shown when linear age is used
and when the age-specific indicator variables are used.
Page 12

Table 2. Summary of parameter estimates, by country and specification.
Estimation Method (Incentive Measure)
Country

Single Year Accrual
Linear
Age

Age
Indicators

Peak Value
Linear
Age

Age
Indicators

Option Value
Linear
Age

Age
Indicators

Belgium

acc:-*
ssw:-*

acc:-*
ssw:-*

pv:-*
ssw-*:

pv:-*
ssw:-*

ov:-*
ssw:-

ov:-*
ssw:-

Canada

acc: -*
ssw:+*

acc: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

ov:-*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

Denmark

acc: +*
ssw:+*

acc: -*
ssw:+

pv: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

France

acc: -*
ssw:-*

acc: -*
ssw:-*

pv: -*
ssw:-*

pv: -*
ssw:-

ov: -*
ssw:-*

ov: -*
ssw:-*

Germany

acc: -*
ssw:-

acc:-*
ssw:-

pv:-*
ssw:-

pv:-*
ssw:-

ov:-*
ssw:-

ov: -*
ssw:-*

Italy

acc: -*
ssw:-*

acc: -*
ssw:-

pv: +
ssw:+

pv: ssw:-

ov: +
ssw:+

ov: ssw:+

Japan

acc: -*
ssw:+

acc: -*
ssw:-

pv: -*
ssw:-

pv: -*
ssw:-

ov: -*
ssw:+

ov: +
ssw:-

Neth.

acc: +*
ssw:+*

acc: +*
ssw:+

pv: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

Spain

acc: -*
ssw:+*

acc: +
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:-

pv: +
ssw:+

ov: ssw:+

ov: +
ssw:+

Sweden

acc: -*
ssw:+*

acc: ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+

UK

acc: -*
ssw:+*

acc: ssw:+*

pv: ssw:+*

pv: ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

ov: -*
ssw:+*

US

acc: +*
ssw:+*

acc: +
ssw:+

pv: -*
ssw:+*

pv: -*
ssw:+

ov: -*
ssw:+

ov: -*
ssw:-*

Note UK: The option valued estimates are significant when standard errors
accounting for repeated observations for the same person are used, and, when
cohort indicator variables, instead of age indicators are used, both the option value
and the peak value incentive measures are very significant.
Note Spain: The indications in this table pertain to the RETA employee group.
Page 13

The results in Table 2 are striking. In ten of the twelve countries, almost all of the
of the estimated incentive measure effects are negatively related to retirement and
significantly different from zero. (With respect to the discussion below, it is also notable
that the sign and significance of the incentive measures rarely depends on whether age
indicator variables are used in the specification.) In two countries–Italy and Spain–the
peak value and option value effects are typically not significant and sometimes of the
wrong sign.4 Also in these three countries the single year accrual effect is negative and
significantly related to retirement in four of the six cases.
The estimated effect of social security wealth (SSW), however, is often not
statistically different from zero and in many cases is of the “wrong” sign. In many
countries, it is likely easier to identify the effect of the incentive measures than the effect
of wealth levels. Because of program provisions, there is much more variation in the
incentive measures than in the social security wealth.
Thus, overall, the results from these 12 separate analyses seem to us amazingly
consistent. The incentives inherent in retirement income programs are clear
determinants of individual retirement behavior. The estimates themselves strongly
suggest a causal interpretation of the cross-country results presented in our first
volume. The results point to an important relationship between incentive effects and
labor force participation, independent of cultural difference among countries. The
magnitude of the implied effects are also vary comparable across countries, as shown
by the simulations discussed below.
C.

ELIGIBILITY AGES AND RETIREMENT: A KEY EMPIRICAL REGULARITY

The effect on retirement of the changes in benefit eligibility ages perhaps
presents the most difficult prediction challenge of the project. Thus we give special
attention to the a consistent empirical regularity in retirement that highlights this
challenge. In each country retirement rates are strongly related to specific eligibility
ages prescribed in country-specific plan provisions. Perhaps most important is that
retirement rates increase sharply at ages of first eligibility for benefits. The age of first
eligibility may differ from person to person and varies by program (social security,
disability, unemployment, for example) in many countries. In the absence of eligibility
for benefits retirement is rare in each of the countries. One way to see this relationship
is to consider retirement hazard rates. The hazard rate shows the proportion of persons
4

In the United Kingdom the option value incentive measures are significant when
a “bootstrap” method, that accounts for repeated observations on the same person, is
used to calculate standard errors. Also in the United Kingdom, both the peak value and
the option value incentive measures are very significant–under conventional standard
error estimates--when cohort indicator, instead of age indicator, variables are used.
Page 14

employed at a given age who retire over the subsequent year. The empirical regularity
between hazard rates and eligibility ages across countries is show in some detail in the
first volume of the project. Here, we show additional country examples that help to
motivate in particular the simulation and estimation methods used in this volume.
United States: Labor force departure rates for men in the United States are
shown in Figure 6. The hazard rates are close to zero before age 54 and then increase
gradually through age 61. All employees are eligible for social security early retirement
benefits at age 62, and there is a sharp jump in the hazard rate at that age. The rise in
departure rates at age 54 can be attributed not to the social security program, but to
eligibility for early retirement under employer-provided pension plans.
The importance of eligibility can be seen clearly in Figure 7. This figure shows
hazard rates by pension plan coverage. The hazard rates for men who have no private
pension coverage, and are covered only by the social security program are indicated by
the line with round markers. The hazard rates for these persons are very close to zero
until the social security early retirement age, when they are first eligible for retirement
benefits. At that age, there is a sharp increase in the departure rate. The important
feature of the pattern is that there is essentially no retirement before that age.5
The other line in the figure shows the hazard rates for men who are covered by
an employer-provided defined benefit pension plan. The early retirement age under
these plans is often age 55 and is rarely over age 60. The hazard rates are very low
before age 55. But for these employees, there is a sharp jump in the hazard rate at age
55, when many in this group are first eligible for benefits. And then another jump at 62,
when social security benefits are first available. If the early retirement age for the
United States social security program were raised from 62 to 65, for example, these
data suggest strongly that the jump in the hazard rate at age 62 would no longer occur
at that age but would shift to age 65 instead. The critical question is whether the hazard
rates would remain close to zero until age 62.
Germany: The German social security system provides additional and perhaps
better examples. Figure 8 is analogous to Figure 6 for the United States and shows
hazard rates, with respect to departure from the labor force, for men in Germany. The
detailed provisions of the 1972 social security legislation (effective until 1998) are
mirrored in the retirement rates by age. In particular, there is a jump in the hazard rate
at each important eligibility age. The ages of key plan provisions are also noted on the
figure so that the correspondence between provisions and retirement is easily seen.
Men who are “disabled” or “unemployed” at age 60, and have a certain number of years
5

These rates are based on labor force participation rates of Health and
Retirement Study respondents. The precise age of departure from the labor force is
obscured by the two-year interval between survey waves, and thus the jump in the
hazard rate does not match the age 62 early retirement age exactly.
Page 15

of employment under the social security system, are eligible for early retirement at that
age. There is a corresponding large jump in the retirement rate at that age. Men who
have been employed for 35 years are eligible for early retirement at age 63 and there is
a corresponding jump in the retirement rate at that age. The normal retirement age is
65 and all men are eligible for benefits at that age. And, there is a corresponding spike
at that age as well. (By age 65, however, fewer than 29 percent of men are still in the
labor force in Germany.) In addition, even before age 60, liberal interpretation of
disability and unemployment plan provisions effectively serves to provide early
retirement benefits, so that many men are eligible for effective early retirement before
age 60. There is a corresponding jump in the hazard rates between 55 and 56.
Like the Unites States data, the German data also suggest that if the eligibility
ages were increased, for example, the observed jumps in the hazard rates would also
shift upward. This sort of pattern is exhibited in all countries and is shown in detail in
the first volume of the project.
The German system provides additional examples that reinforce the importance
of specific plan eligibility ages. First, the provisions of the German social security
program were changed in 1972, as mentioned above. Second, the provisions for men
and women are different. The difference in the pre- and post-reform hazard rates, and
the difference in the hazard rates for men and women, highlight the point. Figure 9
shows the distribution of retirement ages for men under the social security system
provisions in 1970 and in 1976. Before the 1972 reform, retirement under the social
security program was essentially only possible at the 65 normal retirement age. And
there is a corresponding large spike in the distribution at that age. The 1972 reform
provided for early (“flexible”) retirement at age 63 and in 1976 there is a large
concentration of retirement at that age. Notice that retirement at ages before 60 and
after 65 was essentially unaffected by the change in plan provisions. The change in
hazard rates was essentially confined to the ages affected by the legislation. (These
data do not cover retirement under the disability and unemployment programs before
age 60. Retirement under these programs, however, is evident in Figure 8 and in
Figure 5.)
Figure 10 is like Figure 9, but adds the distribution of retirement ages in 1980.
After the 1972 reform, men quickly took up retirement at the 63 early retirement age– as
seen in 1976. Over the next few years, retirement through lenient disability and
unemployment rules was increasingly taken advantage of, and by 1980 a large
retirement concentration at age 60 (through these programs) is evident. Apparently, the
ease of retirement at the earlier age was not at first recognized.
In addition, the eligibility ages for men and women differ. The effect of the
differences can be seen in Figure 11. This figure shows the distribution of retirement
ages, under the social security system, for men and women in 1995. For both men and
women there is a concentration of retirement at age 65, the normal retirement age. For
both men and women there is also a concentration at age 60, but for different reasons.
Page 16

Age 60 is the early retirement age for women. For men, the concentration at age 60 is
due to eligibility for disability and unemployment benefits at that age. Women are also
eligible for these benefits at age 60, if they have enough years of employment. The key
feature of this figure is the retirement behavior at age 63. For men there is a
concentration at age 63, the early (“flexible”) retirement age. But this option is not
available for women, and there is no concentration at age 63 for women. (Or, few
women have enough employment years to retire at that age.)
The United Kingdom: The United Kingdom program also has different
provisions for men and women. Men can begin to receive benefits under the public
social security program at age 65. Women can begin to receive benefit at age 60.
These differences are clearly reflected in the retirement patterns of men and women, as
shown in Figure 12. This figure shows, the labor force “survival probabilities” for men
and women, who do not have an occupational pension. The proportion of women
employees still in the labor force drops by about 20 percentage points (from 60 to 40
percent) at age 60. But there is essentially no decline for men at this age. On the other
hand, there is a 20 percentage point drop (from about 40 to about 20 percent) for men
at age 65, when they can receive benefits.
Thus within country differences in labor force departure rates by gender, by
pension plan coverage, and over time show clearly that retirement is strongly influenced
by eligibility ages. It seems clear that differences in labor force departure rates among
countries are also strongly influenced by differences in eligibility ages. We would like
the estimation and simulation methods used in the analysis to capture the essence of
the empirical regularity between benefit eligibility ages and retirement, and at the same
time, capture the effect of the other plan incentive measures as defined above. We give
particular attention to this issue below.
D.

SIMULATIONS: METHOD AND RESULTS

1.

Simulation Method

Perhaps the best way to judge the implications of the country estimates is to
consider the simulations based on the estimates. Thus, the main focus of this
introduction is on the two illustrative simulations that are performed for each of the
countries. The first simulation predicts the effect of delaying all program benefit
eligibility ages by three years. In countries in which disability, unemployment, or other
retirement pathways are important, the eligibility age for each of the programs is
delayed by three years. The second simulation is intended to predict the effect of the
same reform (the “common reform”) in each country. Under the common reform, the
early retirement age is set at age 60 and the normal retirement age at 65. Benefits
taken before age 65 are reduced “actuarially,” by 6 percent for each year before age 65.
Benefits taken after age 65 are increased by 6 percent for each year the receipt of
benefits is delayed. In addition, the replacement rate at age 65 is set at 60 percent of
Page 17

(projected) age 60 earnings.
The simulations are summarized in the Table 3 below. The country papers show
simulations done in nine different ways. For each reform, simulations are based on the
accrual, the peak value, and the option value methods. For each of these estimation
methods, three simulation approaches are used. The three simulation methods are
based on different uses of the age indicators. In every case the simulations are done by
recalculating the relevant incentive (accrual, peak value, or option value) to correspond
to the program change. (In addition to the incentive measure per say, the social
security wealth measure and wage earnings are also recalculated to correspond to the
change in the program.) Then the retirement rates are re-estimated using the new
measures.
Table 3. Simulations
Simulation and Estimation Method

Simulation
Method

Three-Year Delay in
Eligibility Ages

“common reform” -- ER at
60, NR at 65, replacement
rate of 60% (of age 59
earnings) at 65, 6%
reduction before 65, 6%
increase after 65.

Accrual

Peak
Value

“Option
Value”

Accrual

Peak
Value

“Option
Value”

S1: Without age
indicators

X

X

X(X)

X

X

X(X)

S2: With age indicators
but don’t increment age
effects

X

X

X

X

X

X

S3: With age indicators
and increment age
effects

X

X

X(X)

X

X

X(X)

The key feature that distinguishes the three methods is the use of age indicators.
The first simulation method (S1) does not use age indicators at all, either in the
estimation or in the simulation. Only a linear measure of age is used as a control
variable. In this case only the incentive measures (and the related variables) are
recalculated to simulate the effect of the reforms. The second simulation method (S2)
uses age indicators in the estimation, but does not use the age indicators in the
simulation. The third method (S3) uses age indicators in the estimation, and in addition
Page 18

uses adjusted age indicators to simulate retirement under the program changes.
Simulation method S2 likely minimizes the simulated effect of the program
changes. The effect of the incentive measures is estimated conditional on the individual
age indicators. But in predicting the effect of program changes, the simulations account
only for the change in the incentive measures, and do not account for the age effects.
This will clearly understate the true effect of the program changes assuming that there
are important program eligibility-age effects.
Simulation method S3 may typically yield the largest simulated effect of the
program changes. The estimated age indicator effects, as well as the program
incentive effects, are used to predict the effect of the program changes. For example,
for the three-year eligibility delay, the age indicator for a given age is taken to be the
estimated age indicator three years prior to the given age. The age 60 indicator, for
example, is taken to be the estimated age 57 indicator. The result is that under the
three-year eligibility delay, the projected retirement rate at age 60 is approximately the
same as the current program age 57 retirement rate. The spike at the early retirement
age under the current program, for example, shows up three years later under the
reform. This approach assumes that all of the estimated age effects can be attributed to
the eligibility age program provisions. (The ages include the age at which persons are
eligible for one or more programs, as well as the “normal” retirement age.)
Simulation method S1 perhaps provides a middle ground. In this case, the
estimation method does not explicitly allow for increases in retirement at given eligibility
ages and thus these effects are not allowed to influence the simulated effect of program
changes. These effects will only be reflected in the simulations if they are captured by
the estimated incentive effects. Recall that in our terminology, the incentive measures
are the option value, the peak value, and the single year accrual financial measures;
they do not include the eligibility age effects per se, which may also reflect additional
incentives. Changing the early entitlement age by three years, for example, will change
the incentive measures and SSW, at every age, and the effect of this change is
captured by the S1 simulations. But any other eligibility-age effects, such as “social
norms” or other reasons to retire at given eligibility ages such as liquidity constraints,
are not captured by the S1 simulations.
As the simulation results reported below show, method S3 most often yields the
largest estimated effect of program changes. But this is not always the case. In several
instances, method S1 yields larger effects than method S3.
In this introduction, we discuss–in the next section--simulation results based on
the option value (OV) estimation results and using the S1 and the S3 simulation
methods, marked by the bold double “X(X)”s in the table . Without undo complexity, this
allows us to describe the general features of the results and to direct attention to the
most important issue in estimation and simulation, the use of age indicators. We also
focus solely on the results for mem for expositional convenience, but results for women
Page 19

as well as men are presented in each country chapter.
2.

Simulation Results

We begin by considering the results for the three-year delay in program eligibility.
We first show results based on the third simulation method (S3). Then, for the threeyear delay simulation, we compare results based on the first (S1) and third (S3)
simulation methods. Next we consider the predicted effects of the common reform.
And then we compare results under the common reform and under the three-year
eligibility delay. Before proceeding to cross-country comparisons, however, we briefly
explain why country-to-country differences in simulated results should be expected.
a.

Differences Across Countries

Although, overall, the simulated effects of the illustrative reforms are large in all
countries, the magnitude of the effect differs from country to country. There are several
reasons for the differences: The first, and the single most important reason, is that the
current programs differ substantially among countries and thus the effect of given
reforms should differ as well. A second reason is that the data files on which the
estimates are based differ from country to country. In a few countries, the data pertain
to only a portion of the workforce. A third reason is that there may be differences
across countries in individual responses to a given incentive. A fourth reason, related to
the second, is that the precise calculation of the incentive measures may differ
somewhat from country to country. A fifth reason is that the precise implementation of
the simulations may differ among the countries. It is of course not possible to apportion
the quantitative effect of each of these reasons.
The models described above are used to predict the effect of program incentives
(and other variables) on labor force departure rates–hazard rates, the likelihood that a
person in the labor force at a given age will leave the labor force at that age. The
simulations begin with base hazard rates, that is, the predicted hazard rates under the
current program. Then new hazard rates are predicted based on the provisions of the
illustrative reform. These hazard rates are then used to predict the proportion of
persons out of the labor force at given ages, and these proportions are used to
determine the proportion of person out of the labor force in given age ranges, such as
56 to 65. Thus any of the reasons for differences that affect the base hazard rates
(under the current program) or the predicted hazard rates under the illustrative reforms
will lead to different results among the countries.
b.

Three-Year Delay in Eligibility

Turning to cross-country comparisons, we begin with simulations of the effect of
a three-year delay in eligibility. Results for men aged 56 to 65 on shown in Figure 13.
The figure shows the out-of-the-labor (OLF) percent for the base case, and under the
eligibility delay. The eligibility delay estimates are based on the S3 simulation method.
Page 20

In all countries there is a noticeable reduction in the proportion of men out of the labor
force when the eligibility ages are increased by three years.
The comparison among countries may be confounded, however, by the wide
variation across countries in the age at which retirement begins. Thus the change in the
proportion out of the labor force may vary more among countries at younger ages than
over the entire 56 to 65 age range. To help to standardize for this effect, we define the
first age at which at least 25 percent of men are out of the labor force, which we call the
“25% age.” Then we consider the five years beginning with the 25% age (“25% age +
4yrs”).
The results for the 25% age + 4yrs age range are shown in Figure 14, in which
the 25% age is shown at the top of the bars for the base case. The 25% age ranges
from age 53 in Italy to age 62 in Spain and the United States. Within the 25% + 4yrs
age range, the OLF proportion is currently (under the base case) between 40 and 50
percent in 10 of the 12 countries. Within this more standardized age range there is
typically a greater reduction in the OLF percent--when eligibility is delayed–then for the
56 to 65 age range.
The percent reduction in the OLF proportion for the 25% age + 4yrs age range is
shown in Figure 15. The average reduction is 47 percent, with a range from 14 percent
in Canada to 77 percent in Germany.
Figure 16 is a comparison of results under the S1 and S3 simulation methods.
The figure shows reductions in the OLF proportion for the 25%age + 4yrs age range.
Recall that under the S1 method predictions are based on changes in the incentive
measures alone, while under the S3 method age-specific indicators are used as well.
There are two notable features of this figure. The first is that overall the
reductions are large under either method, and in many of the countries two methods
yield quite similar results. The average reduction is 47 percent under the S3 method
and 28 percent under the S1 method. Under the S3 method, the reduction is at least 34
percent in 11 of the 12 countries. Even using method S1, the reduction is greater than
23 percent in six of the twelve countries (and in two of these countries the reduction is
greater under the S1 than under the S3 method). The reduction is between 12 and 18
percent in 4 countries. Only in Italy and Japan is the estimated effect under the S1
method quite small. For the first six countries–Spain, the Netherlands, France, Canada,
Germany, and Denmark– the two methods yield “rather similar” results. In the first eight
countries, the reduction under the S1 method is at least 47 percent of the reduction
under the S3 method. Thus on balance, the reduction in the OLF proportion is large
under either approach.
The second notable feature of the figure is the similarity across countries in the
reduction under the S3 method. The reduction is between 34 and 55 percent in 9 of the
12 countries. (In Germany and Sweden, the reductions are 77 and 68 percent
Page 21

respectively.) This similarity reflects the similarity in the estimated age effects at
program eligibility ages. In all countries there are similar “spikes” in the hazard rates at
these program eligibility ages, such as those for the United States and Germany shown
in Figures 6 and 8 above.
In summary: in almost every country, the estimates under either method show
very large reductions in the OLF proportion when program eligibility ages are raised.
The reductions, however, are typically larger under the S3 method, which allows agespecific variables to capture the effect of benefit eligibility on retirement. Based on the
strong empirical regularity between retirement rates and program eligibility ages, as
discussed above and in the first volume, we believe that the S3 method likely provides
the more tenable predictions of the long-run reductions in the OLF proportions (although
responses to increases in eligibility ages may not parallel responses to reduction in
eligibility ages). But, even under the more restrictive S1 method–which does not
directly allow for eligibility age effects--the predicted effect of the delay in eligibility ages
is large in almost all countries.
c.

Common Reform

We turn now to simulation results for the common reform. Recall that the
common reform has three key features: (1) It sets the normal retirement age at 65. (2)
It sets the early retirement age at 60. (3) And, benefits are reduced actuarially if they
are taken before age 65. (4) In addition, the replacement rate at the normal retirement
age is set (approximately) at 60 percent of age 59 earnings. Figure 17 shows the OLF
proportion for the 56 to 65 age range under the base case and under the common
reform, based on the S3 method. Only in Germany and in the Netherlands is the OLF
proportion reduced substantially. In 5 of the 12 countries, the common reform increases
the OLF proportion. But there appears to be no clear pattern between the base
proportion OLF and the reduction in the OLF proportion under the common reform. The
variation in the OLF proportion, relative to the base, is reduced under the common
reform, but substantial variation across countries remains.
For the 25% age + 4yrs age range, however, there is a strong pattern to the
change in the OLF percent. The OLF proportion under the base and under the common
reform for this age range is shown in Figure 18. In this figure, the countries are ordered
by the 25% age. For the 25% age + 4yrs age range it is clear that the greatest
reductions in the OLF proportion under the common reform are realized in the countries
with the lowest 25 percent ages. The change in the OLF proportion in the 25% age +
4yrs age range is shown in Figure 19. For the six countries with a 25% age less than
60, the average reduction in the OLF proportion is 44 percent. For the six countries in
which the 25% age is 60 or more, there is, on average, a 4 percent increase in the OLF
proportion.
The systematic pattern of these results shows a strong correspondence with
intuition. For the countries with the lowest 25% age, the common reform represents a
Page 22

substantial increase in the youngest eligibility age, and the actuarial reduction means
that benefits at this age are much lower than under the base country plans. Thus, for
these countries, the OLF proportion should decline under the reform, and that is the
case for every country but Canada. But for the countries with a 25% age of 60 or
greater the common reform may reduce the earliest eligibility age–as in the United
States–and may provide a greater incentive to leave the labor force. In addition, the 60
percent replacement rate at the normal retirement age represents an increase for some
countries, like the United States, and a reduction in the replacement rate for other
countries. Consequently, in three of these six countries, there is an increase in the
OLF proportion under the common reform simulation, and on average there is an
increase in the OLF proportion. The seemingly anomalous result for Canada is
explained by the fact that Canada is the only country in which the 25% age is below the
nominal social security entitlement age; the 25% age is 58 while the social security
entitlement age is 60. In addition, Canada has relatively low benefits at the age 60 early
retirement age. Thus the common reform significantly increases benefit levels,
providing an additional inducement to retirement.
The simulated changes under the common reform based on the S1 and the S3
methods are compared in Figure 20. In each of the countries, both methods either
predict a reduction in the OLF proportion, or both methods predict an increase in the
OLF proportion. Overall, the magnitude of the simulated changes based on the two
methods is rather similar as well. The most apparent exceptions are Italy, Canada, and
Germany. Both methods, on average, show reductions in the OLF proportion in the six
countries with the lowest 25% ages, and small changes in the OLF proportion for the six
countries with the highest 25% ages. The differences between the groups are more
muted, however, under the S1 method. Based on the S3 method, the average OLF
change is -44 percent for the first 6 countries and + 4 percent for the last six, as noted
above. Based on the S1 method, the OLF change is -21 percent for the bottom six
countries and -4 percent for the top six. Most of the difference between the methods is
accounted for by the differences for Italy, Belgium, Germany, and Canada. (The
anomalous result for Canada is explained above). Again, on balance the two methods
suggest similar results. Like the simulated effects of the three-year eligibility delay, we
believe that the S3 method is likely to give the most reliable long run predictions.
d.

Comparing the Three-Year Eligibility Delay and the Common Reform

Finally, Figure 21 compares the results for the three-year eligibility delay with the
common reform results. The figure is based on the S3 method. It shows the percent
change from the base under the two reforms for the 25% age + 4yrs age range, which is
shown as the label on the common reform bars. Recall that the three-year delay
reduces the proportion out of the labor force in all countries. The average reduction in
the OLF proportion is 47 percent, and there is little difference by the 25% age (-49
percent for the six countries with the lowest 25% ages and -45 percent for the six
countries with the highest 25% ages).
Page 23

The results under the common reform, however, should depend on the base
program provisions. As shown in Figure 19, for the first six countries the average
reduction in the OLF proportion is -44 percent and for the last six countries the average
increase in +4 percent. In particular, under the common reform benefits are not
available in any country until age 60. For many countries, current benefits are available
well before age 60. (The 25% age helps to identify the early eligibility countries.) In
most of these countries–Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Canada, and
Germany–the delay in eligibility should tend to reduce the OLF percent. And this is the
result in all of these countries, with the exception of Canada (for reasons noted above).
In addition, the actuarial reduction in benefits if they are taken before the age 65 normal
retirement age, should tend to reduce further the OLF percent in most of these
countries. And, the common reform represents a reduction in the replacement rate in
some of the countries. In other countries, such as Spain and the United States current
benefits are not available until age 60 or later. In these countries the common reform
could increase the OLF proportion.
Overall, the relative effects of the two reforms are plausible, lending credence to
the estimation approach. Under the three-year eligibility delay, which should reduce
retirement ages in all countries, there is a reduction in the OLF proportion in each
countries, and in many countries the reduction is very large. But for the common reform,
the effects should depend on country-specific program provisions, as the simulations
show.
D.

CONCLUSIONS

Our introduction to the first volume of the project concluded with a striking graph
showing a strong relationship across countries between social security program
incentives to retire and the proportion of older persons out of the labor force (Figure 4
above). The weight of the evidence, we judged, was that the relationship was largely
causal. The strong response of retirement decisions to within-country changes in
program provisions over time, and to different provision for different groups at a point in
time (shown in Figures 6-12), also point to a casual relationship between program
provisions and retirement.
The results of the country analyses reported in this volume confirm the strong
causal affect of social security program retirement incentives on labor force
particiaption. But perhaps more important, the results in this volume show the large
magnitude of these effects. Across 12 countries with very different social security
programs and labor market institutions, the results consistently show that program
incentives accord strongly with retirement decisions. The magnitude of the estimated
effects varies from country to country, but in all countries the effects are large.
The magnitude is illustrated most clearly by the simulations reported in each
country paper, and we have emphasized the simulations in this introduction.
Page 24

Considering the average across all countries, a reform that delays benefit eligibility by
three years would likely reduce the proportion of men 56 to 65 out of the labor force
between 23 and 36 percent, perhaps closer to 36 percent in the long run. For the 25%
+ 3yrs age range, the average reduction would likely be between 28 to 47 percent, and
perhaps closer to 47 percent in the long run. The effects are much larger than this in
some countries and in virtually every country the effects are large regardless of the
estimation method.
On the other hand, an illustrative “common reform”-- with early retirement at age
60, normal retirement age 65, and actuarial reduction in benefits between 65 and 60-has very disparate effects across the countries, depending on the provisions of the
current program in each country. For the countries in which the current modal
retirement age is younger than 60, this reform typically implies a reduction in retirement
incentives, and under this reform, the simulated proportion of older persons out of the
labor force declines substantially in most countries. But for countries in which the modal
retirement age is 60 or older, this reform may represent an increase in retirement
incentives, and the proportion of persons out of the labor force increases, on average, in
these countries. The strong correspondence between the simulation results and a priori
expectations lends credence to the estimation procedures used in the country papers.
In short: the results in this volume provide an important complement to the first
volume. The results leave no doubt that social security incentives have a strong effect
on retirement decisions. And the estimates show that the effect is similar in countries
with very different cultural histories, labor market institutions, and other social
characteristics. While countries may different in many respects, the employees in all
countries react similarly to social security retirement incentives. The simulated effects
of illustrative reforms reported in the country papers make clear that changes in the
provisions of social security programs would have very large effects on the labor force
participation of older employees.
In the next stage of the project, we will use the estimation results and simulation
methods developed in this stage to estimate the financial implications of changes in
program provisions.

APPENDIX
1.

Incentive Measures
Page 25

In this appendix we review the relationship between the two forward-looking
incentive measures–the option value and the peak value. Under the option value
formulation, the value at age t of retirement r is given by

Vt (r ) =

r −1

∑β

s− t

s= t

Et (Y ) +
γ
s

S

∑β

s− t

s= r

Et ( kBs (r ))γ

using the Stock-Wise specification. Here Y is future wage income and B is social
security benefit income, which depends on the retirement age r. For simplicity, the
probabilities of being alive to collect the income or the benefits have been suppressed.
The gain from postponing retirement to r, versus retiring at age t, is given by

Vt (r ) =

r −1

S

S

s= t

s= r

s= t

∑ β s− t Et (Ysγ ) + ∑ β s− t Et ( kBs (r ))γ − ∑ β s− t Et ( kBs (r ))γ

If r* is the retirement year that gives the maximum expected gain, the option value is
given by

 S s− t
OVt (r ) = ∑ β Et (Y ) +  ∑ β Et ( kBs (r * ))γ −
s= t
 s= r
*

r −1

s− t

γ
s

*

S

∑β
s= t

s− t


Et ( kBs (t ))γ 


  discounted utility  discounted utility 
 
 discounted utility  

−
=
of
benefits
if
 +   of benefits if
 

 of future wage 




*
  retire at r

  retiree at t

Considering this equation, we can see that there are two ways to calculate the option
value used in the analyses in this volume: One way is to use prior estimated values for
the utility parameters (, $, and k. The second is to set assume a value for $ and to set
( = k = 1.
2.

Multiple Pathways to Retirement and Combining Programs

In the United States, the social security program is the principle public program
route to retirement. Only a small fraction of older persons enter retirement through the
disability program. In some European countries, however, there are several public
programs that provide routes to retirement. The case in Germany is discussed in the
Page 26

text and illustrated in Figure 5. Thus in considering the incentive to retire, it is important
to recognize that retirement incentives under several programs may matter. The key
question is which program, or programs, a person could choose to enter. That is, which
are available to a given person. Who could retire under the disability program, for
example. In some instances, administrative provisions limit the universe of persons
who might be eligible. In other instances, a large fraction of persons could be eligible,
but which persons are eligible is unknown. Thus the incentives facing a given individual
must be estimated probabilistically. What we would like to have is the probability that
each person is eligible for each program. Suppose that the incentive measure under
each possible program is calculated for each person for each age. Then for each age
these probabilities could be used to obtain a “weighted” incentive measure, where the
weights are the probabilities that the person is eligible for each program. This is
essentially an “instrumental variable” approach.
In principle, eligibility probabilities should be estimated for each person for each
age, depending on administrative rules as well as individual attributes. During the
course of this part of the project, several different approaches were tried in various
countries. Eligibility for disability is a good example. Based on administrative rules, it
might be assumed that every person is eligible for disability beginning at some age. Or
it might be assumed that eligibility probabilities correspond to actual empirical take-up
rates by age and other variables. (Where the take-up rate is estimated based on
personal attributes.) Here, it is implicitly assumed that the take-up rate for a person with
attributes X represents, on average, the eligibility rate for persons with attributes X.
There is no correct way to do this without knowing eligibility for a sample of persons and
then being about to predict eligibility. In few, if any, countries was this an option. Thus,
for the purposes of the estimates in this volume, we have elected to assign weights
based on empirical take-up rates. In this case the disability “eligibility” probability will
typically increase with age for example. (Deviations from this method are noted in the
individual country papers.)
To explain the procedure we use the situation in Denmark, which is likely the
most complicated of the country situations. Here are the programs in Denmark,
together with the eligibility age and information to determine elibibility:

Page 27

Program

Eligibility Age

Determine Eligibility Based
On:

PEW

Post-Employment Wage

60 to 66

Age and insurance fund
information

TBP

Transitional Benefits
Program

55 to 59
unemployed
50 to 59 from
1994 to 1996

Age and insurance fund and
unemployment info in two
years prior to age

PEP

Public Employees
Pension

60 to 69

Employer pension
contributions over required
period

SDP

Social and Disability
Pension

18 to 66

Probability: based on
observed participation rates by
age-year-gender in each of
the three levels of the disability
program

OAP

Old Age Pensions

67

Age = 67

An important calculation is the probability that a person is eligible for SDP. To obtain
the probability of SDP eligibility, the approach is to use actual take-up rates by ageyear-sex cells, by disability level.
Suppose the calculation pertains to pension wealth SSW. The goal is to obtain a
weighted measure based on the probability a person is eligible for a specific program at
a given age. At 67 and beyond a person is only eligible for the OAP, and possibly the
PEP. Persons who retire under other programs convert to OAP and start receiving
benefits under that program at age 67. Before age 67, a person could be eligible for the
PEW or the TBP, but not both. Assume we know for sure whether a person is eligible
for these programs. These are the potential sources of wealth:
SSWOAP which is available to all persons
SSWPEW which could be available between 60 and 66
SSWTBP which could be available between 55 and 59 or 50 and 59
SSWPEP which is available to public employees who meet certain criteria
SSWSDP which could be available even before age 50
Page 28

Now SSWOAP can be thought of as a base which is available to everyone. The
question is then what else is available or might be available. Assume that a person is
not eligible for either PEW or TBP (or PEP), but that the person is eligible for SDP with
probability p. Then the weighted average SSW would be
SSW = SSWOAP + p*max[0,(SSWSDP - SSWOAP)].
That is, with probability p the person has more than SSWOAP . (Or, with probability p the
person would have SSWSDP and with probability 1-p the person would have SSWOAP
only). The formula as set out above accounts for the (unlikely) possibility that SSWSDP is
lower than SSWOAP, in which case the disability option would be ignored. (SSWSDP can
be collected beginning at an age much younger than 67, so will almost surely be greater
than SSWOAP , which can only be received beginning at age 67.)
After age 60, a person could be eligible for PEW, for example. (If you retire
before you are eligible for this program you never get these benefits.) In that case,
SSW is
SSW = max(SSWOAP, SSWPEW) + p*max[0, (SSWSDP - max(SSWOAP, SSWPEW)]
That is, the certain amount in this case is max(SSWOAP, SSWPEW). Once again, the
maximum will almost surely be SSWPEW , since the person can take benefits SSWPEW ,
which incorporates benefits SSWOAP beginning at age 67. And, with probability p the
person could be eligible for more, assuming that SDP would provide more.
A similar procedure is used to estimate social security wealth in two consecutive
years. And from social security wealth in these two years, the social security accrual
from one year to the next can be calculated. The peak value and option value
measures are obtained in a similar fashion, but in these cases, wealth measures must
be calculated for all ages into the future.

Page 29

REFERENCES
Coile, Courtney and Jonathon Gruber. "Social Security Incentives for Retirement," in
David Wise, ed., Themes in the Economics of Aging. Chicago, University of Chicago
Press, p. 311-341, 2000a.
Coile, Courtney and Jonathon Gruber."Social Security and Retirement," NBER Working
Paper #7830, August 2000b
Gruber, Jonathon and David A. Wise. “Social Security and Retirement Around the
World: Introduction and Summary,” in Jonathon. Gruber and David A. Wise, eds.,
Social Security and Retirement Around the World, University of Chicago Press,
1999a. Also published in Research in Labor Economics, Volume 18, JAI Press
Inc, 1999.
Gruber, Jonathon and David A. Wise (eds.). Social Security and Retirement Around the
World. University of Chicago Press, 1999b.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and David A. Wise. "Labor Compensation and the Structure of
Private Pension Plans: Evidence for Contractual Versus Spot Labor Markets." in
David A. Wise (ed.) Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, University of
Chicago Press, 1985.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and David A. Wise. The Wage Carrot and the Pension Stick.
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1989.
Lazear, Edward. "Pensions as Severance Pay." in Zvi. Bodie and John Shoven (eds.),
Financial Aspects of the United States Pension System, University of Chicago Press,
1983.

Stock, James H. and David A. Wise. "Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and
Retirement," Econometrica, 58, 5, 1990: 1151-1180.
Stock, James H. and David A. Wise. "The Pension Inducement to Retire: An Option
Value Analysis," in David A. Wise (ed.), Issues in the Economics of Aging, University of
Chicago Press, 1990: 205-224.

Page 30

