                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SKILL SPECIFIC RATHER THAN
                               GENERAL EDUCATION:
                   A REASON FOR US-EUROPE GROWTH DIFFERENCES?

                                              Dirk Krueger
                                            Krishna B. Kumar

                                          Working Paper 9408
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9408


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We benefitted from useful discussions and comments from Daron Acemoglu, Andy Atkeson, Hal Cole, Oded
Galor, Katarina Keller, Felix Kubler, Aris Protopapadakis, Victor Rios-Rull, Richard Rogerson, Manuel
Santos, Harald Uhlig, seminar participants at Penn State, Princeton, Universite de Montreal, University of
Texas-Austin, Wharton and participants at the Stern macro lunch and USC research lunch, the 2001 SED
meeting at Stockholm, and the 2002 winter meetings of the Econometric Society at Atlanta. Remaining errors
are our own. Krueger acknowledges support from the NSF and Kumar from the USC Marshall School’s
research fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dirk Krueger and Krishna B. Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given
to the source.
Skill-specific rather than General Education: A Reason
for US-Europe Growth Differences?
Dirk Krueger and Krishna B. Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 9408
December 2002
JEL No. O40, O30, I21

                                         ABSTRACT

      In this paper, we develop a model of technology adoption and economic growth in which
households optimally obtain either a concept-based, "general" education or a skill-specific,
"vocational" education. General education is more costly to obtain, but enables workers to operate
new technologies incorporated into production. Firms weigh the cost of adopting and operating new
technologies against increased revenues and optimally choose the level of adoption. We show that
an economy whose policies favor vocational education will grow slower in equilibrium than one that
favors general education. Moreover, the gap between their growth rates will increase with the
growth rate of available technology. By characterizing the optimal Ramsey education subsidy policy
we demonstrate that the optimal subsidy for general education increases with the growth rate of
available technology.

       Our theory suggests that European education policies that favored specialized, vocational
education might have worked well, both in terms of growth rates and welfare, during the 60s and
70s when available technologies changed slowly. In the information age of the 80s and 90s when
new technologies emerged at a more rapid pace, however, it may have suboptimally contributed to
slow growth and may have increased the growth gap relative to the US.



Dirk Krueger                                 Krishna B. Kumar
Department of Economics                      Department of Finance and Business Economics
Stanford University                          USC Marshall School of Business
579 Serra Mall                               Kbkumar@usc.edu
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
dkrueger@leland.stanford.edu
1       Introduction
European economic growth has been weak relative to that of the US since the 80s. For
instance, both Germany and Italy grew faster than the US in per capita terms during the
period between 1970 and 1980, while the situation reversed in the subsequent two decades.
During the last two decades Europe has also, with a few notable exceptions, suﬀered from
a “technology deÞcit” relative to the US. As measured by manufacturing productivity, the
share of information technology equipment, or by its contribution to output growth, Euro-
pean technology has lagged behind. Furthermore, Europe has had a tradition of fostering
specialized, skill-speciÞc, “vocational” education at the upper-secondary and higher levels.
    In this paper, motivated by the above-mentioned empirical facts, we formalize the hy-
pothesis that public policies favoring vocational education over a concept-based, “general”
education may contribute to slower technology adoption and economic growth, especially
during times of rapid technological change. We posit that only workers with general edu-
cation can operate new, risky (in terms of task-speciÞc productivity) technologies, whereas
vocationally trained workers are more eﬃcient in operating old, established technologies.
    The notion that education helps in coping with technical change dates back at least to
Nelson and Phelps (1966), who use reduced form speciÞcations to postulate a higher return
to education in an economy with more rapid technological change, and to Welch (1970),
who provides supportive evidence for the dynamic advantage of education using wages of
college graduates.1 The theoretical contribution of our paper is to embed this idea in an
equilibrium growth model that jointly models the adoption decision of Þrms and the decision
of individuals to acquire a particular type of education, and analytically characterize the
eﬀect of education policy on growth. On the empirical front, we provide an explanation
consistent with the “Eurosclerosis” view that holds rigid government policies responsible for
inhibiting economic adjustment, thereby causing low employment and slow growth.2 Our
focus is on continental Europe’s education policies.3
    1
     While Welch (1970) uses R&D intensity as a proxy for technical change, Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987,
1991) use age of equipment as a proxy for lack of change and Þnd that the labor cost share and the wage
rate decrease with equipment age. Gill (1988) Þnds that higher TFP industries employ a larger proportion
of educated workers and that the wage proÞle for highly educated workers shifts out with increasing TFP
growth and is also steeper. Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) Þnd that the human capital stock aﬀects the speed
of technology adoption in a cross-country context, lending support to a speciÞcation in Nelson and Phelps
(1966). Thus, the advantage of education in adapting to technical change has both theoretical precedence
and empirical support in the literature.
   2
     The economist Herbert Giersch is generally credited with coining the term “Eurosclerosis.”
   3
     We formally elaborate on a theme voiced by Lawrence and Schultze (1987); p. 4,5 “The European
economies...now experienced problems in graduating from a catch-up economy to one on the frontier of
technology... Workers must have general training to adapt to new tasks, and European education, which has
encouraged apprenticeships that provide speciÞc skills, must adapt.”



                                                   1
    In our model, newly born individuals optimally and irreversibly choose between one of the
two streams of education mentioned above, based on their intrinsic ability to absorb concep-
tual education, anticipated market conditions, and government subsidies for the two types
of education. They weigh the higher wages associated with operating newer technologies
against the higher cost of acquiring general education.
    Firms have the choice of producing a single non-storable good either through technologies
(production methods) used in the previous period — which have become well-understood and
readily usable in the present period at no cost — or by adopting, at a cost, new technologies
up to the available frontier. This technology frontier evolves exogenously. The non-adopting
Þrms, also referred to as the “low-tech” Þrms, can use the old technology without any
adoption cost. The adopting Þrms, also referred to as the “high-tech” Þrms, have to pay
a cost of adoption that depends on the distance between the new and the previously used
level of technology in a convex fashion, as well as potentially higher wages to attract workers
who face the risk of low task-speciÞc productivity caused by their move to an unfamiliar and
more complex technology.
    We completely characterize the education choices of individuals and the adoption decision
of Þrms, and show that the equilibrium growth rate is lower in an economy that allocates
more of a given amount of resources toward vocational education. The equilibrium growth
rate is equal under two diﬀerent education policies if and only if the economy, under both
policies, adopts new technologies at the same rate at which they become available.
    The positive relationship between the fraction of the work force with general education
and growth may intuitively follow from our assumption that only generally educated workers
can operate new technologies, although demonstrating this requires a fully speciÞed model
such as the one we have developed. However, what is not immediately obvious is the eﬀect
of an increase in the rate of available technology; the true value of the model lies in show-
ing that in such an event, countries with diﬀerent education systems that had comparable
growth initially could diverge. More speciÞcally, the diﬀerence in the growth rate between
an economy that focuses on vocational education and one that focuses on general education
is shown to increase with the exogenous rate of technology availability; the economy with
better general education can more readily exploit the new technologies and might, in fact, be
constrained only by their availability. By characterizing the optimal government education
subsidy policy we demonstrate that the optimal subsidy for general education increases with
the growth rate of available technology.
    Our model suggests that while European education policies that favored specialized, vo-
cational education may have worked well during the 60s and 70s when technologies were
more stable, they may have contributed to slow growth and increased the European growth
gap relative to the US during the information age of the 80s and 90s when new technologies


                                              2
emerged at a more rapid pace.4 The following observations made in the European Competi-
tiveness Report 2001 directly speak to this suggestion (p. 10, 11): “The growing consensus
that the strong growth and productivity performance in the US is related to increased invest-
ment and diﬀusion of ICT goods and services has raised concerns that the weaker economic
performance of EU Member States is caused by sluggishness in the adoption of these new
technologies... in recent years skill shortages in important technology areas have been re-
ported in several European countries... It appears that, unlike in previous years, when the
long-term trend increase in the demand for skills was met by the supply of technology pro-
fessionals from the educational system, the surge in demand for ICT-related skills in the
1990s found no corresponding supply forthcoming.” (ICT: Information and Communication
Technologies)
    We do not claim that the emphasis on skill-speciÞc education alone is responsible for
Europe’s technology deÞcit or recent slow growth. Clearly, several other explanations such
as generous unemployment insurance and inßexible labor laws would be required to complete
the quantitative picture. Rather, our aim is to build a framework grounded in reasonable
assumptions that focuses on the educational aspect, delivers key observed stylized facts,
and lays a theoretical foundation for future empirical and quantitative work.5 We view the
development of a tractable growth model, featuring heterogeneity in the type of education
and endogenous technology adoption decisions by Þrms as a goal in its own right.
    In addition to the above-mentioned early precursors in the literature, our paper is related
to a few other, more recent, studies. Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) model unemployment as
an event that causes a loss in human capital in order to study the eﬀect of European unem-
ployment insurance schemes on the level of unemployment. Our focus is very diﬀerent, but in
a similar spirit we model stochastic productivity losses arising from a change in production
technologies. Violante (2002) posits a skill transferability function across jobs that depends
on the technological distance between machine vintages in order to study the relationship be-
tween the rate of technological change and wage dispersion. The potential skill loss we model
is akin to his transferability function. Neither of these papers is concerned with endogenizing
the education decision and studying the eﬀect of education policy on growth. Gould, Moav
and Weinberg (2001) also focus on inequality caused by a depreciation of technology-speciÞc
skills, but this occurs randomly across sectors in their model; such depreciation is induced
by a choice to work in the high-tech sector in our framework. Education is a choice variable
for them, but there is no intentional adoption of new technology by Þrms.
   4
      See, for instance, Greenwood and Yorukoglu (1997), who argue that there was an increase in the rate
of technological change during the 70s. Hornstein and Krusell (1996), Krusell, Ohanian, Rios-Rull, Violante
(2000) and Cummings and Violante (2002) arrive at a similar conclusion.
    5
      A Þrst attempt to quantify the relative importance of the education system in explaining US-Europe
growth diﬀerences is carried out in Krueger and Kumar (2002).



                                                    3
    Acemoglu (1998) develops a model in which an increase in skilled labor induces faster
upgrading of skill-complementary technologies by Þrms; in our setup, an increase in the mea-
sure of workers with general education would have a similar eﬀect. However, he does not
distinguish between vocational and general education among skilled workers and therefore
also does not discuss optimal policies, while we do. The same is true for the complemen-
tary work of Galor and Tsiddon (1997), who argue that during times of rapid technological
progress the return to ability increases and that to speciÞc human capital decreases, increas-
ing mobility and the concentration of high-ability individuals in high-tech sectors, thereby
fueling future growth. In this view, impediments to mobility in Europe could cause it to trail
the US in economic performance, while our primary focus is on educational policy diﬀerences
between the US and Europe. This paper is also complementary to Galor and Moav (2000),
who develop a model in which education does play a dynamic role, but focus on the eﬀect
of technological change on wage inequality. Unskilled labor is assumed to count for less in
a composite labor input when growth is higher, and ability enables individuals to cope with
technological progress. As in these two papers, we also assume an exogenous ability distri-
bution, but given our focus on education policies, we endogenously model the acquisition of
general education based on this ability. Furthermore we characterize the response of equilib-
rium growth rates and education allocation to a change in the growth rate of technological
progress, in order to explain the evolution of US-Europe growth diﬀerentials, whereas the
aforementioned papers focus on other questions. Thus, when Prescott (1998) calls for the-
ories of total factor productivity diﬀerences, we provide an education-based theory of such
diﬀerences.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. We summarize the stylized facts that
motivate our study in Section 2. In Section 3 we present the economic environment and
deÞne a competitive equilibrium and a balanced growth path (BGP). The BGP is analyzed
in Section 4. Section 5 contains our central theoretical results: an increase in subsidy for
vocational education at the expense of general education will decrease growth, and the growth
gap relative to an economy that focuses on general education will increase with the rate of
arrival of new technologies. In Section 6 we characterize the optimal education subsidy
policy, and Section 7 concludes the paper. Formal proofs and derivations are presented in
the appendix, unless otherwise noted.


2    Stylized Facts
In this section we present the stylized facts that provide empirical motivation for our study
— slow European per capita growth and manufacturing productivity growth since the 80s,
Europe’s “technology deÞcit”, and its bias toward vocational education.


                                              4
     Consider annualized per capita GDP growth for the US and two countries we will use
throughout as representatives of Western Europe — Germany and Italy. In the 70s Germany
(2.6%) and Italy (3.1%) grew faster than the US (2.1%). In the 80s, the US grew at the faster
rate of 2.3%, compared to 2.0% and 2.2% for Germany and Italy. The US lead solidiÞed
in the 90s; it grew at 2.0%, while Germany and Italy managed only 1.0% and 1.2%. The
diﬀerence in growth rates is even more pronounced during the 1995-98 period; the US grew
at 3% while the two European countries managed only 1.3% each.6
     Since our theoretical framework focuses on technology adoption, productivity growth,
technology usage, and technology production might be more relevant indicators of economic
performance. Gust and Marquez (2000) study aggregate data and Þnd that labor produc-
tivity in the major European countries did not accelerate in the latter half of the 1990s as
it did in the US; TFP growth was also lower relative to that of the US. Our model is most
likely to apply to the manufacturing sector; there, US labor productivity has outpaced that
of Germany from as early as the mid-80s. The 1986-1990 and 1991-2000 Þgures for the US
are 2.3% and 4.3%, and those for Germany are 2.0% and 3.8%. While Italy did better than
the US in the initial period (3.8%), during the latter period its labor productivity growth of
2.2% was only half of US productivity growth.7
     The diﬀerence is much starker when one examines technology-driven industries — in the
US, these industries recorded an average annual productivity increase of 8.3% in the 1990s,
when compared to the 3.5% achieved in the same industries as the European Union.8
     There is abundant direct evidence that, with the exception of Sweden, Finland, and the
Netherlands, Europe lags behind the US in technology usage.9 Schreyer (2000), presents
data on the share of information technology (IT) equipment in total investment. In 1985,
this share was 6.3% in the US, and 3.4% each for Germany and Italy. By 1996 the gap had
widened, with 13.4% for the US, and 6.1% for Germany and 4.2% for Italy. Schreyer also
presents results from growth accounting studies which show the contribution of Information
and Communication Technology (ICT) capital to output growth; these are presented in Table
1.10
   6
     Growth rates are from Scarpetta et. al. (2000).
   7
     See Table IV.1 in European Competitiveness Report 2001.
   8
     See page 66, Graph IV.5, and Table IV.6 in European Competitiveness Report 2001. Pharmaceuticals,
Oﬃce machinery and computers, Motor vehicles, Aircraft and spacecraft, are a few of the industries classiÞed
as Technology-driven industries.
   9
     It is highly consistent with our theory that these three exceptions have higher Þgures (relative to the rest
of Europe) for one or more of the following statistics: percentage of upper secondary students enrolled in
general programs, net enrollment in university-level tertiary education, and percentage of public education
expenditure devoted to subsidies for tertiary education. (See tables C3.2, C5.2a, and B3.2 in Education at a
Glance: OECD Indicators, 1997.)
  10
     We present data from Table 4 in Schreyer (2000), which uses a ICT price index harmonized across
countries. When these Þgures are calculated in percentage terms instead of absolute percentage points,


                                                       5
   The contribution of ICT capital to output growth has been increasing for all countries,
but the gap between the US and European countries has been increasing as well. Since our
model is most suited to the technology-driven sectors, delivering a stylized version of this
table is an important goal of our theoretical analysis.

                                            Table 1
                         ICT contribution to output growth (% points)
                         Economy    1980-85 1985-90 1990-96
                         US         0.28      0.34     0.42
                         Germany 0.12         0.17     0.19
                         Italy      0.13      0.18     0.21

    For evidence that increased usage of such technology improves productivity, we turn
to Stiroh (2002), who conducts econometric tests using industry-level data to show that
IT-intensive industries experienced signiÞcantly larger labor productivity gains than other
industries; he also Þnds a strong correlation between IT capital accumulation and labor
productivity.11
    There is evidence that ICT production is also correlated with TFP growth.12 In the US,
the computer and semiconductor industries contributed more than 50% to nonfarm business
TFP growth during 1974-90 despite their small share in output.13 Europe has lagged behind
in ICT production as well (see Chart 3 in Gust and Marquez (2000)).
    Though the actual magnitude of the productivity boom in the US during the 90s continues
to be debated (see, for instance, Gordon (2000) for a skeptic’s view), the facts that Europe
has lagged behind the US in the last two decades in technology usage and production, and
experienced slower productivity growth, are unlikely to be overturned by recent evidence.
    Since our hypothesis is that the diverging trends between the US and Europe can, at least
partially, be explained by diﬀerences in the educational system, we now present evidence on
similar patterns persist.
  11
     A positive correlation between the ICT share and TFP growth also emerges from Graph 6 in the European
Commission (2000) report.
  The widespread nature of productivity acceleration reported by Stiroh (2002) casts doubts on an alternate
explanation for the US productivity advantage, that the US with its more liberal immigration policies attracts
highly skilled specialists to the high-tech sectors, and American focus on general education has nothing to do
with this advantage. This would not explain why industries as far ßung as “Security and Commodity Brokers,”
not typically populated by immigrants, experienced huge increases in productivity growth. The assumption
that only workers with high levels of education immigrate to the US is not tenable, and many immigrants
Þrst acquire general education in US universities before they begin work. The immigration explanation also
does not explain why there was a change in the European economic performance starting in the 80s when
there was no corresponding change in European immigration laws.
  12
     See Graph 4 in the European Commision’s (2000) report.
  13
     See Table 4 in Oliner and Sichel (2000).



                                                      6
European focus on vocational education.14 The classiÞcation of education into general and
vocational should be viewed as a metaphor for the rigidity and inßexibility of European upper
secondary and post-secondary education. Therefore, the issue under consideration includes,
but is broader than, that of college versus school education. In Europe, the channeling of
students into either stream starts earlier than college; indeed, a portion of the diﬀerences in
university enrollment between the US and Europe can be attributed to such early pegging
of students. For instance, OECD’s Education Policy Analysis 1997, states that in Germany
only about 20% of university entrants are from the vocational stream.15
    In 1991, 79.3% of upper secondary students in West Germany and 70.6% of Italian
students were enrolled in vocational or apprenticeship programs. The EU average was 58%.
In contrast, there is no separate stream of vocational education in the US at this level;
however, the percentage of students who completed 30% or more of all credits in speciÞc
labor market preparation courses was just 6.8% in 1990.16 Since education at this level is
typically fully funded by the government, this data suggests that the European governments
spend a greater fraction of their resources on vocational training than the US.17 Vocational
education in the US is typically imparted in two-year community colleges; of those over the
age of 18 enrolled in post-secondary education, only 13.8% were working toward a vocational
Associate’s degree in 1991; this Þgure fell to 10.5% in 1994.18
    A related indicator is the net entry rate into universities, where general education is
primarily imparted; it is 52% in the US but only 27% in Germany, 33% in France, and
26% in Austria.19 This lower European enrollment is reßected in attainment; while 25%
of adults had completed university-level education and 8% had completed non-university
tertiary education (primarily vocational) in the US in 1995, in Germany 13% had completed
university education and 10% non-university education. Incidentally, the rate of return for
men from such non-university tertiary education is 9% in the US, while it is 17% in Germany,
which might point to better employment opportunities for the vocationally educated in that
country.20
    Allocation of educational resources diﬀers between the US and continental Europe as well.
  14
     We abstract from the diversity in education systems that exists within continental Europe.
  15
     Lazear’s (2002) evidence that students who have taken a more general curriculum have a higher chance of
becoming entrepreneurs also seems relevant in this context. Entrepreneurship, which is an important channel
for adoption of new technologies, is generally thought to lag behind in Europe relative to the US. See for
instance, the European Commission’s September 2001 policy paper, Entrepreneurial attitudes in Europe and
the US.
  16
     These Þgures are from Table 3.2 of Medrich et. al. (1994). Also see the European Commission’s 1998
report, Young People’s Training.
  17
     The German apprenticeship program involves partial outlays by Þrms as well.
  18
     See Table 87 in Levesque et. al. (2000).
  19
     See Table C4.1 in Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators 1997.
  20
     See Table E5.1 in Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators 1997.


                                                     7
The OECD Education Database indicates that the percentage of GDP devoted to primary
and secondary education was about the same — 3.8% for the US and Germany in 1997 and
3.4% for Italy. However, the percentage devoted to tertiary education in the US (2.6%)
far outstripped the percentages in Germany (1.1%) and Italy (0.8%). The expenditure per
student relative to GDP per capita on post-secondary non-tertiary (vocational) education
was 49% in Germany for 1997, amounting to 10,839 PPP dollars; little happens on this front
in the US. The corresponding Þgures for tertiary education was 43% in Germany but 59% in
the US. In PPP dollars, the tertiary education expenditure per pupil was $9,466 in Germany
while in the US was $17,466 (it was $5,972 in Italy).
    Therefore, it seems reasonable to conclude that more resources are allocated to vocational
education in Europe relative to the US, where the emphasis has been on general education.
We use this observation to motivate revenue-neutral policy experiments in which European
vocational education subsidies per student are higher than those of the US. The equilibrium
enrollment and education attainment implied by the model presented below will then be
qualitatively consistent with the data presented above.


3        The Environment
The economy is populated by a continuum of households and two continua of identical
Þrms. Firms in one sector potentially adopt new technologies in every period, and Þrms
in the nonadopting sector do not.21 There is a single nonstorable consumption good in
each time period and households supply labor to the Þrms. In this section we describe the
maximization problems of a typical Þrm in each sector and of a typical household, and Þnally
deÞne equilibrium and a balanced growth path.

3.1      Firms and Technology Adoption
Each Þrm in this economy is owned by inÞnitely lived entrepreneur, who consumes all proÞts
from production in each period, as they, like workers, have no access to an intertemporal
storage technology.
    A representative Þrm in the low-tech sector that does not adopt new technologies in the
current period faces the production technology:

                                            Yn,t = At (Hn,t )θ ,

where Yn,t is output of the nonadopting Þrm in period t, Hn,t is the labor input used by
that Þrm in period t, At is the level of technology that is freely available in period t and
    21
    We have abstracted from important issues of industrial organization, such as free entry, to keep our model
analytically tractable and to focus on the education channel as a source of growth diﬀerences between the US
and Europe.


                                                      8
θ ∈ (0, 1) is an intensity parameter. The nonadopting Þrms take At and the real wage rate
(per eﬀective unit of labor) Wn,t in the nonadopting sector as given.
    The Þrms in the high-tech sector of the economy that (potentially) adopt new technologies
face the production technology
                                      Ya,t = A0t (Ha,t )θ ,

where Ya,t is output of the adopting Þrm in period t, Ha,t is the eﬀective labor input used
by that Þrm and A0t is the level of technology used in period t, which is a choice variable for
the adopting Þrms. We let Wa,t denote the real wage rate (per eﬀective unit of labor) in the
adopting sector. The technology frontier grows exponentially, i.e.

                                                Af,t = λAf,t−1 ,                                                (1)

where λ > 1 is the constant gross growth rate of the frontier technology. The technology
choice of the adopting Þrm has to satisfy A0t ≤ Af,t . We assume that A0 = A0−1 = Af,−1 = 1;
i.e. the economy starts at the technology frontier. The parameter λ is the potential growth
rate of the economy. If the economy keeps pace with these periodic inventions by adopting
them as fast as they occur, the actual growth rate will be the same as the potential one. An
increase in λ is later used to model an increased speed at which new technologies become
available.
     We further assume that all Þrms can use the highest technology that was used last period,
and hence has become common practice; that is, At = A0t−1 and there is complete spill-over
of previously adopted technologies in one period.22 It is important to note: 1) It is the
technology actually adopted in the previous period rather than the frontier technology that
was available last period that spills over costlessly to the next period, and 2) The adopting
Þrms are small and do not take into account the inßuence that their adoption choice A0t
today has on the next period’s common practice At+1 .23 What we intend to capture with
  22
       This can be viewed as a reduced form modeling of learning by doing in which productivity gains spill
over across sectors. See, for instance, Young (1993) and the references therein.
    We assume that there are no international spillovers of technology. If there are such spillovers, European
technology would catch up to the US technology with whatever lag is assumed for the spillover. Data does
not seem to support such automatic spillovers. Even with a mature technology such as personal computers,
Microsoft data shows that in the US 90% of white-collar workers use them, whereas only 55% in Western
Europe do so. The International Data Corporation reports that the US market for PCs grew 15% in 1996,
while the Western European market grew only by 7.1%. (See the article, “Europe’s Technology Gap is getting
Scary,” in the March 17, 1997, issue of Fortune.)                                                  R
    23
       More formally, let a0t (i) denote the technology choice of adopting Þrm i ∈ [0, 1] and A0t = a0t (i)di = At+1
denote the common practice. Since Þrms are identical and will have a unique solution to their maximization
problem, it follows that a) every Þrm perceives At+1 = A0t to be unaﬀected by its choice of a0t (i) and b)
a0t (i) = A0t = At+1 . Thus in the main text we do not explicitly distinguish between a0t (i) and A0t and let A0t
denote the techology adoption decision of a representative adopting Þrm.


                                                         9
these assumptions is the notion that most gains from adopting new technologies come in the
form of higher short-run proÞts, before its “bugs” are ironed out and they become available
as common technologies to competitors.
    Gaining this short-run advantage comes at a cost for the Þrm, however. To use a level
of technology A0t ∈ [At, Af,t ], the Þrm incurs a cost of adopting the new technology, which
is increasing and convex in the distance between At and A0t . This cost captures the Þrm’s
outlays for training workers in the new technology, Þxing the aforementioned “bugs” etc.
that will allow the full potential of the new technology to be realized today before it is
discovered and ironed out by competing Þrms. We assume that the cost of adoption takes
the following form:                          ³        ´
                                          At A0t − 1 2 if A0 > A
                                                                  t
                          C(At , A0t ) =    2   At            t
                                                       0
                                                 0 if At ≤ At .
Since our analysis will focus on balanced growth paths (BGP) in which the growth rate
     A0
x = Att ≤ λ is constant, whenever there is no ambiguity we drop time subscripts from At , A0t
and Af,t . If A is viewed in units of machines, the cost function implies that along a BGP the
cost of retooling each machine with the new technology, C        1        2
                                                            A = 2 (x − 1) is constant.
                                                                                       24



3.2     Households
There is a measure one of two-period lived agents born in each period.

3.2.1    Education Choices

An agent is born with an ability a ∈ [0, 1] for higher education, which is distributed uniformly
across the population; i.e. according to the cumulative distribution function F (a) = a. In the
Þrst period of her life each agent has to choose between general education g and vocational
education v. There is a utility cost for attaining general education, e (a), which is strictly
decreasing in a. This captures the greater diﬃculty in learning conceptual material, cost of
longer duration of education, lower subsidies relative to vocational training, etc. Once the
education choice i ∈ {g, v} has been made, it is irreversible until agents die.

3.2.2    Skill Accumulation

In the second period of an agents’ life workers have a skill level for her current occupation
of H ∈ H = {1, h}. We assume that workers with vocational education can only work in the
nonadopting sector and have job-speciÞc skill level h > 1 for working in that sector. Workers
  24
    The modeling choice of not making the cost of adoption depend directly on the measure of the labor force
with general education appears to be a conservative one. Our results are likely to be strengthened if “skilled”
labor is required to adopt technologies.


                                                      10
with general education, in the second period of their life, can only work in the adopting sector
and have skill level H = 1 with probability Tl ∈ (0, 1) and H = h with probability 1 − Tl .
Let
                                   Eh = h − Tl (h − 1) < h
denote the expected skill level of an agent with general education in the second period of its
life. We assume a law of large numbers so that Tl is also the deterministic fraction of the
population with general education that has skill level H = 1.
     Our assumption captures the job-readiness that vocational education imparts for the
technology currently in use, whereas agents with general education face risk of a job-speciÞc
productivity loss when operating a new technology. Obviously agents have to be compensated
for their lower expected skill level in the second period of their life when choosing general
education; this happens through two channels: higher wages in the adopting sector and
(possibly) higher direct education subsidies. Restricting agents with vocational education to
work in the nonadopting sector and agents with general education in the adopting sector is
not crucial for our analysis. In section 8.3 of the appendix we give suﬃcient conditions that
make it optimal for v-agents to choose the nonadopting sector and for g-agents to choose
the adopting sector.25

3.2.3    Endowments and Preferences

A newborn household of type a has preferences over stochastic consumption in the second
period of her life. The only endowment the household has is one unit of time in each period
that is used for education in the Þrst and supplied to the labor market in the second period.
An agent that chooses vocational education consumes ct = Wn,t h in the second period,
whereas an agent with general education consumes
                                (
                                    Wa,t     with probability Tl
                           ct =
                                   Wa,t h with probability 1 − Tl
Households maximize:
                                  U (c) = Et log(ct+1 ) − Ig log(e(a)),
by choosing the type of education, where Ig = 1 if the household chooses to obtain general
education and 0 otherwise. The expectation Et is taken with respect to the underlying
stochastic process governing skill levels for agents with general education.26
  25
     An earlier version of this paper, available at http://siepr.stanford.edu/papers/pdf/01-35.pdf, demon-
strates that the same qualitative results as in the current paper can be shown to hold in a more complicated
model where agents face repeated productivity shocks and choose the sector to work in every period.
  26
     Note that we abstract from time discounting by the households. Obviously our formulation of preferences,
and hence the ensuing analysis is equivalent to having households discount the future and re-scaling the cost
of education.


                                                     11
3.3     Recursive Competitive Equilibrium
The aggregate state of this economy is given by the current level of technology A, the
technology frontier Af , and the cross-sectional distribution of workers over their education
levels i ∈ {g, v}. Let µi denote the fraction of the work force with education i in the
second period of their life. The aggregate state thus consists of z = (A, Af , µ).27 From
our assumptions about the properties of e(a) it is also clear that there exists a cutoﬀ level
a∗ (z) ∈ [0, 1] such that all agents with ability a (z) ≥ a∗ (z) will choose to obtain general
education (Ig = 1), whereas all agents with a (z) < a∗ (z) will choose to obtain vocational
education (Ig = 0) .

3.3.1    Workers Utilities

Let by Vi denote an agents’ lifetime (second period) utility, after having obtained education
i ∈ {v, g}. Given wages Wn (z), Wa (z) in the adopting and nonadopting sector these are given
by

                          Vv (z) = log(Wn (z)h)
                          Vg (z) = Tl log(Wa (z)) + (1 − Tl ) log(Wa (z)h)                                 (2)

   Aggregate eﬀective labor supply in both sectors implied by the aggregate state of the
economy is given by

                                            Hns (z) = µv h
                                            Has (z) = µg Eh .

3.3.2    Equilibrium

We are now in a position to deÞne a recursive competitive equilibrium.

DeÞnition 1 A recursive competitive equilibrium consists of value functions Vi (z) and
policy functions Ig (z) for the household, implied aggregate labor supply functions (Hns (z), Has (z)),
a cutoﬀ level a∗ (z), labor demand functions for Þrms (Hnd (z), Had (z)), and a technology adop-
tion function A0 (z) for the adopting Þrms, wage functions (Wn (z), Wa (z)) and an aggregate
law of motion Φ mapping today’s aggregate state z into tomorrow’s aggregate state z 0 such
that:

   1. Given (Wn (z), Wa (z)) and Φ, the Vi are deÞned in (2).
  27
    Note that an agent’s ability level a will only aﬀect her education decision in the Þrst period of her life,
but not subsequent consumption levels (other than via her education).



                                                      12
  2. Given (Wn (z), Wa (z)),

                              Hnd (z) ∈ arg max A (H)θ − Wn (z)H
                                            H≥0
                    ³               ´
                     Hnd (z), A0 (z) ∈ arg max   0
                                                     A0 (H)θ − Wa (z)H − C(A, A0 ).
                                                 H≥0,A ≤Af


  3. Hnd (z) = Hns (z); and Had (z) = Has (z).

  4. The cutoﬀ a∗ (z) satisÞes: Vg (z) − Vv (z) = log(e(a∗ (z))).28

  5. The aggregate law of motion Φ is induced by the probability Tl , the policy functions
     A0 (z) and IiH (z) and the cutoﬀ a∗ (z) (as described below).

    Given a state z = (A, Af , µ) today, the state z 0 = Φ(z) = (A0 , A0f , µ0 ) tomorrow is de-
termined as follows. The frontier evolves exogenously, A0f = λAf . Given the endogenously
determined technology adoption function A0 (z), we have A0 = A0 (z). This leaves the next
period’s distribution over types, µ0 , to be determined. Let η v (z) denote the fraction of new-
born agents deciding to get vocational education and η g (z) denote the fraction of newborn
agents deciding to obtain general education; given the threshold ability mentioned above,
and a uniform ability distribution, these fractions are η v (z) = a∗ (z) and η g (z) = 1 − a∗ (z)
respectively. The distribution over education types tomorrow is therefore given as:

                                              µ0g (z) = η g (z)
                                              µ0v (z) = η v (z).                             (3)

3.3.3      A Balanced Growth Path

A balanced growth path is deÞned to be a recursive competitive equilibrium for which all
elements of the equilibrium, normalized by the current level of technology in an appropriate
fashion, are constant. Since growth in this economy is driven exclusively by the adoption
                                                                                      0
of new technologies, the growth rate along a balanced growth path is given by x ≡ AA . We
normalize wage per skill unit as wn = WAn and wa = WAa . The normalized Þrm maximization
problems become:

                             Πn = max H θ − wn H                                             (4)
                                        H≥0
                                                                  1
                             Πa =          max       xH θ − wa H − (x − 1)2 ,                (5)
                                        H≥0,1≤x≤x̄                2
               A
where x̄ = Af is the maximal growth rate of technology that the adopting Þrm can choose.
That is, the adopting Þrm’s problem on the BGP now involves a choice of the growth rate
 28
      We shall later make assumptions to guarantee an interior a∗ ∈ (0, 1)


                                                      13
of technology rather than its level. As for the workers, their lifetime continuation values are
given by

                               vv = log(wn h)
                               vg = Tl log(wa ) + (1 − Tl ) log(wa h)                      (6)

Continuation functions reduce to two numbers (vg , vv ) along the BGP. The BGP cutoﬀ level
a∗ then satisÞes the following indiﬀerence condition that governs educational choice:

                                         vg − vv = log(e(a∗ )).                            (7)

Finally, in a BGP the cross-sectional distribution over education and skill level µ is constant
over time, i.e. µ = µ0 = µ̄ with

                                         µ̄g = η g = 1 − a∗
                                         µ̄v = η v = a∗                                    (8)

    We therefore have the following deÞnition.

DeÞnition 2 A balanced growth path consists of values (vg , vv ), labor supplies (Hns , Has ),
labor demands (Hnd , Had ) and a growth rate of technology x, wages (wn , wa ), a cutoﬀ ability
level a∗ and an invariant distribution µ̄ = (µ̄g , µ̄v ) such that:

    1. Given (wn , wa ) the values (vg , vv ) satisfy equation (6)

    2. Given (wn , wa ), Hnd solves (4) and (x, Had ) solve (5).

    3. Hnd = Hns ; and Had = Has .

    4. The cutoﬀ a∗ satisÞes (7).

    5. The distribution µ̄ = (µ̄g , µ̄v ) satisÞes (8).

    We conÞne ourselves to the analysis of BGP equilibria; in particular we are interested
in how diﬀerent educational policies aﬀect the attainment of general education, and hence
the growth rate of the economy along the BGP, as the speed of technological advancement
λ increases.


4     Analysis of the BGP
We Þrst outline the steps in our strategy for characterizing the BGP; the applicable subsec-
tions and Þgures are given within parentheses:

                                                   14
                                                                               ³ ´
                                                                           Had wa
   • Solve the Þrms’ problems to obtain the relative labor demand function H d  wn   and
                                   ¡ ¢                                      n
     technology adoption schedule x η g from the problem for adopting Þrms (Section 4.1).

   • Solve
        ³ for
            ´ the households’ education decision to obtain relative
                                                                ³ labor
                                                                    ´   supply functions
     Has wa                                                 Had wa
     Hns wn . Combine with relative labor demand function Hnd wn to characterize labor
                                                                   ¡ ¢
     market equilibrium and to derive the “education schedule” xs η g (Section 4.2).

   • Combine x(η g ) and xs (η g ) to solve for BGP η ∗g and x∗ and characterize its properties
     (Section 4.3, Figure 1)

   • Characterize how balanced growth and the education allocation changes with subsidies
     for general education, s (Section 5.2, Figure 2).

   • Perform comparative statics with respect to the speed of technological innovation λ,
     and show how the results vary with education policy s (Section 5.3, Figure 3).

   • Characterize the optimal education policy (Section 6).

   We now consider each of the above steps in detail.

4.1   Firms, Labor Demand and Technology Adoption
For a given wage in the nonadopting sector wn the labor demand of Þrms in that sector is
                     ³ ´ 1                                           ³ ´ θ
                          1−θ                                              1−θ
given by, Hnd (wn ) = wθn     , and proÞts are obtained as, Π(wn ) = wθn       (1 − θ) > 0.
For the adopting sector we Þrst solve for the conditional labor demand as a function of the
wage wa , and the growth rate, x, as:
                                                    µ       ¶ 1−θ
                                                               1
                                                        θ
                                   Had (wa ; x) =          x      ,                         (9)
                                                        wa
             0
 where x = AA is the growth rate of technical progress chosen by Þrms. Using equilibrium in
the labor market we have
                                             µ      ¶ 1
                                                θ      1−θ
                                 η g Eh =         x                                    (10)
                                               wa
                                             wa ¡        ¢1−θ
                                      x =         η g Eh
                                              θ
   In order to guarantee concavity of the objective function in the critical range and ensure
the Þrst order condition is suﬃcient, we make
                        1
   Assumption 1: θ <    2




                                               15
  Using the conditional labor demand function in the objective function we can rewrite the
maximization problem of the adopting Þrm as:29
                                                     µ        ¶    θ
                                                1        θ        1−θ            1
                                   max x       1−θ                      (1 − θ) − (x − 1)2
                                  1≤x≤x̄                 wa                      2
                                                     µ        ¶    θ
                                                1        θ        1−θ            1
                              =    max x       1−θ                      (1 − θ) − (x − 1)2
                                  1≤x≤λ                  wa                      2
The Þrst order condition for this problem is (see the appendix for further details; the con-
straint 1 ≤ x is never binding and hence neglected)
                                          µ         ¶    θ
                                               xθ       1−θ
                                                              ≥ x−1
                                               wa
                                                              =         if x < x̄

Using (10) we can rewrite this as
                                           ¡            ¢θ
                                               η g Eh         ≥ x−1
                                                              =         if x < λ

with is an equation in the two endogenous variables (x, η g ). The technology adoption schedule
of the adopting Þrm, as a function of the composition of the labor force η g , is given as

                                                            ¡      ¢θ
                                        x(η g ) = min{λ, 1 + η g Eh }                                 (11)
The technology adoption decision x of the adopting Þrms is a weakly increasing function of
the fraction of the population with general education, since either technology adoption is
only constrained by the available technology λ (in which case x is independent of η g ), or
an increase in share of agents with general education η g drives wages in the adopting sector
down and thus makes faster technology adoption proÞtable.
                        1
   DeÞne η̄ g = (λ−1)
                        θ
                  Eh  as the minimal fraction of generally educated agents for which max-
imal growth occurs. We make the assumption that
                                    1
                              (λ−1) θ
       Assumption 2: η̄ g =     Eh      <1
    Finally, we can compute equilibrium proÞts of the adopting Þrm (and hence consumption
of its owner), as:
                                  ³ ´ θ
                    
                    
                                1       1−θ
                             λ 1−θ wθa      (1 − θ) − 12 (λ − 1)2 if η g ≥ η̄ g
           Π(ηg ) =    h            i 1 ³ ´ θ
                     1 + ¡η Eh ¢θ 1−θ θ 1−θ (1 − θ) − 1 (η Eh )2θ if η < η̄ .
                    
                             g            wa                 2 g                g g

  29
    Given our earlier assumption that the economy starts out at the frontier, on the BGP we have x̄ = λ, or
the constraint x ≤ x̄ is not binding.


                                                              16
    As λ increases, η̄ g increases, and thus the education interval over which maximal growth
occurs, decreases. Intuitively, higher net proÞts are needed to make it worthwhile for Þrms
to adopt technologies at the new (higher) maximal rate. But this requires lower wages in
the adopting sector, which in turn demands a larger share of the population be generally
educated and supply their labor services to that sector. As a prelude to our discussion below,
note that therefore Europe, having a lower share of the labor force with general education,
may fall behind in growth when the speed of available technologies λ increases.
    For further reference we note that, as a function of x, the relative labor demand is given
by
                                              µ     ¶ 1
                                        Had     xwn 1−θ
                                            =             .                               (12)
                                        Hnd      wa
Again from the labor market equilibrium we thus have
                                                 µ     ¶ 1
                                  η g Eh           xwn 1−θ
                                             =                                                      (13)
                                (1 − ηg )h          wa
                                                     µ           ¶1−θ
                                                  wa    η g Eh
                                         x =                                                        (14)
                                                  wn (1 − η g )h

4.2      The Household Education Decision
In this section we discuss how the equilibrium fraction of agents with general education,
η g , is determined. Recall that η g is related to the threshold ability level a∗ , above which all
agents obtain general education and below which all agents obtain vocational education, by
     ¡ ¢
a∗ η g = 1 − ηg . Write (7) as follows in order to obtain the equilibrium threshold ability as
a solution to the following equation:30
                                  ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢         ¡ ¡ ¢¢
                                vg η g − vv η g = log(e a∗ η g )                                    (15)

This captures the Þxed point problem induced by the education decision — newborn agents
anticipate a certain fraction of the work force with general education, η g , which determines
the high-tech wage premium, and thus the value to getting general education; their decision
to obtain one or the other type of education has to be consistent with the posited ηg .
    We now make the following functional form assumption for the cost of obtaining general
education.

       Assumption 3: The function e : [0, 1] → <+ is given by: e(a) = a1 .
   With this assumption we see that for the ablest agents (a = 1) the utility cost of obtaining
                      ¡ ¢
general education, log a1 equals to 0, whereas for the least able agents this cost becomes
  30
    Note that even though the non-normalized value functions Vg and Vv grow over time, their diﬀerence is
stationary and equal to the diﬀerence vv − vg , due to the assumption of logarithmic utility.


                                                   17
prohibitively high. Then the right hand side of equation (15), as a function of η g , becomes
   £ ¡ ¡ ¢¢¤            £ ¡       ¢¤       ³      ´
                                              1
log e a∗ η g       = log e 1 − ηg = log 1−η         = − log(1 − η g ). This is a strictly increasing
                                                g
function of η g , approaching 0 when η g → 0 and approaching −∞ as ηg → 1.
   Using equation (6), the utility diﬀerential is explicitly given as
                                       µ ¶          µ ¶
                                        wa           wa
                            (vg − vv )       = log         − Tl log(h)                          (16)
                                        wn           wn

Combining costs and utility diﬀerentials we have
                              µ ¶
                                wa
                          log        − Tl log(h) = − log(1 − ηg )
                                wn
or                                              µ            ¶
                                       wa             1
                                          =                      hTl                           (17)
                                       wn           1 − ηg
Combining this equation with equation (14) yields the education schedule
                                            µ           ¶1−θ
                           s           wa     ηg Eh
                          x (ηg ) =
                                       wn   (1 − η g )h
                                              µ          ¶2−θ µ ¶1−θ
                                                    1          Eh
                                  = hTl η 1−θ
                                          g                                                    (18)
                                                1 − ηg         h

    The positive relation between growth and the share of agents with general education
arises for the following reason. In order to induce a higher fraction η g of the population
to opt for general education, a higher growth rate x is needed; a higher growth rate, x, is
associated with higher relative labor demand of the adoption sector and thus a higher wage
diﬀerential.

4.3    Equilibrium Growth and Education
Using the technology adoption and the education schedule (11) and (18) one can prove the
following

Lemma 1 Suppose the assumptions made above are satisÞed. Then there exists a unique
BGP equilibrium η ∗g ∈ (0, 1) .

    Proof. Proof: Both (11) and (18) are continuous functions on (0, 1). Furthermore xs (0) =
0, xs (1) → ∞, x(0) = 1 and x(1) < ∞, thus by the intermediate value theorem a solution
exists. The proof of uniqueness is deferred to the appendix




                                                    18
       For a graphical representation of this result, see Figure 1.31


                          x                  s
                                           x (ηg)


                      λ=x*
                                                                                x(ηg; λ)




                          1
                                           _                                    ηg
                              0                                             1
                                           ηg       η*g
                          0

                  Figure 1: Equilibrium Growth Rate and Education Allocation

    The central trade-oﬀ between vocational and general education involves on average higher
but riskier wages in the adopting sector. It is therefore instructive to analyze how equilibrium
growth rates and education allocations change as productivities, and hence wages, in the
adopting sector become more risky; the parameter Tl is handy for this analysis. In section
8.4 in the appendix we prove the following

Lemma 2 A mean-preserving increase in the spread of productivities h ∈ H, which leaves
the expected productivity Eh unchanged, leads to a (weak) decline in the equilibrium growth
rate x∗ and a (strict) decline in the fraction of the population obtaining general education,
η ∗g .

    Intuitively, as general education becomes a riskier proposition, fewer agents Þnd it worth-
while to obtain such education. Adopting Þrms, faced with a lower supply of appropriately
skilled workers, scale back the rate of technology adoption; lower equilibrium growth results.
  31
     We note that xs (ηg ) may not necessarily be strictly convex as drawn, but that, as shown in the proof,
the intersection is unique and the comparative statics presented below remain valid go even if xs (ηg ) is not
strictly convex on the entire interval [0, 1].
   With this characertization of equilibrium we can now, in the appendix, also provide suﬃcient conditions
under which it is optimal for agents with general education to work in the adopting sector and for agents
with vocational education to work in the nonadopting sector (rather than to assume that they have to work
in a particular sector, as done in the main text for simplicity).


                                                      19
5        Comparing US and European Policies
In section 2, we presented evidence on European educational policies that favor vocational
education over general education, while in the US the situation is the reverse. In this
section, we study the eﬀects of this policy diﬀerence on the growth rates of and the growth
gap between the two regions, as implied by our model.

5.1      Policy Diﬀerences
We will denote by G the normalized amount of government expenditure available for sub-
sidizing both types of education. (In the original problem, since this will be multiplied by
A, government subsidies will be growing at the rate of technology.) Let sv denote the per
student subsidy given to a vocational education student and let sg denote the per student
subsidy given to a general education student. Then the government resource constraint,
given a uniform ability distribution and an ability threshold a∗ is:

                                         a∗ sv + (1 − a∗ ) sg = G,                                    (19)

with sv , sg > 0. We will consider a revenue neutral experiment; that is, assume that G is
                                                                                        s
the same for the US and Europe and that (sv )Europe > (sv )U S is given. Also deÞne s = svg
the ratio between the subsidy to general and to vocational education. We now assume that
agents have preferences, in the Þrst period of their lives, given by

                            Ig (− log(e(a)) + log(sg )) + (1 − Ig ) log(sv )

that is, if they choose general education, they incur disutility log(e(a)) and utility log(sg )
from the educational subsidy, and if they choose vocational education they obtain utility
log(sv ) from the educational subsidy.32
    Given this formulation the cost of obtaining general, as opposed to vocational education,
is                                                                     
                          µ        ¶                           G−sg η g
                              1                         ηg      1−η g
                      log            − log(s) = log         ∗          
                            1 − ηg                    1 − ηg     sg

and equation (18) now becomes
                                                                                  G−sg η 
                                               µ            ¶2−θ µ        ¶1−θ               g
                        s                            1               Eh             1−η g
                                                                                                 
                      x (η g ) =   hTl η 1−θ
                                         g                                                            (20)
                                                   1 − ηg            h                sg

    32
    What is crucial for our results is not so much the particular functional form of utility from education
subsidy, but the separability between utility from subsidies and from consumption.




                                                        20
with policy variable sg , or alternatively
                                                µ            ¶2−θ µ        ¶1−θ
                              s       hTl 1−θ         1               Eh
                           x (η g ) =    η                                                    (21)
                                       s g          1 − ηg            h
                          s
with policy variable s = svg . Note that, since we treat G as Þxed, the level of sv (or the levels
of both sg , sv ) has to adjust to guarantee government budget balance. We assume that sg or
s are set in such a way as to guarantee sv > 0. Evidently the xs (η g )-schedule tilts to the right
around the point (ηg , x) = (0, 0) as s increases, since higher diﬀerential subsidies towards
general education, for a given growth rate x, make more agents choose general education;
this gives rise to the results in the next section.

5.2   Growth Rates and Growth Gaps with Diﬀerent Policies
We model the stronger US focus on general education to mean, in the context of our model,
that sUS > sEUR . This implies that xsUS (η g ) ≤ xsEU R (η g ), with inequality strict for η g >
0. Denote by ∆(λ) the gap between the potential growth rate of the economy and the
actual rate, when the frontier evolves exogenously at the rate λ. Formally, the growth gap is
∆(λ) ≡ λ − x∗ (λ), where x∗ is the BGP growth rate associated growth rate λ for the frontier
technology. We have the following

Proposition 1 Suppose the assumptions made above are satisÞed. Then:

  1. η US   EU R
       g > ηg

  2. Either xUS = xEU R = λ or λ ≥ xUS > xEU R .

  3. Either ∆U S (λ) = ∆EUR (λ) = 0 or ∆EUR (λ) > ∆U S (λ) ≥ 0.

    Proof. This follows directly from the fact that the xs (ηg )-schedule tilts down around
the point (η g , x) = (0, 0) as s increases.
    The Þrst statement asserts that the fraction of workers with general education is higher
in the US. The second statement asserts that either the US and Europe both grow at the
potential rate λ, or the US grows at a strictly higher rate. If both grow at the maximal rate,
the growth gap of both countries with respect to the potential is zero; otherwise the growth
gap of Europe is strictly higher. The diﬀerence between the US and Europe is illustrated in
Figure 2.




                                                    21
                                 x                           sEur<sUS
                             λ=x*US                                                    x(ηg; λ)
                              x*US




                                                s
                                              xEur (ηg)             s
                                                                  xUS (ηg)

                                 1                                                     ηg
                                       0                                           1
                                 0

                        Figure 2: Comparing US and European Education Policies



5.3        Eﬀect of an Increase in Speed of Innovation
We now analyze whether an increase in the rate of technological progress widens the growth
gap between the US and Europe. We are thus interested in comparative statics with respect
to λ.33 We have

Proposition 2 Equilibrium general education attainment η ∗g and growth x∗ increases with
       dη ∗g (λ)             dx∗ (λ)
λ:       dλ        ≥ 0 and     dλ      ≥ 0. The increase is strict if and only if η ∗g (λ) ≥ η̄ g (λ).

    Proof. The proof of this and the following two propositions follows directly from the
fact that the xs (η g ) schedule is independent of the potential growth rate λ and the x(ηg , λ)
                                                                               ¡     ¢θ
schedule shifts up one for one with λ only in the region where min{λ, 1 + η g Eh } = λ.
    The higher λ increases the demand for labor in the adopting sector and thus the high-tech
                 wa
wage premium w    n
                      in equilibrium; this increases the incentive to acquire general education.

                         d∆(λ)
Proposition 3             dλ      ≥ 0. The increase is strict if and only if η ∗g (λ) ≥ η̄ g (λ). Almost surely
d∆(λ)         34
 dλ ∈ {0, 1}.
  33
     This is reminiscent of Ljungqvist and Sargent’s (1998) experiment of increasing economic turbulence to
study its eﬀect on European unemployment.
  34
     “Almost surely” is intended to mean, for the measure one of parameter combinations for which λ is not
equal to the unique threshold λ̄ corresponding to η ∗g (λ̄) = η̄g (λ̄)). The number λ̄ > 2 uniquely solves the


                                                             22
    That is, the gap in the growth of an economy relative to the potential growth rate λ, is
itself (weakly) increasing in λ. This leads us to the central proposition of the paper.
                  d∆EU R (λ)         d∆U S (λ)
Proposition 4        dλ          ≥     dλ        with strict inequality if xUS = λ > xEU R .

    Though the proposition is phrased in terms of growth gap of each region relative to
the (new) potential growth rate, its implication for the gap in growth rates between the two
regions is obvious. As the rate of change of available technologies, λ, increases, the fraction of
agents with general education above which maximal growth occurs, η̄ g increases and Europe
may fall out of the maximal growth region, whereas the US may continue to be constrained
only be the available technology.
    As mentioned in the introduction, several economists suggest that the rate at which new
technologies came about (as measured, say, by the rate of price decline for equipment) indeed
increased in the mid-seventies, reaching its peak in the nineties. Our model suggests that the
US, with a much higher fraction of its work force possessing general education was able to
adopt these available technologies at a faster rate than Europe could. Even if both regions
adopt technology at faster rate, our model predicts that there may be a gap in their rate of
adoption, consistent with the data in table 1. This eﬀect is illustrated in Figure 3. The US
continues to be constrained only by the availability of technologies, while Europe potentially
falls behind.
                             x                               sEur<sUS
                        λ’                                                          x(ηg; λ’)


                        λ
                                                                                    x(ηg; λ)




                                           s
                                         xEur (ηg)               s
                                                               xUS (ηg)

                             1                                                      ηg
                                 0                                              1
                             0


                                         Figure 3: An Increase in λ


equation
                                                     2−θ
                                          (λ − 1)     θ
                                                           = h1−Tt Eh1−θ > 1.
                                              λ



                                                            23
6     Optimal Policies
The previous section showed that a stronger focus on general education subsidies fosters
growth. In this section we want to analyze the socially optimal subsidy level, in order to
assess whether in fact Europe’s focus on vocational education is suboptimal, or whether the
US oversubsidizes the attainment of general education.

6.1    The Government Objective Function
The issue of what the objective of the benevolent government ought to be is not a trivial
one, since with two-period lived agents there are many generations to consider, and even
within each generation there is a continuum of agents, indexed by ability a ∈ [0, 1], which
may potentially receive diﬀerent Pareto weights in the government objective function. We
will assume that within each generation all agents receive equal weight in the social welfare
functional and that the benevolent government discounts future generations at social discount
factor β ∈ [0, 1). We also assume that the government can perfectly commit to future policies
and, in order to enable comparison with previous sections, we restrict the government to
choose time-constant policies associated with BGP equilibria.
    In the appendix we show that the objective function of the government, as a function of
                       s
its policy choice s = svg ∈ (0, 1) can be written as (absent constants that are irrelevant for
maximization)
                                                     £                        ¤ 2β log(x(s))
    W (s) = −(2 − θ) log(1 − η g (s)) − η g (s) − log η g (s)s + (1 − η g (s)) +               (22)
                                                                                   1−β

where η g (s) and x(s) solve
                                             µ             ¶2−θ µ ¶1−θ
                              hTl        1−θ       1             Eh
                       x(s) =     η g (s)                                                      (23)
                               s               1 − η g (s)       h
                                           ¡          ¢θ
                       x(s) = min{λ, 1 + ηg (s)Eh }                                            (24)

The last term in the government objective function captures the eﬀect that future generations
obtain higher utility with higher growth rates; if the benevolent government does not value
future generations, then β = 0 and this term disappears. The second to last term summarizes
the welfare eﬀects from the diﬀerential subsidies directly, whereas the Þrst two terms stem
from the utility of consumption, net of the disutility of obtaining general education.




                                                 24
6.2     Characterization of Optimal Policies
From (23) and (24) we note the following properties of equilibrium growth rates and educa-
tion decisions:

                                      lim x(s) = λ, lim η g (s) = 1
                                      s→∞                     s→∞
                                       lim x(s) = 1, lim η g (s) = 0
                                       s→0                    s→0

and ηg (s) is a strictly increasing function, whereas x(s) is increasing in s, strictly as long as
x(s) < λ. Both functions are continuous in s. Therefore W (s) is a continuous function in s,
with W (s = 0) = log(κ) and W (s = ∞) = 1+β   1−β log(λ) − 1.
   It is useful to deÞne the minimal relative subsidy level for general education s̄(λ) that is
required to generate maximal growth x∗ = λ in the BGP equilibrium. It is given implicitly
                                  1                                       ³       ´2−θ
                            (λ−1) θ                                    κ     η̄ g
by η g (s̄(λ)) = η̄ g (λ) ≡ Eh , which can by solved as s̄(λ) = λη̄ 1−η̄               ∈ (0, 1), a
                                                                                       g       g
                                                                    Eh1−θ
function that is strictly increasing in λ. Here κ = h1−θ−Tl is a constant.
   Exploiting the fact that for all higher subsidy levels s ≥ s̄(λ), the growth rate remains
constant at λ, we can show (by using (23) in (22)) and with the help of arguments spelled
out in the appendix

Lemma 3     1. For all s ≥ s̄(λ) we have W 0 (s|s ≥ s̄) > 0 for s < 1, W 0 (s = 1|s ≥ s̄) = 0
   and W 0 (s|s ≥ s̄) < 0 for s > 1.

   2. There exists a β̄ ∈ (0, 1) such that for all β ≥ β̄ we have W 0 (s|s < s̄) > 0 for all
      s ∈ (0, s̄(λ)).

    The Þrst result immediately implies that the benevolent government should choose a
higher subsidy for general education only to obtain maximal growth, that is s∗ (λ) ≤ max{1, s̄(λ)}.
For the region s < s̄(λ), part 2 of the lemma argues that a high enough social discount factor
makes growth so desirable that, as long as maximal growth is not reached, a higher subsidy
level s is preferred, since it generates higher growth.
    Therefore the optimal education subsidy s and its changes with λ depends crucially on
whether maximal growth is attainable without higher subsidies for general education or not,
that is, whether s(λ) ≥ 1. Note that this inequality is based purely on fundamentals, and
is more likely to hold for large λ, all other things being equal. We shall assume that this
condition is satisÞed and state the following proposition35
  35
    A second part of this theorem can be stated for the case in which s̄(λ) < 1. More precisely, let λ < λ0
be such that s̄(λ) < s̄(λ0 ) < 1. Then s∗ (λ) = s∗ (λ0 ) and x(s∗ (λ)) = x(s∗ (λ0 )). Either s∗ (λ) = s∗ (λ0 ) = 1 and
growth is maximal or s∗ (λ) = s∗ (λ0 ) < 1 and x(s∗ (λ)) = x(s∗ (λ0 )) < λ.
  In this case, even without diﬀerential subsidies for general education maximal growth can be attained in
the competitive equilibrium (that is, the potential growth rate is not too high). The optimal subsidy satisÞes
s∗ ≤ 1, and is independent of the potential growth rate of the economy.


                                                         25
Proposition 5 Suppose that s̄(λ) ≥ 1. Then there exists a β̄ ∈ (0, 1) such that for all
β ≥ β̄, the optimal solution to the government problem is s∗ (λ) = s̄(λ) ≥ 1 and for λ0 > λ,
we have that s∗ (λ0 ) > s∗ (λ). Growth is maximal, that is, x(s∗ ) = λ.

    Proof. Follows directly from the previous lemma.
    We interpret this result as follows. Under the assumption s̄(λ) ≥ 1 it is optimal for
the benevolent government to provide greater incentives for obtaining general education in
order to generate growth. If the government values future generations (and hence economic
growth) suﬃciently highly, then it is optimal to subsidize general education exactly to the
point where maximal growth is assured (but not more).36 The optimal subsidy is a strictly
increasing function of the potential growth rate of the economy λ.
    We now relate this proposition on optimal policies to the empirical observations discussed
in Section 2 of the paper. In the 70’s, when the growth rate of the available technology λ
was low it might have been the case that the US oversubsidized general education, whereas
European policy was optimal. As λ increased to λ0 in the 80’s and 90’s, and with it the
optimal general education subsidy level (i.e. s∗ (λ0 ) = s̄(λ0 )) it is the US policy that becomes
optimal and the European policy (i.e. s < s̄(λ0 )) is now suboptimal. Therefore, in addition
to the growth gap between the US and Europe our model also suggests a welfare gap between
the two regions.37
    This discussion also shows that our model, by no means, implies that subsidizing general
education to the maximal extent and pushing the economy to maximal growth at any cost
is optimal. 38


7        Conclusion
We have developed a growth model featuring an occupational advantage of general over
vocational education, endogenous technology adoption by Þrms and educational decisions by
households, to argue that two economies that grow at potential when the rate of technological
progress is low, could diverge when this rate increases. Our analysis thus provides one
    36
     We need the condition on β in order to assure that it is in fact optimal for the Ramsey government to
enact policies that assure maximal growth.
  37
     In this paper we do not explore the political-economic reasons for why such suboptimal policies may
persist, but we view future research in this direction as particularly fruitful and interesting.
  38
     Note that a social planner who is constrained to use the amount of resources G for “subsidies” (sg , sv )
would optimally choose to equate these across agents, i.e. sSP = 1. It is also obvious that the planner equates
consumption across agents and thus completes the insurance markets assumed to be missing in the competitive
equilibrium. Therefore in general the Ramsey government cannot implement fully socially optimal allocations;
the second part of the previous proposition shows that under certain conditions at least the Ramsey education
subsidy is socially optimal.



                                                      26
possible explanation for the growth gap Europe, which focuses on skill-speciÞc education,
has suﬀered since the eighties relative to the US, which focuses more on conceptual education.
It also shows that education policies that were optimal for Europe in the 60’s and 70’s may
have become suboptimal for the information technology age.
    It must be emphasized that the use of balanced growth analysis is mostly an analytically
convenient way to study the issue of slow European technology adoption. One could instead
construct a steady state model and cast European catch-up or falling behind purely as a
transitional issue, relying on numerical instead of analytical characterization. If educational
reforms are instituted, such as the much discussed reforms to make German universities more
competitive, then the growth gaps we have analyzed are going to be necessarily transitional.39
Indeed, one needs to be cautious about literally mapping variations in general education
policy to permanent growth rate diﬀerences; an analysis using a panel data set with shorter
run growth rates and policy variables applicable for those shorter periods might be more
appropriate.
    While casual evidence suggests that manufacturing productivity growth is strongly cor-
related with the share of the work force with tertiary education (European Competitiveness
Report 2001, Table IV.2), rigorous attempts to extend our analysis along quantitative di-
mensions are warranted. One possibility, which we entertain in Krueger and Kumar (2002),
is to calibrate the model presented in this paper to quantify the predicted gap in growth
between the US and Europe. Another is to conduct a cross-country, cross-industry, econo-
metric study to assess whether acceleration in adoption rates has been particularly higher
in the US relative to Europe in those industries that have seen greater increases in available
                                                              wa
technologies. The model points to the high-tech premium, w     n
                                                                 , as a crucial equilibrium vari-
able; the mapping of this into empirically reported premia (such as the college premium)
deserves further attention. Using years of education as a proxy, cross-country growth studies
have found only a weak eﬀect of human capital in explaining growth. Our study points out
that the type of education obtained, rather than the number of years of education per se,
could have a crucial bearing on the rate of economic growth.40 These are topics of ongoing
research.
  39
     See for instance Hyde Flippo’s, “Can the German University be Saved?” an online supplement
(http://www.german-way.com), to The German Way (Passport Books), which reports a steep increase in
the percentage of high school students earning the academic diploma that leads to college study in the city-
state of Hamburg, and points to the emergence of private universities such as Universität Witten/Herdecke.
  40
     Also see Murphy, Schleifer, and Vishny (1991) in this regard.




                                                    27
8     Appendix
8.1     Further Details on the Firms’ Problem

The Þrst order necessary and suﬃcient condition for the Þrm is
                                                 µ        ¶ 1−θ
                                                             θ
                                            θ        θ
                                    (x∗ ) 1−θ                        ≥ x∗ − 1
                                                     wa
                                                                     =       if x∗ < x̄

Suppose there exists BGP with x = λ. Then

                                           Af   A−1
                                                 f    Af
                                    x̄ =      =     ∗ −1 = 1 ∗ λ = λ
                                           A     A   Af

        A−1
         f
where    A      = 1 because in a BGP with growth rate λ the actual level of technology must equal the
potential level at each point of time (remember that we assumed that A0 = Af,−1 ). In order for the
Þrm to optimally choose x∗ = λ a necessary and suﬃcient condition is hence
                                                                             1
                                                             (λ − 1) θ
                                                η g ≥ η̄ g =
                                                                Eh
Suppose there exists BGP with x < λ.
                                A
   First we show that x∗ < x̄ = Af . Suppose not; i.e. suppose x∗ = x̄. But then

                                                       A−1
                                                        f           Af
                                                x∗ =            ∗       ≥λ
                                                           A        A−1
                                                                     f


since A ≤ A−1                           ∗                                ∗
            f . For a BGP we need λ ≤ x = x < λ, a contradiction. Hence x < x̄. But then the
                ∗
optimal choice x satisÞes
                                          µ ¶ 1−θ
                                               θ
                                      θ
                                   ∗ 1−θ   θ
                                 (x )             = x∗ − 1                              (25)
                                           wa
But the unique solution x∗ to this equation satisÞes x∗ < λ if and only if
                                                       µ        ¶ 1−θ
                                                                   θ
                                                 θ         θ
                                           (λ) 1−θ                      <λ−1
                                                           wa
or ηg < η̄g .

8.2     Uniqueness of the BGP

We want to argue that the solution η ∗g to the equation
                                                                        µ            ¶2−θ µ        ¶1−θ
                                   ¡        ¢θ                                1               Eh
                        min {λ, 1+ η g Eh        }=       hTl η 1−θ
                                                                g                                         (26)
                                                                            1 − ηg            h




                                                               28
is unique. We established in the main text that any solution η ∗g satisÞes η ∗g > 0. Now multiply both
sides of (26) by η 1−θ
                   g   to obtain
                                                                    µ            ¶2−θ µ        ¶1−θ
                                                                          1               Eh
                  min {λη 1−θ   1−θ     θ
                          g , η g +η g Eh }   =    hTl η 2(1−θ)
                                                         g
                                                                        1 − ηg            h

Since the left hand side of this equation is concave and the right hand side is strictly convex, there is
at most one positive solution η ∗g > 0 to this equation, which is the unique solution to (26).


8.3    Optimality of Working in the Adoption or Nonadoption Sector

In the main text we have assumed that only agents with general education work in the adopting sector,
and characterized a corresponding BGP. We now provide suﬃcient conditions on the parameters of our
model to guarantee that agents with general education would optimally choose to work in the adoption
sector and agents with vocational education would optimally choose to work in the nonadopting sector.
Suppose that g -agents working in the nonadopting sector have productivity h with probability 1 (as
v -people have) and that v-agents working in the adopting sector have productivity 1 with probability
Tlv and productivity h with probability 1 − Tlv
    Thus for g -agents to optimally work in the adopting sector one requires

                        Tl log (wa ) + (1 − T l ) log (wa h) ≥ log (wn h) or
                                                        wa
                                                             ≥ hTl
                                                        wn
which is always satisÞed in equilibrium by (17). For the v -agents to optimally work in the nonadopting
sector requires
                                               wa     v
                                                  ≤ hTl                                               (27)
                                               wn
To provide suﬃcient conditions for (27) to hold, it is convenient to consider the cases x∗ = λ and
x∗ < λ separately.
                                               1
                                      (λ−1) θ
    Suppose x∗ < λ. Then η ∗g < η̄ g = E . For (27) to hold a suﬃcient condition is, using (17)
                                         h


                                                                1
                                         η ∗g < η̄ g ≤ 1−   Tlv −Tl
                                                                                                      (28)
                                                            h
For x∗ < λ to obtain in equilibrium a necessary and suﬃcient condition is xs (η̄ g ) > λ. But since
xs (ηg ) is strictly increasing in η g , xs (η̄ g ) > λ if
                                                   µ           ¶
                                                s           1
                                             x 1 − T v −T > λ                                         (29)
                                                         h l l

as long as (28) is satisÞed. Using the explicit form of xs () yields, after some algebra, the condition
                                      ¡ v         ¢1−θ T v −1+θ
                                 Eh1−θ hTl −Tl − 1    h l       ≥λ                                    (30)

                                                     29
For all parameter combinations jointly satisfying (28) and (30) (obviously not an empty set) the
equilibrium features growth below potential growth and agents with v -education Þnding it suboptimal
to work in the adopting sector. In particular, the conditions are satisÞed if agents with vocational
education have a lot to lose by working in the adopting sector (Tlv high and h high).
   A similar argument applies to the case x∗ = λ and therefore η ∗g ≥ η̄ g . Now from (14) is optimal
for v -agents to work in the nonadopting sector if

                                                       v     η̄g Eh
                                              λ ≤ hTl
                                                           (1 − η̄g )h

                                                                                      v η̄ g Eh
and the equilibrium features maximal growth if xs (η̄ g ) ≤ λ. But xs (η̄ g ) ≤ λ ≤ hTl (1−η̄      if and
                                                                                              g )h
only if (after some algebra)

                                     Eh1−θ      h            1
                                                               i       1

                                    T v −T −θ ≤  Eh −(λ − 1) θ (λ − 1) θ
                                   h l l
If this condition, again purely on fundamentals, is satisÞed, then equilibrium growth is maximal and
households with vocational education have no incentive to work in the adopting sector. As before,
this condition is satisÞed if h and Tlv are high.


8.4     A Mean Preserving Increase in the Spread of Productivities

Suppose we change the parameter Tl , but in such a way as to keep expected productivity Eh constant.
Suppose the low productivity state equals κ < h instead of 1, and thus

                                             Eh = κT l +(1 − T l )h

Hence
                                               dκ h − κ
                                                    =    >0                                         (31)
                                               dT l   Tl
Intuitively, making the low state more likely and keeping expected productivity constant requires a
productivity increase in the low state. Thus a reduction in Tl (and therefore a decrease in κ) can
be interpreted as a mean-preserving increase in the spread of the productivity process. We want to
analyze how equilibrium growth and education allocations change with such an increase.
    First, the Þrm’s adoption decision (11) and relative labor demands, and thus equation (14)
remain unchanged. Now agents will opt for general education if

           Tl log (κwa ) + (1 − T l ) log (wa h)− log (wn h) ≥ log (e(a) = − log (1 − η g )

Using this result in (14) yields
                                                   Ã                !2−θ µ        ¶1−θ
                             s                1           ηg                 Eh
                           x (η g ) = g(T l )
                                              ηg       (1 − η g )            h

                                                        30
                  ³            ´Tl
                        h
where g(Tl ) =        κ(Tl ) . This is exactly the equation (18), with κ = 1. In order to obtain
comparative statics results with respect to Tl we simply need to characterize the function g(Tl ),
or, more easily, the function f (Tl ) = log(g(Tl )) = Tl [log(h) − log(κ(Tl ))] . Using (31) we Þnd
                             µ         ¶                      µ         ¶ µ           ¶
                0                h            κ0 (T l )           h           h
              f (T l ) = log             −T l           = log            −          −1 <0
                               κ(T l )        κ(T l )           κ(T l )     κ(T l )

since h > κ(Tl ). Therefore g(Tl ) is a decreasing function of Tl and the xs (η g ) schedule tilts upwards
with a decrease in Tl . Therefore, a mean-preserving increase in the spread on productivity (a decrease
in Tl ) equilibrium growth x∗ weakly decreases and equilibrium general education strictly decreases.
As the productivity process for working in the adopting sector becomes more risky, the incentives for
acquiring general, growth-driving education declines.

8.5     The Social Welfare Function of the Government

Along a balanced growth path wages, education subsidies and total government expenditures grow
at rate x. Therefore the lifetime utility of an agent of ability a, born at date t in a balanced growth
path with growth rate x equals
                      h                                                                 i
           ut (a) = Ig Tl log (W at ) + (1 − T l ) log (W at h)− log (e(a))+ log (S gt )
                           +(1 − I g ) [log (W nt h)+ log (S vt )]
                      = u(a) + 2 log (A0 ) + 2t log (x)

where
                  h                                                                      i
         u(a) = Ig Tl log (wa ) + (1 − T l ) log(wa h) + log (sg )− log (wn h)+ log (sv )
                      + log (wn h)+ log (sv ) − I g log (e(a))                                            (32)

The social welfare function we employ is

                                ∞              Z                               R              2β log(x)
                                X                               2 log(A0 ) +       u(a)da +     1−β
                                           t
                       Ŵ =            β           ut (a)da =
                                 t=0
                                                                               1−β

and thus the benevolent government maximizes
                                                          Z
                                                                        2β log (x)
                                                   W̄ =       u(a)da+                                     (33)
                                                                          1−β

by choice of the policy parameters (sg , sv ), subject to the government budget constraint (19) and the
entities (wa , wn , x, η g ) forming a BGP equilibrium, given policies (sg , sv ). Since we are silent about
how taxes are collected to Þnance government expenditure for education G (and its distortions), we
take G as a parameter of the government problem and not as a choice of the government.


                                                                  31
    We can simplify (33) further by noting that in equilibrium the beneÞt from general education
has to equal its cost for the marginal agent,

          Tl log (wa ) + (1 − T l ) log (wa h)+ log (sg )− log (wn h)+ log (sv ) = − log (1 − η g )

and that from (19) and the Þrst order conditions of the nonadopting Þrms
                                                      G
                                        sv =
                                              η g s + (1 − ηg )
                                                h             iθ−1
                                       wn   = θ (1 − ηg )E h

so that
                       Z
                                     2β log (x)
              W̄   =       u(a)da+
                                       1−β
                                                           h                  i 2β log (x)
                   = ψ − (2 − θ) log (1 − η g ) − η g − log η g s + (1 − η g ) +
                                                                                  1−β
where ψ is a constant, so that Þnally, by the choice of s ∈ (0, ∞), the government maximizes
                                                      h                      i 2β log(x(s))
      W (s) = −(2 − θ) log (1 − ηg (s)) − η g (s)− log ηg (s)s + (1 − ηg (s)) +
                                                                                  1−β
where η g (s) and x(s) solve
                                               µ             ¶2−θ µ ¶1−θ
                                  hTl      1−θ       1             Eh
                           x(s) =     η (s)
                                   s g           1 − η g (s)       h
                                             ¡         ¢θ
                           x(s) = min{λ, 1+ η g (s)E h }

as in the main text.

8.6       Derivatives of the Government Objective Function

For all s ≥ s̄(λ) we have, since growth is maximal,
                                                              Ã        λ           3−θ
                                                                                          !
                                                                  η2−θ
                                                                   g + κ (1 − η g )
                        W (s ≥ s̄) = W (s = ∞)− log
                                                                         e1−ηg
and thus
                                  λ           3−θ                         ¡            ¢
             0
                            η 2−θ
                              g + κ (1 − η g )                    −e1−ηg 2 − θ + η g η 1−θg
           W (s|s ≥ s̄) =                           ∗η 0g (s) ∗    h                      i2 ∗ (s − 1)
                                   e1−ηg                            η 2−θ   λ         3−θ
                                                                      g + κ (1 − η g )

from which the Þrst part of the proposition follows.
    For the case s < s̄(λ), from (22) we obtain
                                                                                   η (s) 
                      0 (s) µ       ¶Ã ¡            ¢θ !
                                                                             1 − s− ηg0 (s)
                    η g       1 + β    θ η g (s)E h
   W 0 (s|s < s̄) =                     ¡           ¢θ − (1 − θ + ηg (s))+    ³      g
                                                                                           ´
                    η g (s)   1−β     1 + η (s)Eh                           s+    1
                                                                                      −1
                                                     g                                              ηg (s)

We observe that for β ∈ (0, 1) suﬃciently big we have that             W 0 (s|s   < s̄) > 0 for all s < s̄.

                                                         32
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Techni-
     cal Change and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 113, No. 4.
     (November 1998), pp. 1055-1089.

 [2] Bartel, Ann P., and Frank R. Lichtenberg. “The Comparative Advantage of Educated
     Workers in Implementing New Technology.” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
     Vol. LXIX (February 1987): pp. 1-11.

 [3] Bartel, Ann P., and Frank R. Lichtenberg. “The Age of Technology and its Impact
     on Employee Wages.” Economic Innovation and New Technology, Vol. 1 (1991): pp.
     215-231.

 [4] Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel. “The role of human capital in economic develop-
     ment: Evidence from aggregate cross-country data.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
     Vol. 34 (October 1994): pp. 143-173.

 [5] Cummings, Jason and Giovanni Violante. “Investment-SpeciÞc Technical Change in the
     US (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review of Economic
     Dynamics, Vol. 5, No. 2. (April 2002), pp. 243-284.

 [6] European Commission. “Young People’s Training: Key Data on Vocational Training in
     the European Union,” Luxembourg : Oﬃce for Oﬃcial Publications of the European
     Communities, 1998.

 [7] European Commission. “The contribution of information and communication technolo-
     gies to growth in Europe and the US: A macroeconomic analysis,” Economic trends,
     No. 12, December 2000.

 [8] European Commission. European Competitiveness Report 2001.

 [9] Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. “Ability-Biased Technological Transition, Wage Inequal-
     ity, and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115, No. 2. (May
     2000), pp. 469-497.

[10] Galor, Oded, and Daniel Tsiddon. “Technological Progress, Mobility, and Economic
     Growth,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3. (June 1997), pp. 363-382.

[11] Gill, Indermit. “Technological Change, Education and Obsolescence of Human Capital:
     Some Evidence for the U.S.” Ph.D. thesis, 1988, The University of Chicago.




                                           33
[12] Gordon, Robert J. “Does the ‘New Economy’ Measure up to the Great Inventions of
     the Past?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 4. (Fall 2000), pp. 49-74.

[13] Gould, Eric D., Omer Moav, and Bruce A. Weinberg. “Precautionary Demand for Ed-
     ucation, Inequality, and Technological Progress,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 6,
     No. 4. (December 2001), pp. 285-315.

[14] Greenwood, Jeremy, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. “1974,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
     Series on Public Policy, Vol. 46 (June 1997), pp. 49-95.

[15] Gust, Christopher, and Jaime Marquez. “Productivity Developments Abroad,” Federal
     Reserve Bulletin, October 2000, pp. 665-681.

[16] Hornstein, Andreas, and Per Krusell. “Can Technology Improvements Cause Produc-
     tivity Slowdowns?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, (1996), pp. 209-259.

[17] Krueger, Dirk and Krishna Kumar. “Quantifying the Role of Education and Other Poli-
     cies in Slow European Technology Adoption and Economic Growth,” Mimeo, Stanford
     University, December 2002.

[18] Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante. “Capi-
     tal Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica,
     LXVIII (2000), pp. 1029-1054.

[19] Lawrence, Robert Z., and Charles L. Schultze. “Overview,” in Barriers to European
     Growth: A Transatlantic View, (Robert Z. Lawrence and Charles L. Schultze, eds.).
     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1987.

[20] Lazear, Edward P. “Entrepreneurship.” NBER Working Paper 9109, August 2002.

[21] Levesque, Karen, Doug Lauen, Peter Teitelbaum, Martha Alt, Sally Librera, and Dawn
     Nelson. “Vocational Education in the United States: Toward the Year 2000,” National
     Center for Education Statistics, February 2000.

[22] Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent. “The European Unemployment Dilemma,”
     Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 3. (June 1998), pp. 514-550.

[23] Merdich, Elliot A., Susan A. Kagehiro, and James Houser. “Vocational Education in
     G-7 Countries: ProÞles and Data,” National Center for Education Statistics, Research
     and Development Report, August 1994.

[24] Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Schleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. “The Allocation of Talent:
     Implications for Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics. (May 1991), pp. 503-530.

                                             34
[25] Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund S. Phelps. “Investment in Humans, Technological
     Diﬀusion, and Economic Growth,” The American Economic Review, May 1966, pp.
     69-75.

[26] OECD. “Education at a Glance: OECD Indicators 1997.” Paris, France : 1997.

[27] OECD. “Education Policy Analysis 1997.” Paris, France : 1997.

[28] Oliner, Stephen D., and Daniel E. Sichel. “The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s:
     Is Information Technology the Story?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14,
     No. 4. (Fall 2000), pp. 3-22.

[29] Prescott, Edward C. “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity” International
     Economic Review, Vol. 39, No. 3. (August 1998), pp. 525-552.

[30] Scarpetta, Stefano, Andrea Bassanini, Dirk Pilat and Paul Schreyer. “Economic growth
     in the OECD area: recent trends at the aggregate and sectoral level,” OECD Working
     Paper 248, June 2000.

[31] Schreyer, Paul. “The Contribution of Information and Communication Technology to
     Output Growth: A Study of the G7 Countries,” OECD STI Working Paper 2000/2,
     March 2000.

[32] Stiroh, Kevin J. “Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do
     the Industry Data Say?” forthcoming in American Economic Review, Vol. 92, No. 5
     (December 2002).

[33] Violante, Giovanni L. “Technological Acceleration, Skill Transferability, and the Rise
     in Residual Inequality” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVII (February 2002), pp.
     297-338.

[34] Welch, Finis. “Education in Production,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 78, No. 1.
     (Jan. - Feb., 1970), pp. 35-59.

[35] Young, Alwyn. “Invention and Bounded Learning by Doing,” Journal of Political Econ-
     omy, Vol. 101, No. 3. (1993), pp. 443-472.




                                            35
