                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PARETO IMPROVING SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM
                    WHEN FINANCIAL MARKETS ARE INCOMPLETE!?

                                            Dirk Krueger
                                            Felix Kubler

                                        Working Paper 9410
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w9410


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2002




We thank Piero Gottardi, John Heaton, Karsten Jeske, Ken Judd, Narayana Kocherlakota, Laurence Kotliko,
Victor Rios-Rull, Kent Smetters, Jorge Soares, Nick Souleles and seminar participants at the 2002 AEA
Winter Meetings, the 2001 ET Conference, the 2001 SCE Conference, the Tow Conference in Iowa, the
Wharton Macro Lunch, SITE, the Atlanta FED, the Intergenerational Risk Sharing and Contracts Conference
in Fiesole, USC, Stanford and the Minnesota FED for helpful suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge
support from NSF grant SES-0004376. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dirk Krueger and Felix Kubler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.
Pareto Improving Social Security Reform when Financial Markets are Incomplete!?
Dirk Krueger and Felix Kubler
NBER Working Paper No. 9410
December 2002
JEL No. H55, D91, H31, E62, D58

                                           ABSTRACT


      This paper studies an Overlapping Generations model with stochastic production and
incomplete markets to assess whether the introduction of an unfunded social security system can
lead to a Pareto improvement. When returns to capital and wages are imperfectly correlated, the
consumption variance of all generations can be reduced if government policies enable them to pool
labor and capital incomes. A social security system that endows retired households with a claim to
labor income may serve as an effective tool to share aggregate risk between generations. Our
quantitative analysis shows that, first, abstracting from the crowding-out effect of social security on
the aggregate stock in general equilibrium, the introduction of social security does indeed represent
a Pareto improving reform, if households are both fairly risk-averse and fairly willing to
intertemporally substitute consumption. Second, the severity of the capital crowding-out effect in
general equilibrium overturns these gains for degrees of risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity
of substitution commonly used in the literature.


Dirk Krueger                                   Felix Kubler
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
Stanford University                            Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305                             Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
dkrueger@leland.stanford.edu
1    Introduction
The current US pay-as-you go social security system was introduced in 1935,
partly as a response to the impoverishment of an entire generation during
the great depression, the biggest negative aggregate shock the US economy
has experienced so far. In the current political debate about social security
reform one of the major concerns cited by the opponents of a reform towards
a funded system is the risk of low returns to savings for an entire generation
due to a large and unfavorable aggregate shock (see Aaron et al. (2001) or
Burtless (2001) for a discussion).
    The role that an unfunded social security system may play in facilitating
the allocation of aggregate risk among generations is also a key discussion
point in the current academic debate. Shiller (1999) and Bohn (1998, 1999)
have argued that, if returns to capital and wages are imperfectly correlated
and subject to aggregate shocks, then the consumption variance of all gen-
erations can be reduced if private markets or government policies enable
them to pool their labor and capital incomes. A social security system that
endows retired households with a claim to labor income may serve as such
an e®ective tool to share aggregate risk between generations, in the absence
of ¯nancial securities that achieve the same risk allocation.
    The idea that market failures might give a normative justi¯cation for a
pay-as-you-go public retirement plan dates back at least to Diamond (1977).
He points out that the absence of certain investment opportunities may lead
to ine±cient risk allocations. Merton (1983) analyzes the economic ine±-
ciencies caused by the non-tradeability of human capital in an overlapping
generations model with stochastic production. He suggests that the present
social security system may help to eliminate these ine±ciencies.
    It is the goal of this paper to evaluate the quantitative importance of
this intergenerational risk sharing role of social security, in comparison to
the more traditional arguments of reducing overaccumulation of capital and
intragenerational insurance and redistribution. We ask whether, in a situa-
tion like in 1935, after a large adverse macroeconomic shock, it is possible
to justify the introduction of an unfunded, redistributive pay-as-you go so-
cial security system on the normative grounds that it provides a welfare
improvement for all generations then alive and for generations to be born
into all future states of the world (an ex interim Pareto improvement).
    Our economy is populated by nine overlapping generations that face
stochastic, imperfectly correlated wages and returns to capital, stemming
from a standard neoclassical production function that is hit by produc-

                                      2
tivity and depreciation shocks. Households have a preference for smooth
consumption, both over time and across states and can transfer resources
across time by purchasing claims to the risky aggregate capital stock. By
assuming a recursive utility representation as in Kreps and Porteus (1978)
and Epstein and Zin (1989) we can control risk aversion independently from
the willingness to intertemporally substitute consumption. The government
administers a pure pay-as-you-go de¯ned contribution social security system
by collecting a payroll tax at constant rate ¿ and paying out bene¯ts that
vary with stochastic aggregate wages, in order to insure budget balance of
the system. With the introduction of such a system, since wages and returns
to capital are imperfectly correlated, the government in e®ect forces house-
holds to hold a second asset and thus to diversify capital income risk. This
risk diversi¯cation element is the only positive role social security plays in
our economy. In particular we provide a su±cient theoretical condition for
the equilibrium without social security to be dynamically e±cient and as-
sure that in all our quantitative analysis this condition is satis¯ed. Therefore
social security is not bene¯cial because it cures overaccumulation of capital
or leads to better allocation of (average) resources across generations, but
solely because it enhances risk sharing between generations. This bene¯cial
role of social security has to be traded o® against its lower average implicit
return, compared with other assets, and the crowding-out of physical capital
that its introduction induces.
    Our quantitative analysis exhibits two main ¯ndings. First, abstracting
from the crowding-out e®ect of social security on the aggregate stock in gen-
eral equilibrium the introduction of social security does indeed represent a
Pareto improving reform, if (and only if) households are fairly risk-averse
and fairly willing to intertemporally substitute consumption. This result
is obtained even though the return di®erential between private returns to
capital and implicit returns to the social security system amounts to 4:9
percentage points, indicating a strong positive e®ect of social security on
the intergenerational allocation of risk. Second, the severity of the capital
crowding-out e®ect in general equilibrium overturns these gains for degrees
of risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution commonly used
in the macroeconomic and public ¯nance literature. However, even in gen-
eral equilibrium the introduction of social security is a Pareto-improving
reform if households are highly risk averse and, in addition, have a very
high intertemporal elasticity of substitution or if the excess return of pri-
vate assets over social security is signi¯cantly lower than observed in the
data.

                                       3
    The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we develop a
simple, analytically tractable model that aims at formalizing the intuition
outlined above and at providing a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the
welfare consequences of social security reform. Section 3 describes the gen-
eral equilibrium model, relates our paper to the existing theoretical literature
and contains the su±cient condition for dynamic e±ciency of equilibrium.
Section 4 discusses the calibration of the model and Section 5 summarizes
our main results, ¯rst for a partial equilibrium and then for a general equi-
librium version of the model. Conclusions are contained in Section 6, and
the appendix o®ers further details about our theoretical derivations as well
as on the data used in the paper.


2     A Simple Model
2.1   Theory
In this section we present a simple, two period partial equilibrium model to
formalize the intuition discussed in the introduction. Each agent lives for
two periods, earns wage w0 in the ¯rst period on which she pays a payroll
tax ¿: The remainder of her wages is invested into a risky savings technology
with stochastic gross return R: In the second period of her life she receives
social security payments of ¿w0G; where G is the stochastic gross return
of the social security system. The agent values consumption in the second
period of her live, with consumption given by

                           c = (1 ¡ ¿)w0 R + ¿w0G                           (1)

according to the di®erentiable utility function v(c): Lifetime utility, as a
function of the size of the social security system, is therefore given by

                      U(¿) = Ev [(1 ¡ ¿)w0 R + ¿w0G]                        (2)

where E(:) is the ¯rst period conditional expectation with respect to uncer-
tainty realized in the second period of the households' life.
    We ask under what condition a marginal introduction of a social secu-
rity system is welfare-improving, that is, we seek necessary and su±cient
conditions under which
                               U 0 (¿ = 0) > 0                           (3)
Under the assumption that v(c) = ln(c) and that G and R are jointly log-
normal (3) reduces to (after some tedious algebraic manipulations presented

                                       4
in the appendix)
                 ½   ¾
                G            E(G)        [cv(R)2 + 1]
              E          =        ¢                          >1              (4)
                R            E(R) [½G;R ¢ cv(G) ¢ cv(R) + 1]
               Cov(G;R)
where ½G;R = Std(G)Std(R) is the correlation coe±cient between G and R and
           E(R)
cv(R) = Std(R)   is the coe±cient of variation of the risky savings returns, with
cv(G) de¯ned accordingly.
    From (4) we see that the introduction of a marginal social security system
is welfare improving if the implicit expected return to social security, E(G) is
su±ciently large relative to the return on the risky saving technology, E(R):
Even if the latter is substantially larger than the former, the introduction of
social security may still be justi¯ed if the stochastic saving returns are suf-
¯ciently volatile (i.e. cv(R) su±ciently big) and/or the correlation between
private saving returns and returns to social security su±ciently small (or
negative). We will calibrate our general equilibrium model exactly to these
statistics from the data which this simple model has pointed to as crucial in
determining the welfare consequences of social security.
                                                              1¡¾
    For general utility function of the CRRA form v(c) = c 1¡¾¡1 and without
any distributional assumptions on (G; R) condition (4) can be generalized
to                    µ       ¶       µ    ¶       ³      ´
                        G¡ R            G             1¡¾
                    E           =  E         ¡  E    R      >0                (5)
                          R¾            R¾
    With appropriate data on private returns to saving R and implicit re-
turns to the social security system G equation (5) can be used to provide
a ¯rst quantitative assessment whether the introduction of a (small) social
security system can be justi¯ed on the grounds of a better risk allocation,
abstracting from all intertemporal consumption and general equilibrium ef-
fects. It may also provide an estimate of the degree of risk aversion required
for this argument to work.

2.2   Empirical Implementation
We empirically map the gross returns R into returns to the S&P 500, as
documented by Shiller (1989), and the gross return to social security G into
the gross growth rate of real total compensation of employees from NIPA,
as provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). For details please
consult the data appendix.



                                        5
                                                   Welfare Consequences of Marginal Social Security
                                            0.6
        Utility Consequence of Soc. Sec.

                                            0.4      18 Year Intervals
                                                                           Annual Data

                                            0.2


                                             0


                                           -0.2                                          Zero Line


                                           -0.4

                                           -0.6


                                           -0.8
                                               0      2             4            6           8       10
                                                          Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion



        Figure 1: Welfare Consequences of Social Security Reform

    A key question is what time interval in the data corresponds to a model
period. Our data is available in yearly frequency; since in our simple model
agents live for two periods, a model period may more reasonably be inter-
preted as twenty years. We present results for alternative data frequencies,
for annual data, and for data of 18-year frequency.
    In Figure 1 we plot, using the data for R and G condition (5) against
the degree of risk aversion ¾: We see that for degrees of risk aversion of 2
and higher the introduction of a marginal social security system is bene¯cial,
when the judgement is based on the criterion (5) from our simple two-period
partial equilibrium model.
    The question of whether the better risk allocation induced by the (marginal)
introduction of social security is welfare improving then becomes a quantita-
tive one. To at least partially answer it requires to construct a computable
dynamic general equilibrium model, calibrated to data, a task which we turn
next to.




                                                                      6
3       The General Model
Our model is a straightforward extension of Diamond's (1965) economy to
aggregate uncertainty.

3.1     Time and Uncertainty
Time is discrete and extends from t = 0; : : : ; 1: Aggregate uncertainty is
represented by an event tree. The root of the tree is given by some ¯xed
event z0. Each node of the tree is a history of exogenous shocks to the
economy z t = (z0; z1 : : : zt ). Let by ¼t (zt ) denote the probability that the
node z t occurs. We let the notation zt Â zs mean that z s is a potential
successor node of zs ; for t > s:
   The shocks are assumed to follow a Markov chain with ¯nite support Z
and (in slight abuse of notation) with transition matrix ¼. There are three
commodities at each node, labor, a single consumption good and a capital
good which can only be used as an input to production.

3.2     Demographics, Endowments and Preferences
The economy is populated by overlapping generations of agents that live for
nine periods.1 The population growth rate is given by n. In each period t,
Lt = (1 + n)Lt¡1 identical new households are born. By L0 = 1 let denote
the number of newborns in period 0: A household is fully characterized by
the node in which she is born (z t). When there is no ambiguity about the
identity of households we will index them simply by their date of birth.
    An agent born at node z s has non-negative, deterministic labor endow-
ment over her life-cycle, (l 0; l1 ; : : : ; l 8). The price of the consumption good at
each date event is normalized to one and at each date event zt the household
supplies her labor endowment inelastically for a market wage w(z t).
    Let by cs (z t ) denote the consumption of an agent born at time s in
period t ¸ s and by U s (c; z t) the expected continuation utility of an agent
born in node zs from node z t Â zs onwards. An agent born at node zs
therefore has expected lifetime utility from allocation c given by U s (c; zs ):
Individuals have preferences over consumption streams representable by the
following recursive utility representation (see Kreps and Porteus (1978) and
    1
     The lifespan of nine periods constitutes a compromise between realism and the need to
keep the number of state variables relatively small for our compational strategy to remain
feasible.



                                            7
Epstein and Zin (1989))
                           8                      2                                                 3 ½ 9 1½
                           >
                           <h              i½          X                  ³                    ´¾     ¾ >
                                                                                                        =
          U s (c; z t) =       c s (z t)        + ¯4          ¼(zt+1 jzt) U s (c; z t+1 )           5          (6)
                           >
                           :                           zt+1
                                                                                                        >
                                                                                                        ;

where 1¡½1 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and 1 ¡¾ measures

the risk aversion of the consumer with respect to atemporal wealth gambles.
We assume ¾ < 1 and ½ < 1; ½ 6= 0: Note that if ½ = ¾; then households have
standard constant relative risk aversion expected utility, with CRRA of 1¡¾;
if the ¯nal continuation utility function is given by U s (c; z s+8) = cs (zs+8);
which we shall assume.2
    Households have access to a storage technology: they can use one unit
of the consumption good to obtain one unit of the capital good next period.
We denote the investment of household s into this technology by as (zt ). All
agents are born with zero assets, as (z s¡1) = 0: We do not restrict as (z t ) ¸
0, because we want to permit households to borrow against future labor
income. At time t the household sells its capital goods accumulated from
last period, as (zt¡1 ), to the ¯rm for a market price 1+r(z t) > 0: The budget
constraint of household s in period t ¸ s therefore reads as

 cs (z t ) + as (z t) = (1 + r(zt ))as (z t¡1) + (1 ¡ ¿)lt¡s (zt)w(zt ) + I(s)b(zt ) (8)

where ¿ is the payroll tax to ¯nance social security payments, b(zt ) are the
social security bene¯ts received by a retired agent and I(s) is the indicator
function, with I(s) = 1 for s ¸ ageret and I(s) = 0 otherwise.3 Here ageret
is the retirement age.
   2
       For the isoelastic utility case ½ = 0 preferences are represented recursively by
                      2                                                      Ps+8¡t        3 Ps+8¡t
                                                                                                1
                                                                                      ¯j                 ¯j
                                  0                                      1     j =1             j=0
                      6                                                           ¾        7
                      6 s t X                                                              7
          U (c; z ) = 6       @       ¦(zt+1 jzt)U s(c; zt+1 )¾A                           7
           s     t
                      6c (z )                                                              7                   (7)
                      4         z t+1                                                      5


   It can be shown that the limit of the Euler equations for (6); as ½ ! 0; converge to the
Euler equations for (7)
    3
      Note that bene¯ts b(zt) only depend on the aggregate event history, but not on indi-
vidual income, whereas in the actual U.S. systems bene¯ts do depend on individual labor
earnings, although in a fairly progressive fashion. There is also a maximum income level
beyond which no further social security contributions are levied. Even though our mod-
eling choice may attribute too much intergenerational risk sharing to the social security


                                                          8
    To start o® the economy we assume that at the root node, i.e. in period
zero, there are L0=(1 + n)i households of ages i = 0; : : : ; 8 who enter the
period with given capital holdings a0¡1; : : : ; a¡8                       0
                                                  ¡1, where by assumption a¡1 =
0

3.3    Firms
There is a single representative ¯rm which in each period t uses labor and
capital to produce the consumption good according to a constant returns to
scale production function ft (K; L; zt). Since ¯rms make their decisions on
how much capital to buy and how much labor to hire after the realization of
the shock zt they face no uncertainty and simply maximize current period
pro¯ts.4
    In our quantitative work below we will always use the following para-
metric form for the production function.
                                      h           i1¡®
               ft (K; L) = »(zt )K ® (1 + g)t L          + K(1 ¡ ±(zt))              (9)

where ´(:) is the stochastic shock to productivity, where ±(:) 2 [0; 1] can be
interpreted as the (possibly) stochastic depreciation rate.

3.4    Government
The only role the government has in our model is to levy payroll taxes
to pay for social security bene¯ts. We model social security as a de¯ned
contribution pay-as-you-go system that adheres to period by period budget
balance, with size characterized by the payroll tax rate ¿: This requires that
taxes and bene¯ts satisfy

                              ¿w(z t)L(zt ) = b(zt )Lret
                                                     t                              (10)
                                                                  P8
where L(z t ) is total labor input at node z t and Lret
                                                    t = L0           s=ageret (1+n)
                                                                                   t¡s

is the total number of retired people in the economy.
system by failing to account for the linkage between bene¯ts and contributions, given the
progressive nature of the system it provides a reasonable ¯rst approximation, without
average lifetime income becoming an additional state variable for each generation.
   4
     We assume that households cannot convert capital goods back into consumption goods
at the beginning of the period. This assumption is necessary to prevent households from
consuming the capital at the beginning of the period instead of selling it to the ¯rm in
states where the net return to capital is negative.



                                           9
3.5      Markets
In this simple economy the only markets are spot markets for consumption,
labor and capital, all of which are assumed to be perfectly competitive.

3.6      Equilibrium and Pareto E±ciency
As discussed in the introduction we will study equilibria for two versions of
our model. The ¯rst is a standard closed general equilibrium economy, in
which all capital used in domestic production is owned by domestic agents.
In the second economy part of the productive capital stock may be owned
by the rest of the world; we assume that in this economy the total supply of
capital for the production process is exogenously ¯xed at K     ¹ t; part of which
is owned by domestic agents and part of which is owned by the rest of the
world. K ¹ t = [(1+n)(1+g)]t K  ¹ grows at rate n+g per period. We refer to this
version of the model either as partial equilibrium or small open economy.
    For given initial conditions z0; (as¡1)0s=¡8 a competitive equilibrium for
the closed economy is a collection of choices for households (cs (zt ); as (z t))s+8
                                                                                 t=s ;
for the representative ¯rm fK(zt ); L(zt )g; a policy f¿; b(zt )g as well as prices
fr(zt ); w(z t )g such that a) given prices and policies households and the ¯rm
maximize, b) the government budget constraint (10) is satis¯ed and c) mar-
kets clear: for all t; z t
                                                                  8
                                                                  X      ls
                                           L(zt ) = (1 + n)t                        (11)
                                                                  s=0
                                                                      (1 + n)s
                                                                  8
                                              t               t
                                                                  X at¡s (zt¡1)
                                          K(z ) = (1 + n)                           (12)
                                                                  s=1
                                                                        (1 + n)s
                       8
                   t
                       X c t¡s(zt )
           (1 + n)                    + K(zt¡1) = ft(K(z t); L(zt ); zt )           (13)
                       s=0
                           (1 + n)s
   By Walras' law market clearing in the labor and capital market imply
market clearing in the consumption goods market for the closed economy.
For the small open economy the labor market clearing condition (11) remains
the same, the capital market clearing condition now reads as
                                                  ¹t
                                         K(z t) = K                                 (14)
and the goods market clearing condition is not any longer part of the equi-
librium de¯nition. 5
  5                                       ¹ t ¡ K dom(zt))FK of output as capital income,
      Foreign investors claim a fraction (K


                                             10
    Finally, an allocation (c; K) is (ex interim) Pareto e±cient if it is feasible
                                               ^ such that U s(^c; zs ) ¸ U s (c; zs )
and there is no other feasible allocation (^c; K)
for all z and U (^c; z ) > U (c; z ) for at least one z s:
         s       s    s       s    s

    In order to solve for the equilibrium numerically using recursive tech-
niques we de-trend the economy by deterministic population growth and
technological progress. Denoting growth adjusted consumption by ~c; and
other variables accordingly6, the Euler equations from the individuals' op-
timization problem, the recursive version of which our numerical algorithm
will operate on, read as
                                   "                  # ½¡1 Ã                 !
 h      ³        ´¾i ½ ¡1              c~s (z t+1)              1 + r(zt+1)       ³          ´¾¡½
          ~s
     Ez t U          ¾      ~ zt
                            ¯E                                                        ~s
                                                                                      U             = 1: (15)
           t+1                                                                         t+1
                                         ~cs (z t )                1+ g

Since each agents' optimization problem is ¯nite-dimensional and convex,
these Euler equations are necessary and su±cient for optimal household
choices.
   In order to compute equilibrium allocations numerically we formulate
these Euler equations recursively. We then de¯ne and compute a Functional
Rational Expectations Equilibrium (FREE), following the approach pio-
neered by Spear (1988) and adapted to stochastic OLG models by Krueger
and Kubler (2002).7

3.7     The Thought Experiment
In this paper we are interested in the following thought experiment: Suppose
that in an equilibrium of the economy for a payroll tax rate ¿ = 0 at some
date-event z t, there is an unanticipated increase of ¿. What are the welfare
e®ects for all individuals born at z t and at all successor nodes ?
    Evidently, in order to determine whether an introduction of a social
security system (i.e. an increase of ¿ to a positive value) improves welfare
for all future generations, one needs to compare welfare at in¯nitely many
with the rest of output being available for investment into the domestically owned capital
stock Kdom(zt ) and domestic consumption.
                                        s (z t)                           U s (c;z t )
    6
                            cs(zt ) = c[1+g]
      More precisely, de¯ne ~                     ~          ½      ~s
                                              t ; ¯ = (1 + g) ¯ and U t = (1+g )t :
    7
      A FREE is a recursive competititive equilibrium where the policy functions are re-
stricted to smooth functions, de¯ned on a compact state space, and with range in a
compact set, so that the Markov process induced by the exogenous shocks and the policy
functions never leaves the compact set that constitutes the state space, once it is started in
that set. The bounds of the state space are part of the de¯nition of a FREE. See Krueger
and Kubler (2002) for the details.


                                                        11
nodes. In our quantitative work below, we report welfare gains and losses
for the next 2-3 periods (corresponding to about 20 years in real time) and
verify that the qualitative conclusions remain the same over 4-10 periods. It
turns out that in our examples we do not have to consider more periods to
make conclusive welfare statements, since the welfare consequences of the
reform stabilize after at most 4 periods.

3.8   Dynamic E±ciency and Pareto E±ciency
Since ¯nancial markets are incomplete, it is well known that in our setup
equilibrium allocations are generally suboptimal and that a social planner
could ¯nd Pareto-improving transfers. When discussing possible risk-sharing
bene¯ts of a pay-as-you-go social security system we focus on a particular
intervention. We do not argue that a social security system guarantees full
e±ciency and we do not attempt to explain why this particular system is
in place. We simply want to examine if it is Pareto-improving to introduce
social security.
    Whereas our paper focuses on ine±ciencies caused by sequentially in-
complete ¯nancial markets, since Samuelson (1958) and Diamond (1965) it
is well known that overlapping generation models can exhibit Pareto sub-
optimal equilibria for completely di®erent reasons. Even in deterministic
exchange economies, transfers from young to old agents, which do not consti-
tute a new asset with di®erent risk characteristics can be Pareto-improving
(dynamic ine±ciency). In economies with production a reduction in capi-
tal accumulation can lead to Pareto improvement through higher aggregate
consumption at all future dates (production ine±ciency).
    Demange (2002) generalizes the notion of dynamic e±ciency to economies
with uncertainty and possibly incomplete asset markets. An allocation is
called dynamically e±cient, if there exists no other allocation in the mar-
keted subspace which constitutes a Pareto improvement. An argument sim-
ilar to Samuelson (1958) can be used to demonstrate that equilibria in our
economies may be dynamically ine±cient.
    However, in our analysis we focus on ine±cient risk sharing across gen-
erations (due to incomplete markets), rather than on dynamic or production
ine±ciencies as a source of market failures. When returns on available as-
sets are su±ciently high, equilibrium allocations are production e±cient and
dynamically e±cient. When, in addition, markets are sequentially complete
the equilibrium is Pareto e±cient and social security can never be Pareto-
improving. In other words, if assets yield high enough returns, the ine±-


                                     12
ciency of risk sharing studied in this paper is the only ine±ciency that may
provide a rationale for public transfer programs.
    Are returns on assets are su±ciently high? Abel et al. (1989) argue
empirically that the US economy is dynamically e±cient.8 In addition there
is an important theoretical argument for focusing on dynamically e±cient
economies. An asset that promises to pay a non-negligible fraction of aggre-
gate consumption at each future state of the world (e.g. land, see Demange
(2002)) can only have a ¯nite price today if the allocation is dynamically
e±cient. Therefore equilibria in models with such assets are necessarily
dynamically e±cient.
    However, the conclusion that dynamic e±ciency implies Pareto e±ciency
depends crucially on the assumption that markets are sequentially complete.
If markets are incomplete allocations will generally not be Pareto-e±cient,
even if returns of traded assets are high and thus equilibrium allocations are
dynamically e±cient. In this paper we therefore want to assess whether in
a realistically calibrated economy that is, judging from rates of return on
capital, dynamically e±cient, the introduction of a social security system is
Pareto-improving. For this we need to provide a su±cient and numerically
implementable condition on returns to capital that guarantees dynamic ef-
¯ciency. Our analysis extends Demange's (2002) argument to homothetic
economies with population and productivity growth.
    For each value of the shock z, de¯ne a production function in intensive
units · = K L by
                      Á(·; z) = »(z)F(·; 1) ¡ (1 + ±(z))·                 (16)
De¯ne a supporting price system (q(z t)) by q(z0 ) = 1 and

                             @Á(·(zt ); z) t¡1
                 E(q(z t )                jz ) = q(zt¡1 )(1 + n)(1 + g)      (17)
                                 @·
Since markets are not sequentially complete, there are several supporting
price systems, which we collect in a set Q. The following proposition (The-
orem 1 in Demange (2002)) characterizes dynamically e±cient allocations.

Proposition 1 An equilibrium allocation is dynamically e±cient if
                                             Ã t+8         !
                                              X
                                                       s
                                lim inf E0           q(z ) = 0               (18)
                                t!1 q2Q
                                              s=t
  8
      But see Barbie et al. (2001), for an alternative view on this point.



                                              13
    The proposition states that it is su±cient for optimality that the in¯mum
over all supporting prices tends to zero. Therefore we can verify dynamic
e±ciency if we ¯nd some supporting price system that satis¯es Condition
(18).
    This condition can obviously not be easily veri¯ed since it involves prices
`at in¯nity'. Since we focus on equilibria with a compact state space S, we
can give a more useful su±cient condition. For a given time horizon T de¯ne
the T-period expected discounted present value by
                                  ·                          ¸
                                           (1 + n)(1 + g)
                     R(T ) = Ez0 ¦Ts=1                    :                (19)
                                              1 + r(zs )

Denote by £ 2 S the vector of endogenous state variables (i.e. the aggre-
gate capital stock and the asset holdings of each generation). We have the
following

Proposition 2 A Functional Rational Expectations Equilibrium (FREE) is
dynamically e±cient if there exists a T > 0 such that for all initial conditions
(z; £) 2 Z £ S in the compact state space the resulting equilibrium returns
satisfy R(T) < 1:

   Proof: By de¯nition of a FREE all zT ; £(z T ) will lie in Z£S themselves
and can be viewed as initial conditions as well. Therefore it follows that
R(iT) ! 0 as i ! 1 De¯ning

                                                    q(zt )
                                      (1 + n)(1 + g)~
                        q~(zt+1 ) =                                        (20)
                                          1 + r(zt+1)

implies the su±cient condition (18). QED
    In the applications below it su±ces to consider T = 1. With Jensen's
inequality for T = 1, our result implies that the allocation is dynamically
e±cient if the conditional expected returns to capital lies above (1 + g)(1 +
n) for all possible states in the state space. Also note that from Zilcha
(1990) it follows that, independently of the market structure, allocations
are production e±cient if (18) holds true.


4    Calibration
In order to quantify the welfare e®ects of introducing an unfunded social
security system we ¯rst have to parameterize our model. This amounts to

                                         14
specifying the aggregate stochastic process governing total factor productiv-
ity and stochastic depreciation, population growth and the life-cycle labor
income pro¯le, average economic growth, the capital share in the production
function and parameters governing preferences.

4.1   Aggregate Growth and Technology
In our model economy agents life for 9 periods. Therefore we interpret
one model period to last 6 years. As population growth rate we choose
n = 1:1% per annum, equal to the average population growth rate for the
US postwar period. Similarly we choose the average growth rate of wages
equal to g = 1:7%; the long-run average for the US. The labor share in the
Cobb-Douglas production function is taken to be ® = 0:3:
   We assume that aggregate uncertainty is driven by a four-state Markov
chain with state space Z = fz1; z2 ; z3; z4 g and transition matrix ¼ = (¼ij ):
Since we want to model both shocks to total factor productivity and to
depreciation, a particular state zi maps into a combination of low or high
TFP and low or high depreciation.
                               (
                                   1:0 + º for z 2 fz1; z2g
                   T (z) =
                                   1:0 ¡ º for z 2 fz3; z4g
                               (
                                   ¹± ¡ Ã for z 2 fz1; z3 g
                    ±(z) =          ¹± + Ã for z 2 fz2; z4 g               (21)

        ¹ the average depreciation rate, to 0:31; re°ecting an average depre-
We set ±;
ciation rate of 6% per year.
    The aggregate state z1 is characterized by a good TFP-shock and a good
depreciation shock (low depreciation), whereas z4 features a bad TFP shock
and a bad depreciation shock. We assume that the Markov process is a
mixture between an iid process and the identity matrix, that is

                             ¼ = (1 ¡ w)¦ + wI                             (22)

where I is the identity matrix, w is a parameter governing the persistence of
the process and ¦ is composed of columns of the form (¦1 ; ¦2; ¦3; ¦4 ); where
¦j is the probability of state zj in the stationary distribution of ¼: We assume
                                                                       P
symmetry in that ¦1 = ¦4 and ¦2 = ¦3: Given the restriction j ¦j = 1
the matrix ¼ is then uniquely determined by two numbers (¦1; w), which,
together with (º; Ã) and possibly K   ¹ completely characterize the production
technology.

                                        15
4.2     Labor Endowments
Labor endowments are deterministic and follow the life cycle pattern docu-
mented in Hansen (1993). They are documented in Table 1

            Table 1: Labor Endowments
            age j 1     2    3    4    5                      6       7    8    9
               l j 1 1:35 1:54 1:65 1:67                   1:66    1:61    0    0

    This pro¯le implies that, absent aggregate shocks, individual labor earn-
ings have a hump-shaped pro¯le, with peak around the age of 48; at that age
individuals earn 67% more than at their entry into the labor force in their
early 20's. Households of age 63 retire and possibly receive social security
bene¯ts.

4.3     Social Security
We consider various sizes of the social security system, with a benchmark of
¿ = 0 (no social security) and our experiment consisting of the \marginal"
introduction of a social security system of size ¿ = 2%:

4.4     Preference Parameters
Our recursive preferences are uniquely characterized by the intertemporal
                            1
elasticity of substitution 1¡½ ; the time discount factor ¯ and the risk aversion
parameter 1 ¡ ¾: Since our results depend crucially on these parameters we
report outcomes for di®erent combinations of these parameters.

4.5     Calibration Targets and Benchmark Parameterization
We ¯rst present results for the small open economy in which the capital
crowding-out e®ect of social security is absent by construction. The tech-
                                ¹ are chosen jointly so that the benchmark
nology parameters (¦1; w; º; Ã; K)
model competitive equilibrium delivers the following statistics from aggre-
gate data on wages and returns to capital, which we interpret as the S&P
500. Note again that our model period lasts for 6 years, and thus the statis-
tics reported below refer to wage and return data over six year periods.9

   1. An average real return on risky capital of 7:7% per annum
   9
     For details on the source of the data used as well as the construction of the statistics,
see the appendix.


                                             16
   2. A coe±cient of variation of average wages of 0:133
   3. A correlation coe±cient between wages and returns to risky capital of
      0:418
   4. A coe±cient of variation for the return of capital of 0:808
   5. A serial correlation of wages of 0:623
    Loosely speaking, the parameter K    ¹ determines the average return on
capital, the shock to TFP, º; determines the variability of wages, condi-
tional on º the shock to depreciation Ã determines the variability of returns
to capital, the probability ¦1 determines how correlated returns to capital
and labor are and ¯nally w controls the autocorrelation of wages. Note
that in the small open economy, model-generated statistics for wages and
returns are independent of the preference parameters and thus need not be
re-calibrated as we perform sensitivity analysis with respect to these param-
eters. This is not be true for the closed economy version of the model. For
that model capital accumulation is endogenous, and therefore the parameter
K¹ is absent from that model. Consequently we choose one of the preference
parameters, namely the time discount factor ¯; so that the closed economy
with (¦1; w; º; Ã; ¯) delivers equilibrium observations consistent with the
facts above. In anticipation of this we choose as time discount factor for the
small open economy ¯ = 0:85; or a time discount rate of 2:7% per year.
    The parameters required for model-generated statistics to coincide with
the ¯ve empirical observations stated above are (¦1; w; º; Ã; K)  ¹ = (0:294;
0:623; 0:133; 0:42; 2:18): We make the following observations. The probabil-
ity ¦1 = ¦4 = 0:294 > 0:25 is required to match the signi¯cantly positive
correlation of returns to labor and capital for 6 year time periods in the data.
In order for the model to reproduce this observations it has to be su±ciently
unlikely that TFP-shocks and depreciation shocks of opposite direction oc-
cur simultaneously. The relative magnitude of TFP-shocks and depreciation
shocks is explained by the fact that returns to capital are much more volatile
in the data than are wages. Since TFP-shocks a®ect both returns as well as
wages directly, the size of these shocks have to be somewhat moderate for
wages not to be too volatile. Given this, depreciation shocks have to be of
large magnitude to generate returns to capital that are su±ciently volatile
in the model.
    The required parameter values do not seem to be implausible, with the
possible exception of the high variance of the depreciation shock. In particu-
lar, the size of Ã = 0:42 implies that the depreciation rate can be bigger than

                                      17
100%, which makes a literal interpretation of these shocks as depreciation
shocks problematic. Table 2 summarizes the benchmark parameterization

     Table 2: Benchmark Parameterization
     Par. n(pa) g(pa) ®    ¦1  º      Ã                     ±¹     w       ¯(pa)     ¿
     Val. 1:1% 1:7% 0:3 0:29 0:13 0:42                      0:31   0:62    0:97      0

5        Results
5.1      Small Open Economy with Time-Separable Preferences
We ¯rst investigate whether the basic results from our simple model in
section 2 carry over to a model with nontrivial intertemporal choices carried
out by households in the model. In Figure 1 we plot the welfare consequences
of introducing a marginal unfunded social security system ¿ = 2% against
the risk aversion of an agent with standard time separable preferences. Note
that increasing the agents' risk aversion is automatically associated with
reducing her intertemporal elasticity of substitution, since with standard
preferences both attitudes towards risk and attitudes towards intertemporal
substitutability of consumption are controlled by the same parameter.
    Since the aggregate capital stock is ¯xed and wages and returns to capi-
tal therefore only vary with the exogenous shock z; the welfare consequences
from such a reform for any newborn agent depend only on the current
shock.10 We measure welfare changes in consumption equivalent variation
(or \consumption", for short): we ask what percentage of extra consump-
tion, in each state, an agent would require in the old equilibrium to be as
well of as with the introduction of social security. Positive numbers thus
indicate welfare gains from an introduction of social security for a newborn
agent, negative numbers indicate welfare losses. To better interpret these
numbers, note that without aggregate uncertainty a social security reform
simply leads to a reduction in the present discounted value of lifetime income
worth 1:9% of consumption.
    We see that the introduction of social security leads to uniform welfare
losses for newborn agents, independent of the state at which it is introduced
and the risk aversion of the agent. In fact, as risk aversion increases, these
losses become more severe, after reaching a minimum at a CRRA of around
    10
    If aggregate shocks were iid; then the welfare consequences would only depend on
the current labor productivity shock and would be the same for shocks z1; z2 and z3 ; z4 ,
respectively.


                                           18
5. The magnitude of the losses center around 1% of consumption, signif-
icantly less than the 1:9% without uncertainty. Social security does have
a bene¯cial role in reducing the variability of retirement consumption: the
coe±cient of variation of consumption of agents in their last two periods of
life (their retirement) declines by 2 to 5 percentage points (depending on
the risk aversion), due to the introduction of social security. However, this
e®ect is insu±cient quantitatively to overcome the loss in average lifetime
consumption due to the lower returns of social security, compared to private
physical capital.


                                                                     Welfare Consequences: Beta=0.85
         Welfare Consequence of Soc. Sec. in %




                                                   0

                                                                                                 Zero Line


                                                 -0.5            Shock z4


                                                                                              Shock z2

                                                  -1
                                                                            Shock z1


                                                                Shock z3
                                                 -1.5
                                                        2   4      6     8    10     12    14    16    18    20
                                                                   Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion



        Figure 2: Welfare Consequenses of Social Security Reform

    The reason for why increasing risk aversion does not, as in the simple
model of Section 2, lead to welfare gains from better risk allocation via
social security, lies in the fact that now households make consumption deci-
sions over time. Increasing risk aversion implies a reduction in a households
willingness to intertemporally substitute. In an atemporal model this does
not matter, but in the current model it crucially determines our results. In
particular, in our model with increasing labor income over the life cycle and
long run wage growth due to technological progress households borrow at

                                                                               19
high and risky interest rates when young, and more so with social security
which taxes labor income in return for retirement income. A reduction in
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution makes the desired consumption
pro¯le °atter, leads to more borrowing when young and thus reduces the
attractiveness of a program that reduces labor income early in life, all other
things equal. What drives the results in Figure 2 are therefore not primarily
risk considerations, but rather the changes in the IES implied by the changes
in attitudes towards risk.11
    In order to disentangle these e®ects it is therefore, for the purpose of
this paper, crucial to allow for a utility speci¯cation in which the degree of
risk aversion and the willingness to intertemporally substitute consumption
can be controlled independently. Recursive utility permits exactly this, with
minimal deviations from standard von Neumann-Morgenstern utility.

5.2    Small Open Economy with Recursive Preferences
We now repeat our thought experiment of introducing social security for
varying degrees of risk aversion, holding the intertemporal elasticity of sub-
            1
stitution 1¡½  constant. There is substantial disagreement about the size of
the IES (see Gouvenen (2002) for an excellent survey of the literature). Es-
timates from aggregate consumption data tend to be low, around the order
of 0-0:2; whereas studies that use micro data tend to obtain higher values
of around 0:2-0:8 (see, e.g. Attanasio and Weber, 1993, 1995). On the
other hand the macroeconomic studies cited in Gouvenen (2002), trying to
reconcile observations about interest rates and consumption growth rates,
argue for an ever higher IES, which leads him to conclude that \(f)or many
macroeconomists economic reasoning constitute a strong, albeit indirect,
evidence that the IES is quite high, probably close to unity" (p. 7).
    We follow the macroeconomic literature and use a unit elasticity of sub-
stitution (the log-case) as our benchmark, but also report results for a lower
IES of 0:5; more in line with microeconometric evidence.
    From Figure 3 we see that now, holding the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution constant, the welfare consequences from introducing social secu-
rity are monotonically increasing in the agents' risk aversion. In particular,
such an introduction is a Pareto-improving reform as long as coe±cient of
  11
    The welfare consequences of introducing social security improve if one increases the
discount factor ¯, but qualitatively exhibit the same properties as the results summarized
in Figure 2.




                                           20
                                                                        Welfare Consequences: Beta=0.85
                                                       1
             Welfare Consequence of Soc. Sec. in %
                                                                    Shock z4
                                                     0.5

                                                                                                    Shock z3
                                                       0



                                                     -0.5                                                 Zero Line
                                                                    Shock z2

                                                      -1
                                                                Shock z1


                                                     -1.5
                                                            2   4      6     8    10     12    14    16    18   20
                                                                       Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion



        Figure 3: Welfare Consequences of Soc. Sec. Reform: IES = 1

relative risk aversion exceeds the value of 5:5; since newborns in all aggregate
states of the world are better o® with than without social security.12
    This conclusion, as in the last subsection, depends crucially on the size of
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Figure 4 con¯rms our previous
results that reducing the IES renders the introduction of social security less
bene¯cial. Now such a reform does not constitute a Pareto improvement
since agents born into state z3 (with low wages and high returns on capital)
lose, even for high degree of risk aversion.
    We conclude from this section that introducing an unfunded social se-
curity system may constitute a Pareto improving reform, if agents are suf-
¯ciently (but not unreasonably) risk averse and willing to substitute con-
sumption over time. However, if capital accumulation is endogenous, such
social security reform will reduce private saving and hence reduce the ag-
gregate capital stock and wages. This adverse e®ect was, by construction,
absent in the previous analysis, but is present in the closed economy version
 12
      Not surprisingly, agents already alive at the date of the reform unambigously gain.



                                                                                  21
                                                            Welfare Consequences: Beta=0.85, IES=0.5
                                               1
          Utility Consequence of Soc. Sec.

                                             0.5
                                                                       Shock z2
                                                            Shock z4
                                               0

                                                                                                  Zero Line
                                             -0.5
                                                                  Shock z1             Shock z3

                                              -1



                                             -1.5
                                                    2   4     6     8    10     12    14    16    18   20
                                                              Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion



      Figure 4: Welfare Consequences of Soc. Sec. Reform: IES = 0:5

of our model, the quantitative analysis of which we turn next to.

5.3    The Crowding-Out E®ect of Social Security
In this section we will only consider parameterizations for the IES which are
considered empirically reasonable and for which the small open economy
indicates a signi¯cant increase in all generations' welfare if risk aversion is
su±ciently high. This selection is not meant to imply that we view other
parameterizations as empirically unreasonable, but simply re°ects the fact
that for such parameterizations no additional analysis is needed to arrive
at de¯nitive welfare conclusions { the capital crowding out e®ect of social
security can only make matters worse for the reform.
    For the IES we maintain a value of unity for the rest of this section. As
a benchmark we assume a risk aversion parameter of 15: This value, which
lies outside the range of values commonly deemed reasonable by macroe-
conomists, but is not uncommon in the ¯nance literature and has some em-



                                                                         22
pirical support from experiments,13 produces a solid Pareto improvement
from the introduction of social security in the small open economy. We re-
calibrate the technology parameters, together with the time discount factor
¯ so that the equilibrium of the closed economy reproduces the empirical
wage and return data summarized in the calibration section. 14 The required
¯ equals 0:85; as in the small open economy version of the model.
    The introduction of social security, in contrast to the small open econ-
omy, now changes aggregate production and interest rates. The average
return to capital (in the log run, after the transition has been completed)
increases from 7:7% to 7:9% per annum, the average aggregate capital stock
declines by 2:6%; output by 1% and consumption by 0:4%:
    The crowding-out e®ect, which sets in immediately after the reform has
profound consequences for the welfare properties of the reform, summarized
in Figure 5. The number attached to a given node of the event tree repre-
sents, in consumption equivalent variation, the welfare gains/losses induced
by the reform for an agent born at the particular node of the tree.15
    Whereas generations already alive still bene¯t from the reform, house-
holds born at or after the reform date now lose, in contrast to the case in
which the capital-crowding out e®ect was ignored. Welfare losses increase
slightly over time, are fairly uniform across states and amount to about
1% of consumption. This result is obtained even though, as in the partial
equilibrium case, social security does reduce the consumption variance of re-
tired agents signi¯cantly (the coe±cient of variation of retiree consumption
declines by about 2 percentage points).
    Increasing the risk aversion further does not qualitatively change the re-
sult. For example, with a risk aversion parameter of 30 (and re-calibrating
all other parameters so that model statistics are consistent with the data),
the welfare losses decline to about 0:8% for generations 2 periods after the
reform (as compared to 1% in the benchmark parameterization). It is im-
portant to note that the welfare gains from intergenerational risk sharing
are bounded (see also Figure 2): any intergenerational transfer program of
  13
      See the summary of the experimental literature by Gollier (2001), and for representa-
tive papers in the ¯nance literature, see Kandel and Stambaugh (1991) and Cecchetti et
al. (1993).
   14                                                 ¹ is no longer a parameter; its role in
      Since capital accumulation is now endogenous, K
the calibration is taken by the time discount factor ¯:
   15
      The aggregate capital stock (and its distribution) at the date at which the reform
occurs lies in the middle of the ergodic distribution of the state for the economy without
social security. Qualitatively similar results are obtained if other initial conditions are
used.


                                             23
                                              (4,4) -1.0

                                              (4,3) -1.0
                           -0.8
                            z=4               (4,2) -1.0

                                              (4,1) -1.0
                                              (3,4) -1.0

                                              (3,3) -1.0
                           -0.8
                                              (3,2) -1.0
                            z=3

                                              (3,1) -1.0
                                              (2,4) -1.0

                                              (2,3) -1.1
                           -0.8
                             z=2              (2,2) -1.0

                                              (2,1) -1.0
                                              (1,4) -1.0

                                              (1,3) -1.0
                           -0.8
                             z=1              (1,2) -1.0

                                              (1,1) -1.0




               Figure 5: Welfare Cons. with Crowding-Out

the type considered in this paper at best can eliminate consumption risk
in retirement completely. The ratio of consumption in the best and in the
worst state provides an upper bound on the (consumption equivalent) wel-
fare gains, independent of the risk aversion. If the loss from the return
dominance of private capital over social security exceeds this upper bound,
even with extremely high risk aversion a social security reform does not
generate welfare gains.
    We conclude that even for high risk aversion the crowding-out e®ect
of social security dominates the intergenerational risk sharing e®ect, and
therefore the reform does not provide a Pareto improvement.

5.4   Social Security and Stock Market Returns
The data on returns of the stock market we use in our calibration section
stem from the years 1929-2001: A pay-as-you go social security system was


                                    24
in place in the US since the late 1930's. It is therefore possible that high
stock market returns in the sample period are partially due to the presence
of social security. This possibility is important for our calibration exercise.
The main reason why social security has such adverse welfare consequences
in general equilibrium is the return di®erential between risky capital and an
unfunded social security system, before its introduction, of roughly 4:9%:
    Suppose we take the other extreme view and calibrate our economy in
such a way that with an unfunded social security system our model economy
reproduces the empirical targets set forth in the calibration section. Quali-
tatively, since now returns on the risky capital stock in the absence of social
security are lower and hence closer to the potential implicit returns of an
unfunded social security system, we would expect the welfare consequences
of a social security reform to be more favorable. In this section we want
to pose and answer two questions a) does such calibration render the econ-
omy without social security dynamically ine±cient and b) does a (marginal)
reform now provide a Pareto improvement.
    In particular, we calibrate to the same observations as in the calibration
section and use as social security tax rate the current payroll tax rate of
¿ = 12:4%: While this is an extreme assumption (for most of the sample
period the tax rate was considerably lower), it provides us with the most
stringent robustness check of our previous results.
    Now a high aversion of agents is su±cient to obtain a Pareto improving
social security reform. For a risk aversion parameter of 30 all current and all
future generations gain from the introduction of an unfunded social security
system with payroll tax rate of ¿ = 2%: The welfare gains amount to about
0:2% for agents born directly at the date of the reform and 0:1% for agents
born farther into the future. The crucial driving force for this result, beyond
high risk aversion and fairly high IES of 1 (which alone are not su±cient as
argued above) is the reduction of the return di®erential between capital and
social security. Before the introduction of the system the average return
to capital now is 6:4% instead of 7:7% as under our previous calibration
strategy. The economy is still deep inside the dynamically e±cient region,
as it passes condition (18) easily.
    Even though the crowding-out e®ect is non-negligible for this parametriza-
tion (the average capital stock falls by 3:2%; aggregate output by 1% and
aggregate consumption by 0:4%; similar to the benchmark calibration), now
its welfare implications are dominated by the bene¯ts of better risk alloca-
tion. but its size dominated by better risk allocation. Note that with more
moderate degrees of risk aversion (such as a risk aversion parameter of 15 or

                                     25
below) the reform does not constitute a Pareto improvement, although now
the generation born at the time of the reform gains (as opposed to Figure
5).
    To us, this example shows that there do exist defendable parameter-
izations even of the closed economy version of the model for which the
introduction of a small unfunded social security system provides a Pareto
improvement. Given that the average return on the stock market has a
sizeable standard error, calibrating to a return of 6:4% is not a priori unrea-
sonable. Reducing the target return further, to about 5% generates a Pareto
improvement of the reform even for lower degrees of risk aversion than 15
and still leaves the economy dynamically e±cient.

5.5   The Role of the Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution
It is easy to obtain a Pareto improving reform if one resorts to higher (and
thus empirically implausible) values for the intertemporal elasticity of sub-
stitution, because a higher IES reduces the magnitude of the crowding-out
e®ect of social security. With our calibrated life cycle pro¯le of labor earn-
ings (and the equilibrium relation between time discount factor and interest
rate) young agents in the model borrow. As the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (IES) increases (and thus agents value a °at consumption pro-
¯le less), the incentive to borrow more to o®set a payroll tax at young age
is declines. The weaker the motive of the young to do additional borrowing,
the milder is the required increase in interest rates (and consequent fall in
the capital stock) to bring about equilibrium in the capital market after the
introduction of social security. This point, already discussed in Imrohoroglu
et al. (1999), explains why we, with a large IES of 5 ¯nd Pareto improve-
ments via social security even for moderate degrees of risk aversion and
return di®erentials between private assets and social security as observed in
the data; in these examples the crowding-out e®ect is virtually absent and
the welfare conclusions parallel those of the small open economy discussed
previously.
    Granting the reader freedom in choosing her or his own preferred prefer-
ence parameters, we would interpret the ¯ndings documented in this section
as suggesting that a Pareto improving introduction of social security is a
possibility even from a quantitative point of view, but that for parameter
values usually deemed reasonable in the macroeconomic literature such a
Pareto improvement seems unlikely to occur.



                                      26
6    Conclusion
Can the introduction of an unfunded social security system provide a Pareto
improvement by facilitating intergenerational risk sharing? In this paper we
argue that, in the presence of incomplete markets, it potentially can do so
in a quantitatively important way. However, in a realistically calibrated
economy the intergenerational risk sharing role of unfunded social security
is dominated in its importance by the adverse e®ect on capital accumulation
arising from the introduction of such a system.
    Future research could extend our work along several important dimen-
sions. First, the current paper abstracts from several bene¯cial roles of
an unfunded, redistributive social security system. In the presence of in-
complete ¯nancial markets social security provides a partial substitute for
missing insurance markets against idiosyncratic labor income and lifetime
uncertainty. On the other hand the distortive e®ects of payroll taxes on the
labor supply decision remain unmodeled as well. We abstract from these
features to more clearly isolate the potential magnitude of the bene¯cial
intergenerational risk sharing role of social security. A complete assessment
of its relative quantitative importance, compared to the intragenerational
risk sharing and distortion e®ects would require incorporating these e®ects
explicitly, however. Whereas elastic labor supply would add limited com-
plexity to the numerical algorithm by adding a control variable, allowing
for uninsurable idiosyncratic uncertainty would generate intragenerational
heterogeneity, a nontrivial wealth distribution within generations and thus
induce the same curse of dimensionality that occurs when expanding the
number of generations in the model.
    Second, in this paper we are setting a very demanding bar that social
security has to pass in order to be judged as welfare improving and therefore
implementable. Employing the Pareto criterion our normative analysis is
silent about the political con°ict surrounding the adoption or reform of social
security. Extensions of the work of Cooley and Soares (1997) and Boldrin
and Rustichini (2000) to our environment with aggregate uncertainty are
needed to address the question why, though not mutually bene¯cial, the US
social security system was introduced when it was introduced and who one
would expect the major supporters of this reform to be.




                                      27
A     Theoretical Appendix
In this appendix we derive equation (4) explicitly. With v(c) = ln(c) (3)
becomes
                                               ½                                               ¾
                0             G ¡R
          U (¿ = 0) = E                   > 0 if and only if
                        (1 ¡ 0)R + 0 ¤ G
         ½ ¾
           G
       E       > 1                                                                                             (23)
           R
We note that     µ ¶    ³            ´   ³       ´
                  G
               E     = E eln(G)¡ln(R) = E eln(Z)                                                               (24)
                  R
where ln(Z) := ln(G) ¡ ln(R); so that Z = G         R : Since (ln(G); ln(R)) are
jointly normal, both ln(G) and ln(R) are normal random variables, and
                                                                          2
thus ln(Z) is normal with mean ¹ln Z = ¹ln G ¡ lnln R and variance ¾ln      Z =
  2      2
¾ln G + ¾ln R ¡ 2¾ln G;ln R : Since Z is lognormal we have
            µ       ¶
                G                                                      1   2
        E                 = E(Z) = e¹ln Z + 2 ¾ln Z
                R
                                           1       2                                   1   2       2
                          = e¹ln G+ 2 ¾ln G ¢ e¡(¹ln R + 2 ¾ln R ) ¢ e¾ln R ¢ e¡¾ln G;ln R                     (25)
Since G and R are log-normal we have
                                                           1       2                                   1   2
                    E(G) = e¹ln G+ 2 ¾ln G and E(R) = e¹ln R + 2 ¾ln R
                                                               2
                                                                           ³       2
                                                                                               ´
                V ar(R) = e2¹ln R +¾ln R ¢ e¾ln R ¡ 1
                                                           ³           2
                                                                                       ´
                                = E(R)2¢ e¾ln R ¡ 1                                                            (26)
We thus obtain
                                           1   2
                              e¹ln G+ 2 ¾ln G                      = E(G)                                      (27)
                                       1       2                       1
                           e¡(¹ln R + 2 ¾ln R )                    =                                           (28)
                                                                     E(R)
                                               2                               V ar(R) + E(R)2
                                        e¾ln R =                                                               (29)
                                                                                    E(R)2
Finally we want to obtain an expression for e¡¾ln G;ln R : But
    Cov(G; R) = E(GR) ¡ E(G)E(R) = E(eln(G)+ln(R) ) ¡ E(G)E(R)
                                                       1       2           1   2
                        = e¹ln G ¡¹ln R + 2 ¾ln G + 2 ¾ln R +¾ln G;ln R ¡E(G)E(R)
                        = E(G)E(R) (e¾ln G;ln R ¡ 1)                                                           (30)

                                                                       28
and thus
                                   Cov(G; R) + E(G)E(R)
                      e¾ln G;ln R =
                                        E(G)E(R)
                                        E(G)E(R)
                  e¡¾ln G;ln R   =                                     (31)
                                   Cov(G; R) + E(G)E(R)

    Plugging in (27) ¡ (31) into (25) yields

                  µ     ¶               V ar(R)+E(R)2
                 G            E(G)         E(R)2
               E            =      ¢ Cov(G;R)+E(G)E(R)
                 R            E(R)
                                           E(G)E(R)
                                             h          i
                              E(G)        cv(R)2+1
                            =      ¢                                   (32)
                              E(R) [½G;R¢cv(G) ¢ cv(R) + 1]

as in the main text.


B     Data Appendix
We use data for 1929-2001, since reliable wage and stock market data are
available only for this period. Our annual data on dividends and stock
market prices, in order to compute returns on the S&P 500 are taken from
Shiller (1989) and the updates available on his web site. For annual wages
we use total compensation of employees from the NIPA, divided by the
total number of full-time and (full-time-equivalent) part-time employees.
All variables are de°ated by the de°ator for total consumption expenditures
from the NIPA. We remove a constant growth rate of 1:7 per annum from
the wage data; the statistics referring to the wage data pertain to the so
detrended data. Where applicable, we aggregate yearly data into 12 six-
year intervals to obtain data of frequency comparable to that of our models.




                                      29
References
 [1] Aaron, H., A. Blinder, A. Munnell and P. Orzag (2000), \Governor
     Bush's Individual Account Proposal," mimeo, Brookings Institution.

 [2] Abel, A., G. Mankiw, L. Summers and R. Zeckhauser (1989), \Assess-
     ing Dynamic E±ciency: Theory and Evidence," Review of Economic
     Studies, 56, 1-20.

 [3] Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1995), \Consumption Growth, the Inter-
     est Rate and Aggregation," Review of Economic Studies, 60, 631-649.

 [4] Attanasio, O. and G. Weber (1995), \Is Consumption Growth Con-
     sistent with Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence for the Consumer
     Expenditure Survey," Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1121-1157.

 [5] Barbie, M., M. Hagedorn and A. Kaul (2001), \Government Debt as
     Insurance against Macroeconomic Risk," Discussion paper 412, IZA
     Bonn.

 [6] Bohn, H. (1998), \Risk Sharing in a Stochastic Overlapping Genera-
     tions Economy," mimeo, University of California at Santa Barbara.

 [7] Bohn, H. (1999), \Social Security and Demographic Uncertainty: The
     Risk Sharing Properties of Alternative Policies," NBER working paper
     7030.

 [8] Boldrin, M and A. Rustichini (2000), \Political Equilibria with Social
     Security," Review of Economic Dynamics, 3, 41-78.

 [9] Burtless, G. (2000), \Social Security Privatization and Financial Mar-
     ket Risk: Lessons from U.S. Financial History," mimeo, Brookings In-
     stitution.

[10] Cecchetti, S., P. Lam and N. Mark (1993), \The Equity Premium and
     the Risk-Free Rate: Matching the Moments," Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, 31, 21-46.

[11] Cooley, T. and J. Soares (1997), \A Positive Theory of Social Security
     Based on Reputation," Journal of Political Economy, 107, 135-160.

[12] Demange, G. (2002), \On Optimality of Intergenerational Risk Shar-
     ing," Economic Theory, 20, 1-27.

                                    30
[13] Diamond, P. (1965), \National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
     American Economic Review, 55, 1127-1155.

[14] Diamond, P. (1977), \A Framework for Social Security Analysis," Jour-
     nal of Public Economics, 8, 275-298.

[15] Epstein, L. and S. Zin (1989), \Substitution, Risk Aversion and the
     Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,"
     Econometrica, 57, 937-969.

[16] Gollier, C. (2001) The Economics of Risk and Time, MIT Press, Cam-
     bridge.

[17] Gouvenen, F. (2002), \Reconciling Con°icting Evidence on the Elas-
     ticity of Intertemporal Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective,"
     mimeo, University of Rochester.

[18] Hansen, G. (1993), \The Cyclical and Secular Behavior of the Labor
     Input: Comparing E±ciency Units and Hours Worked," Journal of
     Applied Econometrics, 8, 71-80.

[19] Imrohoroglu, A., Imrohoroglu, S. and D. Joines (1999), \Social Secu-
     rity in an Overlapping Generations Economy with Land," Review of
     Economic Dynamics, 2, 638-665.

[20] Kandel, S. and R. Stambaugh (1991), \Asset Returns and Intertempo-
     ral Preferences," Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 39-71.

[21] Kreps, D. and E. Porteus (1978), \Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty
     and Dynamic Choice Theory," Econometrica, 46, 185-200.

[22] Krueger, D. and F. Kubler (2002), \Computing OLG Models with
     Stochastic Production," mimeo, Stanford University.

[23] Merton, R. (1983), \On the Role of Social Security as a Means for
     E±cient Risk Sharing in an Economy Where Human Capital is Not
     Tradable," in Z. Bodie and J. Shoven (eds.) Financial Aspects of the
     United States Pension System, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

[24] Samuelson, P. (1958), \An Exact Consumption Loan Model of Interest
     with or without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political
     Economy, 66, 467-482.


                                    31
[25] Shiller, R. (1989), Market Volatility, MIT Press, Cambridge.

[26] Shiller, R. (1999), \Social Security and Institutions for Intergenera-
     tional, Intragenerational and International Risk Sharing," Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference on Public Policy, 50, 165-204.

[27] Spear, S. (1988), \Existence and Local Uniqueness of Functional Ra-
     tional Expectations Equilibria in Dynamic Economic Models," Journal
     of Economic Theory, 44, 124-155.

[28] Zilcha, I. (1990), \Dynamic E±ciency in Overlapping Generations Mod-
     els with Stochastic Production," Journal of Economic Theory, 52, 364{
     379.




                                    32
