                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      FRACTIONALIZATION

                                          Alberto Alesina
                                      Arnaud Devleeschauwer
                                         William Easterly
                                           Sergio Kurlat
                                         Romain Wacziarg

                                        Working Paper 9411
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w9411


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2002




We thank Francesco Caselli and Jim Fearon for useful discussions. All errors remain ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Alberto Alesina, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.
Fractionalization
Alberto Alesina, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly,
Sergio Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 9411
December 2002
JEL No. O5, H1

                                          ABSTRACT




We provide new measures of ethnic, linguistic and religious fractionalization for about 190
countries. These measures are more comprehensive than those previously used in the economics
literature and we compare our new variables with those previously used. We also revisit the question
of the effects of ethnic, linguistic and religious fractionalization on quality of institutions and
growth. We partly confirm and partly modify previous results. The patterns of cross-correlations
between potential explanatory variables and their different degree of endogeneity makes it hard to
make unqualified statements about competing explanations for economic growth and the quality of
government.



Alberto Alesina             Arnaud Devleeschauwer            William Easterly
Department of Economics     Department of Economics          Institute for International Economics
Harvard University          Harvard University               and Center for Global Development
Cambridge, MA 02138         Cambridge, MA 02138              1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
and NBER                    Devleesc@fas.harvard.edu         Washington, DC 20036
aalesina@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu                             Weasterly@iie.com

Sergio Kurlat                         Romain Wacziarg
The World Bank                        Stanford Graduate School of Business
1818 H Street, NW                     518 Memorial Way
Washington, DC 20433                  Stanford, CA 94305
skurlat@worldbank.org                 and NBER
                                      wacziarg@gsb.stanford.edu
1       Introduction
Ethnic conflict is an important determinant of the political economy of many
nations and localities. Many believe that it leads to political instability, poor
quality of institutions, badly designed of economic policy and disappointing
economic performance.
    In a cross-country setting, Easterly and Levine (1997) have shown that
per capita GDP growth is inversely related to ethnolinguistic fractionaliza-
tion in a large sample of countries. In particular, they argued that much of
Africa’s growth failure is due to ethnic conflict, partly as a result of absurd
borders left by former colonizers.1 As a result of that paper, a measure
of ethnic fractionalization has become a “standard” control in regressions
explaining cross-national diﬀerences in economic success.2
    A related literature, early examples being Canning and Fay (1993) and
Mauro (1995), has discussed the impact of ethnic fragmentation on govern-
ment activities and quality of institutions. La Porta et al. (1999), in a broad
empirical study of the determinants of the quality of government, suggest
that ethnic fractionalization matters, even though variables related to legal
origins may be more important. A large literature on US localities show that
in more ethnically fragmented communities, public goods provision is less
eﬃcient, participation in social activities and trust is lower, and economic
success, measured by growth of city size, is inferior.3 Evidence that trust
does not travel well across racial lines is also supported by experimental
evidence.4
    Another related literature, Esteban and Ray (1994) on the theoretical
side and Garcia-Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2002) on the empirical side,
discuss which are the best measures of heterogeneity. The traditional mea-
sure of ethnic fractionalization is given by the probability that two randomly
    1
     For a discussion of the political economy of borders, country size and heterogeneity
of populations see Alesina and Spolaore (2002). Note hovewer that ethnic conflict was a
constant in African history even before colonization, as pointed out by Herbst (2000).
   2
     See for example the general growth empirics exercises of Brock and Durlauf (2001),
and Doppelhofer, Miller, and Sala-i-Martin (2000).
   3
     A partial list of papers in this area include Alesina Baqir and Easterly (1999), Alesina
and La Ferrara (2000), Alesina and La Ferrara (2002), Lutmer (2001), Goldin and Katz
(1999) and Costa and Khan (2002). Another line of research has explored the eﬀects of
ethnic diversity on civil wars, suggesting that fractionalization does not help predict the
incidence of domestic violent conflict once poverty and income levels are controlled for
(see Fearon and Lattin (2000)).
   4
     See Glaeser et al. (2000).



                                             1
drawn individuals from the population belong to two diﬀerent groups. Its
theoretical maximum is reached (at the value of 1) when each person be-
longs to a diﬀerent group. In contrast, simple measures of polarization reach
their maximum when two equally sized groups face each other. We use both
measures of fractionalization and of polarization in our empirical work, and
discuss how results diﬀer across the two sets of indices.
    While existing measure of racial (or ethnic) fragmentation for the US
are reasonably well-accepted, since they are based upon detailed and reli-
able census data, cross-country measures have been widely debated. Easterly
and Levine (1997) use indices based on ethnolinguistic classification provided
by sources from the former Soviet Union, the Atlas Narodov Mira of 1964.
These data rely largely on linguistic distinctions, which may obscure other
aspect of ethnicity like racial origin, skin color, etc. Interestingly, studies
within the United States do not look at language in the racial classification.
If they did, blacks and whites would be classified in the same group. As
we discuss below, this example shows that although useful, language is not
the only way to look at ethnicity.5 In Latin America several countries are
relatively homogeneous in terms of language spoken, often the one of for-
mer colonizers, but much less so if skin color or racial origin is taken into
account. The World Bank estimates that the percentage of Afro-Latinos in
Latin America is higher than the percentage of African-Americans in the
United States. Peoples of indigenous or mestizo background also form a
large percentage of the population in most Latin American countries.
    Another diﬃculty in measuring heterogeneity is that ethnic classifica-
tions are not set in stone, and are more complex than can be summarized
by simple measures. For example, the Oromo in Ethiopia are split into five
diﬀerent groups as a result of regional migrations and intermixing with other
groups, suggesting that fractionalization evolves endogenously as a function
of migration and intergroup mixing. The infamous Hutu-Tutsi divide in
Burundi was thought by some to have been greatly accentuated (some even
say created) by the Belgian colonizers, suggesting that fractionalization may
also be endogenous because the definition of groups can shift over time. Peo-
ple of African origin do not have as clear a dividing line from the rest of
the population in many Latin American countries as they do in the US,
suggesting that ethnic diﬀerences may not be suﬃcient to fully characterize
the degree of heterogeneity. Hence, ethnic classifications are fraught with
   5
    Racial classification follows the census which divides American in five groups: White,
Blacks, America Indians, Pacific islanders, and Hispanics. As for ethnicity country of
origin like Ireland, Italy, Japan etc. is also available.


                                            2
ambiguities, as we discuss in depth below. Having mentioned this important
caveat, our measures of ethnic, linguistic and religious heterogeneity capture
distinctions that may still matter enormously for economic outcomes.
    This paper seeks to achieve four goals. Firstly, we provide a new measure
of ethnic fragmentation based on a boarder classification of groups, taking
into account not only language but also other cleavages such as racial char-
acteristics. We provide this measure for many more countries (almost twice
as many) than those normally used in the literature, using diﬀerent sources,
and we discuss in detail similarities and diﬀerences between our measure
and previous ones. We construct three new indices, one based on a broad
measure of ethnicity, one based strictly on language and one based on reli-
gion.
    Secondly, we show that indices of fractionalization constructed using
measures of ethnicity, language or religion lead to substantially diﬀerent re-
sults when they are entered in regressions to explain growth and government
quality.
    Thirdly, using our new measures we reexamine the evidence on the eﬀects
of ethnic fragmentation on two general areas: economic growth and the
quality of institutions and policy. We reach interesting results:
    a) On economic growth, we broadly confirm the results by Easterly and
Levine (1997). In fact the negative eﬀect of ethnic fragmentation on growth
is reinforced with the new data, and we are able to highlight the diﬀerences
between ethnic, linguistic and religious fractionalization.
    b) On quality of government and policies we make some progress over La
Porta et al. (1999). They argued that both legal origin, distance from the
equator and ethnolinguistic fractionalization explain the quality of govern-
ment. In their results, legal origin variables tend to be stronger than ethno-
linguistic fractionalization. We argue that results on this point are sensitive
to the specification, and one can easily produce reasonable specifications in
which ethnic fragmentation “dominates” legal origin. We do not intend to
argue that ethnic fractionalization “beats” legal origin, but more modestly
that the pattern of correlation between independent variables makes it very
hard to resolve this horse race. Most likely both set of variables are impor-
tant, and we discuss carefully the patterns of cross-correlation between these
variables and the potential channels linking fractionalization to government
quality.
   c) Ethnic fractionalization is also closely correlated with GDP per capita
and geographic variables, like latitude. More ethnic fragmentation is more

                                      3
common in poorer countries which are closer to the equator. This com-
plicate even more the task of apportioning precisely the weight of ethnic
fragmentation to policy variables, the quality of government and growth.
Thus the pattern of cross-correlations between explanatory variables cannot
be ignored when drawing conclusions on these issues. As is well known,
in many cases the results of cross-country regressions are sensitive to the
econometric specification, and this case is no exception. Useful lessons can
be learned from this sensitivity, however, as it may inform us as to the
channels whereby fractionalization operated to depress growth or reduce
the quality of government.
    d) While ethnic and linguistic fractionalization are associated with neg-
ative outcomes in terms of quality of government, religious fractionalization
is not; in fact, if anything, this measure displays a positive correlation with
measures of good governance. This is because measured religious fractional-
ization tends to be higher in more tolerant and free societies, like the United
States, which in fact displays one the of the highest level of religious fraction-
alization. This result has no bearing, however, on the question of whether
certain religious denominations are correlated with better politico-economic
outcomes, an issue recently explored by Barro and McLeary (2002).
   Finally we explore which indicator of fractionalization is more correlated
with variables of interest. We conclude that the measure of fractionalization,
traditionally used in the literature perform a bit better than the measure of
polarization proposed by Garcia-Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2002).
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present our new
data and new indices of ethnic fractionalization and polarization. In Section
3, we present evidence on the relationship between fractionalization and
growth in a broad cross-section of countries. In Section 4, we examine
how fractionalization relates to the quality of government and institutions.
Section 5 summarizes our results using measures of polarization. Section
6 discusses the impact of ethnic fractionalization on economic variables in
individual countries. The last section concludes.




                                        4
2     New Measures of Fractionalization6
2.1    Data sources and measurement issues
Our main goal in gathering data on fractionalization to clearly distinguish
between ethnic, religious and linguistic heterogeneity. Ethnic and linguistic
diﬀerences were previously lumped together as part of an “ethnolinguistic”
fractionalization variable. The data most frequently used in the literature
was compiled in the Soviet Union in the early 1960s on the basis of pri-
mary country sources, and published in the Atlas Narodov Mira in 1964.
The ethnolinguistic fractionalization variable (often referred to as ELF) was
computed as one minus the Herfindahl index of ethnolinguistic group shares,
and reflected the probability that two randomly selected individuals from a
population belonged to diﬀerent groups.7 We use the same formula, applied
to diﬀerent underlying data, to compute our measures of fractionalization:
                                                N
                                                X
                              F RACTj = 1 −       s2ij                            (1)
                                                 i=1

where sij is the share of group i (i = 1...N ) in country j.
    A major obstacle to distinguishing between ethnic and linguistic vari-
ables is that language is part of the criterion used by ethnologists and an-
thropologists to define the concept of ethnicity. This is true, for example,
in Africa, where racial or physical criteria are seldom used to define ethnic
groups. This is not the case, however, in Latin America, where characteris-
tics typically used to distinguish between ethnic groups are racial in nature.
To our knowledge, no measures of racial fragmentation exist for a broad
cross-section of countries, largely because the underlying data on group size
is missing for most countries. Moreover, the gathering of such data would be
fraught with conceptual problems, such as the definition of the physiological
characteristics that distinguish races.
    One feasible improvement over existing measures, however, is to compile
a separate variable for linguistic fractionalization in isolation of any racial
of physical characteristics. Our variable “language”, is based exclusively on
data from Encyclopedia Britannica, 2001, which reports the shares of lan-
guages spoken as “mother tongues”, generally based on national census data.
   6
     See http://www.stanford.edu/~wacziarg/papersum.html for our new dataset and re-
lated documentation.
   7
     For the purpose of cross-country regressions, ELF was used, among many others, in
Mauro (1995), Canning and Fay (1993) and Easterly and Levine (1997).


                                          5
Other possible sources for language data include the CIA World Factbook
(which, however, only lists the shares of each language for a few countries)
and the Ethnologue project, which lists approximately 6,800 languages.8
Fractionalization measures constructed from these sources are closely re-
lated, as they are based on very similar country source data.9 Our data
includes 1055 major linguistic groups for 201 countries or dependencies.
    We also compute a separate variable for religious fractionalization (“re-
ligion”), based on data from the Encyclopedia Britannica, 2001. The dis-
tinctions in this data are perhaps less controversial and subject to arbitrary
definitions than the data on linguistic and ethnic fractionalization, since
the boundaries of religions are more clear and definitions consistent across
countries. Our data cover 294 diﬀerent religions in 215 countries and depen-
dencies.
    Finally, the main variable we focus on is a measure of ethnic fractionaliza-
tion, “ethnicity”. As suggested above, the definition of ethnicity involves a
combination of racial and linguistic characteristics. For example, our data on
Bolivia involves the following groups: Blancos (10.13%) , Aymara (30.38%),
Quechua (30.38%), Mestizos (25.32%) and others groups (indigenous and
Afro, 3.80%). This, like the data for most of the rest of Latin America and
the Caribbean, is based on racial distinctions rather than linguistic distinc-
tions. In fact, our language data for Bolivia looks very diﬀerent: Aymara
3.24%, Guarani 0.12%, Quechua 8.15%, Spanish 87.65%, Other 0.84%.
    In contrast, the ethnicity data for some European countries such as Bel-
gium, Luxembourg and Switzerland largely reflects languages (for exam-
ple, the “ethnicity” we have identified in Switzerland include: German 65%,
French 18%, Italian 10%, other Swiss 6% and Romansch 1%). The same
holds for much of Sub-Saharan Africa. These classifications reflect the judg-
ment of ethnologists and anthropologists on the appropriate definition of
ethnicity, which to our knowledge remains a rather vague and amorphous
concept. It would be wrong to interpret our ethnicity variable as reflect-
ing racial characteristics alone, but it does reflect these characteristics to a
greater extent than our language variable, and it should thus be expected
to bear a diﬀerent relationship to economic variables.
       An important goal of our collection of ethnicity data was to obtain data
   8
    http://www.ethnologue.com/
   9
    However, the Ethnologue data is much more disaggregated than the Encyclopedia
Britannica data that we use, as relatively similar dialects are classified there as diﬀerent
languages.


                                             6
on various ethnic groups that was as disaggregated as we could find. This
required the use of multiple sources of data, which we painstakingly checked
against each other for consistency. The primary source was the Encyclopedia
Britannica (2001), which was the source of our data in 124 of 190 countries.
This was completed with data from the CIA (2000) for 25 countries, Levinson
(1998) for 23 cases and Minority Rights Group International (1997) for 13
cases. For France, Israel, the United States and New Zealand, we directly
consulted the national censuses of these countries to come up with ethnicity
data as disaggregated as available. The rule we followed for data collection
was as follows: if two or more sources for the index of ethnic fractionalization
were identical to the third decimal point, we used these sources (this was
generally recorded as data sourced from the Encyclopedia Britannica). If
sources diverged in such a way that the index of fractionalization diﬀered to
the second decimal point, we used the source where reported ethnic groups
covered the greatest share of the total population. If this was 100% in more
than one sources, we used the source with the most disaggregated data (i.e.
the greatest number of reported ethnic groups). In the end, our ethnicity
variable covers approximately 650 distinct ethnic groups in 190 countries.
    One last issue to contend with is that of changes in the ethnic fraction-
alization index through time, which also raises the issue of its endogeneity.
This is important because our data is from recent sources (generally the
early to mid-1990s). If there were major shifts in ethnic composition, using
data from the end of our period to explain variables for the 1960-1995 period
could lead to endogeneity bias.
    Shifts in ethnic composition could stem from changes in the shares of each
group or from changes in the definition of the various ethnic groups. Ethnic
fractionalization indices are generally taken as exogenous in cross-country
regressions, based on the fact that group shares are suﬃciently stable that
changes only have a minor impact on fractionalization measures. This seems
a reasonable assumption at the 30 year horizon of the typical cross-country
regression, even though this assumption may be less tenable for a much
longer horizon. Think for instance of diﬀerent fertility rates across ethnic
groups.
    Another problem could occur if the definitions of ethnic groups changed
through time, as a function of economic or political variables. The possi-
bility of such changes in definitions has been pointed out by the “reflexive”
school in ethnology and sociology. According to the reflexive theory of eth-
nicity and nationality, the boundaries of ethnic groups are changing because


                                       7
individual’s self-identification to groups can change as a result of social, eco-
nomic or political forces, and ethnicity is therefore endogenous, especially at
long horizons.10 One recent example of this phenomenon is Somalia: prior
to the 1991 civil war, this country appeared relatively homogeneous (85%
Somalis), but during and after the civil war “clans” became the dominant
dimension of ethnic cleavage. In other words, a political event led to the cre-
ation of a new dimension of ethnic cleavage, and self-identification to groups
now reflect preexisting clans rather than the Somali “ethnicity”.11
    In general, it does not matter for our purposes whether ethnic diﬀer-
ences reflect physical attributes of groups (skin color, facial features) or
long-lasting social conventions (language, marriage within the group, cul-
tural norms) or simple social definition (self-identification, identification by
outsiders). When people persistently identify with a particular group, they
form potential interest groups that can be manipulated by political leaders,
who often choose to mobilize some coalition of ethnic groups (“us”) to the
exclusion of others (“them”). Politicians can also mobilize support by sin-
gling out some groups for persecution, where hatred of the minority group
is complementary to some policy the politician wishes to pursue (Glaeser
(2002)).
    The bottom line is that while we recognize that ethnic fractionalization
could to some extent be endogenous, and that the previous literature has
probably underplayed this point, we do not believe this is a very serious
problem at the horizon of 20 to 30 years which characterizes our cross-
country work. While the example of Somalia is interesting, in our sample
period such examples are rare and ethnic fractionalization displays tremen-
dous time persistence. More serious is the problem of endogeneity of the
religious fragmentation variable. Repressive regimes, especially those with
a religious bend, may make it diﬃcult for individuals to be “counted” as
members of the non oﬃcially sanctioned religion. This phenomenon could
introduce a spurious correlation between (lack of) political freedom and re-
ligious fragmentation.
  10
      See Hammersley and Atkinson (1995) for a survey of these concepts. The reflexive
school of thought, which seems to be associated with the postmodern tradition in sociology,
is generally contrasted with the “primordialist” school, identified for example with Cliﬀord
Geetz (1973), which seems to be associated with evolutionist theories.
   11
      Mozzafar and Scarrit (1999) report data on ethnicity at three distinct levels of “self-
reference” for Africa. We use their clan data for Somalia, since the rest of their dataset is
suﬃciently close to our other sources.




                                             8
2.2   Comparison with existing measures
We now compare our measures of linguistic, ethnic and religious fraction-
alization with the index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization based on the
Soviet data usually used in the literature. Firstly, our indices are available
for many more countries, between 190 and 215 compared to 112 for the
Soviet index. Table 2 shows the pairwise correlations between these four
indices, computed, obviously, on the intersection of our sample and the So-
viet sample. The Soviet sample is, with very few exceptions, a subsample of
our own. Not surprisingly, the correlation between our ethnic and linguis-
tic index and the Soviet index are fairly high (0.76 and 0.88, respectively).
Instead, the religious fractionalization index bears a much lower correlation
with the other three indices.
    Our data gathering eﬀort can also be related to recent attempts by other
scholars to gather cross-country ethnic heterogeneity data. Annett (2001)
presents an index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization closely related concep-
tually to the Soviet data, using exclusively data published in the World
Christian Encyclopedia (Barrett, 1982), a source distinct from our own. He
also presents data on religious fractionalization, but does not attempt to
isolate linguistic fractionalization like we do. His data cover 150 countries
(compared to 190 for our ethnicity variable and 215 for our religion vari-
able). Perhaps reassuringly given the diﬀerent sources, for the overlapping
sample of countries the correlation between his ethnolinguistic fractionaliza-
tion variable and ours ethnicity variable is 88.85% The correlation between
his religious fractionalization variable and our own is 83.66%.
    Even more recently, Fearon (2002) has gathered detailed data on eth-
nic groups for 160 countries, from sources that sometimes overlap with ours
(he does not present data for religious and linguistic fractionalization). His
data is slighly less disaggregated than ours (each country displays on av-
erage 5.11 groups in his dataset, versus 5.55 in ours), partly because he
restricts attention to groups making up more than 1% of the population.
These small diﬀerences do not greatly impact our respective measures of
fractionalization: as Fearon reports (2002, p. 3), referring to our dataset,
“the descriptive statistics for their ethnic measure look broadly similar to
those for the measure constructed here”.
    Table 3 highlights diﬀerences across regions amongst our three indices
and ELF. With the exception of East and South East Asia, our ethnic frac-
tionalization index show more fractionalization than the Soviet index. Given
the way it is constructed, this is not surprising. Particularly interesting is

                                      9
the case of Latin America, were our ethnic fractionalization index is on aver-
age much higher than ELF. This is because, in this region, many ethnically
diverse groups (as captured by skin color), often speak the same language as
former European colonizers, Spanish, English or Portuguese. So a classifica-
tion based purely on language shows a much lower degree of fractionalization
than one that includes racial characteristics. In fact our linguistic fraction-
alization index leads to an average of 0.16 versus an average of 0.42 for the
ethnicity index. The Soviet index is closer to our linguistic index. Note how
Sub-Saharan Africa displays the highest index of fractionalization in every
single column. Appendix 1 displays these figures country by country.
    Restricting our attention to countries with more than one million inhabi-
tants, according to our data the most ethnically diverse country in the world
is Uganda, with a fractionalization index of 0.93. The 13 most ethnically
diverse countries are all in Sub-Saharan Africa, followed by Yugoslavia and
then 7 more Sub-Saharan African countries. The least ethnically fractional-
ized countries are South Korea, Japan and North Korea. Turning to linguis-
tic fractionalization, the most diverse countries are again 18 Sub-Saharan
African countries (note that the definition of ethnicity there largely overlaps
with linguistic distinctions). They are followed by India, with a linguistic
fractionalization index of 0.81. The least diverse countries are South Korea
and North Korea, followed by Yemen. Finally, turning to religious fraction-
alization, the most diverse countries are South Africa, the United States
and Australia, and the least diverse Yemen, Somalia, Morocco, Turkey and
Algeria.


3    Fractionalization and Growth
In this section we revisit the question of the relationship between fractional-
ization and long-run growth. For the sake of comparison, we closely follow
the specification of Easterly and Levine (1997). We begin in Table 4 by
showing the correlation between several economic variables of interest and
our three measures of fractionalization: ethnic, linguistic and religious. Our
ethnic variable is highly negatively correlated with GDP per capita growth,
schooling and telephones per capita. These correlations are slightly lower for
the linguistic measure. The measure of religious fractionalization does not
seem to bear any pattern of correlations with the above mentioned variables.
    Table 5 is organized exactly in the same way as Easterly and Levine’s
(1997) Table 4. This table shows that our measure of ethnic fractionaliza-
tion is inversely related to per capita growth, as shown in Column 1. The

                                      10
next three columns show that as one controls for more and more variables,
the eﬀect of fractionalization vanishes. The point is that variables such
as schooling, telephones per worker, etc., can be understood as channels
through which the ethnic fractionalization variable aﬀects growth. Table
6 highlights this by reproducing Table 6 of Easterly and Levine (1997).
It shows that ethnic fractionalization is strongly negatively correlated with
schooling, financial depth, fiscal surplus, and the log of telephones per worker
(these results are the same as in Easterly and Levine except for the fiscal
surplus, where Easterly and Levine did not find a significant association).
This negative eﬀect of racial fractionalization on infrastructure and produc-
tive public goods will be discussed in more detail in the next section. Since
ethnic fractionalization aﬀects variables that in turn aﬀect growth, there is a
reduced form relationship between these variables and growth. The partial
association between growth and fractionalization vanishes once we control
for the intermediating variables.
    In terms of economic magnitudes, the results in Table 5 suggest that
going from complete ethnic homogeneity (an index of 0) to complete het-
erogeneity (an index of 1) depresses annual growth by 1.9 percentage points
(column 1). In other words, up to 1.77 percentage points of the diﬀerence
in annual growth between South Korea and Uganda can be explained by
diﬀerent degrees of ethnic fractionalization. This eﬀect is reduced as we
control for variables that can be interpreted as channels through which eth-
nic fractionalization aﬀects growth.
    In Tables 7 and 9 we rerun the same regressions as in Table 5, but using
religious fractionalization and linguistic fractionalization. While linguistic
fractionalization is strongly inversely related to growth, religious fractional-
ization is not. In fact, as Table 4 already showed religious fractionalization
does not seem to be correlated with any of the other right-hand side variable.
Instead linguistic fractionalization is, especially with telephones per workers
and schooling, a result which is confirmed in Tables 8 and 10 and in the
next section. Overall our results are quite similar to those of Easterly and
Levine (1997), perhaps even a little stronger when using our new measure
of linguistic fractionalization.
    The diﬀerences in the results between religious and linguistic and ethnic
fractionalization are quite suggestive. Religious aﬃliation is the most en-
dogenous of the three variables. Religions can be banned and individual can
relatively easily “hide” their religious aﬃliation to avoid repression. Indi-
viduals and families can change from one religion to another far more easily
than they can change race (!) or language. In a sense, a higher observed

                                      11
measure of religious fractionalization can be a sign of a more tolerant and
democratic form of government. In a more repressive regime, you can hide
your religion or conform to the state-imposed religion, but hiding your racial
origin, especially if it relates to skin color, is much more diﬃcult. Short of
genocide, it is diﬃcult to change the ethnic composition of a country. As
early as 1830, Tocqueville had noted this problem with reference to slavery
in America. He wrote that “there is a natural prejudice that prompts men
to despise whoever has been their inferior long after he has become their
equal... But amongst the ancients this secondary consequence of slavery
had a natural limit; for the freedman bore so entire a resemblance to those
born free that it soon became impossible to distinguish him from them”. In
the United States, instead, skin color diﬀerences between blacks and whites
makes assimilation more diﬃcult. In other words, skin color becomes an
important focal point to characterize lasting diﬀerences and perceptions, as
also argued by Caselli and Coleman (2002).


4    Fractionalization and Government Quality
One of the reasons why ethnic fractionalization may negatively influence
economic success in terms of growth and level of income has to do with the
potentially negative eﬀects of ethnic conflict on the quality of policy and
of institutions. In a sweeping empirical study La Porta et al. (1999) have
investigated the determinants of the quality of government and of policy
outcomes looking and a large number of indicators of policy. They con-
cluded that a country’s legal origins are an important determinant of these
variables, while the ethnic fractionalization variable (the same as used by
Easterly and Levine (1997)) bore a reduced form relationship with govern-
ment quality. However, fractionalization was typically not significant after
controlling for the level of GDP per capita (which however could be endoge-
nous) and latitude.
    Table 11 reports a matrix of correlation between all the variables used as
potential explanation of the quality of government. Note that our measures
of linguistic and ethnic fractionalization are highly correlated with latitude
and GDP per capita. Therefore it is quite diﬃcult to disentangle the inde-
pendent eﬀect of these three variables on the quality of government. While
GDP per capita is very likely to be endogenous to the left-hand side vari-
ables, so that it is unclear whether one should control for it or not, the other
two variables are less endogenous. Also, ethnic fractionalization and latitude
are less obviously linked by causal relationships than the same two variables

                                      12
are with income. The correlation between latitude and ethnic fractionaliza-
tion is quite high, about 0.4. This makes it hard to disentangle the eﬀect
of one variable from the other and the result in this type of cross-sectional
regressions will depend on the specification. On a priori grounds, while one
can think of several reasons why ethnic conflict may aﬀect policy outcomes
and institutions, the relationship between latitude and, say, the regulation
of economic activity or the protection of property rights seems much less
obvious.
    The measure of religious fragmentation displays a much lower level of cor-
relation with GDP per capita; in fact this correlation is basically zero. Our
ethnic fractionalization variable displays a positive correlation (0.2) with the
dummy variables for French legal origins, which according to La Porta et al.
(1999) is associated with poor quality of government. This does not help in
separating the eﬀects of legal origins from those of fractionalization.
     In Tables 12a-h we run a set of regressions along the lines of La Porta et
al. (1999). These tables are organized as follows. Let us begin with Table
12a. For each left-hand side variable, we present three regressions. The
first one reproduces exactly the full specification of La Porta et al. (1999),
i.e. their specification which include the largest number of independent
variables, that is legal origins, religious variables, latitude, etc. To these
variables we have added our measure of ethnic fractionalization. Column
2 present a minimalist specification, which includes only country size and
regional dummies. The third column adds to this specification income per
capita and legal origins variables. For brevity we do not report another col-
umn including also the religious variables, but the results (available upon
request) are similar to those of column 3. Note that the omitted legal origins
variable is the British one. Tables 12b-h have the same structure, with diﬀer-
ent dependent variables. Tables 13a-h and 14a-h replicate these regressions
with, respectively, the measures of linguistic and religious fractionalization.
Several observations are in order.
    1) Our index of ethnic fractionalization is significant in the “minimal-
ist” regression, Column 2, for corruption, bureaucratic delays, infrastructure
quality, infant mortality, illiteracy, and school attainment. It is significant
or nearly significant in Column 3 that controls for GDP per capita for cor-
ruption, infant mortality, and illiteracy. The sign of the coeﬃcient always
implies that more fractionalization leads to a lower quality of government.
This index is also negatively associated with the share of transfers over GDP,
a result consistent with those obtained by Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote
(2001) on a much smaller sample of countries, and by Alesina and Wacziarg

                                      13
(1998) on a large sample of countries but with diﬀerent data on govern-
ment spending.12 It seems that governments have a much more diﬃcult
task achieving consensus for redistribution to the needy in a fractionalized
society.
    2) The democracy index is inversely related to ethnic fractionalization
(when latitude is not controlled for). This result is consistent with theory
and evidence presented in Aghion, Alesina and Trebbi (2002). The idea is
that in more fragmented societies a group imposes restrictions on political
liberty to impose control on the other groups. In more homogeneous soci-
eties, it is easier to rule more democratically since conflicts are less intense.13
    3) Overall the index of linguistic fractionalization seems to work less
well than the index based on ethnicity, in the sense of leading to coeﬃcients
that are less robust to changes of specification and more often statistically
insignificant.
    4) The index of religious fractionalization bears a positive relationship
to controlling corruption, preventing bureaucratic delays, tax compliance,
transfers, infrastructure quality, lower infant mortality, lower illiteracy, school
attainment, democracy, and political rights. Note that this result holds re-
gardless of whether the size of various religious denominations is held con-
stant in the regressions or not. Our interpretation is that observed religious
fragmentation is larger in more tolerant countries.
    5) The index of ethnic fractionalization loses statistical significance in
many of the regressions with the full specification used by of La Porta et al.
(1999). This is because these regressions include latitude and, as we argued
above, this variable is highly correlated with ethnic fractionalization. The
ethnic fractionalization variable remains significant at standard levels even
after controlling for latitude in the case of infant mortality, and the share of
state-owned enterprises. In virtually all other cases the ethnic fractionaliza-
tion variable retains the “expected” sign but it is not statistically diﬀerent
from zero at standard levels of confidence. This reflects the diﬃculty in dis-
entangling the eﬀects of latitude, per capita income (which again may not
belong in the regression due to endogeneity), and fractionalization.
  12
     These papers questioned Rodrik’s view (1998) that the size of government is driven
by openness in the economy, an issue that we do not explore here.
  13
     These authors present additional evidence precisely on this point using the same data
on ethnic fractionalization collected for the present paper. This is consistent with the
fact that relatively homogeneous settler colonies like the US, Canada, New Zealand and
Australia had an easier time establishing democracy after independence than the more
ethnically diverse former colonies in Latin America and Africa.


                                           14
    6) In many regressions neither latitude nor ethnic fractionalization are
significant but they both tend to be when introduced alone. The table does
not show the case in which latitude is entered without ethnic fractionaliza-
tion, but these results are available upon request.
    7) Not surprisingly, since we are using the same data, we confirm results
in La Porta and al. (1999) on legal origins. French and Socialist legal origins
seem to be negatively associated with measures of quality of government.
    The bottom line is that the evaluation of the eﬀect of ethnic fragmen-
tation on quality of government depends on whether one believes that lati-
tude belongs in the regression or not. If one believes that geography is the
leading explanation of corruption, tax compliance, democracy, freedom etc.
then one could find confirmation of these priors in these results. If, instead
one believes that conflicts amongst groups brings about more diﬃcult and
ineﬃcient policymaking and that ethnic fractionalization happens to be cor-
related with latitude (or constitutes a channel or explanation through which
the latitude variable operates), then one can find support for this set of
priors in our results as well.


5        Polarization
Our measures of fractionalization, while the most widespread in the liter-
ature, are not the only measures of ethnic, religious and linguistic hetero-
geneity available. In particular, scholars have recently started to calculate
and use measures of polarization, rather than fractionalization.14 Holding
the “distance” between groups constant, polarization is typically maximized
when there are two groups of equal size, whereas fractionalization increases
when there are many small groups. Additionally, the degree of polarization
should increase as the distance between groups increases. When it comes
to ethnic, linguistic and religious groups, however, the concept of distance
is hard to capture with simple measures, so that researchers have implicitly
assumed that the distance between groups is constant across group pairs.15

    14
    See for instance Garcia-Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2002).
    15
    A recent eﬀort to generate an index of “cultural distance” appears in Fearon (2002).
He noticed that linguists classify languages in trees - two languages on the same branch
of a linguistic tree are “closer” to each other than two languages on a diﬀerent branch.
Linguistic trees can therefore be used to approximate the distance between linguistic
groups. Eﬀorts to similarly measure the distance between ethnic groups and religions
should be at the forefront of the data gathering eﬀort in fractionalization research. We
are not aware of such attempts.


                                          15
     Whether societal conflict is the result of fractionalization or polarization
is largely an unresolved question in theory, calling for empirical work. The
discussion of whether a country with many relatively small groups is more
or less stable than one with only two equally sized groups is an old one,
and goes back at least to Madison in the Federalist Papers of 1788 (nos. 10
and 11 see Hamilton et al., 1911). Without much of a stretch of Madison’s
views, one can argue that a polarization measure is, according to him, the
appropriate concept to capture heterogeneity. In what follows, we extend
our estimates of the eﬀects of ethnic, religious and linguistic heterogeneity
on growth and government quality using measures of polarization.
    Esteban and Ray (1994) develop a theory of polarization and axiomat-
ically derive a measure of income polarization with “desirable” features.16
They show that a desirable measure of polarization must take the form:
                                     n X
                                     X n
                        P (s, y) = K     s1+α
                                          i   sj |yi − yj |                        (2)
                                      i=1 j=1

where K is a constant, α is a constant between 0 and ' 1.6, and yi is the
income of group i = 1...n (polarization here is defined with respect to income
- it is presumed there is no within group variation in income). This defines
a fairly narrow class of measures, since the only degrees of freedom are K
(a scaling factor) and α. In order to compute this measure for ethnically
defined groups we need a measure of the distance between groups (the analog
of |yi − yj | in equation (2)). Lacking such a measure, the empirical literature
has had to assume that the distance between every group is the same.17
    We have repeated all the previous estimations using the measure of po-
larization based on (2) rather than fractionalization. For brevity we do not
report all the results, which are available upon request. We set K = 1 and
considered three values of α - the two extreme values 0 and 1.6, and an inter-
  16
      The axioms imposed on polarization measures are the analogs of the Dalton Axiom
for the measurement of inequality. See also Duclos, Esteban and Ray (2002) for a gener-
alization.
   17
      Garcia-Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2002) use the following specification:
                                         X n µ          ¶2
                                               0.5 − si
                            P OLi = 1 −                    si
                                          i=1
                                                 0.5

They show that this index can be derived from a model of lobbying. Note that this index
reaches a maximum of 1 when there are two equally sized groups in the country.




                                          16
mediate value of 0.8.18 In a context where we have to assume that |yi − yj |
is constant for all i 6= j, it is easy to show that a value of α = 0 leads to a
measure that is perfectly correlated with the fractionalization measure pre-
sented earlier if and only if every group in a country’s population is observed
(so that the sum of observed group shares equals 1).19
    A summary of our results is as follows:
    1). The polarization indices, especially when computed with an α around
the middle of the feasible range (i.e. around 0.8), are highly correlated
with the fractionalization measures. This is due to the assumption of equal
distance between all groups within a given country, an assumption required
by our lack of data on those distances.
    2). We find that polarization indices with α equal to 0.8 perform rel-
atively better than those with an extreme value of 1.6. Thus the index
of polarization that works better is the one that is most correlated with
fractionalization.
    3). In the growth regressions, the results seems substantially weaker
using the polarization index. When both indices are used together, the
fragmentation index typically remains significant and the polarization index
is not.
    4). In the quality of government regressions the index of ethnic fraction-
alization works slightly better than the corresponding index of polarization.
In these regressions, because of the high correlation between the two indices,
when they are used together the results are generally not easily interpretable.
   5). We obtain poor results using linguistic polarization in the quality of
government regressions whatever the value of α.
    6). As for the fractionalization index, religious polarization is associated
with better performances in the areas of regulation, red tape, corruption,
tax compliance, transfers and political rights, especially when α has an in-
termediate value of 0.8. Higher religious polarization is also associated with
better public goods, lower infant mortality and illiteracy rates, higher levels
of schooling and better infrastructure.
  18
     Esteban and Ray (1994) do not point to which value was “better” to capture po-
larization - all values of α in the specified range satisfy the properties that the class of
polarization measures should satisfy. There is therefore no a priori reason to prefer one
value over the other.
  19
     Thus, in practice a measure based on α = 0 does not add anything to our earlier
results, so we abstain from commenting on the corresponding results.


                                            17
    The bottom line is that the measure of polarization produces similar but
slightly worse results than the result with fractionalization when we choose
a parameter value for α that makes the correlation between the two indices
high. When the choose of parameter values makes the polarization index
less correlated with fractionalization, the latter is a better predictor of our
outcome variables.
    Garcia-Montalvo and Reynal-Querol (2002) show that their index of po-
larization predicts civil wars better than fractionalization. Their results and
ours are not contradictory. It may very well be the case that a civil war
is more likely when two large equally size group face each other than when
many small groups are present. A war is also more likely when the two
groups are roughly of equal size than when one is clearly predominant since
in that case the dominant one can more easily repress the other one and
avoid war. However, the quality of policy may be specially bad when many
groups fight over public resources.


6    The eﬀects of ethnic conflict: A few examples
A cross-country statistical exercise is a crude way to summarize complex
political and economic histories of countries and their constituent ethnic
groups. A promising direction for future research would be for economists
to do more case histories of development, economic policy, and government
quality in ethnically diverse places, of the kind that the political science
literature does.
    In this sections we briefly examine some individual data points to illus-
trate salient ethnic divisions as well as the complex history that lies behind
our cross-section associations. Nigeria has among the highest ethnic and
linguistic diversity in the entire sample, and was also ranked as highly di-
verse by Easterly and Levine (1997). Maier (2000) makes clear it would be
hard to find a better example of institutional and policy failure leading to
underdevelopment. Nigeria has produced $280 billion in oil revenues since
the discovery of reserves in the late 1950s, but the average Nigerian is no
further out of poverty today than 4 decades ago. Such egregious failures as
the $8 billion state-owned Ajaokuta steel complex, which has yet to produce
a bar of steel, give a hint of the breakdown of state institutions. The stan-
dard account of Nigeria’s ethnic conflict pits the Muslim North versus the
Christian South, but this is a simplification. Firstly, the Christian South
is divided between the Yoruba and Igbo. Secondly, there are substantial
Southern minority groups living in Northern cities, a situation that has led

                                      18
to recurrent communal violence. Thirdly, fractious ethnic groups in the cen-
ter of the country and in the oil-rich Niger delta keep small-scale conflict
going even out of the limelight of the Hausa/Yoruba/Igbo three-way eth-
nic war. Table 15 shows that Nigeria has had disastrous economic policies
(high black market premiums), poor infrastructure (virtually no telephone
density) and high corruption.
    Ethiopia also has very high ethnic and linguistic diversity (according to
both new and old measures), and ethnic conflict has been at the center of
Ethiopian history for centuries. Ethiopia has had one of the lowest growth
rates in the world over the past half-century and as a result remains one
of the least developed nations in the world. It has known various types
of regimes, from monarchy to Marxist-Leninist to reformist, but growth
has been mediocre to poor under all of them. Political/ethnic conflict and
disastrous institutions have partly caused and certainly magnified the eﬀects
of major disasters such as famine, AIDS, civil war, and international war,
and these disasters have absorbed a high share of the government’s paltry
aid and tax revenues.
    The current government is dominated by the Tigray Peoples’s Libera-
tion Front, representing an ethnic group making up only 6 percent of the
population. The latter is alleged to own a large number of agricultural,
industrial and financial businesses under the umbrella of the Endowment
Fund for the Rehabilitation of Tigray.20 The current government is at-
tempting to prevent ethnic conflicts by decentralizing power to ethnically
defined regions, including the promotion of local languages. However, this
strategy remains deeply controversial. At one extreme, some observers see
it as a ploy by the Tigrayan ruling elite to divide the potential opposition
along ethnic lines, as well as to undercut the national government bureau-
cracy. The rulers are alleged to have co-opted participants from other ethnic
groups rather than allowed representative organizations to emerge. There
are also accusations of a second level of oppression, this time by the dom-
inant majority group in each region oppressing the regional minorities (on
some accounts, there are over 80 ethnic groups in Ethiopia, but only 9 re-
gions). Some Ethiopians decry the threat to the unity and identity of the
country and the “ethnicization” of politics. Of course, ethnicization is far
from new, given the long-standing Amhara dominance of the state, and its
“colonization” of other “nationalities”. Some see the current government as
simply substituting Tigray dominance for Amhara dominance (see Tronvoll
(2000)).
 20
      Abegaz (2001), p. 207.


                                     19
    More charitable observers see government policy as an honest attempt
to address the ethnic divisions that have bedeviled Ethiopia for much of its
history (today there continues to be an armed insurgency by the Oromo Lib-
eration Front).21 These observers see the current government as responding
to this history of domination by the Amhara by granting autonomy to the
“nationalities.”
    Botswana is an interesting exception to the poor economic outcomes
and low quality government in most of Africa. The table shows it had
high growth, a low black market premium, a government surplus, and low
corruption. While we do not mean to give a monocausal explanation for this
success, it is notable that it has relatively low ethnic diversity for Africa.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) describe how the Tswana tribes
had a long history of cooperation amongst themselves before independence,
as well as generally inclusive institutions since.
    Ethiopia and Nigeria were already highly diverse relative to Botswana
in the old Easterly and Levine (1997) dataset. Even more interesting is
the much higher degree of ethnic diversity in some Latin American and
Caribbean countries according to our new ethnic fractionalization measure.
Among the poorest, most institutionally underdeveloped, and most conflict-
ridden societies in this region are Bolivia, Ecuador, and Guyana. All of
these score lower on linguistic fractionalization (and hence did not show up
as very ethnically diverse in Easterly and Levine (1997)) than on ethnic
fractionalization, because of racial diﬀerences. A Latin American success
story, Chile, continues to show up as relatively homogeneous.
    To take Bolivia as an example, whites (about 10 percent of the popula-
tion) dominated the governments of Bolivia with systematic exploitation of
mestizos, Aymara, and Quechua peoples from colonial times to 1952 (Klein
(1992)). Six percent of landowners owned 92 percent of the land in 1950.
There were feudal anachronisms such as an obligation for Indian tenants to
spend part of their time as unpaid servants in the landowner’s household.
A literacy requirement prevented the majority of the population from vot-
ing. The Indians successfully revolted in 1952, redistributed land towards
the peasants, and abolished the more obvious exclusionary laws. However,
whites continued to dominate politics and economics. Political instability
remained endemic after 1952, with frequent military coups overthrowing
democratic regimes. Democracy has been restored since 1982, but racial
conflict continues. When one of the authors visited Bolivia in early 2002,
 21
      See Marcus 1994 on the complicated history of ethnic groups in Ethiopia.


                                            20
Indian activists were blockading the main roads surrounding La Paz to artic-
ulate various grievances. A meeting of the leaders of the 1952 revolutionary
party was conspicuous for its lack of Indian representation. Anecdotally, it
appeared that racist sentiments towards the Indians still existed amongst
the white elite. Bolivia still has poor growth, high corruption, poor social
service delivery, and predatory police and judges.
    Guyana shows up as ethnically diverse in our data because of its racial
breakdown between Africans, East Indians, Europeans, and others. The
Afro-Guyanese and Indo-Guyanese are the predominant groups and are al-
most numerically equal. Since they have mobilized politically along ethnic
lines (supporting two diﬀerent parties since before independence), any con-
sensus for development has been torn apart by competition for rents between
the two groups.22 As Table 15 shows, Guyana is rated as one of the most
corrupt countries in the world, has followed distortionary economic policies,
and has had very poor growth outcomes.
    Chile, in contrast, is a well known Latin American success story. It
has pursued free market reforms since the 1970s under first military and
later democratically elected governments. Although it did have political
and economic gyrations under Allende in the early 1970s and then a debt
crisis and severe political repression under Pinochet in the early 1980s, the
last twenty years have shown a high degree of political and economic sta-
bility and sustained growth. By the 1980s, Chile had also achieved a high
level of schooling and infrastructure (Table 15). There are certainly many
causes explaining why reforms were made possible, in particular the author-
itarian and repressive nature of the Pinochet regime, which made it easier
to eliminate opposition to reform. After the period of repression a con-
siderable amount of consensus emerged on policy. Many other developing
countries experienced bloody coups, and did not evolve into peaceful and
rapidly growing economies. The diﬀerence in Chile was probably due to its
higher level of homogeneity. In fact, after Pinochet’s departure from power
the new democratic regime showed remarkable stability by Latin Ameri-
can standards. The relative ethnic homogeneity of the society may have
made achieving support for reform and economic development easier than
in Bolivia or Guyana.




 22
      See Library of Congress (1994).


                                        21
7    Conclusion
The question of what makes diﬀerent countries more or less successful eco-
nomically and what explains the quality of their policies is one of the most
fascinating that economists can ask, but it is also one of the most diﬃcult to
answer. Diﬀerent authors have their own “favorite” explanatory variables:
from purely “economic” ones, to geographic ones, to legal ones, to politi-
cal, cultural, religious and historical ones. In this paper we have considered
closely one such set of variables: measures of ethnic, linguistic and religious
fractionalization.
    Dealing with this type of variables raises two problems. One is a measure-
ment: how to measure ethnicity is a delicate and diﬃcult matter. Secondly,
the patterns of correlations between potential explanatory factors makes it
diﬃcult to unambiguously answer the question of why certain countries have
better policies than others. In this paper we have made some progress on
both fronts. Firstly, on the measurement issue we provided a new set of
fractionalization variables for a much larger sample of countries than was
available before, and we put much eﬀort into solving classification issues us-
ing consistent criteria across countries. Secondly, using these new variables
we revisited empirical issues concerning the determinants of growth and of
quality of policies and institutions. We concluded that ethnic and linguis-
tic fractionalization variables, more so than religious ones, are likely to be
important determinants of economic success, both in terms of output (GDP
growth), the quality of policies (such as the literacy rate, infant mortality
etc.) and the quality of institutions (measured by the extent of corruption,
political freedom, etc.). However, it is diﬃcult to evaluate precisely the
size of these eﬀects because of the strong correlation of ethnolinguistic frac-
tionalization variables with other potential explanatory variables, especially
geographical ones. In the end one has to use theory and priors to interpret
our partial correlations.


References
 [1] Abegaz, B. (2001), “Ethiopia” in Devarajan, S., D. Dollar, and T.
     Holmgren, eds. Aid and Reform in Africa, World Bank.

 [2] Acemoglu D. , S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Ori-
     gins of Comparative Development” American Economic Review, vol.
     91, no. 5, December, 1369-1401.


                                      22
 [3] Acemoglu D. , S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2001), “An African Success
     Story: Botswana”, in D. Rodrik, ed., Analytical Country Narratives of
     Economic Growth, forthcoming.

 [4] Aghion P., Alesina A. and F. Trebbi (2002), “Endogenous Political
     Institutions” unpublished, Harvard University.

 [5] Alesina A., R. Baqir and W. Easterly (1999), “Public Goods and Ethnic
     Divisions” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, no. 4, November,
     pp. 1243-1284.

 [6] Alesina A. and E. La Ferrara (2000), “Participation in Heterogeneous
     Communities”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115, no. 3, Au-
     gust, pp. 847-904.

 [7] Alesina A. and E. La Ferrara (2002), “Who Trusts Others?” Journal of
     Public Economics, vol. 85, August, pp. 207-34.

 [8] Alesina A. E. Glaeser and B. Sacerdote (2001), “Why Doesn’t the US
     Have a European Style Welfare State?” Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, Fall.

 [9] Alesina A. and R. Wacziarg (1998), “Openness, Country Size and Gov-
     ernment”, Journal of Public Economics, vol. 69, no. 3, September, p.
     305-321.

[10] Annett, Anthony (2001), “Social Fractionalization, Political Instability,
     and the Size of Government”, IMF Staﬀ Papers, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 561-
     592.

[11] Atlas Narodov Mira, Moscow: Miklukho-Maklai Ethnological Institute
     at the Department of Geodesy and Cartography of the State Geological
     Committee of the Soviet Union, 1964.

[12] Barro R. and R. McLeary (2002), “Religion and Political Economy in
     an International Panel”, NBER Working Paper No. 8931, May.

[13] Barrett, David B. (1982), World Christian Encyclopedia, New York:
     Oxford University Press.

[14] Brock, S. and S. Durlauf (2001), “Growth Empirics and Reality”, World
     Bank Economic Review, vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 229-272.


                                     23
[15] Canning, D. and M. Fay (1993), “The Eﬀects of Transportation Net-
     works on Economic Growth” Columbia University Working Paper.

[16] Caselli, F. and J. Coleman (2002), “On the Theory of Ethnic Conflict”,
     unpublished, Harvard University.

[17] Costa, D. and Kahn, M. (2002), “Understanding the Decline in Social
     Capital, 1952-1998”, Kyklos, forthcoming.

[18] Doppelhofer, G., R. Miller and X. Sala-i-Martin (2000), “Determinants
     of Long-Term Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates
     (BACE) Approach”, NBER Working Paper No. 7750, June.

[19] Duclos, J-Y., J. Esteban and D. Ray, (2002), “Polarization: Concepts,
     Measurement, Estimation”, unpublished, New York University, May.

[20] Easterly W. and R. Levine (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies
     and Ethnic Divisions”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, no.
     4, November, pp. 1203-1250.

[21] Esteban, J. and Ray, D. (1994), “On the Measurement of Polarization”,
     Econometrica, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 819—851.

[22] Fearon, J. and D. Laitin (2000), “Ethnicity, Insurgency and Civil War”,
     unpublished, Stanford University, August (forthcoming, American Po-
     litical Science Review).

[23] Fearon, J. (2002), Ethnic Structure and Cultural Diversity around the
     World: A Cross-National Data Set on Ethnic Groups, unpublished,
     Stanford University, August.

[24] Glaeser, E.(2002), “The Political Economy of Hatred”, unpublished,
     Harvard University, June.

[25] Glaeser, E. L., D. Laibson, J. A. Scheinkman and C. L. Soutter (2000),
     “Measuring Trust”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 65, August,
     pp. 811-846.

[26] Glaeser E. and A. Shleifer (2002), “Legal Origins”, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, forthcoming.



                                    24
[27] Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (1999), “Human Capital and Social Capital:
     The Rise of Secondary Schooling in America, 1910-1940”, Journal of
     Interdisciplinary History, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 683-723.

[28] Hamilton J., J. Madison and J. Jay (1911), The Federalist. Everyman,
     London (first published in 1788)

[29] Hammersley, M. and P. Atkinson (1995), Ethnography: Principles in
     Practice (2nd edition), Routledge.

[30] Klein, H. (1992), Bolivia: the Evolution of a Multi-Ethnic Society, 2nd
     Edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[31] La Porta R., F. Lopez de Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny (1999),
     “The Quality of Government”, Journal of Law, Economics and Orga-
     nization, vol. 15, no. 1, March, pp. 222-279.

[32] Levinson D. (1998) Ethnic Groups Worldwide, A Ready Reference
     Handbook, Phoenix: Oryx Press.

[33] Luttmer, Erzo F.P. (2001), “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistri-
     bution”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109 no. 3, June.

[34] Marcus, H. (1994), A History of Ethiopia, Berkeley: University of Cal-
     ifornia Press.

[35] Maier, K. (2000), This House Has Fallen: Midnight in Nigeria, New
     York: Public Aﬀairs.

[36] Mauro P. (1995), “Corruption and Growth” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, vol. 110, no. 3, August, pp. 681-712.

[37] Minority Rights Group International (1997), World Directory of Mi-
     norities, London: Minority Rights Group International.

[38] Garcia-Montalvo, José and Marta Reynal-Querol (2002), “Why Ethnic
     Fractionalization? Polarization, Ethnic Conflict and Growth”, unpub-
     lished, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, September.

[39] INSEE (2000), Recensement de la population 1999.



                                    25
[40] Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (2001), 1995 Census of Population
     and Housing, (available on-line).

[41] Rodrik D. (1998), “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Gov-
     ernments?” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 106, no. 5, October, pp.
     997-1032.

[42] Scarrit J. and S. Mozaﬀar (1999), “The Specification of Ethnic Cleav-
     ages and Ethnopolitical Groups for the Analysis of Democratic Compe-
     tition in Contemporary Africa”, Nationalism and Ethnic Politics, vol.
     5, no.1, Spring, pp. 82-117.

[43] Statistics New Zealand (2001), 1996 Census (available on-line).

[44] Tronvoll, K. (2000), Ethiopia: A New Start? Minority Rights Group
     International Report.

[45] United States Census Bureau (2001), 2000 Census (available on-line).




                                    26
                         Appendix 1 – Fractionalization Data

              1                  2              3             4              5               6
           Country             Source         Date          Ethnic        Language        Religion
                             (Ethnicity     (Ethnicity
                               Data)          Data)
                                                         Source: see     Source: eb.    Source: eb.
                                                         column 2.       Date: 2001.    Date: 2001.
                                                         Date: see
                                                         column 3.
Afghanistan                         wdm          1995            0.7693         0.6141          0.2717
Albania                             wdm          1989            0.2204         0.0399          0.4719
Algeria                               eb         1992            0.3394         0.4427          0.0091
American Samoa                         .             .                 .        0.1733          0.6395
Andorra                               eb         1997            0.7139         0.6848          0.2326
Angola                                eb         1983            0.7867         0.7870          0.6276
Antigua and Barbuda                   eb         1994            0.1643         0.1063          0.6840
Argentina                             eb         1986            0.2550         0.0618          0.2236
Armenia                               eb         1989            0.1272         0.1291          0.4576
Aruba                                  .            .                 .         0.3889          0.4107
Australia                             eb         1986            0.0929         0.3349          0.8211
Austria                              lev         1998            0.1068         0.1522          0.4146
Azerbaijan                            eb         1995            0.2047         0.2054          0.4899
Bahamas                              lev         1989            0.4228         0.1855          0.6815
Bahrain                               eb         1991            0.5021         0.4344          0.5528
Bangladesh                            eb         1997            0.0454         0.0925          0.2090
Barbados                              eb         1990            0.1423         0.0926          0.6934
Belarus                              cia         2001            0.3222         0.4666          0.6116
Belgium                              cia         2001            0.5554         0.5409          0.2127
Belize                                eb         1991            0.7015         0.6303          0.5813
Benin                                 eb         1992            0.7872         0.7905          0.5544
Bermuda                                 .            .                 .              .         0.7112
Bhutan                                eb         1993            0.6050         0.6056          0.3787
Bolivia                              lev         1998            0.7396         0.2240          0.2085
Bosnia and Herzegovina                eb         1991            0.6300         0.6751          0.6851
Botswana                              eb         1983            0.4102         0.4110          0.5986
Brazil                                eb         1995            0.5408         0.0468          0.6054
Brunei                              wdm          1995            0.5416         0.3438          0.4404
Bulgaria                            wdm          1992            0.4021         0.3031          0.5965
Burkina Faso                          eb         1983            0.7377         0.7228          0.5798
Burundi                               eb         1983            0.2951         0.2977          0.5158
Cambodia                              eb         1994            0.2105         0.2104          0.0965
Cameroon                              eb         1983            0.8635         0.8898          0.7338


                                            27
              1                2              3          4             5             6
           Country           Source         Date       Ethnic       Language      Religion
                           (Ethnicity     (Ethnicity
                             Data)          Data)
Canada                              eb         1991       0.7124        0.5772        0.6958
Cape Verde                          eb         1986       0.4174              .       0.0766
Central African Republic            eb         1988       0.8295        0.8334        0.7916
Chad                                eb         1993       0.8620        0.8635        0.6411
Chile                               eb         1992       0.1861        0.1871        0.3841
China                               eb         1990       0.1538        0.1327        0.6643
Colombia                            eb         1985       0.6014        0.0193        0.1478
Comoros                             eb         1995       0.0000        0.0103        0.0137
Congo, Dem. Rep. (Zaire)            eb         1983       0.8747        0.8705        0.7021
Congo                               eb         1983       0.8747        0.6871        0.6642
Costa Rica                          eb         1993       0.2368        0.0489        0.2410
Cote d'Ivoire                      lev         1998       0.8204        0.7842        0.7551
Croatia                             eb         1991       0.3690        0.0763        0.4447
Cuba                                eb         1994       0.5908              .       0.5059
Cyprus                              eb         1992       0.0939        0.3962        0.3962
Czech Republic                      eb         1991       0.3222        0.3233        0.6591
Denmark                             eb         1996       0.0819        0.1049        0.2333
Djibouti                            eb         1983       0.7962        0.6558        0.0435
Dominica                            eb         1991       0.2003              .       0.4628
Dominican Republic                  eb         1993       0.4294        0.0395        0.3118
East Timor                           .             .            .       0.5261        0.4254
Ecuador                             eb         1989       0.6550        0.1308        0.1417
Egypt                              lev         1998       0.1836        0.0237        0.1979
El Salvador                         eb         1993       0.1978              .       0.3559
Equatorial Guinea                  lev         1998       0.3467        0.3220        0.1195
Eritrea                            lev         1998       0.6524        0.6530        0.4253
Estonia                             eb         1994       0.5062        0.4944        0.4985
Ethiopia                            eb         1983       0.7235        0.8073        0.6249
Faroe Islands                         .            .            .             .       0.3147
Fiji                                eb         1996       0.5479        0.5479        0.5682
Finland                            cia         2001       0.1315        0.1412        0.2531
France                          census         1999       0.1032        0.1221        0.4029
French Guiana                        .             .            .       0.1154        0.4959
French Polynesia                      .            .            .       0.6078        0.5813
Gabon                               eb         1983       0.7690        0.7821        0.6674
Gambia, The                         eb         1993       0.7864        0.8076        0.0970
Gaza Strip                            .            .            .       0.0104        0.0342
Georgia                             eb         1989       0.4923        0.4749        0.6543


                                          28
              1            2              3          4             5             6
           Country       Source         Date       Ethnic       Language      Religion
                       (Ethnicity     (Ethnicity
                         Data)          Data)
Germany                         eb         1997       0.1682        0.1642        0.6571
Ghana                           eb         1983       0.6733        0.6731        0.7987
Greece                         lev         1998       0.1576        0.0300        0.1530
Greenland                        .             .            .       0.2188        0.4592
Grenada                         eb         1991       0.2661              .       0.5898
Guadeloupe                       .             .            .       0.0933        0.3069
Guam                             .            .            .        0.7320        0.4082
Guatemala                      cia         2001       0.5122        0.4586        0.3753
Guinea                          eb         1990       0.7389        0.7725        0.2649
Guinea-Bissau                   eb         1979       0.8082        0.8141        0.6128
Guyana                          eb         1993       0.6195        0.0688        0.7876
Haiti                           eb         1993       0.0950              .       0.4704
Honduras                        eb         1987       0.1867        0.0553        0.2357
Hong Kong                    wdm           1994       0.0620        0.2128        0.4191
Hungary                         eb         1993       0.1522        0.0297        0.5244
Iceland                         eb         1995       0.0798        0.0820        0.1913
India                           eb         2000       0.4182        0.8069        0.3260
Indonesia                       eb         1990       0.7351        0.7680        0.2340
Iran                            eb         1995       0.6684        0.7462        0.1152
Iraq                            eb         1983       0.3689        0.3694        0.4844
Ireland                         eb         1995       0.1206        0.0312        0.1550
Isle of Man                       .            .            .             .       0.4729
Israel                      census         1995       0.3436        0.5525        0.3469
Italy                           eb         1983       0.1145        0.1147        0.3027
Jamaica                         eb         1982       0.4129        0.1098        0.6160
Japan                          cia         1999       0.0119        0.0178        0.5406
Jersey                           .             .            .             .       0.5479
Jordan                       wdm           1993       0.5926        0.0396        0.0659
Kazakhstan                     cia         1999       0.6171        0.6621        0.5898
Kenya                          cia         2001       0.8588        0.8860        0.7765
Kiribati                        eb         1990       0.0511        0.0237        0.5541
Korea, North                    eb         1995       0.0392        0.0028        0.4891
Korea, South                    eb         1990       0.0020        0.0021        0.6604
Kyrgyzstan                     cia         2001       0.6752        0.5949        0.4470
Kuwait                         cia         2001       0.6604        0.3444        0.6745
Lao People's Dem Rep            eb         1983       0.5139        0.6382        0.5453
Latvia                          eb         1996       0.5867        0.5795        0.5556
Lebanon                         eb         1996       0.1314        0.1312        0.7886


                                      29
              1                   2             3          4             5            6
           Country              Source        Date       Ethnic       Language     Religion
                              (Ethnicity    (Ethnicity
                                Data)         Data)
Lesotho                                eb        1986       0.2550        0.2543       0.7211
Liberia                             wdm          1992       0.9084        0.9038       0.4883
Libya                                  eb        1995       0.7920        0.0758       0.0570
Liechtenstein                          eb        1997       0.5726        0.2246       0.3343
Lithuania                              eb        1996       0.3223        0.3219       0.4141
Luxembourg                             eb        1996       0.5302        0.6440       0.0911
Macau                                   .            .            .       0.2519       0.5511
Macedonia (Former Yug. Rep)            eb        1994       0.5023        0.5021       0.5899
Madagascar                            lev        1985       0.8791        0.0204       0.5191
Malawi                                lev        1998       0.6744        0.6023       0.8192
Malaysia                               eb        1996       0.5880        0.5970       0.6657
Mali                                  cia        1996       0.6906        0.8388       0.1820
Malta                                 lev        1996       0.0414        0.0907       0.1223
Marshall Islands                       eb        1988       0.0603        0.0601       0.5207
Martinique                              .           .            .        0.0653       0.2336
Mauritania                          wdm          1992       0.6150        0.3260       0.0149
Mauritius                              eb        1992       0.4634        0.4547       0.6385
Mayotte                                 .            .            .       0.7212       0.0620
Mexico                                 eb        1990       0.5418        0.1511       0.1796
Micronesia                             eb        1994       0.7005        0.7483       0.6469
Moldova                                eb        1989       0.5535        0.5533       0.5603
Monaco                                cia        2001       0.6838        0.7305       0.3047
Mongolia                               eb        1989       0.3682        0.3734       0.0799
Morocco                             wdm          1994       0.4841        0.4683       0.0035
Mozambique                             eb        1983       0.6932        0.8125       0.6759
Myanmar (Burma)                        eb        1983       0.5062        0.5072       0.1974
Namibia                             wdm          1995       0.6329        0.7005       0.6626
Nauru                                 cia        1995       0.5832        0.6161       0.6194
Nepal                                  eb        1991       0.6632        0.7167       0.1417
Netherlands Antilles                    .            .            .       0.2508       0.3866
Netherlands                           lev        1995       0.1054        0.5143       0.7222
New Caledonia                           .            .            .       0.6633       0.5462
New Zealand                        census        1996       0.3969        0.1657       0.8110
Nicaragua                              eb        1991       0.4844        0.0473       0.4290
Niger                                  eb        1988       0.6518        0.6519       0.2013
Nigeria                                eb        1983       0.8505        0.8503       0.7421
Northern Mariana Islands                .            .            .       0.7754       0.4811
Norway                                lev        1998       0.0586        0.0673       0.2048


                                            30
              1                      2             3          4             5             6
           Country                 Source        Date       Ethnic       Language      Religion
                                 (Ethnicity    (Ethnicity
                                   Data)         Data)
Oman                                     eb         1993       0.4373        0.3567        0.4322
Pakistan                               wdm          1995       0.7098        0.7190        0.3848
Palau                                   cia         2000       0.4312        0.3157        0.7147
Panama                                   eb         1992       0.5528        0.3873        0.3338
Papua New Guinea                         eb         1993       0.2718        0.3526        0.5523
Paraguay                                lev         1998       0.1689        0.5975        0.2123
Peru                                     eb         1981       0.6566        0.3358        0.1988
Philippines                             lev         1998       0.2385        0.8360        0.3056
Poland                                  lev         1998       0.1183        0.0468        0.1712
Portugal                                lev         1998       0.0468        0.0198        0.1438
Puerto Rico                               .             .            .       0.0352        0.4952
Qatar                                   cia         2001       0.7456        0.4800        0.0950
Reunion                                   .             .            .       0.1578        0.1952
Romania                                 lev         1998       0.3069        0.1723        0.2373
Russian Federation                       eb         1997       0.2452        0.2485        0.4398
Rwanda                                   eb         1996       0.3238              .       0.5066
Saint Lucia                              eb         1990       0.1769        0.3169        0.3320
Saint Vincent and Grenadines             eb         1995       0.3066        0.0175        0.7028
Western Samoa                            eb         1995       0.1376        0.0111        0.7871
San Marino                               eb         1997       0.2927              .       0.1975
Sao Tome and Principe                      .            .            .       0.2322        0.1866
Saudi Arabia                             eb         1995       0.1800        0.0949        0.1270
Senegal                                  eb         1988       0.6939        0.6961        0.1497
Serbia/Montenegro (Yugoslavia)           eb         1991       0.5736              .             .
Seychelles                               eb         1983       0.2025        0.1606        0.2323
Sierra Leone                           wdm          1993       0.8191        0.7634        0.5395
Singapore                               cia         2001       0.3857        0.3835        0.6561
Slovak Republic                          eb         1996       0.2539        0.2551        0.5655
Slovenia                                cia         1991       0.2216        0.2201        0.2868
Solomon Islands                          eb         1986       0.1110        0.5254        0.6708
Somalia                                 sm          1999       0.8117        0.0326        0.0028
South Africa                            lev         1998       0.7517        0.8652        0.8603
Spain                                    eb         1991       0.4165        0.4132        0.4514
Sri Lanka                               cia         2001       0.4150        0.4645        0.4853
St Kitts & Nevis                        lev         1998       0.1842              .       0.6614
Sudan                                    eb         1983       0.7147        0.7190        0.4307
Suriname                                cia         2001       0.7332        0.3310        0.7910
Swaziland                               cia         2001       0.0582        0.1722        0.4444


                                               31
              1                       2            3             4             5            6
           Country                  Source       Date          Ethnic       Language     Religion
                                  (Ethnicity   (Ethnicity
                                    Data)        Data)
Sweden                                     lev       1998          0.0600       0.1968       0.2342
Switzerland                                cia       2001          0.5314       0.5441       0.6083
Syria                                    wdm         1993          0.5399       0.1817       0.4310
Taiwan                                     cia       2001          0.2744       0.5028       0.6845
Tajikistan                                 cia       2001          0.5107       0.5473       0.3386
Tanzania                                    eb       1995          0.7353       0.8983       0.6334
Thailand                                    eb       1983          0.6338       0.6344       0.0994
Togo                                        eb       1995          0.7099       0.8980       0.6596
Tonga                                       eb       1995          0.0869       0.3782       0.6214
Trinidad and Tobago                        cia       2001          0.6475       0.1251       0.7936
Tunisia                                    cia       2001          0.0394       0.0124       0.0104
Turkey                                     cia       2001          0.3200       0.2216       0.0049
Turkmenistan                                eb       1997          0.3918       0.3984       0.2327
Tuvalu                                      eb       1979          0.1629       0.1372       0.2524
Uganda                                      eb       1983          0.9302       0.9227       0.6332
Ukraine                                     eb       1998          0.4737       0.4741       0.6157
United Arab Emirates                        eb       1993          0.6252       0.4874       0.3310
United Kingdom                              eb       1994          0.1211       0.0532       0.6944
United States                           census       2000          0.4901       0.2514       0.8241
Uruguay                                     eb       1990          0.2504       0.0817       0.3548
Uzbekistan                                  eb       1995          0.4125       0.4120       0.2133
Vanuatu                                     eb       1989          0.0413       0.5794       0.7044
Venezuela                                   eb       1993          0.4966       0.0686       0.1350
Vietnam                                     eb       1995          0.2383       0.2377       0.5080
Virgin Islands (U.S.)                         .           .              .      0.3140       0.6359
West Bank                                     .           .              .      0.1438       0.3095
Yemen                                         .           .              .      0.0080       0.0023
Yugoslavia (pre 1991)                       eb       1995          0.8092       0.4050       0.5530
Zambia                                     lev       1998          0.7808       0.8734       0.7359
Zimbabwe                                   lev       1998          0.3874       0.4472       0.7363
 Source Key: eb=Encyclopedia Brit, cia=CIA, sm=Scarrit and Mozaffar
 lev=Levinson, wdm=World Directory of Minorities, census=national census data




                                               32
            Appendix 2 – Description of the data from Easterly and Levine, 1997


Growth of Per Capita Real       Growth rate of real per capita GDP, World Bank {various years}
GDP
Dummy for the 1960s, 1970s,     Dummy variable for 1960s, 1970s, 1980s
1980s
Dummy variable for Sub-         Dummy variable for Sub-Saharan African countries. World Bank.
Saharan Africa
Dummy variable for Latin        Dummy variable for Latin America and the Caribbean
America and the Caribbean
Log of initial income           Log of initial income: log of real per capita GDP measured at the
                                start of each decade (1960, 1970, 1980). Summers and Heston
                                {1988}
Log of initial income squared   Log of initial income squared: log of initial real per capita GDP
                                squared. Summers and Heston {1988}
Log of schooling                Log of schooling: log of 1+average years of school attainment,
                                beginning of each decade (1960, 1970, and 1980). Barro and Lee
                                {1993}
Assassinations                  Assassinations: number of assassinations per thousand
                                population, decade average. Banks {1994}
Financial depth                 Financial depth: ratio of liquid liabilities of the financial system
                                to GDP, decade average. Liquid liabilities consist of currency
                                held outside the banking system 1 demand and interest-bearing
                                liabilities of banks and nonbank financial intermediaries. King
                                and Levine {1993b}
Black market premium            Black market premium: log of 1+black market premium, decade
                                average. World Bank {1991} and Pick’s Currency Yearbook
                                {various years}
Fiscal surplus/GDP              Fiscal surplus/GDP: decade average of ratio of central
                                government surplus to GDP, both in local currency, current
                                prices. IMF {various years} International Financial Statistics
                                (line 80), and IMF {various years} Government Finance
                                Statistics (line L80)
Log of telephones per worker    Log of telephones per worker: log of telephones per 1000
                                workers. Canning and Fay {1993}
ELF                             index of ethnolinguistic fractionalization, 1960. Measures
                                probability that two randomly selected people from a given
                                country will not belong to the same ethnolinguistic group. Atlas
                                Narodov Mira {1964}

Source: This table was extracted from Easterly and Levine (1997)




                                                33
         Appendix 2 (continued) – Description of the data from La Porta et al., 1999

Table 1. Description of the Variables
Variable Name Description and Source                                             Number of
                                                                                Observations
  Interference with the private sector:
Property                 A rating of property rights in each country (on a               149
rights                   scale of 1 to 5). The more protection private
index                    property receives, the higher the score. The score
                         is based, broadly, on the degree of legal protection
                         of private property, the extent to which the
                         government protects and enforces laws that
                         protect private property, the probability that the
                         government will expropriate private property, and
                         the country’s legal protection to private property.
                         Source: Holmes, Johnson, and Kirkpatrick, 1997.
Business                 A rating of regulation policies related to opening a            149
Regulation               business and keeping open a business (on a scale
index                    of 1 to 5). Higher score means that regulations
                         are straight-forward and applied uniformly to all
                         businesses and that regulations are less of a
                         burden to business. Source: Holmes, Johnson and
                         Kirkpatrick, 1997.
Top tax rate             Top marginal tax rate for each country in 1994.                  82
                         Source: Gwartney, Lawson, and Block, 1996.
  Efficiency:
Corruption               Corruption in government index. Low ratings                     126
                         indicate “high government officials are likely to
                         demand special payments” and “illegal payments
                         are generally expected thought lower levels of
                         government” in the form of “bribes connected
                         with import and export licenses, exchange
                         controls, tax assessment, policy protection, or
                         loans.” Scale from 0 to 10. Average of the
                         months of April and October in the monthly index
                         between 1982 and 1995. Source: Political Risk
                         Services, various years.
Bureaucratic             An indicator of bureaucratic delays (red tape).                  60
delays                   High ratings indicate lower levels of red tape in
                         the bureaucracy of the country. Scale from 0 to
                         10. The index is published three times per year.
                         The data is the average of the years between 1972
                         and 1995. Source: Business Environmental Risk
                         Intelligence’s (BERI) Operation Risk Index.
Tax Compliance           Assessment of the level of tax compliance. Scale                 49
                         from 0 to 6, where higher scores indicate higher
                         compliance. Data is for 1995. Source: World
                         Economic Forum, 1996.
                                                                                  Continued



                                                 34
Table 1. Continued
 Output of public goods:
Log of infant         Logarithm of the number of deaths of infants                 196
mortality             under one year of age per one thousand live births
                      for the years 1970-1995. Source: World Bank,
                      World Development Indicators 1997 (WDI).

Log of school          Log of schooling taken over five year periods               106
attainment             (1960-65, 1970-75, and 1980-85). Each value is
                       obtained as the logarithm of (1 + average years of
                       school attainment during the respective period).
                       Source: Barro and Lee, 1994.
Illiteracy rate        Average of adult illiteracy rate for the years 1990-        128
                       1995. Adult illiteracy rate is the proportion of
                       adults aged 15 and above who cannot, with
                       understanding, read and write a short, simple
                       statement of their everyday life. 1990-1995.
                       Scale 0 to 100. Source: WDI.
Infrastructure         Assessment of the “facilities for and ease of                60
quality                communications between headquarters and the
                       operation, and within the country,” as well as the
                       quality of the transportation. Average data for the
                       years 1972 to 1995. Scale from 0 to 10 with
                       higher scores for superior quality. Source: BERI’s
                       Operation Risk Index.
 Size of public sector:
Transfers and           Total government transfers and subsidies as a               90
subsidies/GDP           percentage of GDP (scale from 0 to 100).
                        Average for the years 1975-1995. Source:
                        Gwartney, Lawson, and Block, 1996 (with data
                        from the World Bank and International Montetary
                        Fund).

                                                                              Continued




                                               35
Table 1. Continued
Government               Government consumption expenditures as a               104
consumption/GDP          percentage of GDP (scale from 0 to 100). Average
                         for the years 1975-1995. Government
                         consumption expenditures “include all spending
                         on goods and services purchased by the
                         government—things like national defense, road
                         maintenance, wages and salaries, office space, and
                         government-owned vehicles. Since it is obtained
                         from the national income accounts, it includes all
                         levels of government spending. It does not
                         include direct transfers and subsidies, since these
                         do not enter into the national income accounts.”
                         Source: Gwartney, Lawson, and Block, 1996 (with
                         data from the World Bank and International
                         Monetary Fund).
SOEs in the              Index of State-Owned Enterprises as a share of the     104
economy                  economy (scale from 0 to 10). Higher scores
                         include countries with les government-owned
                         enterprises which are estimated to produce less of
                         the country’s output. As the estimated size and
                         breadth of the SOE sector increases, countries are
                         assigned lower ratings. Average of the score for
                         the years 1975-1995. Source: Gwartney, Lawson
                         and Block, 1996.
Public sector            Average of the ratio of public sector employment       124
employment/total         in general government to total population for the
population               years 1976-1996. General government
                         employment includes employment in “all
                         government department offices, organizations and
                         other bodies which are agencies or instruments of
                         the central or local authorities whether accounted
                         for or financed in, ordinary or extraordinary
                         budgets or extra-budgetary funds. They are not
                         solely engaged in administration but also in
                         defense and public order, in the promotion of
                         economic growth and in the provision of
                         education, health and cultural and social services.”
                         Source: Schiavo-Campo, de Tommaso, and
                         Mukherjee, 1997.
 Political Freedom:
Democracy index          Average of democracy score for the period 1970-        161
                         1994. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower values
                         indicating a less democratic environment. Source:
                         Jaggers and Gurr, 1996.
Political rights index   Index of political rights. Higher ratings indicate     209
                         countries that come closer “to the ideals suggested
                         by the checklist questions of: (1) free and fair
                         elections; (2) those elected rule; (3) there are
                         competitive parties or other competitive political
                         groupings; (4) the opposition has an important
                         role and power; and (5) the entities have self-
                         determination or an extremely high degree of
                         autonomy.” Source: Freedom House, 1996.
                                                 36
                                                                           Continued

Table 1. Continued
  Determinants:
Ethnolinguistic    Average value of five different indices of                   161
fractionalization  ethonolinguistic fractionalization. Its value ranges
                   from 0 to 1. The five component indices are: (1)
                   index of ethonolinguistic fractionalization in
                   1960, which measures the probability that two
                   randomly selected people from a given country
                   will not belong to the same ethonolinguistic
                   group(the index is based on the number and size
                   of population groups as distinguished by their
                   ethnic and linguistic status); (2) probability of two
                   randomly selected individuals speaking different
                   languages; (3) probability of two randomly
                   selected individuals do not speak the same
                   language; (4) percent of the population not
                   speaking the official language; and (5) percent of
                   the population not speaking the most widely used
                   language. Sources: Easterly and Levine, 1997.
                   The sources of the components of the average
                   index are (1) Atlas Narodov Mira, 1964;
                   (2)Muller, 1964; (3) Roberts, 1962; (4) and (5)
                   Gunnemark, 1991.
Legal origin       Identifies the legal origin of the Company law or            212
                   Commercial Code of each country. There are five
                   possible origins: (1) English Common Law; (2)
                   French Commercial Code; (3) German
                   Commercial Code; (4) Scandinavian Commercial
                   Code; and (5) Socialist/Communist laws. Source:
                   La Porta et al., 1998, extended using “Foreign
                   Laws: Current Sources of Basic Legislation in
                   Jurisdictions of the World,” 1989; and CIA World
                   Factbook 1996.
Religion           Identifies the percentage of the population of each          209
                   country that belonged to the three most widely
                   spread religions in the world in 1980. For
                   countries of recent formation, the data is available
                   for 1990-1995. The numbers are in percent (scale
                   from 0 to 100). The three religions identified here
                   are: (1) Roman Catholic; (2) Protestant; and (3)
                   Muslim. The residual is called “other religions”.
                   Sources: Barrett, 1982, Worldmark Encyclopedia
                   of Nations 1995, Statistical Abstract of the World
                   1995, United Nations, 1995, CIA 1996.
 Economic Development:
Latitude           The absolute value of the latitude of the country,           209
                   scaled to take values between 0 and 1. Source:
                   CIA 1996.
Log GNP per        Logarithm of GNP per capita expressed in current             186
capita             U.S. dollars for the period 1970-1995. Source:
                   WDI.
Source: This table was extracted from La Porta et al, 1999.

                                                37
                        Table 1 – Sample Means of the Fractionalization Measures

   Variable         # of Observations           Sample Mean
Religion                            198                       0.439
Ethnic                              180                       0.435
Language                            185                       0.385
ELF                                 112                       0.418


                     Table 2 - Pairwise Correlations of the Fractionalization Measures

                                  Religion      Ethnic      Language           ELF
Religion                              1
                                   (198)
Ethnic                             0.142          1
                                   (180)        (180)
Language                           0.269        0.697           1
                                   (185)        (171)         (185)
ELF                                0.372        0.759         0.878              1
                                   (111)        (110)         (108)            (112)
Number of observations in parentheses


                                    Table 3 – Sample Means by Region

                                 Sample restricted to countries available in           Unrestricted Sample
                                                Soviet Data
                                    ELF      ethnic language religion            ethnic     language   religion
Latin America and Carribean         0.265    0.418       0.159      0.367        0.405        0.179     0.442
                                     (23)     (23)        (21)       (23)         (33)         (32)      (40)
Subsaharan Africa                   0.651    0.711       0.689      0.560        0.658        0.625     0.496
                                     (38)     (38)        (37)       (38)         (47)         (47)      (49)
Eastern and Central Europe          0.315    0.319       0.348      0.512        0.366        0.320     0.491
                                      (2)      (2)         (2)        (2)         (20)         (20)      (20)
Western and Southern Europe         0.147    0.170       0.198      0.285        0.177        0.196     0.311
                                     (17)     (16)        (16)       (16)         (18)         (17)      (20)
Middle East                         0.244    0.431       0.304      0.294        0.453        0.330     0.346
                                      (9)      (8)         (9)        (9)         (13)         (14)      (14)
East and South East Asia            0.462    0.365       0.460      0.460        0.306        0.353     0.457
                                     (10)     (10)        (10)       (10)         (16)         (17)      (17)
Number of observations in parentheses




                                                     38
             Table 4 – Correlations between Fractionalization, Growth and its Determinants

                             ethnic language religion   growth rgdpch60      bmp       assas   human
Language                      0.697       1
                              (171)    (185)
Religion                      0.142    0.269      1
                              (180)    (185)   (198)
Growth                       -0.471   -0.305  -0.103        1
                              (119)    (115)   (119)     (120)
Log Initial Income 1960      -0.330   -0.293   0.049     0.137        1
                              (118)    (114)   (118)     (119)     (119)
Black Market Premium          0.102    0.096  -0.041    -0.260    -0.277       1
                               (96)     (93)    (96)      (91)      (91)     (97)
Assasinations                -0.110   -0.027  -0.080    -0.079    -0.003    -0.012       1
                               (90)     (89)    (91)      (87)      (87)     (79)      (92)
Schooling                    -0.459   -0.387   0.122     0.328     0.816    -0.225    -0.117      1
                               (97)     (94)    (97)      (91)      (90)     (81)      (71)     (98)
Phones per capita            -0.356   -0.248   0.084     0.337     0.895    -0.271    -0.080   0.828
                              (133)    (128)   (134)     (119)     (118)     (96)      (91)     (97)
Number of observations in parentheses




                                                  39
                              Table 5 - Ethnic Diversity and Long-Run Growth
                            (Dependent variable is growth of per capita real GDP)

          Variable                    (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)

Dummy for the 1960s                     -0.086              -0.109          -0.222            -0.259
                                        (-0.99)             (-1.24)         (-2.22)          (-2.47)
Dummy for the 1970s                     -0.089              -0.111          -0.218            -0.253
                                        (-1.02)             (-1.27)         (-2.19)          (-2.42)
Dummy for the 1980s                     -0.109              -0.131          -0.236            -0.269
                                        (-1.25)             (-1.50)         (-2.36)          (-2.57)
Dummy variable for Sub-                 -0.008              -0.009          -0.011            -0.015
Saharan Africa                          (-1.70)             (-1.99)         (-2.05)          (-2.76)
Dummy variable for Latin                -0.018              -0.017          -0.013            -0.015
America and the Caribbean               (-4.87)             (-4.54)         (-3.55)          (-4.01)
Log of initial income                     0.035               0.041           0.073             0.088
                                         (1.55)              (1.84)          (2.85)            (3.34)
Log of initial income squared            -0.003             -0.003          -0.005            -0.007
                                        (-1.77)             (-2.09)         (-3.24)          (-4.06)
Log of schooling                          0.013               0.013           0.013             0.009
                                         (3.06)              (3.16)          (3.03)            (1.84)
Assassinations                                             -24.728         -17.654          -22.55
                                                            (-2.42)         (-1.86)          (-2.46)
Financial depth                                                               0.017             0.013
                                                                             (2.89)            (2.12)
Black market premium                                                         -0.020           -0.020
                                                                            (-4.14)          (-4.14)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                                                            0.101             0.163
                                                                             (3.06)            (4.26)
Log of telephones per worker                                                                    0.007
                                                                                               (2.52)
Ethnic                                   -0.019            -0.018           -0.009            -0.005
                                        (-2.97)           (-2.84)          (-1.41)           (-0.68)
No. of observations                  82; 88; 94        77; 87; 93       44; 71; 74        40; 69; 66
R2                                 .25; .22; .36     .24; .22; .38    .39; .45; .52     .39; .51; .58

(t-statistics are in parentheses)
Estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions: a separate regression for each 10 year period. See the Data
Appendix for definitions and sources.




                                                      40
                       Table 6 – Ethnicity as a Determinant of Economic Indicators

       Dependent                                                                        Number of
        Variable                  C              ETHNIC                R2              observations
Log of schooling                        1.963         -1.394       0.19; 0.23; 0.17      94 ; 95 ; 102
                                     (26.85)         (-9.83)
Assassinations                     9.79E-06        6.47E-06      -0.01; -0.06; -0.02     99; 109; 109
                                       (1.07)          (0.38)
Financial depth                         0.465         -0.353       0.22; 0.12; 0.03      95; 103; 106
                                     (12.42)         (-5.03)
Black market premium                    0.178           0.104     -0.01; 0.02; -0.03   105; 119; 120
                                       (3.61)          (1.12)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                     -0.022         -0.020     -0.08; -0.01; -0.06      56; 94; 100
                                      (-4.42)        (-2.13)
Log of telephones per                   4.982         -3.909       0.26; 0.31; 0.13       98; 105; 95
  worker                             (20.72)         (-9.29)
(t-statistics are in parentheses)
Equations estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regression procedures.




                                                     41
                             Table 7 - Language Diversity and Long-Run Growth
                            (dependent variable is growth of per capita real GDP)

          Variable                    (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)

Dummy for the 1960s                     -0.056              -0.070         -0.166             -0.226
                                        (-0.63)             (-0.77)        (-1.60)           (-2.13)
Dummy for the 1970s                     -0.058              -0.072         -0.162             -0.219
                                        (-0.66)             (-0.80)        (-1.57)           (-2.07)
Dummy for the 1980s                     -0.077              -0.091         -0.177             -0.235
                                        (-0.87)             (-1.00)        (-1.72)           (-2.22)
Dummy variable for Sub-                 -0.009              -0.010         -0.011             -0.014
Saharan Africa                          (-1.81)             (-2.09)        (-2.20)           (-2.53)
Dummy variable for Latin                -0.023              -0.022         -0.018             -0.019
America and the Caribbean               (-6.02)             (-5.78)        (-4.69)           (-4.67)
Log of initial income                     0.030               0.034          0.062              0.080
                                         (1.29)              (1.45)         (2.36)             (3.03)
Log of initial income squared            -0.002             -0.003         -0.005             -0.006
                                        (-1.58)             (-1.75)        (-2.81)           (-3.75)
Log of schooling                          0.012               0.012          0.011              0.010
                                         (2.93)              (2.92)         (2.65)             (2.19)
Assassinations                                             -18.254        -10.126           -16.068
                                                            (-1.30)        (-0.76)           (-1.23)
Financial depth                                                              0.015              0.012
                                                                            (2.57)             (1.98)
Black market premium                                                        -0.023            -0.020
                                                                           (-4.64)           (-4.16)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                                                           0.088              0.162
                                                                            (2.68)             (4.26)
Log of telephones per worker                                                                    0.005
                                                                                               (1.99)
LANGUAGE                                 -0.025            -0.024           -0.020            -0.013
                                        (-3.73)           (-3.59)          (-3.03)           (-1.85)
No. of observations                  80; 86; 92        75; 85; 91       43; 69; 73        39; 68; 65
R2                                  0.24; 0.26;       0.23; 0.26;      0.42; 0.48;        0.42; 0.53;
                                           0.30              0.31             0.49               0.57
(t-statistics are in parentheses.)
Estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions: a separate regression for each period.
See the Data Appendix for definitions and sources.




                                                      42
                              Table 8 - Determinants of Economic Indicators

       Dependent                                                                          Number of
        Variable                  C            LANGUAGE                 R2               observations
Log of schooling                       1.796          -1.166         0.19; 0.19; 0.09        91; 92; 99
                                    (27.75)          (-9.08)
Assassinations                    8.26E-06         7.44E-06        -0.02; -0.06; -0.02    96; 107; 107
                                      (1.10)           (0.50)
Financial depth                        0.388          -0.205         0.09; 0.04; -0.06    92; 101; 104
                                    (11.46)          (-3.01)
Black market premium                   0.194            0.074       -0.01; 0.01; -0.04   102; 117; 118
                                      (4.58)           (0.88)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                    -0.027          -0.010       -0.09; -0.02; -0.10       55; 91; 98
                                     (-6.40)         (-1.07)
Log of telephones per                  4.453          -3.118         0.23; 0.24; 0.03       95; 103; 93
  worker                            (21.31)          (-8.05)
(t-statistics are in parentheses.)
Equations estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regression procedures.




                                                     43
                             Table 9 - Religious Diversity and Long-Run Growth
                            (Dependent variable is growth of per capita real GDP)

Variable                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)

Dummy for the 1960s                     -0.108              -0.138             -0.273              -0.307
                                        (-1.19)             (-1.51)            (-2.67)            (-3.00)
Dummy for the 1970s                     -0.111              -0.140             -0.269              -0.300
                                        (-1.22)             (-1.53)            (-2.64)            (-2.94)
Dummy for the 1980s                     -0.131              -0.160             -0.285              -0.316
                                        (-1.45)             (-1.75)            (-2.80)            (-3.10)
Dummy variable for Sub-                 -0.014              -0.015             -0.017              -0.019
Saharan Africa                          (-2.68)             (-2.98)            (-3.14)            (-3.30)
Dummy variable for Latin                -0.021              -0.020             -0.015              -0.016
America and the Caribbean               (-5.53)             (-5.20)            (-4.11)            (-4.37)
Log of initial income                     0.039               0.047              0.086               0.100
                                         (1.65)              (1.99)             (3.26)              (3.87)
Log of initial income                   -0.003              -0.003             -0.006              -0.008
squared                                 (-1.82)             (-2.19)            (-3.61)            (-4.66)
Log of schooling                          0.013               0.013              0.010               0.008
                                         (2.92)              (2.96)             (2.37)              (1.68)
Assassinations                                             -23.630            -18.235            -22.956
                                                            (-2.22)            (-1.84)            (-2.49)
Financial depth                                                                  0.018               0.012
                                                                                (3.05)              (2.11)
Black market premium                                                           -0.022              -0.021
                                                                               (-4.48)            (-4.20)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                                                               0.089               0.172
                                                                                (2.76)              (4.58)
Log of telephones per                                                                                0.007
worker                                                                                              (2.88)
RELIGION                                 -0.004            -0.002               0.006                0.008
                                        (-0.52)           (-0.24)              (0.92)               (1.16)
No. of observations                  82; 88; 95        77; 87; 94          44; 71; 75          40; 69; 66
R2                             0.20; 0.18; 0.32   0.20; 0.18; 0.34    0.43; 0.44; 0.49    0.43; 0.51; 0.58

t-statistics are in parentheses.
Estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regressions: a separate regression for each period.
See the Data Appendix for definitions and sources.




                                                      44
                           Table 10 – Religion as a Determinant of Economic Indicators

       Dependent                                                                               Number of
        Variable                      C             RELIGION                    R2            observations
Log of schooling                       1.160                0.358        0.01; -0.01; -0.14      94; 95; 103
                                    (11.99)                (1.91)
Assassinations                    1.77E-05            -1.13E-05         -0.01; -0.06; -0.02        99; 110; 110
                                      (1.93)             (-0.61)
Financial depth                        0.292                0.012       -0.01; -0.04; -0.17        95; 104; 107
                                      (7.06)               (0.15)
Black market premium                   0.222                0.004        -0.01; 0.00; -0.05    105; 120; 121
                                      (4.29)               (0.04)
Fiscal surplus/GDP                    -0.027              -0.008        -0.14; -0.02; -0.08         56; 95; 101
                                     (-5.25)             (-0.78)
Log of telephones per                  2.759                0.321
                                                             0.00; -0.12; -0.45                     98; 105; 95
  worker                              (9.77)               (0.59)
t-statistics are in parentheses.
Equations estimated using Seemingly Unrelated Regression procedures.



Table 11 – Correlations of Fractionalization Measures and the Determinants of the Quality of Government

                 log gnp                                                      leg_or      leg_or
                     pc    latitude leg_or uk leg_or soc leg_or fr              ger        scan       ethnic      language
Latitude          0.5314
                   (185)
leg_or uk        -0.0960    -0.2758
                   (184)      (205)
leg_or soc       -0.0193     0.4426       -0.3223
                   (184)      (205)         (212)
leg_or fr        -0.1651    -0.2429       -0.6345    -0.3894
                   (184)      (205)         (212)      (212)
leg_or ger        0.2687     0.1745       -0.1339    -0.0822        -0.1618
                   (184)      (205)         (212)      (212)          (212)
leg_or scan       0.2817     0.3382       -0.1126    -0.0691        -0.1361   -0.0287
                   (184)      (205)         (212)      (212)          (212)     (212)
ethnic           -0.3929    -0.3816        0.0144    -0.1104         0.2085   -0.1561    -0.2324
                   (173)      (183)         (185)      (185)          (185)     (185)     (185)
language         -0.3639    -0.2679        0.1483    -0.0741         0.0140   -0.1157    -0.1629      0.6981
                   (174)      (193)         (191)      (191)          (191)     (191)     (191)        (176)
religion          0.0269    -0.1138        0.3632     0.0433        -0.3656    0.1012    -0.1481      0.1520       0.2718
                   (183)      (205)         (204)      (204)          (204)     (204)     (204)        (185)        (195)




                                                               45
            Table 12a – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Business Climate

                             Property rights index                  Business regulation index
log(GNP 70-95)          0.403***                  0.497***       0.483***                  0.447***
                          (5.542)                   (8.326)        (7.073)                   (6.512)
log(pop60)                             -0.102*       -0.003                  -0.122***        -0.035
                                       (1.969)      (0.089)                     (2.670)      (1.025)
Subs. Africa                        -0.867***        -0.003                  -0.908***        -0.099
                                       (3.097)      (0.012)                     (4.272)      (0.377)
East Asia                               -0.268        0.144                      -0.225        0.173
                                       (0.594)      (0.575)                     (0.587)      (0.699)
Latin Am.                            -0.522**        -0.067                   -0.452**        -0.138
                                       (2.052)      (0.286)                     (2.125)      (0.646)
Socialist legal        -1.396***                 -1.044***      -0.676***                 -0.609***
  origin                  (6.279)                   (5.156)        (3.111)                   (2.799)
French legal           -0.656***                 -0.600***          -0.253                 -0.301**
  origin                  (3.542)                   (3.754)        (1.594)                   (2.248)
German legal               -0.037                     0.064     -0.966***                 -0.917***
  origin                  (0.172)                   (0.329)        (5.021)                   (3.671)
Scandinavian               -0.447                    -0.220      -0.919**                 -1.067***
  legal origin            (1.086)                   (0.900)        (1.995)                   (4.312)
Catholic 80                 0.002                                    0.000
                          (0.478)                                  (0.091)
Muslim 80                   0.000                                    0.002
                          (0.065)                                  (0.511)
Other religion 80           0.002                                    0.005
                          (0.460)                                  (0.880)
Latitude                1.383***                                     0.004
                          (3.029)                                  (0.008)
Ethnic frag.               -0.028       -0.573       -0.262         -0.429       -0.343       -0.382
                          (0.089)      (1.189)      (0.676)        (1.465)      (0.954)      (1.239)
Constant                    0.421    5.505***         0.331         -0.510    5.104***         0.531
                          (0.607)       (6.875)      (0.393)       (0.753)     (7.331)      (0.584)
Observations               141           141          141          141        141          141
Adj R2                    0.582         0.140       0.564         0.494      0.196        0.489
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        46
   Table 12b – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Corruption and Bureaucratic
                                                 Quality

                                      Corruption                          Bureaucratic delays
log(GNP 70-95)            0.549***                   1.083***        0.597***                0.794***
                            (3.110)                    (6.111)         (3.650)                  (6.882)
log(pop60)                                  -0.009   0.246***                       -0.179        0.026
                                           (0.083)     (2.703)                     (1.236)      (0.233)
Subs. Africa                               -1.125*    1.377**                       -0.353       1.039*
                                           (1.855)     (2.294)                     (0.434)      (1.808)
East Asia                                   -1.165      -0.108                      -0.120       0.610*
                                           (1.649)     (0.201)                     (0.207)      (1.821)
Latin Am.                               -2.201***       -0.530                   -0.847**         0.234
                                           (4.282)     (1.151)                     (2.046)      (0.670)
Socialist legal              -0.595                     0.982*         -0.842*                   -0.628
  origin                    (1.206)                    (1.913)         (1.797)                  (1.370)
French legal                 -0.296                     -0.170       -0.608**                 -0.779**
  origin                    (0.762)                    (0.442)         (2.218)                  (2.507)
German legal                  0.053                     -0.015          -0.108                   -0.033
  origin                    (0.092)                    (0.023)         (0.303)                  (0.066)
Scandinavian                  1.086                  1.979***       -2.010***                    -0.191
  legal origin              (0.925)                    (4.075)         (3.092)                  (0.544)
Catholic 80                   0.002                                 -0.026***
                            (0.138)                                    (2.975)
Muslim 80                    -0.010                                 -0.032***
                            (0.768)                                    (3.662)
Other religion 80             0.010                                  -0.022**
                            (0.790)                                    (2.457)
Latitude                  5.680***                                      -0.340
                            (3.925)                                    (0.312)
Ethnic frag.                  1.011     -2.487**       -1.317*          -0.896   -1.969**        -1.023
                            (1.332)       (2.374)       (1.704)        (1.635)     (2.235)      (1.460)
Constant                     -0.418     7.771***      -5.858**          3.191* 8.583***          -1.385
                            (0.243)       (4.283)       (2.583)        (1.928)     (3.661)      (0.633)
Observations                 121          121           121           59          59           59
Adj R2                      0.540        0.252         0.517        0.734        0.179        0.671
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        47
                  Table 12c – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Taxation

                                   Tax compliance                      Top marginal tax rate
log(GNP 70-95)              0.515***                     0.218     1.953                       1.755
                              (4.009)                  (1.342)   (1.140)                     (1.624)
log(pop60)                               -0.151*        -0.099                   0.696         0.717
                                          (1.717)      (1.153)                 (0.830)       (0.799)
Subs. Africa                            -1.447**     -1.055**                   -2.814         0.436
                                          (2.682)      (2.297)                 (0.632)       (0.085)
East Asia                                   0.258        0.117             -12.463***     -9.295***
                                          (0.684)      (0.352)                 (4.447)       (2.898)
Latin Am.                                -0.716*         0.013             -16.816*** -16.052***
                                          (1.743)      (0.029)                 (4.990)       (4.496)
Socialist legal             -0.877**                -1.448***     9.629*                      6.092*
  origin                      (2.304)                  (3.154)   (1.925)                     (1.668)
French legal               -1.020***                -1.273***     7.443*                    6.461**
  origin                      (4.339)                  (3.916)   (1.743)                     (2.493)
German legal                -0.563**                    -0.521     6.222                       5.798
  origin                      (2.083)                  (1.665)   (1.026)                     (0.968)
Scandinavian                  -1.083*               -1.091***      7.015                   12.153**
  legal origin                (1.800)                  (2.930)   (0.841)                     (2.367)
Catholic 80                    -0.006                             -0.115
                              (0.824)                            (1.045)
Muslim 80                       0.006                              0.007
                              (0.661)                            (0.074)
Other religion 80              -0.003                             -0.012
                              (0.370)                            (0.103)
Latitude                      -1.216*                             18.991
                              (1.753)                            (1.454)
Ethnic frag.                   -0.585      -0.024      -0.342     10.369        -3.155         3.260
                              (1.049)     (0.038)     (0.606)    (1.495)       (0.509)       (0.445)
Constant                        0.506 5.756***          3.931     16.895    38.014***         15.877
                              (0.330)    (4.001)      (1.618)    (1.143)       (2.836)       (0.925)
Observations                  49           49          49          82        82            82
Adj R2                      0.530        0.127       0.507       0.202      0.360         0.414
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        48
      Table 12d – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of the Public Sector

                               SOEs in the economy               Public sector empl. / total pop.
log(GNP 70-95)                0.369                  0.374*      1.392***                   1.186***
                            (1.493)                 (1.809)        (5.345)                     (6.269)
log(pop60)                            -0.336**    -0.351**                     -0.383**       -0.180*
                                        (2.155)     (2.394)                      (2.250)       (1.901)
Subs. Africa                              0.268       0.505                   -4.360***       -1.077*
                                        (0.421)     (0.797)                      (6.666)       (1.783)
East Asia                            1.917***      1.435**                    -3.381***       -1.365*
                                        (2.759)     (2.052)                      (5.793)       (1.842)
Latin Am.                            1.460***      1.351**                    -2.974***         -0.532
                                        (2.768)     (2.254)                      (4.213)       (0.908)
Socialist legal          -3.127***               -2.940***       2.486***                   2.370***
  origin                    (3.168)                 (3.477)        (3.600)                     (4.059)
French legal                 -0.032                  -0.185         -0.544                      -0.557
  origin                    (0.054)                 (0.380)        (1.360)                     (1.653)
German legal                  0.073                   0.314      -2.471**                    -1.909**
  origin                    (0.068)                 (0.248)        (2.558)                     (2.017)
Scandinavian                 -2.189               -1.872**       6.770***                   6.875***
  legal origin              (1.599)                 (2.036)        (4.565)                     (5.695)
Catholic 80                  -0.009                                  0.000
                            (0.528)                                (0.040)
Muslim 80                    -0.015                                  0.008
                            (0.957)                                (0.859)
Other religion 80            -0.013                                  0.003
                            (0.750)                                (0.243)
Latitude                     -2.194                                  0.512
                            (1.114)                                (0.252)
Ethnic frag.                -1.815*      -1.539      -1.480          0.017        -1.367         0.422
                            (1.778)     (1.562)     (1.517)        (0.021)       (1.019)       (0.477)
Constant                     4.440* 9.780***       7.587**      -6.594***    12.829***          -1.628
                           (1.926)      (4.075)      (2.438)       (3.210)       (4.379)      (0.711)
Observations                 103         103         103           116         116           116
Adj R2                      0.144       0.155       0.264         0.709       0.385         0.721
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        49
           Table 12e – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of Government

                        Government consumption / GDP       Transfers and subsidies / GDP
log(GNP 70-95)          1.162**                 1.139*** 1.540***                   2.797***
                         (2.192)                  (2.897)    (3.048)                  (4.858)
log(pop60)                       -1.329***    -1.073***                     0.272      0.593*
                                     (4.627)      (3.522)                 (0.712)     (1.827)
Subs. Africa                     -4.309***         -2.098              -9.100***       -2.368
                                     (2.860)      (1.214)                 (4.524)     (1.242)
East Asia                        -5.465***     -4.847***              -12.682*** -9.004***
                                     (4.074)      (3.005)                 (8.679)     (5.536)
Latin Am.                        -5.823***    -4.268***                -8.823*** -4.229***
                                     (4.841)      (3.477)                 (5.572)     (2.819)
Socialist legal           -1.061                   -1.677   6.141**                 8.515***
  origin                 (0.356)                  (0.616)    (2.022)                  (3.230)
French legal              -0.642                   -0.736      0.360                    0.199
  origin                 (0.587)                  (0.802)    (0.291)                  (0.185)
German legal              -3.105                   -1.324     -3.609                   -2.760
  origin                 (1.519)                  (0.594)    (1.530)                  (1.172)
Scandinavian              -0.033                    2.287     -0.639                    2.168
  legal origin           (0.011)                  (0.859)    (0.142)                  (0.770)
Catholic 80               -0.047                               0.021
                         (1.489)                             (0.466)
Muslim 80                 -0.017                              -0.014
                         (0.530)                             (0.357)
Other religion 80         -0.043                               0.015
                         (1.141)                             (0.347)
Latitude                   5.152                          24.083***
                         (1.428)                             (5.337)
Ethnic frag.               2.935       1.323        2.790     -0.498    -7.360**      -4.984*
                         (1.521)     (0.663)      (1.471)    (0.179)      (2.502)     (1.981)
Constant                   7.661 38.025***    24.490***    -10.744*     13.291** -17.250**
                         (1.469)       (7.954)        (3.962)      (1.852)     (2.192)    (2.311)
Observations               103          103           103          89         89          89
Adj R2                    0.194       0.250          0.310        0.694      0.598       0.724
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       50
               Table 12f – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Public Goods

                               Infrastructure quality                  Log infant mortality
log(GNP 70-95)             0.744***                 1.038***    -0.431***                 -0.479***
                             (4.760)                  (8.534)     (12.561)                  (12.714)
log(pop60)                                -0.126       0.175*                     0.036      -0.034*
                                         (0.628)      (1.694)                   (1.268)       (1.837)
Subs. Africa                              -0.906        0.797                 1.108***         -0.008
                                         (0.913)      (1.306)                   (7.698)       (0.058)
East Asia                                 -0.922       -0.001                 0.622***         -0.026
                                         (1.228)      (0.003)                   (2.831)       (0.191)
Latin Am.                              -1.324**        -0.150                 0.484***       -0.179*
                                         (2.579)      (0.375)                   (3.833)       (1.698)
Socialist legal           -1.949***                -1.555***         -0.146               -0.403***
  origin                     (3.985)                  (3.079)       (1.265)                   (3.461)
French legal               -0.543**                 -0.762**       0.211**                   0.197**
  origin                     (2.079)                  (2.267)       (2.594)                   (2.458)
German legal                   0.040                    0.256         0.036                    -0.056
  origin                     (0.081)                  (0.539)       (0.249)                   (0.339)
Scandinavian              -2.684***                    -0.059    -0.452**                 -0.405***
  legal origin               (3.506)                  (0.178)       (2.245)                   (3.062)
Catholic 80               -0.032***                              -0.005**
                             (3.740)                                (2.270)
Muslim 80                 -0.038***                                   0.001
                             (4.396)                                (0.404)
Other religion 80         -0.026***                              -0.005**
                             (2.954)                                (2.283)
Latitude                       1.184                             -0.734**
                             (1.286)                                (2.489)
Ethnic frag.                  -0.623    -2.019*        -0.726    0.442*** 1.075***         0.665***
                             (1.131)     (1.704)      (0.924)       (3.436)     (4.065)       (3.966)
Constant                      2.808* 8.810***       -4.810**     7.160*** 2.315***         7.498***
                             (1.766)    (2.749)       (2.267)     (23.588)     (5.252)      (17.237)
Observations                  59           59           59         166         166          166
Adj R2                      0.828        0.169        0.775       0.842       0.481        0.806
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       51
       Table 12g – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Schooling and Literacy

                                      Illiteracy rate                       Log school attainment
log(GNP 70-95)         -11.560***                       -10.841***      0.307***               0.337***
                          (13.166)                          (7.771)       (8.339)               (10.351)
log(pop60)                                   1.300*         -1.338*                    -0.016      0.021
                                            (1.838)         (1.923)                   (0.604)    (1.211)
Subs. Africa                             13.549***           -3.853                -0.639***      -0.028
                                            (2.808)         (0.854)                   (3.485)    (0.239)
East Asia                                -11.932**      -14.834***                     -0.115      0.068
                                            (2.014)         (2.716)                   (0.752)    (0.455)
Latin Am.                               -16.674***      -22.079***                     -0.138 0.285***
                                            (3.970)         (6.366)                   (0.975)    (3.077)
Socialist legal            -10.639                           -4.271     0.423***               0.562***
  origin                   (1.123)                          (0.507)       (4.413)                (7.852)
French legal                 4.172                            4.638    -0.184***              -0.217***
  origin                   (1.326)                          (1.575)       (2.839)                (3.391)
German legal                -3.961                            2.937     -0.221**               -0.206**
  origin                   (0.875)                          (0.506)       (2.327)                (2.268)
Scandinavian                 0.000                            0.000        -0.063                 -0.069
  legal origin                  (.)                              (.)      (0.329)                (0.790)
Catholic 80                 -0.004                                          0.002
                           (0.037)                                        (0.801)
Muslim 80                0.286***                                          -0.003
                           (3.231)                                        (1.239)
Other religion 80            0.089                                          0.001
                           (0.734)                                        (0.332)
Latitude                    -6.920                                          0.085
                           (0.527)                                        (0.299)
Ethnic frag.                 8.991        15.820**       14.090***         -0.056 -0.568**        -0.045
                           (1.654)          (2.233)         (2.634)       (0.445)     (2.246)    (0.361)
Constant                95.017***             5.254     124.604***      -0.791** 2.115*** -1.311***
                            (9.793)         (0.518)         (6.550)      (2.370)     (5.182)     (3.095)
Observations                117           117           117              101        101         101
Adj R2                     0.666         0.436         0.636            0.781      0.386       0.779
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                           52
           Table 12h – Ethnic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Political Rights

                                   Democracy index                        Political rights index
log(GNP 70-95)             0.978***                   1.602***           0.143                 0.565***
                             (3.415)                     (6.276)       (1.149)                    (3.624)
log(pop60)                                  -0.015         0.287                      -0.008        0.086
                                           (0.065)       (1.431)                     (0.089)      (0.964)
Subs. Africa                             -2.039**          0.728                      -0.289        0.771
                                           (2.307)       (0.798)                     (0.575)      (1.363)
East Asia                                   -1.701        -0.287                      -0.790       -0.202
                                           (1.508)       (0.271)                     (1.443)      (0.362)
Latin Am.                                   -0.195      1.861**                   1.007***     1.618***
                                           (0.235)       (2.321)                     (2.697)      (3.833)
Socialist legal           -2.855***                     -1.610*     -1.768***                      -0.441
  origin                     (3.574)                     (1.897)       (3.895)                    (0.914)
French legal               -1.694**                  -2.127***          -0.396                     -0.570
  origin                     (2.525)                     (3.482)       (1.152)                    (1.593)
German legal                  -1.924                      -1.624        -0.357                      0.576
  origin                     (1.588)                     (1.115)       (0.872)                    (1.074)
Scandinavian                  -2.092                       0.837    -1.771***                       0.638
  legal origin               (1.338)                     (0.842)       (2.672)                    (1.311)
Catholic 80                   -0.008                                    -0.003
                             (0.434)                                   (0.407)
Muslim 80                 -0.048***                                 -0.038***
                             (2.616)                                   (5.166)
Other religion 80             -0.020                                    -0.013
                             (1.089)                                   (1.608)
Latitude                    5.581**                                  4.842***
                             (2.467)                                   (4.963)
Ethnic frag.                  -1.053 -4.238***          -2.278*         -0.687 -3.108*** -2.378***
                             (0.951)       (2.906)       (1.797)       (1.150)       (4.148)      (3.135)
Constant                      -0.815        6.778* -10.200***        4.265***     5.869***         -0.117
                             (0.289)       (1.896)       (2.833)       (3.419)       (4.501)      (0.058)
Observations                147           147          147            167           167          167
Adj R2                     0.545        0.175         0.448          0.518        0.189        0.291
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        53
        Table 13a – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Business Climate

                                   Property rights index                  Business regulation index
log(GNP 70-95)            0.397***                     0.486***     0.473***                    0.438***
                           (5.689)                      (9.259)      (6.894)                     (6.818)
log(pop60)                               -0.094*         0.004                   -0.124***        -0.038
                                         (1.819)        (0.134)                    (2.720)       (1.096)
Subs. Africa                            -1.071***        -0.161                  -1.007***        -0.192
                                         (4.287)        (0.664)                    (5.362)       (0.832)
East Asia                                 -0.297          0.101                     -0.242         0.164
                                         (0.639)        (0.418)                    (0.617)       (0.646)
Latin Am.                                -0.435*         -0.005                   -0.409**        -0.171
                                         (1.953)        (0.022)                    (2.056)       (0.821)
Socialist legal           -1.377***                   -1.020***     -0.699***                  -0.586***
  origin                   (6.226)                      (5.176)      (3.167)                     (2.724)
French legal              -0.628***                   -0.597***       -0.248                    -0.279**
  origin                   (3.462)                      (3.838)      (1.565)                     (2.091)
German legal                 0.008                        0.168     -0.908***                  -0.817***
  origin                   (0.035)                      (0.791)      (4.498)                     (3.053)
Scandinavian                -0.418                       -0.073      -0.824*                   -0.945***
  legal origin             (1.038)                      (0.286)      (1.785)                     (3.740)
Catholic 80                  0.002                                    0.001
                           (0.466)                                   (0.245)
Muslim 80                   -0.001                                    0.003
                           (0.190)                                   (0.522)
Other religion 80            0.002                                     0.005
                           (0.397)                                   (1.023)
Latitude                  1.455***                                    0.248
                           (3.100)                                   (0.507)
Linguistic frag.             0.170        0.139           0.187       -0.099        0.098         -0.049
                           (0.649)       (0.331)        (0.582)      (0.442)       (0.317)       (0.194)
Constant                     0.380      5.128***          0.134       -0.711      4.995***         0.513
                           (0.640)       (6.333)        (0.173)      (1.158)       (7.012)       (0.583)
Observations                  138          138             138          138          138            138
Adj R2                       0.591        0.115           0.569       0.472         0.176          0.470
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        54
 Table 13b – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Corruption and Bureaucratic
                                                 Quality


                                      Corruption                              Bureaucratic delays
log(GNP 70-95)           0.468**                    1.012***         0.664***                   0.879***
                         (2.538)                     (5.481)          (3.725)                     (7.399)
log(pop60)                               0.037      0.261***                         -0.174        0.062
                                        (0.325)      (2.754)                        (1.106)       (0.516)
Subs. Africa                           -1.248**      1.350**                         -0.849         0.431
                                        (2.169)      (2.292)                        (0.904)       (0.701)
East Asia                                -0.893        0.033                         -0.180         0.571
                                        (1.263)      (0.060)                        (0.286)       (1.631)
Latin Am.                             -2.539***     -0.983**                      -1.420***         0.187
                                        (5.727)      (2.079)                        (4.296)       (0.520)
Socialist legal              -0.596                    0.710           -0.778                      -0.425
  origin                    (1.151)                  (1.309)          (1.574)                     (0.840)
French legal                 -0.185                   -0.147         -0.581**                    -0.737**
  origin                    (0.464)                  (0.377)          (2.039)                     (2.336)
German legal                  0.073                    0.010            0.022                       0.115
  origin                    (0.117)                  (0.014)          (0.073)                     (0.292)
Scandinavian                  0.778                 2.039***         -1.426**                       0.099
  legal origin              (0.648)                  (4.349)          (2.122)                     (0.279)
Catholic 80                  -0.003                                  -0.019**
                            (0.201)                                   (2.057)
Muslim 80                    -0.013                                 -0.027***
                            (0.946)                                   (2.903)
Other religion 80             0.004                                    -0.014
                            (0.319)                                   (1.587)
Latitude                   5.073***                                    0.234
                            (3.699)                                   (0.225)
Linguistic frag.              0.016     -2.082**     -1.760**           0.085        -0.707         0.261
                            (0.024)      (2.387)      (2.595)         (0.177)       (0.777)       (0.398)
Constant                      1.229     6.842***     -5.351**           1.404      8.147***        -3.162
                            (0.673)      (3.876)      (2.322)         (0.803)       (3.109)       (1.310)
Observations                   120         120          120              58            58            58
Adj R2                        0.511       0.233        0.501           0.727          0.092         0.666
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        55
               Table 13c – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Taxation

                                    Tax compliance                       Top marginal tax rate
log(GNP 70-95)           0.489***                    0.245      2.511                         1.966*
                          (3.181)                  (1.484)     (1.487)                        (1.763)
log(pop60)                              -0.162*     -0.081                      0.620          0.712
                                        (1.816)    (0.908)                     (0.769)        (0.848)
Subs. Africa                           -0.852**   -1.287***                     -4.185         -0.133
                                        (2.138)    (3.224)                     (1.039)        (0.030)
East Asia                                0.245       0.171                   -12.796***     -9.841***
                                        (0.694)    (0.526)                     (4.191)        (2.877)
Latin Am.                               -0.712*     -0.054                   -17.554***    -14.468***
                                        (1.939)    (0.113)                     (5.988)        (4.170)
Socialist legal           -0.929**                -1.446***     11.849**                      7.153*
  origin                   (2.387)                 (3.251)       (2.239)                      (1.870)
French legal             -1.004***                -1.295***      8.140**                      6.638**
  origin                   (3.849)                 (4.107)       (2.067)                      (2.614)
German legal               -0.522*                 -0.552*         6.624                        6.175
  origin                   (2.002)                 (1.764)       (1.037)                      (1.008)
Scandinavian                -1.066                -1.069***       10.121                     12.575**
  legal origin             (1.563)                 (3.142)       (1.498)                      (2.524)
Catholic 80                 -0.007                                -0.072
                           (0.766)                               (0.826)
Muslim 80                   0.004                                 0.021
                           (0.399)                               (0.252)
Other religion 80           -0.002                                 0.000
                           (0.259)                               (0.001)
Latitude                    -0.991                                16.697
                           (1.309)                               (1.566)
Linguistic frag.            -0.368      0.042       -0.248      15.744***      -0.448         6.030
                           (0.750)     (0.070)     (0.454)       (2.974)      (0.086)        (0.959)
Constant                     0.581    5.909***      3.383          8.711     38.555***       13.021
                           (0.305)     (4.087)     (1.376)       (0.654)      (2.965)        (0.783)
Observations                   48         48          48             81          81             81
Adj R2                       0.491      0.085       0.475          0.265       0.350          0.414
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        56
    Table 13d – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of the Public Sector

                                SOEs in the economy              Public sector employment / total pop.
log(GNP 70-95)            0.459*                  0.458**       1.372***                      1.135***
                          (1.775)                 (2.164)        (5.279)                       (6.345)
log(pop60)                           -0.361** -0.357**                           -0.380**      -0.181*
                                      (2.327)     (2.531)                         (2.262)      (1.819)
Subs. Africa                           -0.532       0.002                       -4.765***     -1.312**
                                      (0.917)     (0.003)                         (7.897)      (2.243)
East Asia                             1.733**      1.344*                       -3.432***     -1.527**
                                      (2.304)     (1.809)                         (5.802)      (2.112)
Latin Am.                             1.068**      1.079*                       -3.027***       -0.449
                                      (2.009)     (1.708)                         (3.924)      (0.740)
Socialist legal         -3.237***                -2.828***      2.488***                      2.303***
  origin                  (3.292)                 (3.338)        (3.636)                       (3.942)
French legal               -0.096                  -0.189         -0.532                        -0.526
  origin                  (0.162)                 (0.387)        (1.336)                       (1.460)
German legal                0.120                   0.445       -2.483**                       -1.852*
  origin                  (0.115)                 (0.363)        (2.504)                       (1.905)
Scandinavian               -1.869                 -1.661*       6.603***                      6.896***
  legal origin            (1.374)                 (1.830)        (4.366)                       (5.665)
Catholic 80                -0.005                                 -0.004
                          (0.274)                                (0.344)
Muslim 80                 -0.010                                  0.008
                          (0.598)                                (0.796)
Other religion 80          -0.006                                  0.001
                          (0.337)                                (0.069)
Latitude                   -1.243                                  0.308
                          (0.649)                                (0.154)
Linguistic frag.           -0.702       0.044      -0.020         -0.452           -0.206        0.485
                          (0.858)     (0.049)     (0.023)        (0.780)          (0.205)      (0.665)
Constant                    2.473    9.744*** 6.532**          -6.015***       12.355***        -1.161
                          (1.050)     (4.062)     (2.181)        (3.099)          (4.291)      (0.523)
Observations                 100         100         100            115             115           115
Adj R2                      0.129      0.123        0.248          0.709           0.369         0.720
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        57
     Table 13e – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of the Government

                            Government consumption / GDP               Transfers and subsidies / GDP
log(GNP 70-95)            1.143*                    1.093**        1.665***                     2.964***
                         (1.950)                     (2.528)        (3.044)                      (4.827)
log(pop60)                          -1.305***      -1.042***                         0.232       0.571*
                                      (4.328)        (3.259)                        (0.670)      (1.739)
Subs. Africa                         -3.794**         -1.397                      -9.695***       -2.943
                                      (2.370)        (0.834)                        (4.950)      (1.654)
East Asia                           -5.338***      -4.767***                     -12.196*** -8.804***
                                      (3.626)        (2.697)                        (8.059)      (5.478)
Latin Am.                           -5.420***      -3.791***                    -10.530*** -5.317***
                                      (4.600)        (3.026)                        (7.281)      (3.586)
Socialist legal           -0.969                      -1.875        6.217**                     8.403***
  origin                 (0.325)                     (0.679)        (2.053)                      (3.184)
French legal              -0.766                      -0.911          0.257                        0.194
  origin                 (0.681)                     (1.009)        (0.203)                      (0.176)
German legal             -3.450*                      -1.739         -3.636                       -2.628
  origin                 (1.723)                     (0.814)        (1.552)                      (1.131)
Scandinavian              -0.929                       1.774         -0.132                        2.438
  legal origin           (0.292)                     (0.679)        (0.030)                      (0.860)
Catholic 80               -0.055                                      0.029
                         (1.645)                                    (0.667)
Muslim 80                 -0.022                                     -0.006
                         (0.663)                                    (0.163)
Other religion 80         -0.054                                      0.021
                         (1.380)                                    (0.524)
Latitude                   3.830                                  24.207***
                         (1.154)                                    (6.069)
Linguistic frag.           1.053       0.101           0.672          0.249        -6.048**       -2.949
                         (0.596)      (0.049)       (0.335)         (0.117)         (2.203)      (1.334)
Constant                  9.865*    37.969***      25.142***      -12.660**       13.632**     -18.857**
                         (1.703)      (7.706)       (3.752)         (2.248)         (2.366)      (2.336)
Observations                100         100             100            86              86           86
Adj R2                     0.181       0.240          0.291           0.691          0.586        0.718
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        58
          Table 13f – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Public Goods

                                   Infrastructure quality                     Log infant mortality
log(GNP 70-95)              0.806***                    1.116***    -0.431***                   -0.486***
                             (4.865)                     (8.942)     (11.386)                    (12.557)
log(pop60)                                  -0.136       0.195*                      0.039        -0.029
                                           (0.632)       (1.795)                    (1.327)       (1.346)
Subs. Africa                                -1.374         0.184                   1.268***         0.132
                                           (1.278)       (0.295)                    (8.151)       (0.959)
East Asia                                   -1.015        -0.091                    0.495**        -0.079
                                           (1.247)       (0.256)                    (2.200)       (0.562)
Latin Am.                                -1.891***        -0.091                   0.606***        -0.072
                                           (4.508)       (0.250)                    (4.472)       (0.627)
Socialist legal            -1.852***                    -1.321**       -0.152                   -0.388***
  origin                     (3.701)                     (2.518)      (1.293)                     (3.314)
French legal                 -0.492*                    -0.691**     0.184**                     0.219**
  origin                     (1.845)                     (2.046)      (2.252)                     (2.500)
German legal                  0.180                        0.441        0.022                      -0.117
  origin                     (0.410)                     (1.143)      (0.160)                     (0.731)
Scandinavian                -2.093**                       0.237       -0.294                   -0.505***
  legal origin               (2.666)                     (0.699)      (1.274)                     (3.545)
Catholic 80                 -0.025**                                   -0.002
                             (2.631)                                  (0.861)
Muslim 80                  -0.032***                                   0.003
                             (3.585)                                  (1.375)
Other religion 80           -0.019**                                   -0.003
                             (2.119)                                  (1.130)
Latitude                     1.589*                                 -0.879***
                             (1.752)                                  (2.891)
Linguistic frag.              0.290         -0.566         0.628     0.285**        0.529*          0.244
                             (0.595)       (0.456)       (0.905)      (2.334)       (1.937)       (1.605)
Constant                      1.176        8.571**      -6.307**     7.079***      2.492***      7.622***
                             (0.736)       (2.464)       (2.606)     (20.405)       (5.405)      (16.382)
Observations                    58             58            58          161          161            161
Adj R2                        0.824          0.103         0.775        0.832        0.419          0.786
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        59
     Table 13g – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Schooling and Literacy

                                     Illiteracy rate                       Log school attainment
log(GNP 70-95)         -10.392***                      -10.601***   0.289***                 0.341***
                        (11.597)                         (7.362)     (7.279)                  (10.628)
log(pop60)                               1.099          -1.567**                   -0.017       0.016
                                        (1.567)          (2.104)                  (0.616)      (0.907)
Subs. Africa                            10.672*           -4.373                -0.641***       -0.079
                                        (1.894)          (0.904)                  (3.431)      (0.601)
East Asia                             -16.647***       -18.171***                  -0.068        0.051
                                        (2.792)          (3.227)                  (0.395)      (0.347)
Latin Am.                             -17.323***       -21.442***                 -0.220*     0.305***
                                        (4.229)          (5.860)                  (1.867)      (3.120)
Socialist legal             -7.109                        -2.418    0.388***                  0.600***
  origin                   (0.766)                       (0.284)     (3.772)                   (7.131)
French legal                 3.647                       5.513*     -0.175**                 -0.212***
  origin                   (1.150)                       (1.752)     (2.631)                   (3.147)
German legal                -1.076                         5.337    -0.210**                   -0.185*
  origin                   (0.226)                       (0.828)     (2.364)                   (1.960)
Scandinavian                 0.000                         0.000      -0.086                    -0.051
  legal origin                 (.)                           (.)     (0.441)                   (0.556)
Catholic 80                  0.025                                     0.002
                           (0.261)                                   (0.605)
Muslim 80                 0.305***                                    -0.003
                           (3.700)                                   (1.418)
Other religion 80            0.078                                     0.001
                           (0.661)                                   (0.280)
Latitude                    -5.493                                     0.114
                           (0.476)                                   (0.423)
Linguistic frag.          17.143***      17.727**      13.859**       -0.157      -0.503*        0.083
                           (3.590)        (2.221)       (2.060)      (1.419)      (1.986)      (0.585)
Constant                 82.964***        10.320      127.504***     -0.599*     2.102*** -1.311***
                           (8.953)        (0.990)       (6.293)      (1.740)      (4.928)      (2.951)
Observations                  111           111           111           97            97          97
Adj R2                      0.693          0.443         0.639         0.779        0.378        0.774
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          60
         Table 13h – Linguistic Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Political Rights

                                    Democracy index                          Political rights index
log(GNP 70-95)           0.937***                    1.645***           0.080                    0.567***
                          (3.240)                     (6.488)         (0.670)                     (3.542)
log(pop60)                              0.028          0.313                          -0.011       0.082
                                       (0.119)        (1.514)                        (0.111)      (0.848)
Subs. Africa                          -2.932***         0.188                        -0.904*        0.210
                                       (3.427)        (0.209)                        (1.801)      (0.376)
East Asia                               -1.619         -0.308                         -0.506       -0.037
                                       (1.448)        (0.281)                        (0.819)      (0.063)
Latin Am.                               -0.503        1.764**                          0.623     1.338***
                                       (0.604)        (2.153)                        (1.636)      (3.018)
Socialist legal           -2.924***                   -1.503*       -1.770***                      -0.490
  origin                    (3.593)                   (1.789)         (3.848)                     (1.000)
French legal               -1.682**                  -2.145***         -0.239                     -0.636*
  origin                    (2.473)                   (3.397)         (0.695)                     (1.667)
German legal                 -1.787                    -1.252          -0.247                       0.856
  origin                    (1.509)                   (0.873)         (0.607)                     (1.633)
Scandinavian                 -2.019                     1.455       -1.969***                     1.095**
  legal origin              (1.330)                   (1.458)         (3.075)                     (2.088)
Catholic 80                  -0.008                                    -0.008
                            (0.436)                                   (1.098)
Muslim 80                  -0.049**                                 -0.042***
                            (2.575)                                   (5.912)
Other religion 80            -0.020                                  -0.016**
                            (1.068)                                   (2.068)
Latitude                   6.094***                                  5.102***
                            (2.737)                                   (5.405)
Linguistic frag.             -0.681       -1.256        -0.162        -0.873*        -1.247*       -0.715
                            (0.791)      (0.962)       (0.159)        (1.857)        (1.673)      (1.003)
Constant                     -0.858       4.981      -11.783***      4.953***       5.237***       -0.649
                            (0.317)      (1.344)       (3.317)        (4.447)        (3.538)      (0.308)
Observations                   145         145           145             162            162          162
Adj R2                        0.543       0.119         0.432           0.529          0.101        0.235
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        61
         Table 14a – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Business Climate

                               Property rights index                 Business regulation index
log(GNP 70-95)        0.414***                     0.529***    0.490***                    0.444***
                       (5.588)                      (8.936)     (7.157)                     (6.492)
log(pop60)                           -0.108**         0.005                 -0.128***       -0.037
                                      (2.156)       (0.143)                   (2.959)       (1.061)
Subs. Africa                        -1.148***         0.058                 -1.123***       -0.242
                                      (5.683)       (0.242)                   (7.351)       (0.991)
East Asia                              -0.312         0.179                    -0.269        0.157
                                      (0.690)       (0.755)                   (0.713)       (0.627)
Latin Am.                            -0.590**        -0.003                  -0.504**       -0.179
                                      (2.595)       (0.014)                   (2.502)       (0.874)
Socialist legal      -1.385***                    -1.001*** -0.687***                     -0.590***
  origin               (6.301)                      (5.086)     (3.140)                     (2.813)
French legal         -0.678***                    -0.669***     -0.264*                    -0.277**
  origin               (3.629)                      (3.910)     (1.722)                     (2.118)
German legal            -0.032                        0.105   -0.911***                   -0.838***
  origin               (0.145)                      (0.496)     (4.507)                     (3.172)
Scandinavian            -0.677                       -0.253      -0.750                   -0.929***
  legal origin         (1.485)                      (0.896)     (1.351)                     (3.602)
Catholic 80              0.000                                    0.002
                       (0.048)                                  (0.363)
Muslim 80               -0.003                                    0.004
                       (0.672)                                  (0.606)
Other religion 80        0.000                                    0.006
                       (0.054)                                  (1.028)
Latitude              1.276***                                    0.249
                       (2.626)                                  (0.501)
Religious frag.         -0.333        0.673*         -0.327       0.029       0.724**        0.098
                       (0.965)        (1.751)       (0.926)     (0.095)       (2.535)       (0.380)
Constant                 0.716       5.132***        -0.005      -0.974      4.800***        0.405
                       (1.146)        (6.311)       (0.006)     (1.402)       (7.163)       (0.453)
Observations              142           142            142         142          142           142
Adj R2                   0.589         0.140          0.569       0.487        0.217         0.485
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        62
  Table 14b – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Corruption and Bureaucratic
                                                  Quality

                                    Corruption                         Bureaucratic delays
log(GNP 70-95)          0.504***                  0.994***    0.610***                  0.664***
                         (2.806)                   (5.305)     (3.783)                   (6.201)
log(pop60)                             0.018      0.245**                   -0.299**      -0.034
                                      (0.153)      (2.583)                   (2.374)     (0.353)
Subs. Africa                        -2.551***        0.544                 -2.365***      -0.376
                                      (5.536)      (0.843)                   (3.778)     (0.630)
East Asia                            -1.469**       -0.304                    -0.569       0.295
                                      (2.108)      (0.522)                   (1.309)     (1.004)
Latin Am.                           -2.571***      -0.836*                 -0.862***      -0.025
                                      (5.405)      (1.746)                   (2.738)     (0.091)
Socialist legal             -0.542                 1.013**    -0.905**                   -0.759*
  Origin                   (1.132)                 (2.039)     (2.064)                   (1.913)
French legal                -0.192                  -0.097     -0.467*                    -0.392
  Origin                   (0.475)                 (0.221)     (1.706)                   (1.431)
German legal                 0.026                   0.292       0.065                     0.124
  origin                   (0.042)                 (0.494)     (0.215)                   (0.360)
Scandinavian                 1.067                2.458***      -0.399                    0.648*
  legal origin             (0.777)                 (4.646)     (0.547)                   (1.724)
Catholic 80                  0.000                              -0.009
                           (0.020)                             (0.905)
Muslim 80                  -0.008                               -0.016
                           (0.528)                             (1.616)
Other religion 80            0.007                              -0.007
                           (0.497)                             (0.682)
Latitude                  5.064***                               0.433
                           (3.654)                             (0.437)
Religious frag.              0.382     1.544**       0.216     1.134**      3.190*** 2.016***
                           (0.460)     (2.053)      (0.279)    (2.389)       (4.550)     (4.242)
Constant                     0.482    6.037***     -5.621**      0.416      8.755***      -0.611
                           (0.255)     (3.244)      (2.487)    (0.257)       (4.148)     (0.328)
Observations                  122        122          122          59           59           59
Adj R2                       0.513      0.232        0.490       0.736        0.333        0.718
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        63
             Table 14c – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Taxation

                                  Tax compliance                       Top marginal tax rate
log(GNP 70-95)          0.494***                    0.086        1.232                     1.213
                          (3.457)                 (0.510)      (0.728)                    (1.065)
log(pop60)                          -0.249*** -0.163*                        0.609         0.723
                                      (3.426)     (1.875)                   (0.781)       (0.845)
Subs. Africa                        -2.159*** -1.840***                      -3.885        -0.605
                                      (6.730)     (3.550)                   (1.075)       (0.131)
East Asia                              0.108       -0.058                 -12.744*** -9.543***
                                      (0.347)     (0.181)                   (4.982)       (3.104)
Latin Am.                              -0.384      -0.142                 -17.624*** -16.372***
                                      (1.225)     (0.373)                   (6.146)       (5.074)
Socialist legal          -0.899**               -1.474***        9.234                     5.740
  origin                  (2.236)                 (3.648)      (1.573)                    (1.490)
French legal            -0.921***               -0.936*** 8.917*                          7.428**
  origin                  (3.914)                 (3.142)      (1.907)                    (2.572)
German legal              -0.469*                  -0.402        5.023                     5.425
  origin                  (1.759)                 (1.370)      (0.958)                    (1.037)
Scandinavian               -0.231                  -0.576      17.275*                   13.240**
  legal origin            (0.268)                 (1.465)      (1.857)                    (2.500)
Catholic 80                 0.002                               -0.011
                          (0.203)                              (0.098)
Muslim 80                  0.014                                 0.141
                          (1.273)                              (1.232)
Other religion 80           0.005                                0.062
                          (0.520)                              (0.499)
Latitude                   -0.724                              18.309
                          (0.884)                              (1.402)
Religious frag.             0.634    2.288*** 1.387*** 16.736**              -1.754         4.674
                          (0.919)     (5.119)     (2.862)      (2.248)      (0.392)       (0.884)
Constant                   -0.752    6.437***    5.284**       10.124      39.302***       19.067
                          (0.510)     (5.451)     (2.243)      (0.638)      (3.019)       (1.035)
Observations                  49          49          49           82          82             82
Adj R2                      0.526       0.410       0.562        0.223       0.358          0.415
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                       64
       Table 14d – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of Public Sector

                             SOEs in the economy            Public sector employment / total pop.
log(GNP 70-95)           0.434*                0.378*       1.367***                    1.095***
                        (1.663)               (1.750)        (5.438)                     (5.799)
log(pop60)                         -0.375** -0.376***                       -0.388**     -0.191*
                                    (2.547)   (2.679)                        (2.306)     (1.898)
Subs. Africa                         -0.716    -0.198                      -5.152***     -1.301*
                                    (1.328)   (0.287)                        (9.675)     (1.915)
East Asia                           1.611**    1.284*                      -3.546***    -1.467**
                                    (2.200)   (1.705)                        (5.948)     (1.989)
Latin Am.                          1.192**     1.113*                      -3.126***      -0.669
                                    (2.323)   (1.921)                        (4.439)     (1.106)
Socialist legal        -3.149***             -2.796*** 2.474***                         2.288***
  origin                (3.282)               (3.461)        (3.619)                     (3.942)
French legal             -0.053                -0.020         -0.445                      -0.412
  origin                (0.089)               (0.040)        (1.136)                     (1.114)
German legal              0.301                 0.581       -2.418**                    -1.921**
  origin                (0.288)               (0.477)        (2.520)                     (2.086)
Scandinavian             -1.978                -1.419       7.334***                    7.027***
  legal origin          (1.152)               (1.481)        (4.501)                     (5.806)
Catholic 80              -0.005                                0.005
                        (0.253)                              (0.357)
Muslim 80                -0.015                                0.015
                        (0.706)                              (1.141)
Other religion 80        -0.009                                0.006
                        (0.464)                              (0.493)
Latitude                 -1.167                                0.765
                        (0.634)                              (0.387)
Religious frag.          -0.642       1.091     0.378          0.813          1.731        0.643
                        (0.559)     (1.134)   (0.392)        (0.776)         (1.609)     (0.723)
Constant                  2.850    9.586*** 7.261**        -7.312***      11.702***       -0.843
                        (1.099)     (4.114)   (2.486)        (3.349)         (4.182)     (0.362)
Observations               103         103       103            117            117          117
Adj R2                    0.118       0.146     0.246          0.709          0.385        0.720
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        65
       Table 14e – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Size of Government

                          Government consumption / GDP             Transfers and subsidies / GDP
log(GNP 70-95)          0.956*                    0.847*       1.437***                    2.556***
                        (1.695)                  (1.733)         (2.930)                     (4.356)
log(pop60)                         -1.328*** -1.062***                          0.052          0.425
                                    (4.855)      (3.501)                       (0.135)       (1.293)
Subs. Africa                       -4.569***      -2.254                     -14.202*** -6.165***
                                    (3.801)      (1.270)                      (10.884)       (3.132)
East Asia                          -5.738*** -4.907***                       -14.413*** -9.871***
                                    (4.375)      (3.006)                      (12.385)       (7.160)
Latin Am.                          -5.560*** -4.345***                       -10.293*** -5.731***
                                    (4.981)      (3.674)                       (7.442)       (4.158)
Socialist legal          -1.416                   -2.036        6.295**                    9.379***
  origin                (0.525)                  (0.770)         (2.152)                     (3.782)
French legal             -0.319                   -0.348          1.007                        1.655
  Origin                (0.268)                  (0.291)         (0.797)                     (1.345)
German legal            -3.596*                   -1.785         -3.707                       -1.771
  Origin                (1.826)                  (0.882)         (1.491)                     (0.756)
Scandinavian              3.627                    2.590          6.071                        4.728
  legal origin          (0.971)                  (0.891)         (1.411)                     (1.567)
Catholic 80              -0.008                                 0.095**
                        (0.222)                                  (2.156)
Muslim 80                 0.032                                   0.066
                        (0.865)                                  (1.547)
Other religion 80        -0.013                                  0.077*
                        (0.353)                                  (1.883)
Latitude                  5.506                                27.330***
                        (1.615)                                  (6.671)
Religious frag.         5.535**     3.505**        2.567        7.255***       6.020**         4.425
                        (2.109)     (2.202)      (1.067)         (2.962)       (2.417)       (1.616)
Constant                  4.440    37.124*** 26.477*** -20.971*** 12.839** -16.436**
                        (0.949)     (7.727)      (4.096)         (4.164)       (2.066)       (2.142)
Observations               103        103           103             89            89            89
Adj R2                    0.210      0.272         0.306          0.713         0.591          0.717
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                         66
           Table 14f – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Public Goods

                                Infrastructure quality                    Log infant mortality
Log(GNP 70-95)           0.755***                   0.925*** -0.446***                     -0.460***
                          (4.783)                    (7.461)     (12.039)                    (11.035)
Log(pop60)                              -0.246         0.124                     0.052*       -0.012
                                        (1.301)      (1.267)                     (1.716)      (0.570)
Subs. Africa                          -2.938***       -0.337                    1.614***     0.344**
                                        (4.057)      (0.517)                    (14.433)      (2.430)
East Asia                              -1.376**       -0.257                   0.692***        0.017
                                        (2.163)      (0.741)                     (3.320)      (0.129)
Latin Am.                             -1.352***       -0.344                   0.608***        -0.061
                                        (3.579)      (1.093)                     (4.764)      (0.562)
Socialist legal         -1.976***                  -1.684***       -0.154                  -0.391***
  Origin                  (3.958)                    (3.515)      (1.319)                     (3.535)
French legal              -0.460*                     -0.452     0.235***                       0.125
  Origin                  (1.765)                    (1.473)      (2.703)                     (1.339)
German legal               0.155                       0.364        0.024                     -0.186
  Origin                  (0.330)                    (0.852)      (0.170)                     (1.228)
Scandinavian             -1.759**                      0.601      -0.504*                   -0.699***
  legal origin            (2.147)                    (1.669)      (1.849)                     (4.517)
Catholic 80              -0.022**                                  -0.005
                          (2.298)                                 (1.628)
Muslim 80               -0.029***                                   0.001
                          (3.273)                                 (0.428)
Other religion 80         -0.017*                                  -0.004
                          (1.754)                                 (1.457)
Latitude                  1.679*                                -0.906***
                          (1.862)                                 (2.935)
Religious frag.            0.595       3.178***      1.669**       -0.161      -1.024*** -0.463**
                          (1.243)       (3.163)      (2.421)      (0.863)        (4.598)      (2.502)
Constant                   1.145       8.971***      -4.059*     7.540*** 2.849*** 7.447***
                          (0.838)       (2.888)      (1.918)     (19.822)        (5.799)     (16.330)
Observations                 59            59            59          168           168           168
Adj R2                     0.827         0.255         0.797        0.824         0.471         0.789
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          67
Table 14g – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Schooling and Literacy

                                  Illiteracy rate               Log school attainment
log(GNP 70-95)       -11.860***               -10.503*** 0.310***                 0.320***
                      (13.422)                  (7.629)    (8.366)                (10.083)
log(pop60)                            1.170      -1.102                -0.044*       0.013
                                     (1.571)    (1.503)                (1.789)     (0.755)
Subs. Africa                       22.560***      4.432              -1.085***      -0.159
                                     (4.958)    (0.872)               (10.468)     (1.313)
East Asia                             -9.595   -13.504**               -0.289*       0.035
                                     (1.570)    (2.457)                (1.902)     (0.238)
Latin Am.                          -14.304*** -19.487***              -0.269**    0.231**
                                     (3.333)    (5.345)                (2.321)     (2.483)
Socialist legal          -12.792                 -6.017   0.430***                0.611***
  Origin                 (1.271)                (0.740)    (4.471)                 (8.131)
French legal              5.094                   1.639  -0.182***                -0.142**
  Origin                 (1.605)                (0.539)    (2.717)                 (2.113)
German legal              -6.957                 -0.354   -0.226**                -0.201**
  Origin                 (1.585)                (0.067)    (2.331)                 (2.325)
Scandinavian              0.000                   0.000     0.015                    0.040
  Legal origin               (.)                    (.)    (0.057)                 (0.412)
Catholic 80               0.020                             0.003
                         (0.196)                           (0.959)
Muslim 80               0.337***                           -0.002
                         (3.520)                           (0.596)
Other religion 80         0.126                             0.002
                         (1.057)                           (0.551)
Latitude                 -13.640                            0.132
                         (1.124)                           (0.510)
Religious frag.            4.020   -23.794*** -17.174***    0.083     0.854*** 0.336**
                         (0.567)     (4.084)    (2.989)    (0.426)     (4.696)     (2.397)
Constant                97.357***    21.364*  131.201*** -0.962** 2.097*** -1.220***
                         (8.864)     (1.829)    (7.185)    (2.226)     (5.041)     (3.000)
Observations                118        118         118       101         101          101
Adj R2                    0.664       0.463       0.647     0.781       0.449        0.791
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                        68
          Table 14h – Religious Fractionalization and the Quality of Government – Political Rights

                                  Democracy index                        Political rights index
log(GNP 70-95)         1.052***                   1.631***          0.169                    0.524***
                        (3.804)                    (5.994)        (1.370)                     (3.107)
log(pop60)                             -0.013        0.306                        -0.055        0.028
                                      (0.054)      (1.482)                       (0.614)      (0.297)
Subs. Africa                        -4.024***        0.063                     -1.631***       -0.314
                                      (5.628)      (0.066)                       (3.871)      (0.524)
East Asia                            -2.071**       -0.353                        -0.917       -0.266
                                      (1.990)      (0.340)                       (1.573)      (0.463)
Latin Am.                              -0.391      1.799**                       0.666*      1.308***
                                      (0.488)      (2.210)                       (1.830)      (2.967)
Socialist legal         -2.748***                  -1.498*      -1.731***                      -0.441
  origin                  (3.456)                  (1.811)        (3.791)                     (0.898)
French legal            -1.796***                 -2.089***        -0.451                      -0.368
  origin                  (2.704)                  (2.886)        (1.281)                     (0.883)
German legal               -1.651                   -1.218         -0.263                     1.047**
  origin                  (1.458)                  (0.878)        (0.592)                     (2.194)
Scandinavian             -3.622**                    1.567      -2.225***                    1.599***
  legal origin            (2.195)                  (1.382)        (2.836)                     (2.727)
Catholic 80                -0.025                                  -0.009
                          (1.305)                                 (0.954)
Muslim 80               -0.067***                               -0.045***
                          (3.448)                                 (5.013)
Other religion 80         -0.032*                                -0.018**
                          (1.737)                                 (2.100)
Latitude                 5.254**                                 4.895***
                          (2.410)                                 (4.936)
Religious frag.          -2.688**     3.172**        0.233         -0.690       1.907***        1.226
                          (2.101)     (2.331)      (0.163)        (1.004)        (2.754)      (1.480)
Constant                    0.864       4.007    -11.730*** 4.570*** 4.814***                  -0.291
                          (0.311)     (1.047)      (3.270)        (3.675)        (3.140)      (0.144)
Observations                 148         148          148            169            169          169
Adj R2                      0.559       0.150        0.438          0.516          0.133        0.251
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          69
          Table 15 – Country Examples of Ethnic Fractionalization, Growth and Government Quality

                          Average    Average
                          black      Years of        Telephone                   Corruption (0 to
                Average market       Schooling of    lines per 1000 Government   10) Higher       Ethnic
                growth in premium    Labor Force,    workers,       Balance to   means less       fractio-
Country         1980s     in 1980s   1980s           1980s          GDP, 1980s   corruption       nalization
Africa
Botswana             7.0%      16%             3.3             27        11.2%                6.5      0.410
Ethiopia             0.0%      76%                              4        -7.1%                4.3      0.724
Nigeria             -3.3%      76%                              2         0.3%                3.0      0.851
Latin America
Bolivia             -3.3%      39%             5.0             46       -14.4%                2.8       0.74
Chile                1.9%      16%             7.0             84        -0.2%                5.3       0.19
Guyana              -2.4%     131%             5.6                      -39.7%                2.0       0.62




                                                       70
