NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADING WITH THE UNBORN:
A NEW PERSPECTIVE ON
CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION
Kent A. Smetters
Working Paper 9412
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9412
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

Helpful comments were received from seminar participants at the 1998 Brown Macroeconomics Workshop;
the 1999 IMF seminar series; the 2000 Harvard Monetary and Fiscal Policy Workshop; The Centre for
Economic Policy Research workshop held in Tilburg, Holland, 2000; the 2000 Wharton Macro-Finance
workshop, the 2000 Wharton Insurance and Risk Management Workshop, as well as Laurence Kotlikoff,
Greg Mankiw, and Jan Walliser. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Kent A. Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

Trading with the Unborn: A New Perspective on Capital Income Taxation
Kent A. Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 9412
December 2002
JEL No. D9, E6, H2, H3
ABSTRACT
Security markets between generations are incomplete due to a "biological trading constraint"
that prevents living generations from negotiating contingent contracts with the unborn. This paper
shows, however, that government policy can be used to replicate the trades that would have occurred
if these generations could trade. Specifically, for the class of linear securities, these trades can be
replicated using a Domar-Musgrave capital income tax that is similar to the U.S. capital income tax.
It is then proven that the Replicating Tax Rate (RTR) in the replicating capital income tax system
is positive in a production economy if wage and capital returns are uncorrelated (i.e., only
depreciation is stochastic). The sign of the RTR is ambiguous, however, if wage and capital returns
are perfectly correlated (i.e., only productivity is stochastic). But, in this case, if we also assume that
(i) production takes the Cobb-Douglas form, (ii) depreciation per period is less than 100 percent, and
(iii) the inter-temporal substitution elasticity (IES) is unity, then the RTR is actually negative.
Since completing a missing market is not necessarily pareto improving in the presence of generalequilibrium effects, this paper also investigates whether the Replicating Tax increases efficiency.
In the case in which the RTR can be signed as negative, efficiency is proven to increase. While this
result is one of the first derivations of efficiency gains associated with completing a missing market
in a production economy with an endogenous equity return distribution, this result is still restrictive.
Simulation evidence, therefore, is reported for more realistic cases in which both productivity and
depreciation are stochastic; a calibrated value for the IES parameter is also used and other realistic
features of the U.S. economy are incorporated. Welfare results, corresponding to a change in the
RTR, are reported for both transition and steady-state generations using a recursive technique that
accommodates a state space that expands rapidly over time.
Kent A. Smetters
The Wharton School
The University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
smetters@wharton.upenn.edu

