NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OLIGOPOLY DEREGULATION AND
THE TAXATION OF COMMODITIES
Gilbert E. Metcalf
George Norman
Working Paper 9415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9415
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

The first author acknowledges support from the M.I.T. Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global
Change and a grant from the National Science Foundation (SBR-9811324) through the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Gilbert E. Metcalf and George Norman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is
given to the source.

Oligopoly Deregulation and the Taxation of Commodities
Gilbert E. Metcalf and George Norman
NBER Working Paper No. 9415
December 2002
JEL No. D43, H20, H21
ABSTRACT
We examine the interplay between market structure and the form that commodity taxation
should take in a world in which firms produce differentiated products and so are able to exert some
degree of market power. Our analysis takes explicit account of two important recent developments
that carry significant implications for market structure and so for the appropriate design and
effectiveness of commodity taxation: market deregulation and technological change. In the presence
of price discrimination, we find that tax policy loses much of its effectiveness at serving as a
substitute for direct regulation. Moreover, in cases where taxes can influence market structure,
subsides rather than taxes may be required to achieve optimum market structure.

Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

George Norman
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
george.norman@tufts.edu

1.

Introduction
It is well accepted that the appropriate design of commodity taxes is affected by

market structure. It is equally well recognized that commodity taxes can serve as
regulatory instruments to achieve desired market structure outcomes in cases where firms
produce differentiated products and so are able to exert some degree of market power.
This latter idea was first explicitly analyzed by Kay and Keen (1983) who showed that in
differentiated product markets ad valorem taxes can be used to achieve desired product
variety while specific taxes are used to set price optimally. Even if there were no need
for distorting taxes for revenue raising purposes due to the existence of lump sum
taxation, it still might be desirable to levy an ad valorem tax to alter the equilibrium
number of firms in the market. In other words, the ad valorem tax could be welfare
enhancing over some range.
The specific contribution of this paper is to extend the Kay and Keen study to
introduce two elements that recent analysis of spatial and, more generally, differentiated
product markets have shown to be important in determining market structure. First, we
know from the work, for example, of Eaton and Wooders (1985) and Norman and Thisse
(1996), Norman and Thisse (1999), that equilibrium market structure is affected by the
ability of incumbents to commit to their location, or product design choices: what
Norman and Thisse (1996) refer to as the degree of spatial contestability. Second, the
same analyses indicate that market structure is affected by the pricing policies that firms
adopt and, in particular, by whether firms price discriminate or not. There is the clear
implication, which we investigate in this paper, that if spatial contestability and firms’
choices of pricing policy determine equilibrium market structure in the absence of

1

commodity taxes, they should also affect the design of commodity taxes that are intended
to achieve social welfare objectives.
Our analysis is relevant and timely for at least two reasons. First, the last two
decades have seen a significant relaxation in regulatory controls, with firms being
allowed much more latitude in their choice of pricing policies. It should come as little
surprise, therefore, to see the extensive application of discriminatory prices. Second,
technological change over the same two decades has seen the increasingly wide adoption
of flexible manufacturing systems, defined as “a production unit capable of producing a
range of discrete products with a minimum of manual intervention” (U.S. Office of
Technology Assessment (1984), p. 60). These systems allow firms to switch product
specifications easily, with the result that firms adopting this type of technology can
customize their products to the specific requirements of their buyers at little or no cost
penalty. Developments in e-commerce have further extended the ability of firms to
customize or “version” the services and products offered to customers based upon
information gathered about each customer’s preferences.
“What this means in practice is that rather than display the same set of pages to
every visitor, a Web site would present different information to each customer
based on the person’s data profile.” (Stellin (2000))
What this and the more general use of flexible manufacturing also mean is that not only
do we get our very own customized products or personalized Web pages; we often also
get our very own customized or personalized prices since firms find themselves unable to
commit to non-discriminatory prices.
In our analysis below, we find that the differences in optimal commodity taxes
across different regimes, defined by spatial contestability, technology or pricing policy, in
some cases is merely one of degree. In other cases, however, it emerges that the
2

difference is one of sign – taxes should be replaced by subsidies. In yet other cases we
find a dramatic contrast with the Kay and Keen results in that commodity taxes lose all
leverage in their ability to affect market structure. This does not mean, however, that the
authorities face a chaotic environment in designing commodity taxes. We show that
there are potentially observable characteristics that can be used to distinguish between the
different regimes and so can be used to guide policy.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we outline the
basic model on which our analysis is based. In the next two sections we identify the
impact of commodity taxes on market structure, in section 3 when firms do not price
discriminate and in section 4 in the presence of price discrimination. Our main
conclusions are summarized in the final section.
2.

The Model
We base our analysis on the Salop (1979) model that has become standard in the

literature on horizontal product differentiation. A particular virtue of this model is that it
explicitly allows us to identify the equilibrium number of firms and so to ascertain the
connection between the regulatory and technological regime, market structure and the
impact – and so optimal design – of commodity taxes.
Our market is represented as a one-dimensional attribute space with support [0, L]
which, to avoid end-point problems, we assume to be circular: we normalize L = 1
without loss of generality. Firms that enter this market are assumed to offer products that
are identical in all characteristics other than their locations in the attribute space. They
may employ one of two technologies: a designated technology or a flexible technology.1

1

We do not model firms’ choice of technologies but rather assume that either they all employ the
designated technology or they all employ the flexible technology.

3

When firms employ the designated technology they each produce a single good with a
defined characteristic that cannot be customized, so that the “location” of firm i is the
characteristic xi ∈ [0, 1] that this firm offers. By contrast, with the flexible technology
the producer starts with a ‘basic product’ and customizes or personalizes it to the precise
specifications of particular consumers.
“This means that the firm now produces a band of horizontally differentiated
products centered upon its basic product instead of a single product.” (Norman
and Thisse (1996), p. 79)2
In other words, with flexible manufacturing the “location” of firm i is the attribute of the
basic product xi ∈ [0, 1] on which the range of customized products offered by firm i is
centered.
Production costs for firms that enter the market are assumed to be identical and to
exhibit economies of scale. The production cost function for firm i is
(1)

Ci(Q) = f + c.Q

where c are (constant) marginal costs and f are fixed costs.3 If the firms operate the
flexible technology, they also incur customization costs. The cost of customizing basic
product xi to attribute x is assumed to be
(2)

ci ( x ) = r x − xi

Firms face an ad valorem tax rate τv and a unit or specific tax rate τs.
Consumers are distributed over this space at density D which, without loss of
generality, we can normalize to D = 1. Consumer j’s “address” is defined as xj ∈ [0, 1],
where xj denotes this consumer’s most preferred product attribute. Each consumer is

2

See also Eaton and Schmitt (1994) for a discussion of this model as a model of flexible
manufacturing.
3
We do not compare designated and flexible equilibria with each other and so do not distinguish
their fixed costs.

4

assumed to buy exactly one unit of the product that offers her the greatest utility. The
indirect utility that consumer j gets from buying a product with attribute x at price p(x) is
(3)

U j ( x, p( x )) = V − p( x ) − t x − x j

where V is the consumer’s reservation price. The parameter t can be given one of two
familiar interpretations. If we consider this to be a pure spatial model t is unit transport
cost, while if we think of this as a model of horizontal product differentiation, t is the
valuation consumers place on the utility they lose from having to consume other than
their ideal product. We assume that V is sufficiently large that the market is covered in
each of the equilibria we consider below.
The flexible manufacturing technology has two essential characteristics. First 0 <
r < t and secondly, each consumer obtains the same utility from basic product xi
customized to attribute x as from a basic product x if they are offered at the same price.4
Firms in this market compete in a two-stage game. In the first stage they
(simultaneously) decide whether to enter and the locations, or attributes of their (basic)
products. In the second stage they compete in prices à la Bertrand. We confine our
attention to two, exogenously determined, pricing policies. With non-discriminatory
pricing each firm sets a (mill) price mi. The full price that a consumer with most
preferred product attribute x pays to consume firm i’s product is then mi + t x − xi . With
discriminatory pricing the only restriction imposed on firm i’s price to any consumer
location is that the firm never prices below marginal cost, including commodity taxes.
In order to keep the analysis tractable we confine our attention throughout to
symmetric locations of the entrant firms.5 We still need to identify, however, what is

5

meant by equilibrium to the entry subgame. Entry takes place to the point where no
additional entrant expects to break even but this leaves a potentially wide range of
potential equilibria determined by the costs that incumbent firms incur in re-locating or,
in the product differentiation interpretation, re-anchoring their (basic) products. We
concentrate throughout on two polar cases6
(i)

spatial contestability (SC) in which re-anchoring costs are zero; and

(ii)

spatial non-contestability (SNC) in which re-anchoring costs are prohibitive.

With SC the only candidate equilibrium is the maximum packing configuration in which
all incumbent firms just break even. With SNC the candidate equilibria range from this
maximum packing equilibrium to the minimum packing equilibrium in which a
sophisticated entrant just fails to break even given the (symmetric) locations of the
incumbents. In this context a sophisticated entrant is an entrant that can “foresee the
price equilibrium that would prevail if they were to enter” ((Eaton and Wooders (1985)),
p. 283). We confine our attention in the SNC case to the minimum packing equilibrium.
In the analyses that follow, we take as our benchmark the equilibrium number of
products that maximizes social welfare. Given our specification (3) of the consumer
utility function, the socially optimal degree of product variety is the number of (basic)
products N0 that minimizes total costs
(4)

TC (N ) = N . f + 2 N ∫

1 2N

0

h.sds = N . f +

h
4N

which gives

4

The implicit assumption with the designated technology is that, while customization might be
possible, it can be implemented only at a “distance” cost rd >> t and so will be rejected by consumers.
5
This is actually not particularly restrictive in that it can be shown that a symmetric configuration
of products is a location equilibrium in this type of model (see, for example, Novshek (1980), Kats (1995)).
6
See Norman and Thisse (1996), (1999).

6

(5)

N0 =

1
2

h
f

where h = t with the designated technology and r with the flexible technology.
3.

Tax Policy in the Absence of Price Discrimination

In this section, we consider whether tax policy can be used to achieve optimal
market structure to maximize social welfare when firms are unable to price discriminate.
We focus primarily on markets with designated technologies. While we briefly consider
tax policy in the presence of flexible technologies, we argue that firms are likely to price
discriminate when they employ such technologies because, in the absence of regulations
to the contrary, flexible manufacturing undermines the ability of firms to make credible
commitments not to price discriminate. Since the firm now has the ability to offer a wide
range of product variants it can, subject only to arbitrage constraints, price these variants
individually. Competition between firms for individual consumers can then be expected
to undermine any attempt to maintain a pricing policy with the inflexible characteristics
of non-discriminatory (mill) pricing.

Simply put, competition is likely to become

Bertrand-at-every-point.
When firms employ designated technologies and re-anchoring is costless, the
determination of the price equilibrium is as described in Kay and Keen (1983). After
reviewing this equilibrium, we consider the case where re-anchoring is ruled out by high
costs. Assume that there are N active firms uniformly distributed over the market.
Consider firm i and assume that all other firms have set the mill price m. Then the
consumer located at x who is indifferent between buying from firm i and the nearest
neighbor to firm i is characterized by

7

(6)

m − mi
1
1

+
mi + tx = m + t  − x  ⇒ x =
2N
2t
N


Demand to firm i is 2x or
(7)

D(mi , m ) =

1 m − mi
+
N
t

and profit to firm i is
(8)

π i = ((1 − τ v )mi − c − τ s )D(m, mi ) − f

Taking the derivative with respect to mi, setting this to zero and solving for mi with the
symmetry assumption that in equilibrium m = mi gives the equilibrium price
(9)

mi =

t c + τs
+
N 1 − τv

The equilibrium number of firms is then determined by the degree of spatial
contestability in the market.
Spatial Contestability (SC)
When the market is SC the equilibrium condition is, as in Kay and Keen (1983),
that the entrant firms just break even. Substituting (9) into (8) with m = mi and
simplifying gives the equilibrium condition on the degree of product variety
(10)

πi =

(1 − τ v )t
N2

− f = 0 ⇒ N SC (t , τ v , τ s ) =

(1 − τ v )t
f

Substituting into (9) gives the equilibrium producer price
(11)

(1 − τ v )m* =

(1 − τ v )t
+ c + τs
N (t , τ v , τ s )
SC

=

f .t
+ c + τs
(1 − τ v )

8

It follows that unit taxes are fully passed forward in the sense of the producer price rising
by the amount of the tax.7 Ad valorem tax incidence can be decomposed into two
components: a direct effect and an indirect effect through the change in the equilibrium
number of firms. Fixing N,
(12)

~
∂m
∂τ v

≡
N

∂ (1 − τ v )m
∂τ v

=−
N

t
.
N

The complete incidence is given by
(13)

~
f .t
t
∂m
1
,
=−
=−
SC
∂τ v
2 1 − τv
2 N (t , τ v , τ s )

half the incidence in the case where N is fixed. In other words, firm exit contributes to
half the incidence being shifted forward to consumers. Firms exit because an increase in
ad valorem taxation is equivalent (from the firm's point of view) to an increase in fixed
costs relative to revenue (see Kay and Keen for details).
Since the specific tax is passed on fully as an increase in prices, it follows – as can
be seen from (10), that the equilibrium degree of product variety is a function solely of
the ad valorem tax rate. Comparing (5) and (10) indicates that an ad valorem tax rate of
75% is needed to give the socially optimal number of firms.
Spatial Non-Contestability (SNC)
When the market is SNC the relevant equilibrium condition is that an entrant just
fails to break even given that the incumbents do not relocate in response to entry (because
re-anchoring costs are prohibitively high) but are expected by the entrant to change their

7

From equation (11), the consumer price rises by more than the unit tax in the presence of an ad
valorem tax. The increase in price by the firm to cover the unit tax must also cover an increase in ad
valorem tax collections. It is not the case, however, that the unit tax is more than 100 percent passed
forward.

9

prices optimally in response to entry. We must first, therefore, identify the Nash
equilibrium prices that the entrant expects to prevail post-entry.
It is a familiar result that an entrant should locate midway between some pair of
incumbents. So suppose that the entrant, denoted 0, locates midway between two
incumbents, denoted –1 and 1. The incumbents will change their prices in response to
entry and this price change will affect their nearest neighbors, 2 and –2 who can be
expected to change their prices, affecting their neighbors 3 and –3 and so on. A chain
reaction is set up in the post-entry mill prices of the incumbent firms.
Suppose that there are N firms pre-entry. Then we have the following:8
Theorem 1: The post-entry mill prices charged by the entrant (m0) and the incumbent
firms (mi, i = ±1,±2,... ) are:
m0 ( N , τ s , τ v ) =

(

)

c + τs 3 1 + 3 t
+
1 − τv 3 + 2 3 2N

m1 ( N , τ s , τ v ) = m−1 ( N , τ s , τ v ) =

c + τs 3 + 4 3 t
+
1 − τv 3 + 2 3 2N

m2 ( N , τ s , τ v ) = m− 2 ( N , τ s , τ v ) =

c + τs
7 3 t
+
1 − τv 3 + 2 3 2N

(

)

i
c + τ s 
3 2 − 3  t
mi (N , τ s , τ v ) =
+ 2−
(i = 3,-3; 4,-4;…)
 2N
1 − τv 
3
+
2
3


Using the prices from Theorem 1 to calculate the profits of the entrant and setting

these to zero gives the equilibrium number degree of product variety with SNC
(14)

N ndSNC (t , τ v , τ s ) =

3t (1 − τ v )

(

)

2 2+ 3 f

The direct and complete incidences of commodity taxes are as for the SC case.

8

The proof follows Eaton and Wooders (1985) and can be obtained from the authors on request.
See also Norman and Thisse (1996).

10

Comparison with (10) indicates, as we would expect, that SNC leads to lower
equilibrium product variety.

This market environment does not, however, provide

qualitatively different results from the Kay and Keen analysis. Where the optimal tax is
75 percent in the latter case, the optimal tax now is 37.8 percent. Ad valorem taxes are
overshifted in both cases with the overshifting arising from firm exit in response to the ad
valorem tax.
Recall that the equilibrium price is given by equation (9) in either the contestable
or non-contestable market. Non-contestability affects the equilibrium number of firms
and allows for the possibility of economic rents. From equations (8), (9), and (14), we
can calculate rents per firm as
(15)

πi =

1+ 2 3
f
3

and aggregate profits are
(16)

Π=

(1 + 2 3 ) (1 − τ
6(2 + 3 )

V

)tf

In addition to serving as an instrument for achieving optimal product diversity, the ad
valorem tax serves to appropriate some of the economic rents earned in non-contestable
markets. With an optimal tax rate of 37.8 percent, aggregate economic rents are reduced
by 21.1 percent.
We argued at the beginning of this section that firms are unlikely to be able to
commit not to price discriminate when they employ flexible manufacturing systems. For
completeness, however, we report results for the case where such firms can commit to
non-discriminatory prices.9 The difference between this case and those analyzed above

9

Details can be obtained from the authors on request.

11

is that “transport” costs are now customization costs and so are part of the tax base.
Whether the market is SC or SNC there is excessive product variety in the absence of
commodity taxes which can be corrected by a positive ad valorem tax: of 100% with
spatial contestability and 58.2% with spatial non-contestability.
Table 1 below summarizes our results when firms can commit not to price
discriminate. In all cases the equilibrium number of firms exceeds the socially optimal
number of firms. Ad valorem taxes, therefore, have the capability of reducing excess
product variety and achieving the social optimum. The optimizing tax rate varies from
37.8 to 100 percent depending on technology and re-anchoring costs. The qualitative
result, however, is quite robust: ad valorem taxes can be used to reduce excessive product
variety. We next turn to the case where firms price discriminate.
Table 1. Product Variety and Optimal Ad Valorem Tax Rates:
No Price Discrimination
τ*υ
Technology
Contestability
N* - N0
SC
+
75.0%
Designated
SNC
+
37.8%
SC
+
100.0%
Flexible
SNC
+
58.2%
4.

Tax Policy With Price Discrimination

As we pointed out in the Introduction, a trend towards weaker enforcement of
regulations on firms’ pricing policies has occurred both in the United States and Europe.
In this section, we consider how the ability of tax policy to affect market structure is
altered in the presence of price discrimination.
4.1

Designated Technology
We begin by assuming that the entrant firms adopt the designated technology but

choose discriminatory prices. This changes the price equilibrium. The price charged by
12

firm i to each consumer is such that the utility for each consumer that purchases from
firm i is exactly what they would achieve if they bought at cost from the next most
preferred competitor. If a consumer is located z units to the right of firm i, then the
pricing rule is given by:
(17)

p i ( z ) + t.z =

c + τs
1
+ t ( − z)
N
1 − τv

 1 
z ∈ 0,

 2N 

The marginal cost on the RHS of equation (17) must be grossed up by the tax to account
for the fact that the competitor must pay taxes on its sales to a consumer. Since this is a
model of product differentiation, t measures utility loss and is not included in the tax
base.
A similar (symmetric) equation holds for consumers to the left of the firm. It
follows that the price schedule that firm i applies is
(18)

c + τs t
+ − 2t.z
1 − τv N

pi ( z ) =

Profit to firm i is, therefore
(19)

1 2N

π i = 2∫

0

((1 − τ v ) pi (z ) − c − τ s )dz − f

=

(1 − τ v )t
−f
2N 2

Spatial Contestability
Entry occurs until profits go to zero. Thus, in equilibrium,
(20)

N dSC (t , τ v , τ s ) =

(1 − t v )t
2f

and the equilibrium consumer price is
(21)

pi (z ) =

c + τs
2t. f
- 2t.z
+
1 − τv
1 − τv

 1 
z ∈ 0,

 2N 

13

As in the no-price discrimination case, equation (18) indicates that with a given
number of firms any taxes are fully shifted to the consumer. Once the impact of taxes on
market structure is taken into account, equation (21) indicates that the excise tax is fully
forward shifted while the ad valorem tax is overshifted. Increasing τv has the effect of
raising fixed costs and so driving out firms. Comparison with (10) indicates, however,
that as in Kay and Keen, there is an excessive number of firms in the absence of
commodity taxes, a feature that is typical of spatially contestable markets. The optimal ad
valorem tax rate can get us to the optimum, the optimal tax rate being 50% in this case.
Spatial Non-Contestability
With spatial non-contestability and price discrimination, the price equilibrium for
a sophisticated entrant is straightforward: equation (18) applies to the entrant as well as to
the incumbents. In order to identify the zero-profit condition for an entrant, denote the
market area obtained by an incumbent firm, given that there are N firms in the market, as
M = 1/N. Putting this into equation (19) we have that the profit of a firm with market
area M is
(22)

(1 − τ v )tM 2
π i (M ) =
−f
2
Now consider an entrant. This firm will enter mid-way between two incumbents,

charge prices characterized by the equilibrium condition (18) and so will capture a
market of area M/2. As a result, the entrant’s profit is
(23)

2
(1 − τ v )t
 M  (1 − τ v )tM
πi   =
−f =
−f
8
8N 2
 2 

This means that the equilibrium number of firms is

14

(24)

N dSNC (t , τ v , τ s ) =

(1 − τ v )t
8f

Ad valorem taxes continue to reduce product variety. However, the intense price
competition that an entrant expects to face together with the product specification
commitment that incumbents are able to make because of the prohibitive re-anchoring
costs means that, even in the absence of commodity taxes there is too little product
variety. Since an increase in the ad valorem tax rate decreases equilibrium product
variety, we now find that the optimal tax rate needed to generate the socially optimal
product variety is actually a subsidy of 100%. Incumbent firms earn economic rents per
firm of
(25)

πi = 3 f

and aggregate profits equal
(26)

Π =3

(1 − τ v )tf
.
8

In contrast to the environment in which price discrimination is prohibited, the use of a tax
to achieve the optimal amount of product diversity will increase economic rents, in this
model by 41.5 percent.
4.2

Flexible Technology
Now consider situations in which firms adopt flexible technologies. Recall that

this means that the firms can customize their products to the precise requirements of their
customers: in a purely spatial context it is equivalent to the firm controlling and
potentially charging for delivery of the product to its consumers.
We need first to identify the price equilibrium that will result. Consider a
consumer whose most preferred product attribute is between firm i and i+1 “distance” z
15

from firm i such that this consumer is located nearer to firm i than firm i+1. Competition
between firms i and i+1 drives the price down to the point at which firm i+1 cannot break
even. If firm i+1 quotes a price p(z) to this consumer then, given an ad valorem tax rate
of τv and a specific tax of τs, firm i+1 receives post-tax revenues of p(z)(1 - τv) - τs and
this must be no less than costs c + r(1/N – z). The Nash equilibrium price that firm i
charges to consumer z with Bertrand competition is the minimum price firm i+1 can
quote, giving firm i’s equilibrium price schedule for consumers between firms i and i+1
as:

(27)

1

c + τ s + r − z 
N

pi (z ) =
1 − τv

 1 
z ∈ 0,
 2 N 

Equation (27) differs from equation (18) in that the cost of customization (r) is now
included in the tax base whereas in equation (18) the utility loss was not taxable.
Otherwise, the logic leading to equation (27) is the same as the logic leading to equation
(18).
It follows that firm i’s profit is
(28)

π i (s ) = 2 ∫

1 2N

0

( pi (z )(1 − τ v ) − c − τ s − r.s )ds − f

=

r
−f.
2N 2

This is precisely the same as the profit that firm i earns when all tax rates are zero. It
follows that when firms operate flexible technologies and are allowed to price
discriminate, neither ad valorem nor specific taxes have any impact on product variety.
All taxes are passed on in full to consumers. In other words, since the producer price at
pi ( z ) = c + τ s + r (1 N − z ) and N is independent of τv, there is
each consumer location is ~
no direct or indirect effect of ad valorem taxes on producer prices.

16

What about the equilibrium number of basic products that will be established? By
the same argument as in section 3 we know that with spatial contestability the
equilibrium location configuration is such that all incumbents just break even. By
contrast, with spatial non-contestability it must be that an entrant, who gains a market
share 1/2N and profits of one-quarter those of the incumbents, just fails to break even. It
follows from (28) that the equilibrium number of product variants in these two cases is
(29)

N dSC (r ) =

r
2f

N dSNC (r ) =

r
8f

With spatial contestability there are too many basic products and with spatial noncontestability there are too few.
Much more fundamentally, an important implication of equations (28) and (29) is
that government has lost the ability to use commodity taxes to move the industry to the
optimal number of firms. Some other instrument will be needed but, as can be seen from
(29) the options available to policy makers are limited. Equilibrium product variety is a
function solely of customization costs, fixed costs and, implicitly, re-anchoring costs.
Table 2 summarizes our analytical results with respect to the equilibrium degree
of product variety and the ad valorem tax rate needed to generate the socially optimal
product variety for markets where firms may price discriminate. Only if the technology
is designated and re-anchoring is costless is it optimal to levy an ad valorem tax to
achieve desired product variety. If re-anchoring is prohibitively costly, then a subsidy is
required. More striking is the result with flexible technology. Now tax policy is
completely ineffective for achieving optimal product variety. Given the likely growth in
importance of flexible technologies, this is a troubling result.

17

Table 2. Product Variety and Optimal Ad Valorem Tax Rates:
Price Discrimination
τ*υ
Technology
Contestability
N* - N0
SC
+
50.0%
Designated
SNC
-100.0%
SC
+
NA
Flexible
SNC
NA
5.

Policy Implications and Conclusions

When regulations prohibiting price discrimination are rigidly enforced it is
apparent that there is always excessive product variety in the absence of commodity
taxes, no matter the ease with which firms can re-anchor their product specifications (the
degree of spatial contestability) and whether or not firms adopt flexible technologies.
The primary impact of such regulations is to protect firms against selective price cuts and
so allow the firms to maintain higher prices than would be the case with price
discrimination. This in turn leads to greater product variety than is socially desirable. In
these circumstances, no matter the technological choices of firms, specific taxes can be
used to generate tax revenues while ad valorem taxes can be used to affect market
structure. All that changes with technology and re-anchoring costs are the magnitudes of
the tax rates needed to generate the desired market structure and target tax revenues.
When it is expensive for firms to change product design and image, prices are higher and
product variety lower, as a result of which the authorities need lower unit taxes and
specific taxes in order to attain desired revenue/market structure targets.
Deregulation that leaves firms free to price discriminate changes matters
significantly. No matter whether firms adopt designated or flexible manufacturing
techniques, it is apparent that with price discrimination the ease with which firms can reanchor the characteristics of their products “matters” for market structure and the design
18

of commodity taxation policy. With designated or inflexible technologies it is still
possible to assign instruments – unit taxes to revenue generation and ad valorem taxes to
structural objectives – but it is no longer the case that the market will always support
excessive product variety in the absence of taxes.
If firms employ designated technologies, spatial non-contestability in the presence
of sophisticated pricing also differs from spatial contestability in allowing for the
presence of rents in equilibrium. Ad valorem taxation will appropriate some of those
rents to the extent that it reduces the number of firms in equilibrium. If price
discrimination occurs, however, the optimal tax increases the number of firms and so
increases aggregate rents in this market. This indicates the potential gains that arise from
the ability to tax rents directly in non-contestable markets when price discrimination is
allowed.
While we have dealt analytically with the two extremes – of zero and prohibitive
re-anchoring costs – we can use Norman and Thisse (1999) to conclude more generally
that the minimum sustainable degree of product variety is an inverse function of reanchoring costs. In other words, when re-anchoring is relatively inexpensive a positive
ad valorem tax is necessary to achieve the optimal market structure. By contrast, when it
is relatively expensive for firms to re-anchor their products they are able to make binding
commitments to product specifications that deter entry sufficiently for a subsidy to be
needed to attain the socially optimal market structure.
What we need are observable signals of the degree of spatial contestability. Some
obvious candidates can be suggested. High initial entry costs, a high degree of product
complexity and quality and high advertising expenditures – particularly those intended to
build brand and corporate image – all point to a lack of spatial contestability.
19

Matters are even worse with flexible manufacturing systems. It remains the case
that the ease with which firms can re-anchor their basic products is important in
determining whether or not product variety is excessive. However, now we find that
commodity taxes can no longer be used to affect market structure. These taxes are passed
on in full to consumers leaving no direct or indirect incidence on firms. If part of the
motivation for deregulation was the belief that the tax system could be used to achieve
optimal market structure, then policy analysts need to examine carefully the ease with
which firms can customize or personalize their product offerings. Moreover, our analysis
adds a further dimension to the current debate on taxation of Internet transactions. We
noted in the introduction that modern developments in e-commerce allow firms to
personalize or “version” their services in much the same manner that flexible
manufacturing systems do. Our analysis then implies that any attempt to use commodity
taxes to attain structural objectives in Internet-based markets is doomed to failure.
An alternative possibility can be suggested. The equilibrium that we have
identified with price discrimination and spatial non-contestability is the minimum
packing degree of product variety. We also indicated, however, that the market can
support as an equilibrium any degree of product variety between this minimum packing
and the maximum packing that zero re-anchoring cost generates. What this implies is that
if policy can be formulated to encourage entry in emerging markets it may be possible to
gain an outcome that is nearer to the social optimum even when commodity taxes are
largely ineffective.

20

References
Eaton, B. Curtis and Schmitt, Nicolas. "Flexible Manufacturing and Market Structure."
American Economic Review, 1994, 84(4), pp. 875-88.
Eaton, B. Curtis and Wooders, Myrna Holtz. "Sophisticated Entry in a Model of
Spatial Competition." RAND Journal of Economics, 1985, 16(2), pp. 282-97.
Kats, Amoz. "More on Hotelling's Stability in Competition." International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 1995, 13(1), pp. 89-93.
Kay, John A. and Keen, Michael J. "How Should Commodities Be Taxed?" European
Economic Review, 1983, 23(3), pp. 339-58.
Norman, George and Thisse, Jacques F. "Technology Choice and Market Structure:
Strategic Aspects of Flexible Manufacturing." Journal of Industrial Economics,
1999, 47, pp. 345-72.
Norman, George and Thisse, Jacques-Francois. "Product Variety and Welfare under
Tough and Soft Pricing Regimes." The Economic Journal, 1996, 106(434), pp.
76-91.
Novshek, William. "Equilibrium in Simple Spatial (or Differentiated Product) Models."
Journal of Economic Theory, 1980, 22(2), pp. 313-26.
Salop, Steven C. "Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods." Bell Journal of
Economics, 1979, 10, pp. 141-56.
Stellin, Susan. "Internet Companies Learn How to Personalize Service," The New York
Times. New York:, 2000.
U.S. Office of Technology Assessment. "Computerized Manufacturing Automation:
Employment, Education and the Workplace,"
Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office,, 1984.

21

