                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ANOTHER LOOK AT THE NEW YORK CITY
                             SCHOOL VOUCHER EXPERIMENT

                                             Alan B. Krueger
                                                 Pei Zhu

                                          Working Paper 9418
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9418


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2002




We thank Daniel Mayer, David Myers and Christina Tuttle for answering many of our questions and
providing data. We have also benefited from helpful comments from Joshua Angrist, David Card, Alan
Gerber, Donald Green, Jean Grossman, Bo Honore, Larry Katz, Jens Ludwig, Lisa Markman, Derek Neal,
Cecilia Rouse, Jack Stenner and seminar participants at Duke, the University of Virginia and Yale.
Financial support was provided by the Princeton University Industrial Relations Section. This paper was
prepared for the “Conference on Randomized Experimentation in the Social Sciences,” Yale University,
August 20, 2002. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Alan B. Krueger and Pei Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given
to the source.
Another Look at the New York City School Voucher Experiment
Alan B. Krueger and Pei Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 9418
December 2002
JEL No. I2

                                            ABSTRACT

        This paper reexamines data from the New York City school choice program, the largest and
best implemented private school scholarship experiment yet conducted. In the experiment, low-
income public school students in grades K-4 were eligible to participate in a series of lotteries for
a private school scholarship in May 1997. Data were collected from students and their parents at
baseline, and in the Spring of each of the next three years. Students with missing baseline test scores,
which encompasses all those who were initially in Kindergarten and 11 percent of those initially in
grades 1-4, were excluded from previous analyses of achievement, even though these students were
tested in the follow-up years. In principle, random assignment would be expected to lead treatment
status to be uncorrelated with all baseline characteristics. Including students with missing baseline
test scores increases the sample size by 44 percent. For African American students, the only group
to show a significant, positive effect of vouchers on achievement in past studies, the difference in
average follow-up test scores between the treatment group (those offered a voucher) and control
group (those not offered a voucher) becomes statistically insignificant at the .05 level and much
smaller if the full sample is used. In addition, the effect of vouchers is found to be sensitive to the
particular way race/ethnicity was defined. Previously, race was assigned according to the
racial/ethnic category of the child's mother. If children with a Black (non-Hispanic) father are added
to the sample of children with a Black (non-Hispanic) mother, the effect of vouchers is smaller and
statistically insignificant at conventional levels.



Alan B. Krueger                                 Pei Zhu
Economics Department                            Economics Department
Princeton University                            Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                             Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                        pzhu@princeton.edu
akrueger@princeton.edu
         Now that the Supreme Court has ruled in the Zelman case that public funds may

be used to support vouchers to enroll children in private religious schools, many states,

school districts and parents will seriously consider the desirability of school vouchers.

This decision naturally depends on many factors, not least of which is whether school

vouchers are likely to raise student achievement. The best currently available evidence

on the effect of school vouchers on students’ performance is from a series of three

randomized experiments conducted in Washington, D.C., Dayton, OH and New York

City by Paul Peterson and his collaborators. This paper reexamines evidence from the

New York City voucher experiment, which was conducted by Mathematica Policy

Research and the Program on Education Policy and Governance at Harvard University.

         The New York City experiment was selected because it is the only one of the

three experiments for which data have been made available to outside researchers. Two

additional reasons argue for a detailed evaluation of the New York experiment, however.

First, the New York experiment is the best documented of the three experiments, and had

the lowest attrition rate, highest voucher take-up rate, and largest sample size. Second,

New York is the only one of the three cities to show significant gains in test scores for

voucher recipients relative to non-recipients for African American students at the

conclusion of the experiment.1 In all three experiments, there is no significant difference

in student performance between those offered a voucher and the control group for other

racial and ethnic groups, or overall.




1
 See Howell and Peterson (2002), Table 6-3. In Washington, vouchers had a statistically insignificant,
negative effect on Black students’ scores after three years; in Dayton, vouchers had a positive effect that
was statistically insignificant at the 0.10 level holding constant family background controls (but significant
at the 0.10 level without family background controls) in the second and final year of the experiment.
           The New York City school choice experiment worked as follows.2 In February

1997, the School Choice Scholarships Foundation (SCSF), a private foundation, offered

1,300 scholarships worth up to $1,400 a year for three years to children from low-income

families (i.e., qualified for free lunch) who were enrolled in Kindergarten through fourth

grade in New York City public schools. Some 11,105 eligible students applied for a

scholarship between February and late April 1997. Recipients were selected in a series of

lotteries in May 1997, and began attending private schools the next fall. Mathematica

randomly selected the students offered vouchers (subject to the SCSF requirement that 85

percent of recipients be from public schools in the bottom half of the city-wide test score

distribution) and a control group from the eligible applicants. About three quarters of the

students who were offered vouchers used them in at least one year; these students

overwhelmingly attended religious schools.3 Information from the students and their

parents was collected prior to the lottery and in the spring of each of the ensuing three

years. Base weights were constructed so the students in the sample were representative

of the pool of eligible applicants (which had 70 percent of students from schools with

below-median scores), and the weights were subsequently adjusted for attrition each year.

           Students were given the Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS) at baseline and in the

spring of each of the three follow-up years. A decision was made not to test the cohort of

Kindergarten students applying for scholarships for first grade at baseline, however.

(Henceforth, the five cohorts of students in different grades will be referred to by their

grade level at baseline.) The Kindergarten cohort was nonetheless given follow-up ITBS

tests, along with other students, when they were in grades 1, 2 and 3. In addition, about


2
    See Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002) and Hill, Rubin and Thomas (2000) for further details.
3
    Very few of the controls attended private school.


                                                       2
11 percent of students initially in grades 1-4 lacked baseline scores.4 These students were

also given the ITBS in the three follow-up waves. The sample weights do not attempt to

adjust for missing baseline scores.

         A contribution of our paper is that we include students with missing baseline

scores in much of our analysis. Previous analyses of achievement omitted students with

missing baseline test data.5 Howell and Peterson (2002), for example, report, “A handful

of additional families were offered vouchers, but they were not included in the evaluation

for lack of baseline [test] information.” Because of random assignment, however,

estimates are unbiased even without conditioning on baseline information, so there is an

efficiency loss from excluding these students entirely. For the subsample with baseline

scores, omitting the baseline score only trivially affects the estimated treatment effect, as

one would expect with random assignment. Including students with missing baseline test

data increases the sample size by 44 percent in the third and final follow-up year; nearly

30% of those with missing baseline scores were in grades 1-4 when the experiment

started and should have had baseline scores. An argument can be made that including

students with missing baseline scores – both those in the Kindergarten cohort and those in

the other cohorts – is desirable because the weights make no provision for sample

exclusion due to missing baseline scores, and, more importantly, because using a sample

that encompasses more grade levels enhances the generalizability of the results.


4
  This is in addition to students who had scores of 0 on the baseline test – of the 1,851 students with
baseline scores, 199 (10.7%) received a zero score in reading and 324 (17.5%) received a zero score in
math; 97 (5.2%) received a zero on both exams.
5
  When Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002) examine outcomes such as parental satisfaction, however,
they include observations on students without baseline test data. It is unclear whether Howell and Peterson
(2002) include or exclude students with missing baseline tests when they study parental responses. Their
Table 2-3 reports that they include students entering grades 1-4, but that apparently is a misprint, as their
sample includes students entering grades 2-5. Nevertheless, we could only replicate some of their results
based on the parental survey if we include the Kindergarten cohort.


                                                      3
        For African American students, the estimated effect of being offered a voucher is

much weaker if students with missing baseline scores are included in the analysis. In the

third follow-up year, for example, the estimated effect of being offered a voucher on

composite test scores is 2.78 percentile points (t = 1.65) if baseline test scores are

dropped from the model and the larger sample is used; controlling for baseline covariates

other than test scores, the effect is 2.12 points with a t-ratio of 1.27.6 For comparison,

Mayer, Peterson and Myers report a coefficient of 5.5 points with a t-ratio of 3.42.

Results are also weaker in the first two follow-up years if students with missing baseline

scores are included in the sample. These findings raise doubts about the robustness of

earlier findings of a significant positive effect of offering vouchers on test scores for

African American students.

        In the next section, we discuss and evaluate the random assignment procedures in

more detail. In the following section we explore the sensitivity of the results to including

and excluding students without baseline scores, and examine differences in the treatment

effect across cohorts.

        Although results for the larger sample encompassing students with and without

baseline scores cast doubt on the inference that vouchers had a positive impact on Black

students’ test scores, we explore reasons why vouchers might have been more effective at

raising scores for Black students than for other students in the grade 1-4 cohorts. Results

presented in Section 4 suggest that differential characteristics of the initial public schools

Black and non-Black students attended are not responsible for any differential effect by

race, even in the sample analyzed by Howell and Peterson.


6
 These estimates control for 30 dummies indicating the original strata students were placed in for random
assignment. The definition of the strata is described in detail below.


                                                    4
        Indeed, the data suggest that race itself independently affects the gain from

vouchers. This leads us to closely examine the particular definition of race used in the

experiment. There is no universally accepted definition of race. Mathematica assigned

students to a racial/ethnic group based on a single question on the parental survey that

asked respondents to select only one of the following categories for the mother or female

guardian: Black/African American (non-Hispanic), White (non-Hispanic), Puerto Rican,

Dominican, Other Hispanic, etc. Students were assigned the mother’s race/ethnicity,

regardless of the father’s race or ethnicity. Thus, if a student is reported as having a

Black mother and a Hispanic father, he or she was classified as Black. If the same

student had a Black father and Hispanic mother, however, he or she would have been

classified as Hispanic. Arguably, father’s race is also relevant. If we augment the sample

to include students for whom either parent is classified as Black/African American (non-

Hispanic), the effect of offering a voucher on the composite score in year three falls to

1.52 points with a t-ratio of 1.04. So in the broader sample the estimated effect of

offering vouchers to students with a Black parent is small and statistically insignificant.

        Throughout the paper, we focus mainly on intent-to-treat estimates; that is, the

impact of offering students a voucher on their test performance, as opposed to the effect

of attending private school on test performance. We focus on intent-to-treat estimates

because offering a voucher – as opposed to compelling students to switch to private

school -- is the policy decision that is most relevant, and because there is a cleaner

statistical interpretation of the intent-to-treat estimates in this case. Nevertheless, the

effect of attending a private school for varying lengths of time is also of interest. In

Section 5 we present Instrumental Variables results that estimate the impact of the




                                               5
number of years in private school on student achievement. These results differ from

those emphasized by Howell and Peterson (2002), who examine the effect of attending

private school for three full years, and implicitly make strong assumptions about the

effect of switching to private school on achievement for those who attend private school

for fewer than three years.


1. Randomization

       The procedures used to randomly assign students to treatment and control status,

and select control group members for follow up, are described in Hill, Rubin and Thomas

(2000). Because multiple children from many families applied for scholarships, and it

was desired to assign all family members to the same treatment status, students were

assigned to control and treatment groups in a lottery in which families were the unit of

observation. Two methods of random assignment were used.

       Briefly, for students from 1,000 families a Propensity Match Pairs Design

(PMPD) was used, and for students from 960 families a Stratified Block design was used.

The PMPD method, which introduces considerable complexity to the design, was used

because in the first lottery many more potential control group members were available to

be followed up than was money to follow them up. Rather than select a random sample

of the controls to follow up, it was decided that it would be more efficient to follow up

the subset that, in some sense, is most alike to treatment group members. Consequently,

after the treatment group was randomly selected, the members of the control group who

were followed up were selected by estimating a propensity score model to identify those

with attributes that were closest to members of the treatment group.




                                             6
         According to Hill, Rubin and Thomas (2000), variables used in this model

included, in order of importance: family size, a dummy indicating above versus below

median schools, grade level, and initial test scores.7 Students with missing data were also

included in the selection. Once the propensity score model was estimated, a matched pair

for each treatment group family was selected by choosing the nearest available neighbor

Mahalanobis match from among those with propensity scores close to that of each

treatment group member.

         The Stratified Block design was much simpler. Samples of screened applicants

were invited to participate in four sessions at which baseline data were collected and

ITBS tests were administered. In these lotteries, by design approximately 85 percent of

the invitees were from schools with below the city median test score. Treatments and

controls were randomly assigned in four lotteries, and a random sample of participants

were included in the follow-up sample. Each of these lotteries constitutes a block.

         One can define 30 mutually exclusive “random assignment strata”: 5 lottery

blocks (PMPD block plus 4 stratified blocks) x 2 school types (above and below city

median test) x 3 family size groups (1, 2 or 3 or more students). Assignment is random

within these strata. After the lotteries were held, Mathematica discovered that some

families had misreported their family size and were thus placed in the “wrong” strata;

revised strata were created with the latest family size information. Nevertheless,

assignment to treatment status is random within the original strata that were actually used

to apportion the sample at the time of random assignment. Peterson and Howell (2002)


7
  Other variables included, in order of importance, were: ethnicity, mother’s education, participation in
special education, participation in a gifted and talented program, language spoken at home, welfare receipt,
food stamp receipt, mother’s employment status, educational expectations, number of siblings, and an
indicator for whether the mother was foreign born.


                                                     7
and Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002), however, controlled for dummies

indicating membership in the revised strata, not the actual strata used to make

assignments. Unless otherwise specified, our results condition on the actual strata that

were used when random assignments were made. Fortunately, as shown below, the

choice of original or revised strata has relatively little impact on the results.

        Because assignments were over families, not students, and children from the same

family tend to have correlated outcomes, we compute bootstrap standard errors that use

families instead of individual students as the unit for resampling to allow for dependence

across family members.8 (Forty-six percent of students in the sample had at least one

sibling in the sample as well.) Moulton (1990) provides a nice illustration of inference

problems that can arise from ignoring correlated errors.

        Table 1 reports the mean of several baseline characteristics for the treatment and

control groups for the full sample, separately for Black and Latino students, and

disaggregated by cohort for Black students. Because random assignment was

implemented within strata, regressions were estimated to condition on the 30 original

randomization strata, and conditional treatment-control differences and t-tests are

reported as well. For the overall sample, the results indicate small and statistically

insignificant differences between the treatment and control groups. For example, the

conditional t-test for the difference in the mean baseline composite test score between

treatments and controls is only -0.63. Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002) present

similar results. Hill, Rubin and Thomas (2000) report treatment-control differences by

PMPD versus Stratified Block strata, and find slightly better balance in the PMPD strata,

but in both cases there are not systematic differences between the treatments and controls.




                                               8
         In the first-year follow-up report, however, Peterson, Myers and Howell (1998)

reported highly statistically significant differences in baseline test scores between the

treatment and control group, with control group members scoring significantly higher on

both the math and reading exams. Evidently, this was a result of inaccurate weights. The

baseline weights did not adjust correctly for the size of the underlying assignment strata.9

In the subsequent reports, the baseline weights were revised “to include post-stratification

adjustments,” and the baseline differences in test scores were no longer statistically

significant. The complexity of the design of the experiment probably contributed to the

initially inaccurate baseline weights, as the average discrepancy between the initial and

corrected baseline weights was 316 percent for the PMPD strata and only 24 percent for

the Stratified Block strata. 10

         The results in Table 1 suggest that the assignment groups were well balanced, as

one would expect with random assignment. One exception, however, is the oldest cohort

of African American students. For this group, at baseline the treatments’ mean score is

higher than the controls’, and the treatments are more likely to come from higher income

families with better educated mothers. For African Americans as a whole, however, the

differences in baseline characteristics are typically insignificant.

1.1 Precision

         The PMPD design was intended to reduce sampling variance and improve the

balance between treatments and controls. Did the precision of the estimates improve?



8
  The sample was drawn with replacement 10,000 times to compute the bootstrap standard errors.
9
  Email communication from David Myers of Mathematica, February 5, 2001.
10
   Just before the completion of this draft, we were informed by David Myers that, as a result of one of our
queries, Mathematica had discovered a problem with the revised baseline weights that affected a small
number of cases. Mathematica plans to issue new weights in the future. We plan to utilize the revised,
revised weights when they become available.


                                                     9
Table 2 reports separate estimates of the treatment effect and associated standard errors

for the two methods of random assignment. The treatment effect in this instance is the

average impact of being offered a voucher on students’ test scores, measured in National

Percentile Ranks (NPR’s). Formally, the treatment effect, ", is computed by estimating

the following regression model for each follow-up year:

(1)            Yif = " Zf + *jif + ,if,

where Yif is the composite test score (that is, average NPR on reading and math), Zf is a

dummy variable that equals one if the student was offered a voucher and zero if not, *jif is

a fixed effect for the randomization strata (j = 1, …, 30), and ,if is an error term that is

possibly correlated among members of the same family. The subscript i indexes students

and f indexes families. The strata fixed effects are controlled for by including 30 dummy

variables indicating each original randomization stratum.

       We also present another set of estimates in which the regression model is

augmented to control for baseline math and reading test scores, using as a sample the

subset of students who have baseline test scores. Formally:

(2)        Yif = " Zf + (MM if + (RR if + *jif + ,if,

where M is the math NPR score, R is the reading NPR score, and the (’s are coefficients.

       Estimates of " for the full sample are in Panel A, and for African Americans in

Panel B. The rows of the table indicate whether the underlying regression model

controlled for baseline test scores or omitted baseline scores and used a larger sample.

The second to last column reports the standard error in the Stratified Block design

relative to the standard error in the PMPD design. Because the sample sizes differ




                                              10
slightly, in the last column the relative standard errors are scaled by the ratio of the

square root of the relative sample sizes.11

        For the full sample, in most cases the standard error of the estimated treatment

effect is about 10 percent larger in the Stratified Block design than in the PMPD design.

The adjustment for sample size has little effect on this ratio. The treatment effect is

insignificantly different from zero under either design. Thus, there is a small gain in

power from the PMPD design.

        Unexpectedly, for the subsample of black students the standard errors are not

consistently smaller in the PMPD design than in the Stratified Block design. This result

is surprising because, as Hill, Rubin and Thomas point out, analyses of subgroups are

expected to have more power in the PMPD design because matching should lead to a

more equal representation of subgroups in the treatment and control groups.

        One could question whether the gain in precision from the PMPD random

assignment procedure was worth the cost of added complexity. For practical purposes,

the difference in precision between the two designs is fairly small, even in the full

sample: in year 3, for example, the width of a 95% confidence interval increases trivially,

from +/-3.1 points in the PMPD design to +/-3.5 points in the Stratified Block design. If

the complexity of the experimental design contributed to the incorrect initial inference

about the baseline difference in test scores (because of inaccurate weights), then in this

case the PMPD design would seem to have been hardly worth the gain in power. This

likelihood seems to us to underscore Cochran and Cox’s (1957) advice: “A good working

rule is to use the simplest experimental design that meets the needs of the occasion.”

11
  At baseline, the sample size was 1,341 for the PMPD sample and 1,325 for the Stratified Block sample.
The sample sizes in Table 2 differ because of attrition and missing follow-up test data. If attrition is


                                                   11
2. Sensitivity of Earlier Results

        Next we explore the sensitivity of the estimated impact of offering a voucher to

controlling or not controlling for baseline scores, and to including the cohort of students

who were in Kindergarten when the experiment began. The first set of columns in Table

3a report estimates of equation (2): a regression of the test score NPR on a dummy

indicating whether the student was randomly selected to be offered a voucher, baseline

test scores, and 30 dummy variables indicating the actual stratum the family was

allocated to for random assignment. The coefficient (") on the voucher offer dummy,

also known as the intent-to-treat (ITT) estimate, is presented in the table, along with its

standard error and t-ratio. Because it is useful to compare our results to previous studies,

in Table 3b we report corresponding results for models that control for the revised

randomization strata. To exploit the experiment, it is more appropriate to control for the

strata that were used at the time of random assignment, although the results are not very

different in either case.

        The first set of results in Table 3b exactly replicate those in Mayer, Peterson and

Myers, et al., Tables 20-22. As they found, for Black students the results indicate

significantly higher test scores for those offered a voucher than for the controls. For

Latino students the voucher effect is negative but statistically insignificant. The results

are very similar in Table 3a, which condition on the original randomization strata.

        The middle set of columns report estimates for models that use the same sample

of students – i.e., those who were in grades 1-4 and have baseline test data – but omit the

baseline test scores (i.e., equation (1)). Omitting the baseline scores has a trivial effect on


endogenous to the design, then the unadjusted comparison is more appropriate.


                                                   12
the ITT estimate, as one would expect given random assignment. For the year three

composite score for African Americans in Table 3a, for example, the estimated treatment

effect is 5.2 points controlling for baseline scores and 5.1 points without controlling for

baseline scores. Similar stability is found in Table 3b, with the revised strata controls.

         The third set of columns report estimates of the same model for the largest

possible sample, including students initially in Kindergarten (all of whom were not tested

at baseline) and those initially in grades 1-4 with missing baseline scores.12 Seventy-one

percent of the additional observations are from the Kindergarten cohort, and 29 percent

from the other cohorts. The results for African American students are notably weaker in

the larger sample. In year three, for example, the estimated treatment effect in Table 3a

falls about in half, to 2.78 points (s.e. = 1.68), with a t-ratio that is about equal to the

threshold value for statistical significance at the 0.10 level.13 By subject, the effect on the

reading test is even smaller, while the treatment effect for the mathematics test is larger

and statistically significant at the 0.05 level.

         The notably smaller estimates when students with missing baseline scores are

included are primarily due to the inclusion of students who were in Kindergarten at

baseline, not those who were in grades 1-4. If the Kindergarten cohort is excluded from

the sample in the model in Table 3a that omits baseline scores, the treatment effect in the

composite score regression for African Americans is 4.56 (s.e. = 1.83; N = 577).

         Interestingly, the standard errors are only trivially different between the estimates

that condition on baseline test scores and those that do not but use a larger sample. In the

12
  Note that the cohort in Kindergarten at baseline was in grade 1, 2 or 3 during the follow ups, so testing
them in the follow-up waves presumably did not pose greater challenges than testing the other cohorts
when they were in those grades.




                                                     13
third follow up, for example, the standard error for the treatment effect on African

Americans’ reading scores is 0.05 points smaller using the full sample and omitting

baseline scores than it is in the subsample that controls for baseline scores, and for math

scores it is 0.02 points larger when baseline scores are omitted. The reason for this result

is that the reduction in residual variance from controlling for baseline scores is roughly

offset by the gain in precision from having a larger sample.

         One can improve the precision of the estimates in Table 3 by controlling for

baseline information other than test scores. Table 4 presents results from models that

control for the original 30 randomization strata, cohort (i.e., grade at baseline), gender,

log family income, mother’s years of schooling, indicators for whether the mother works

full- or part-time, an indicator for whether the student has had special education, an

indicator for whether the student has been in a gifted or talented class, student’s age, and

dummies for English spoken at home, mother born in the United States, family welfare

receipt, mother resided in residence for more than one year, and whether the mother’s

religion was Catholic.14 The first set of columns present results from models that also

control for baseline test scores, for the subsample of observations with baseline scores.

         Results shown in the second set of columns are based on the larger sample and

omit baseline test scores from the model. The treatment effect of vouchers is smaller in

these models. In year 3, for example, the impact of offering a voucher on the composite

score for African Americans is 2.12 NPR’s (t-ratio = 1.27). Again, the impact on math

scores is larger than the impact on reading scores.

13
   The conventional standard error in this case is 1.66, not very different than the one we compute, which
allows for within family correlated errors.




                                                    14
        Finally, it is possible to incorporate the information on baseline scores for those

who have it, and still use the larger sample. In particular, we created a dummy variable

that equals one if baseline scores are available and zero if they are missing.15 Define this

variable as D. We then interacted D with the baseline math and reading scores, which

imposes a value of zero for those with missing scores regardless of the values one would

have used to impute those scores. The following “hybrid” model was estimated using the

full sample of observations, both those with and without baseline scores:

(3) Yif = " Zf + (M MifyDif + (RR ifyDif + 8Dif + Xif’$ + Lcif + *jif + ,if,

where X is a vector of other baseline covariates, such as gender, mother’s education and

log family income, and Lc is a set of cohort fixed effects. This model has the effect of

controlling for baseline scores for students who have them, and not controlling for

baseline scores for student who lack them. Because baseline scores can be missing for

two distinct reasons – either students are in the Kindergarten cohort and not tested by

design or they are in the other cohorts and failed to comply with testing – controlling for

cohort dummies and D in the hybrid model removes differences between these groups.

        Results of estimating " from equation (3) without X-covariates (but with cohort

and lottery strata dummies) are reported in the third set of columns in Table 4, and with

additional X-covariates in the fourth set of columns of the table. Notice that the standard

errors from both hybrid models are smaller than those from the other models in the table.

The hybrid model with the additional X-covariates in the right-most set of columns, it

turns out, typically yields the most powerful estimates of the models we have considered.


14
   So as to not reduce the sample size, missing values of income and mother’s education were replaced by
their means, and dummy variables were included indicating whether income, mother’s education, students’
gender, mother’s employment status, and each of the other covariates were missing.
15
   It is never the case that math scores are missing and reading scores are available, or vice versa.


                                                  15
Controlling for baseline test scores when they are available results in a slightly higher

estimated effect of vouchers when the X-covariates are excluded. In the model without

the X-covariates, the year three impact of offering a voucher on the composite test scores

of African American students is just below the threshold for statistical significance at the

0.05 level. In the model with additional baseline covariates – which yields a slightly

more precise estimate -- the effect is somewhat smaller, 2.19 NPR’s, and not statistically

significant at the 0.10 level. This point estimate is less than half as large as the estimate

in Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002), and more precisely estimated.

2.1 To Control, or Not Control

         Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002, p. 9) give the following justification for

why they controlled for baseline test scores: “Baseline characteristics were included to

adjust for chance differences between the characteristics of treatment- and control-group

members and to increase the precision of the estimated impacts.” But because both sets

of estimates -- those with or those without baseline characteristics – give an unbiased

estimate of the treatment effect, only the latter rationale is potentially valid.16 Any

improvement in the estimates from controlling for covariates is fully reflected in the

sampling variance of the estimates.

         The key question then is whether including baseline covariates reduces the

residual variance by enough to justify the loss of degrees of freedom and the fact that, in

practice, some observations must be dropped from the sample because they have missing

baseline data. On this basis, there is little reason to chose between the estimates in Table

16
   Another way to see this is to note that if there is a chance difference in a baseline characteristic between
treatments and controls, there could also be an erroneous correlation (due to chance or misspecification)
between the baseline characteristic and the outcome variable that would sway the estimates if covariates are




                                                      16
3a that control for baseline test scores and the ones that do not. Both are unbiased with

about equal power. However, an advantage of estimates using the larger sample is that

the results potentially can be generalized to a broader population – namely, students

initially in grades K-4, as opposed to those in grades 1-4 without missing baseline data.

Moreover, estimates without baseline covariates are simple and transparent.

        Lastly, notice that equation (3) in the far right of Table 4, which incorporates the

baseline covariates for those who have them and still uses observations for those with

missing baseline data, provides the most precise estimates and pertains to grades K-4. An

argument can be made that, of the estimates presented so far, the most credence should be

placed in these estimates. As we explain in Section 4 below, however, we think the

sample of Black students used in Table 4 is still unnecessarily restrictive.

2.2 Cohort Interactions

        The results in Tables 3a,b and 4 suggest that including students who were enrolled

in Kindergarten at baseline in the sample qualitatively weakens the impact of school

vouchers on achievement scores of African American students. These students were in

grades 1-3 when the follow-up tests were administered (assuming they were not held

back), and were among the youngest students in the experiment. One possibility is that

vouchers are effective for older African American students, but not younger ones.

Mathematica (2000) raised this concern after the second-year follow-up study. Howell

and Peterson (2002; p. 222) strongly argue against this interpretation, however,

maintaining that “no decipherable pattern suggests that impacts vary by grade level.”

Our analysis of inter-cohort differences in treatment effects also suggests that the grade at


included. A correlation between treatment status and baseline covariates in an experiment is potentially
problematic regardless of whether baseline covariates are controlled in a regression.


                                                    17
which students are offered vouchers is unrelated to the magnitude of the treatment effect

in the third year of the experiment when we test the null hypothesis of any unrestricted

pattern of cohort effects, although we find some tendency for older students to have a

larger treatment effect when Kindergarten students are included in the sample and the

cohort-treatment-status interaction is constrained to be linear.

       The treatment effect on the third-year composite test score for each cohort can be

viewed in the Addendum at the bottom of Table 1. The treatment effects are not uniform,

and it is particularly large for the 4th grade cohort, but they individually have large

standard errors. To conduct a formal test for inter-cohort variability in treatment effects,

we interacted five dummy variables indicating membership in one of the initial grade

cohorts with the treatment status dummy in the models in Table 4, and conducted an F-

test of the null hypothesis that the treatment effects were equal for all cohorts. In the

third follow-up year, there was no more than a chance occurrence that the treatment

effect differed across the cohorts for African American students. For example, in the

model for the composite score in the far right of Table 4, the p-value for an F-test of

uniform treatment effects is 0.21. This F-test puts no structure on the pattern of

interactions and does not depend on first screening the pattern of coefficients to test a

particular alternative hypothesis, so in this sense it is “hands above the table.”

       Observing the pattern of treatment effects by cohort, however, it appears that

there is a tendency for the older cohorts to have larger coefficients than younger cohorts.

If we perform a simple test for differential cohort effects that recognizes the order of the

cohorts by including an interaction between a student’s linear grade level at baseline (0,

1, 2, 3, 4) and the voucher offer dummy, as well as the voucher offer main effect, the p-




                                              18
value for a test of the interaction term in the most powerful model in Table 4 is 0.05 for

the composite score. Thus, there is some evidence that the treatment effect rises with the

entry grade of the cohort of African American students in the full sample, but it is not

overwhelming and it requires the imposition of a linear cohort-treatment interaction.

Moreover, it is unclear why the treatment effect would vary with age for African

American students but not Hispanic students.

2.3 Attrition

       One commonly voiced criticism of the voucher experiments is that attrition was

high, especially for the control group (e.g., Neal, 2002). The response rate in the third

year of the New York experiment was 68.8 percent for treatment group members and

64.6 percent for control group members in cohorts 1-4. The rates were slightly higher for

the Kindergarten cohort: 71.7 percent for treatments and 69.2 percent for controls.

Although, in principle, the follow-up sample weights adjust for attrition based on

observable characteristics, it is possible that those who exited the sample differ along

unobserved dimensions, and the average achievement in year three for non-responding

treatments and controls could be different than it was for respondents. Nonrandom

attrition that is correlated with treatment status would bias the weighted estimates.

       In results not reported here, we examined the impact of attrition in a couple of

different ways. First, we computed two-step normal selection correction estimates to

adjust for those with missing follow-up test scores. Second, we used the technique

employed in Krueger (1999) of carrying forward the last available test score for those

with missing data. We also used these techniques to adjust for students with scores of

zero. These adjustments typically led to only slightly smaller estimates of the effect of




                                             19
vouchers. Thus we conclude that nonrandom attrition was probably not a major problem

in the experiment.


3. The Relevance of Race and Residence

       Our interpretation of the results so far is that the impact of vouchers on

achievement for Black students in New York City is smaller and less robust than has

been previously acknowledged. Nevertheless, we examine reasons why there may have

been gains using the sample that displayed the largest impact, Black students in the grade

1-4 cohorts with baseline test data.

       The inference that African American students benefited academically from

scholarships to attend private school would be more credible if there were a compelling

explanation for why African American students benefited while other, equally poor

Hispanic and White students did not benefit. Howell and Peterson (2002) offer the

following ex post explanation: “African Americans, more than other groups, live in the

poorest, least attractive, and most dangerous communities within metropolitan regions.

… Precisely because African Americans suffer most under a system of public education

based on residency, they stand to benefit the most from the new education opportunities

that vouchers afford.”

       In short, they hypothesize that constrained residential choices for African

American families – but not Dominican or Puerto Rican families – account for the poor

performance of public schools attended by African American students. As a result,

African American students are disproportionately confined to public schools that under

perform vis-à-vis private schools. This is a plausible and potentially quite important




                                            20
hypothesis, with many striking implications.17 Indeed, if discrimination in the housing

market were responsible for the alleged poorer performance of Black students in public

school, then enforcing anti-discrimination laws could possibly be more effective at

raising achievement than school reform.

         Howell and Peterson’s hypothesis is testable. In particular, if differential

residential location and therefore differential school attendance explains the results, then

the minority of non-Black students who attend the same public schools as Black students

should benefit from being offered private school scholarships as much as Black students.

We find no support for this hypothesis.

         To test the hypothesis, we identified all the non-Black students in the sample who,

at the time of baseline, attended a public school that was also attended by a Black student

in the sample that year. In the third follow-up, a total of 470 non-Black students and 333

Black students in cohorts 1-4 came from overlapping baseline schools. We then adjusted

the sample weights for this subsample of non-Black students so that weighted counts

would correspond to the (weighted) distribution of Black students in the overlapping

schools. Consequently, we can produce results for a sample of non-Black students in the

experiment who attended the same distribution of schools as a subsample of Black

students in the experiment. If differential residence and school attendance patterns by

race are responsible for the differential effect of school vouchers, we would expect the

sample of non-Black students in this subsample to exhibit the same treatment effect of

vouchers as the Black students.




17
  One fact that is inconsistent with this hypothesis, however, is that, on average, the Hispanic students have
lower baseline test scores and lower family incomes than the Black, non-Hispanic students in the sample.


                                                     21
         This was not the case. If anything, the results point in the opposite direction. For

third year math scores, for example, the treatment effect of vouchers for the sample of

Blacks from overlapping schools is 5.47 (s.e. = 2.37) and for non-Black students is –3.27

(s.e. = 3.26).18 Even when attention is limited to the set of overlapping schools that

Black and non-Black students attended, the non-Black students do not appear to gain

from being offered a voucher; indeed, they do worse, and the differential treatment effect

is statistically significant, with a t-ratio of 2.17. In addition, we find an insignificant

effect if we interact the percent of students in the baseline school who are black (derived

from Common Core Data reported by schools) with the treatment status dummy for non-

Black or for Black students. These findings suggest that differential characteristics of the

initial public school that students with different racial backgrounds attended do not

account for any gain in test scores that Black students may have reaped from attending

private school.19

         This conclusion is a contrast to Krueger and Whitmore’s (2002) findings on racial

differences of the effect of class size. They find that the Black students benefited more

from attending smaller classes than White students, but when they estimate effects for

White students who attended the same mix of schools as Black students, the White

students benefited equally. They concluded, “These findings suggest that small classes

matter for Blacks because of something having to do with the schools they attend, rather

than something inherent to individual Black students per se.” In the case of New York


18
  These results control for baseline test scores and 30 strata dummies. Similar results arise if reading data
are analyzed, or if data from all five cohorts are used and baseline scores are dropped from the model. We
focus here on the older cohorts to give the hypothesis a stronger chance of being supported by the data.
19
  From examining administrative data on school characteristics and parental reports on the school
environments, Mayer, Myers and Tuttle (2002) similarly conclude, “Differences in school characteristics
do not appear to explain the differences in test scores between the African American and Latino controls.”


                                                     22
City school vouchers, if one accepts that there is an impact for Black students, something

about race itself would seem to be inherently part of the reason.


4. Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Black Mothers and Fathers

        If race matters, it is important to know how race is defined. Race is a social

construct that varies from survey to survey. In Howell and Peterson (2002), Black

students are defined as children whose mother or female guardian is reported as

Black/African American (non-Hispanic) in the parental survey. Specifically, the

Mathematica baseline survey asked respondents to “MARK ONLY ONE” of the

following racial/ethnic categories for each parent or guardian: “Black/African American

(non-Hispanic); White (non-Hispanic); Puerto Rican; Dominican; Other Hispanic”;

American Indian, Chinese, etc. Mathematica then coded a child’s race as Black if the

mother or female guardian responded “Black/African American (non-Hispanic)”.

Consequently, a child’s race and Hispanic ethnic origin are by definition mutually

exclusively in these data. This deviates from the Office of Management and Budget’s

guidelines (Statistical Policy Directive No. 15), which recommend separate questions for

race and ethnicity self-identification questions.20

        We find from the 1990 Census that in the New York metropolitan area 15 percent

of low-income (≤ $20,000) children age 5-14 whose race is reported as “Black, African

American or Negro” are also reported as Hispanic.21 And 28 percent of those who

indicate their ethnicity as Dominican indicate their race as Black/African American. A


20
   In other surveys, such as the National Job Corps Study, Mathematica has used the OMB format of asking
separate race and ethnicity questions.
21
   This is based on a sample of children living in the New York-Northeastern New Jersey Consolidated
Metropolitan Area.



                                                  23
total of 541 students whose race/ethnicity was classified as Dominican participated in the

voucher experiment, almost half as many as the number of non-Hispanic Blacks who

participated. Many of those who were categorized as Dominican probably would have

identified themselves as Black if the Census definition of race had been used in the study.

Because the treatment effect of vouchers was negative for students whose race was

classified as Dominican Republic, including Black Dominicans in the sample of Black

students would likely lead to smaller estimated treatment effects.

         Another problem is that the practice of assigning a child the race/ethnicity of his

or her mother irrespective of his or her father’s race is asymmetric and restrictive.22

Some countries, such as China, legally assign a child’s race based on the father’s race,

while others use the mother’s race, and still others allow families to choose. In part, race

may matter because society treats individuals with different skin tones differently (see,

e.g., Darity, Hamilton and Dietrich, 2001, Keith and Herring, 1991 and Scarr, et al.,

1977). If this is the case, then one could argue that treating mothers and fathers

symmetrically is more sensible than assigning race according to the mother’s race,

regardless of father’s race. Moreover, race was reported as Black for 85 percent of the

children with a Black father and a Hispanic mother present in the New York metropolitan

region according to a tabulation of the 1990 Census. Because most of the children with a

Black father who were not classified as Black in the Mathematica sample had a Hispanic

(possibly Black) mother, it is quite likely that these students would have been classified




22
  As an example of the types of problems created by this procedure, note that eight students in the data set
had a Black (non-Hispanic) father and were missing information on their mother’s race; these students were
classified as non-Black. In three of these cases, there is no indication the mother lived at home.



                                                    24
as Black had they or their parents been given the opportunity to report the race of the

child.

         In Table 5 we present results for the group of students for whom either parent’s

race/ethnicity is identified as Black/African American (non-Hispanic), which increases

the sample by about 10 percent. This is a broader definition of Black students’ race than

the one employed previously, although it still treats race and Hispanic origin as mutually

exclusive, contrary to the OMB guidelines. Notably, the results for this sample are

weaker than those in the original sample. In the full sample, including students with

missing baseline scores, the effect of offering a voucher on the third-year composite score

is quite small (1.52 NPR’s) and statistically insignificant at conventional levels (t-

ratio=1.04). To put this in context, note that the standard deviation of percentile ranks in

the national population is 28.9 (because percentiles are uniform), so the estimated effect

size is only 0.053 standard deviations. Moreover, if we interact treatment status with

three dummies indicating parents’ race (mother Black, father Black, both parents Black),

we do not reject that the treatment effect is the same for all three groups.23

         These results cast further doubt on the extent to which one can generalize

previous findings from the voucher experiment to the population of low-income Black

students. We would stress that the qualitatively different results in Table 5 stem from

two plausible changes from previous estimates: students with missing baseline scores are

included and parental race is treated symmetrically for assigning children’s race. We

regard the results in Table 5 as the most relevant estimates of the impact of offering


23
  The coefficients (with standard errors in parentheses) for the voucher-race interactions in the third model
of Table 5 are: 1.24 (1.72) for both parents Black (non-Hispanic); -1.14 (5.71) for father Black, mother
non-Black or Hispanic; and 2.22 (2.43) for mother Black, father non-Black or Hispanic. The p-value for an
F-test of the null hypothesis that the three effects are equal is 0.92.


                                                     25
private school vouchers on achievement for the broadest sample of Black elementary

school children. The finding that the results are so sensitive to these defensible changes

in the sample leads us to conclude that the provision of vouchers in New York City

probably had no more than a trivial effect on the average test performance of

participating Black students. Furthermore, if parents were not constrained to give a

mutually exclusive response to their race and ethnicity in a single question, contrary to

the OMB guidelines, the effect of vouchers for Black students of any ethnicity would

likely be even smaller.


5. Effect of Time in Private School – Instrumental Variables Estimates

       Although the ITT estimates of the effect of offering a student a voucher are of

much interest, another question concerns the effect of attending private school on student

achievement. Howell and Peterson (2002) and Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2002)

report Instrumental Variables (IV) estimates to estimate the impact of attending private

school on student achievement. Specifically, they create a dummy variable that equals

one if the student attended private school for three years, and zero otherwise. They then

use the voucher offer dummy as an instrument for private school attendance. Because the

voucher was randomly offered, this approach yields a consistent estimate of the

population parameter. (If there are heterogeneous treatment effects across students,

additional assumptions are necessary to interpret the parameter as the causal effect on

compliers; see Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996.) As Rouse (1997) and Mayer, Peterson

and Myers, et al. point out, if switching to private school for one or two years raises

(lowers) achievement, this approach will overstate (understate) the impact of attending

private school for three years versus not at all. Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. also



                                             26
present estimates where the endogenous regressor is a dummy indicating whether the

student ever attended private school.

        Intuitively, all the IV estimates involve scaling the ITT estimate emphasized

previously by the difference in some quantity between those offered and not offered a

voucher. To see this, note that if there are no covariates the IV estimate of the effect of

attending private school for three years, 2, has probability limit:

(4)         plim 2 = {E[Y | Z = 1] - E[Y | Z = 0]} / {E[P3 | Z = 1] - E[P3 | Z = 0]},

where Y is test scores, Z is a dummy that equals one if a voucher was offered and zero if

not, and P3 is a dummy variable that equals one if the student was enrolled in private

school for all three years of the experiment and zero otherwise. The numerator is the ITT

estimate. In a model in which attending private school for at least one year is the

endogenous regressor, the numerator is the same but the denominator is the treatment-

control difference in the probability of attending private school at least one year.

        An alternative approach is to treat the number of years in private school as the

relevant variable of interest. Assuming years in private school have a linear effect on

achievement, the equations of interest are:

(5) Qif = "0 + "1Zf + Xif’"2 + (jif + :if
(6) Yif = $0 + $1Qif + Xif’$2 + *jif + ,if,

where Qif is the number of years the student has spent in a private school up to that point

of the experiment, Zf is a dummy indicating whether the student was offered a voucher,

Xif is a vector of baseline covariates, Yif is the test score in the relevant follow-up year,

(jif and *jif are randomization strata fixed effects, and :if and ,if are equation errors.

Interest is in the parameter $1, which measures the marginal impact on performance of




                                              27
attending private school an additional year. An advantage of the linear model is that the

coefficient $1 can be compared in different years. Furthermore, for comparison to 2, an

estimate of the effect of attending private school for all three years is 3$1.

       Two-Stage Least Squares estimates of $1 using various samples are presented in

Table 6. Similar to our earlier findings, the results indicate that spending more time in

private school has a positive and statistically significant effect on achievement for

children of Black (non-Hispanic) mothers when the analysis is confined to those with

baseline test scores, but an insignificant effect in the larger samples. In the third follow-

up, the implied effect of attending a private school for three years is 6.7 points (t = 2.75)

in the sample with baseline test scores, and 3.5 points (t = 1.45) in the sample that is not

restricted to those with baseline scores. These effects are, respectively, 28 and 62 percent

smaller than the estimated impact of spending three years in a private school emphasized

by Howell and Peterson (2002; Table 6-3).

       The third set of columns in Table 6 use the race/ethnicity of the father as well as

the mother to delineate the samples. That is, as in Table 5, the sample of Black (non-

Hispanic) students includes children for whom either parent is reported as Black (non-

Hispanic). The sample of Latino students likewise includes students for whom either

parent is reported as Puerto Rican, Dominican, or other Hispanic. (These samples are not

mutually exclusive, as is normally the case with race and ethnicity.) For students with a

Black (non-Hispanic) parent, the estimated effect of attending a private school for three

years is 2.3 points (t=1.04), 75 percent smaller than Peterson and Howell’s estimate for

students with a Black mother.




                                              28
6. Conclusion

        Our reanalysis of the New York City school voucher experiment suggests that the

positive effect of vouchers on the achievement of African American students emphasized

by previous researchers is much less robust than commonly acknowledged. Most

importantly, if the wave of students who were enrolled in Kindergarten when the

experiment began is included in the sample, the effect of vouchers is greatly attenuated.

As the results in Table 5 indicate, treating mother and father’s race symmetrically further

attenuates the effect of school vouchers for African American children. The evidence is

stronger that the availability of private school vouchers raised achievement on math than

on reading exams after three years, but both effects are relatively small if the sample

includes students with missing baseline test scores and students who have at least one

Black (non-Hispanic) parent.

        Below is a list of several issues about experimental program evaluation that we

believe our analysis raises:

y Researchers are often unsure as to whether they should or should not control for

baseline characteristics when a treatment is randomly assigned. We would advise that

key results be presented both ways, with and without baseline characteristics (and with

and without varying samples).24 In expectation, the treatment effect should not change; if

it does, more work is needed to understand why.

y Controlling for baseline characteristics can be justified if their inclusion increases the

precision of the key estimates. As a practical matter, however, controlling for baseline


24
   This is often done in the academic economics literature. For example, Angrist, Bettinger, and Bloom, et
al. (2003) present results with and without baseline controls in their analysis of a natural experiment
involving vouchers in Colombia. Researchers are on stronger grounds for presenting results that do not
condition on baseline covariates when they have an actual randomized experiment.


                                                    29
characteristics tends to reduce the sample size, which could well offset the decline in

residual variance and create a non-representative sample.

y Simplicity and transparency are valuable in their own right and can help prevent

mistakes. These benefits may be well worth the loss of some precision. A complicated

design increases the likelihood of error down the road – for example, in the derivation of

weights or in the delineation of strata within which the treatment is randomly assigned.

An under appreciated virtue of presenting results without baseline covariates is that the

results are transparent and simple, and therefore less prone to human error.

y Having a broader sample expands the population to which the results can be

generalized. One wonders why the foundations that funded the voucher experiment paid

the additional costs to grant scholarships and administer follow-up tests to

Kindergarteners and other students with missing baseline tests if they were not to be used

in the analysis.25 Because these students make up more than 40 percent of the sample

used in previous analyses, there was also a loss in efficiency from excluding them from

the sample. (It is unclear whether follow-up tests were administered to students with

missing baseline test scores in the Dayton and Washington experiments.)

y Researchers often make data available to other scholars, but limit the data to the

sample and variables used in their previous analysis. Mathematica deserves much credit

for quickly making data available (for a small fee) to outside researchers who agreed to

adhere to certain confidentiality requirements, and for providing all their data, not just the

subset used to generate results presented in previously published reports.




25
  Certainly the participating students would wonder why they were inconvenienced on three weekends to
take exams that were not analyzed by the research team.


                                                  30
y The definition of race can be more than an incidental detail. Researchers should think

carefully about the assignment of a child’s race, especially if the child or parent is not

asked to directly report the child’s race. Because race is inherently subjective, there may

be benefits from exploring the sensitivity of the findings to alternative definitions of race.

Government statistics typically define race and ethnicity separately. Using a consistent

and clear definition of race is necessary if results are to be compared across studies. For

example, NAEP data from NCES define race to include students of any ethnicity, so the

Black-White gap from NAEP is not a comparable benchmark for statistics pertaining to

students with a Black (non-Hispanic) mother from the voucher experiments.

y Although we do not think that a fully specified and empirically verified theoretical

model is necessary to interpret experimental results (let alone achievable), a plausible and

testable theoretical explanation can help avoid mistakes in interpretation and policy. For

example, the lack of a convincing theory for why African American students would

benefit from vouchers while Hispanic students from the same schools would not is a

cause for concern in interpreting the New York City experiment. In its simplest form,

Howell and Peterson’s model of constrained residential choice would predict that poor

Hispanic students attending the same initial public schools as African American students

would experience a rise in test scores from vouchers, at variance with the data.

Combined with our finding that the effect of vouchers for African American students is

more fragile than previous analyses of the data have suggested, we would counsel caution

in concluding that vouchers raised achievement for African American students in New

York City. The safest conclusion is probably that the provision of vouchers did not lower

the scores of African American students.




                                             31
References

Angrist, Joshua D., Eric Bettinger, Erik Bloom, Elizabeth King, and Michael Kremer,
“Vouchers for Private Schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a Randomized Natural
Experiment,” forthcoming, American Economic Review, 2003.

Angrist, Joshua D., Guido Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin, “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
vol. 91, 1996, pp. 444-455.

Cochran, William G. and Gertrude M. Cox, Experimental Designs, New York: John
Wiley and Sons, 2nd edition, 1957.

Darity, William, Darrick Hamilton and Jason Dietrich, “Passing on Blackness: Latinos,
Race and Earnings in the USA,” Mimeo., University of North Carolina, September 2001.

Hill, Jennifer L., Donald B. Rubin, and Neal Thomas, “The Design of the New York
School Choice Scholarship Program Evaluation,” in Donald Campbell's Legacy, edited
by Leonard Bickman, Sage Publications, 2000.

Howell, William G. and Paul E. Peterson, The Education Gap: Vouchers and Urban
Schools, Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press, 2002 (Advance Reading Copy).

Keith, Verna M., and Cedric Herring, “Skin Tone and Stratification in the Black
Community,” American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 97, No. 3. (Nov., 1991), pp. 760-778.

Krueger, Alan, “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 114, no. 2, May, 1999, pp. 497-532.

Krueger, Alan and Diane Whitmore, "Would Smaller Classes Help Close the Black-
White Achievement Gap?" In Bridging the Achievement Gap, edited by John Chubb and
Tom Loveless, Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press, 2002.

Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., Press Release, “Voucher Claims of Success Are
Premature in New York City,” Washington, D.C., September 2000.

Mayer, Daniel P., David E. Myers, and Christina Clark Tuttle, “Appendix E: African
American and Latino Test-Score Differences,” in “School Choice in New York City
After Three Years: An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program,” edited by
Daniel P. Mayer, et al.,Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc., 2002.

Mayer, Daniel P., Paul E. Peterson, David E. Myers, Christina Clark Tuttle, and William
G. Howell, “School Choice in New York City After Three Years: An Evaluation of the
School Choice Scholarships Program,” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research,
Inc., 2002.




                                           32
Moulton, Brent R., “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
Variables on Micro Units,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 72, no. 2, May 1990,
pp. 334-338.

Neal, Derek, “How Vouchers Could Change the Market for Education,” forthcoming
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2002.

Peterson, Paul E., David Myers and William G. Howell, “An Evaluation of the New York
City Scholarships Program: The First Year,” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy
Research, Inc., 1998.

Rouse, Cecilia Elena, "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement:
An Evaluation of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program," NBER Working
Paper Number 5964 (March, 1997).

Scarr, Sandra, Andrew J. Pakstis, Solomon Katz and William Barker, “Absence of a
relationship between degree of white ancestry and intellectual skills within a black
population,” Human Genetics 39, 1977, pp. 69-86.




                                           33
Table 1: Treatment-Control Differences at Baseline by Assignment Status, Selected Variables

             Mean         Mean         Raw T-C                 Conditional on Lottery Strata:   Sample
Group        treatment    control      Difference    t-ratio   T-C Difference       t-ratio     size
MOTHER'S YEARS OF EDUCATION
Overall           12.84        12.78          0.07      0.61             0.07            0.69     2,476
Black- all        13.03        12.96          0.07      0.48             0.11            0.77     1,081
 Black-ch0        12.83        12.92         -0.09     -0.32            -0.10           -0.33       233
 Black-ch1        13.10        13.22         -0.13     -0.47            -0.04           -0.15       215
 Black-ch2        13.22        13.08          0.14      0.52             0.18            0.62       247
 Black-ch3        12.84        12.88         -0.04     -0.17             0.00           -0.01       216
 Black-ch4        13.19        12.57          0.62      1.95             0.55            1.52       169
Latino-all        12.46        12.41          0.06      0.37             0.08            0.50     1,186
MOTHER GRADUATED COLLEGE
Overall      0.11     0.09                    0.02      0.98             0.01            0.90     2,476
Black- all   0.12     0.09                    0.03      1.31             0.04            1.73     1,081
 Black-ch0   0.12     0.05                    0.07      1.80             0.06            1.50       233
 Black-ch1   0.07     0.12                   -0.05     -1.12            -0.01           -0.30       215
 Black-ch2   0.17     0.13                    0.03      0.63             0.04            0.68       247
 Black-ch3   0.07     0.08                   -0.01     -0.28             0.00           -0.10       216
 Black-ch4   0.20     0.03                    0.16      2.95             0.13            2.29       169
Latino-all   0.06     0.07                    0.00     -0.18             0.00           -0.13     1,186

ANNUAL INCOME
Overall     $10,291          $9,982           $308      0.81             $296            0.78     2,433
Black- all   10,629          10,283            345      0.57              222            0.36     1,068
 Black-ch0   11,933          10,306          1,627      1.30            1,266            0.92       228
 Black-ch1    8,736          10,433         -1,696     -1.51           -1,357           -1.07       213
 Black-ch2   10,669           9,989            680      0.68              471            0.43       246
 Black-ch3    9,846          10,750           -904     -0.87             -981           -0.89       211
 Black-ch4   12,438           9,890          2,548      2.19            2,602            1.84       169
Latino-all    9,941           9,470            471      0.88              347            0.67     1,161

BASELINE TEST SCORES
COMPOSITE MATH AND READING SCORE (AVERAGE NPR)
Overall           19.97        20.83         -0.86     -0.84            -0.66           -0.63     1,851
Black- all        20.11        20.41         -0.30     -0.21            -0.24           -0.17       806
 Black-ch0          NA           NA            NA        NA               NA              NA         NA
 Black-ch1        17.50        21.84         -4.35     -1.53            -4.22           -1.32       203
 Black-ch2        23.35        22.45          0.90      0.34            -0.27           -0.09       230
 Black-ch3        16.15        18.04         -1.89     -0.77            -2.01           -0.79       214
 Black-ch4        24.82        18.23          6.59      2.17             5.79            1.81       159
Latino-all        18.02        20.01         -1.99     -1.40            -1.81           -1.18       876
READING (NPR)
Overall           22.88        24.55         -1.67     -1.37            -1.42           -1.15     1,851
Black- all        24.40        25.35         -0.95     -0.54            -0.76           -0.42       806
 Black-ch0          NA           NA            NA        NA               NA              NA         NA
 Black-ch1        24.71        31.27         -6.56     -1.64            -7.10           -1.52       203
 Black-ch2        26.44        25.96          0.48      0.14             0.82            0.21       230
 Black-ch3        19.72        21.69         -1.97     -0.72            -2.92           -1.04       214
 Black-ch4        27.73        20.58          7.14      2.16             7.65            2.11       159
Latino-all        19.76        23.33         -3.57     -2.07            -3.17           -1.70       876
MATH (NPR)
Overall          17.06   17.11   -0.04   -0.04    0.11    0.09   1,851
Black- all       15.82   15.46    0.36    0.25    0.28    0.19     806
 Black-ch0         NA      NA      NA      NA      NA      NA       NA
 Black-ch1       10.28   12.42   -2.14   -0.95   -1.33   -0.56     203
 Black-ch2       20.26   18.93    1.32    0.51   -1.35   -0.48     230
 Black-ch3       12.58   14.40   -1.82   -0.70   -1.10   -0.40     214
 Black-ch4       21.92   15.89    6.04    1.66    3.93    1.12     159
Latino-all       16.28   16.70   -0.42   -0.28   -0.45   -0.29     876

MOTHER EMPLOYED FULL TIME
Overall      0.23      0.22       0.00    0.21    0.01    0.25   2,479
Black- all   0.28      0.26       0.03    0.72    0.02    0.45   1,083
 Black-ch0   0.36      0.27       0.09    1.39    0.04    0.63     233
 Black-ch1   0.19      0.29      -0.10   -1.57   -0.08   -1.09     216
 Black-ch2   0.27      0.20       0.06    1.02    0.07    1.20     248
 Black-ch3   0.25      0.31      -0.06   -0.92   -0.09   -1.27     216
 Black-ch4   0.36      0.19       0.17    2.38    0.17    2.08     169
Latino-all   0.20      0.19       0.00    0.10    0.01    0.17   1,187
STUDENT SEX (MALE)
Overall        0.50       0.48    0.01    0.69    0.01    0.65   2,617
Black- all     0.47       0.53   -0.06   -1.75   -0.06   -1.80   1,134
 Black-ch0     0.41       0.60   -0.19   -2.69   -0.22   -3.29     241
 Black-ch1     0.49       0.58   -0.09   -1.22   -0.15   -1.74     225
 Black-ch2     0.51       0.54   -0.03   -0.46   -0.09   -1.27     256
 Black-ch3     0.46       0.43    0.03    0.46    0.00    0.01     232
 Black-ch4     0.48       0.45    0.03    0.33    0.05    0.57     180
Latino-all     0.49       0.44    0.05    1.59    0.05    1.46   1,253

MOTHER'S PLACE OF BIRTH USA
Overall        0.52     0.55     -0.03   -1.03   -0.03   -1.15   2,593
Black- all     0.75     0.82     -0.07   -1.98   -0.08   -2.55   1,132
 Black-ch0     0.74     0.77     -0.03   -0.47    0.00   -0.07     240
 Black-ch1     0.76     0.86     -0.10   -1.65   -0.15   -2.37     225
 Black-ch2     0.77     0.78     -0.02   -0.29   -0.05   -0.92     261
 Black-ch3     0.82     0.82     -0.01   -0.12   -0.05   -0.94     227
 Black-ch4     0.64     0.87     -0.23   -3.42   -0.22   -3.02     178
Latino-all     0.31     0.36     -0.04   -1.21   -0.05   -1.41   1,245

FOOD STAMP RECIPIENT
Overall       0.65        0.69   -0.03   -1.26   -0.03   -1.11   2,474
Black- all    0.63        0.70   -0.06   -1.74   -0.05   -1.20   1,074
 Black-ch0    0.61        0.70   -0.09   -1.34   -0.08   -1.09     227
 Black-ch1    0.71        0.68    0.02    0.33    0.06    0.78     216
 Black-ch2    0.59        0.70   -0.11   -1.65   -0.14   -1.87     248
 Black-ch3    0.69        0.68    0.01    0.18    0.00    0.05     217
 Black-ch4    0.54        0.73   -0.19   -2.35   -0.21   -2.32     165
Latino-all    0.67        0.70   -0.03   -0.75   -0.02   -0.62   1,190

AFDC RECIPIENT
Overall           0.57    0.60   -0.04   -1.33   -0.03   -1.11   2,375
Black- all        0.58    0.65   -0.07   -1.81   -0.06   -1.40   1,030
 Black-ch0        0.57    0.64   -0.07   -0.95   -0.07   -0.92     218
 Black-ch1        0.64    0.63    0.01    0.09    0.03    0.31     204
 Black-ch2        0.51    0.67   -0.16   -2.36   -0.18   -2.44     241
 Black-ch3        0.64    0.60    0.04    0.56    0.03    0.32     206
 Black-ch4        0.53    0.73   -0.20   -2.59   -0.24   -2.82     160
Latino-all        0.54    0.59   -0.05   -1.34   -0.05   -1.27   1,143
MEDICAID RECIPIENT
Overall         0.62              0.69        -0.07     -2.53             -0.06           -2.29      2,299
Black- all      0.59              0.69        -0.09     -2.31             -0.07           -1.86      1,003
 Black-ch0      0.61              0.69        -0.08     -1.14             -0.07           -0.91        217
 Black-ch1      0.57              0.60        -0.04     -0.42             -0.01           -0.16        195
 Black-ch2      0.58              0.72        -0.14     -2.03             -0.15           -1.99        239
 Black-ch3      0.67              0.69        -0.02     -0.21             -0.02           -0.26        203
 Black-ch4      0.52              0.74        -0.22     -2.70             -0.23           -2.43        148
Latino-all      0.62              0.70        -0.08     -2.01             -0.07           -1.79      1,098


EVER ATTENDED GIFTED STUDENT CLASSES
Overall        0.12    0.12      0.00                   -0.09              0.00           -0.08      2,547
Black- all     0.15    0.13      0.01                    0.60              0.01            0.49      1,115
 Black-ch0     0.08    0.09     -0.02                   -0.34              0.00           -0.10        239
 Black-ch1     0.12    0.11      0.01                    0.17             -0.01           -0.17        222
 Black-ch2     0.21    0.17      0.04                    0.61              0.00           -0.01        254
 Black-ch3     0.14    0.11      0.03                    0.55              0.06            1.37        227
 Black-ch4     0.21    0.19      0.01                    0.16              0.01            0.13        173
Latino-all     0.09    0.09     -0.01                   -0.29             -0.01           -0.29      1,208

EVER RECEIVED SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES
Overall        0.11     0.10      0.01  0.71                               0.01            0.65      2,574
Black- all     0.11     0.10      0.01  0.67                               0.02            0.75      1,111
 Black-ch0     0.08     0.09     -0.02 -0.37                              -0.02           -0.39        238
 Black-ch1     0.07     0.10     -0.03 -0.71                              -0.03           -0.58        222
 Black-ch2     0.13     0.10      0.03  0.73                              -0.01           -0.13        252
 Black-ch3     0.16     0.06      0.09  2.11                               0.08            1.88        226
 Black-ch4     0.14     0.15     -0.01 -0.20                               0.03            0.46        173
Latino-all     0.11     0.12     -0.01 -0.58                              -0.01           -0.63      1,239


ADDENDUM: THIRD YEAR FOLLOW-UP TEST RESULTS
COMPOSITE MATH AND READING SCORE (AVERAGE NPR)
Overall      26.72    27.12    -0.40  -0.34                              -0.41            -0.34      1,801
Black- all   25.50    23.67     1.84   1.11                               2.78             1.65        733
 Black-ch0   21.62    27.13    -5.51  -1.47                              -6.24            -1.58        156
 Black-ch1   26.40    23.33     3.07   0.77                               1.82             0.40        139
 Black-ch2   23.10    21.11     1.99   0.68                               2.76             0.82        177
 Black-ch3   27.99    26.66     1.33   0.39                               1.57             0.40        139
 Black-ch4   29.04    20.14     8.90   2.25                              10.49             2.60        122
Latino-all   26.42    28.18    -1.77  -1.06                              -1.46            -0.86        932



Notes: ch-0 refers to Kindergartners at baseline, ch-1 to first graders at baseline, and so on.
Observations with missing values for a particular variable are dropped from the sample in the
relevant row. Bootstrap standard errors used to compute the t-ratios account for dependent
observations within families. Lottery strata are the 30 groups students were placed in at the
time of random assignment.

A bold font indicates that the absolute t-ratio for the within-strata treatment-control difference
exceeds 1.96.
Table 2: Efficiency Comparison of Two Methods of Random Assignment
Estimated Treatment Effect and Standard Error By Method of Random Assignment

A. All Students
                                                                                                                            Sample-Size-
Year        Model                  Propensity Score Match Subsample       Stratified Blocks Subsample          Relative     Adjusted Relative
                                       Coeff. Std. Error    Nobs.           Coeff. Std. Error     Nobs.        Std. Error   Std. Error

Year 1      Control for baseline        0.41      1.40        721             2.08       1.38        734           0.986      0.995

            Omit baseline               0.42      1.40       1048            -1.12       1.58       1032           1.129      1.120

Year 2      Control for baseline        0.55      1.49        603             0.21       1.73        596           1.161      1.154

            Omit baseline               0.24      1.59        908            -0.14       1.84        846           1.157      1.117

Year 3      Control for baseline        0.88      1.56        613             0.69       1.74        637           1.115      1.137
            Omit baseline              -0.32      1.58        900            -0.50       1.80        901           1.139      1.140

B. African American Students
Year 1      Control for baseline        0.23      1.87        302             8.08       1.72        321           0.920      0.948
            Omit baseline               2.44      1.97        436             3.21       2.07        447           1.051      1.064

Year 2      Control for baseline        2.82      2.16        244             3.53       2.60        253           1.204      1.226
            Omit baseline               4.10      2.28        360             1.61       2.54        362           1.114      1.117

Year 3      Control for baseline        4.18      2.51        247             6.55       2.09        272           0.833      0.874
            Omit baseline               2.46      2.48        347             3.10       2.32        386           0.935      0.987

Notes: Treatment effect coefficient is from a regression of test scores on a dummy indicating assignment to receive a voucher (1=yes),
original 30 lottery randomization strata dummies, and in some models baseline test scores. Bootstrap standard errors account for
within-family correlation in residuals. Year 1, 2, or 3 refers to follow-up year.
Table 3a: Estimated treatment effects, with and without controlling for baseline scores
            Controls for original 30 strata used to assign students to random assignment blocks

Test        Group          SubSample with Baseline Scores;                SubSample with Baseline Scores;                Full Sample;
                           Controls For Baseline Scores                   Omits Baseline Scores                          Omits Baseline Scores
First Follow-up Test:        NOBS Coefficient        S.E.     t-ratio       NOBS Coefficient        S.E.   t-ratio        NOBS Coefficient       S.E.     t-ratio
Composite Overall              1,455    1.30          0.96      1.35          1,455    0.40           1.29 0.31             2,080   -0.36         1.06      -0.34
            Black                623    4.20          1.28      3.28            623    3.89           1.73 2.26               883    2.83         1.41       2.01
            Latino               709   -0.38          1.37     -0.28            709   -1.96           1.67 -1.17            1,021   -1.63         1.48      -1.11

Reading     Overall             1,455        1.15     1.04     1.11            1,455        0.04      1.37 0.03              2,080       -1.13    1.17      -0.96
            Black                 623        3.35     1.57     2.14              623        2.90      1.99 1.46                883        1.64    1.72       0.95
            Latino                709       -0.55     1.44    -0.38              709       -2.46      1.80 -1.36             1,021       -2.34    1.66      -1.41

Math        Overall             1,455        1.45     1.18     1.23            1,455        0.76      1.45 0.52              2,080        0.42    1.17       0.36
            Black                 623        5.04     1.53     3.30              623        4.88      1.91 2.55                883        4.02    1.51       2.67
            Latino                709       -0.22     1.69    -0.13              709       -1.46      1.90 -0.77             1,021       -0.93    1.60      -0.58

Second Follow-up Test:
Composite Overall               1,199        0.40     1.14     0.36            1,199        0.11      1.44 0.08              1,754        0.05    1.22       0.04
           Black                  497        3.14     1.68     1.87              497        3.60      1.95 1.84                722        2.86    1.70       1.68
           Latino                 612       -0.60     1.52    -0.40              612       -2.18      1.97 -1.11               902       -1.84    1.63      -1.13

Reading     Overall             1,199        1.31     1.11     1.17            1,199        0.82      1.46 0.56              1,754        0.63    1.30       0.48
            Black                 497        3.49     1.77     1.98              497        3.81      2.11 1.81                722        2.87    1.92       1.49
            Latino                612        0.16     1.56     0.10              612       -1.61      2.01 -0.80               902       -1.25    1.72      -0.73

Math        Overall             1,199       -0.50     1.52    -0.33            1,199       -0.59      1.73 -0.34             1,754       -0.53    1.39      -0.38
            Black                 497        2.79     2.18     1.28              497        3.39      2.36 1.44                722        2.85    1.96       1.46
            Latino                612       -1.36     1.94    -0.70              612       -2.76      2.31 -1.20               902       -2.44    1.84      -1.32

Third Follow-up Test
Composite Overall               1,250        0.84     1.14     0.74            1,250        0.33      1.40 0.24              1,801       -0.41    1.20      -0.34
            Black                 519        5.21     1.62     3.21              519        5.14      1.93 2.66                733        2.78    1.68       1.65
            Latino                637       -1.11     1.61    -0.69              637       -1.67      1.99 -0.84               932       -1.46    1.70      -0.86

Reading     Overall             1,250        0.29     1.26     0.23            1,250       -0.36      1.52 -0.24             1,801       -0.96    1.26      -0.76
            Black                 519        3.73     1.89     1.98              519        3.47      2.21 1.57                733        1.51    1.84       0.82
            Latino                637       -1.91     1.78    -1.07              637       -2.63      2.13 -1.24               932       -1.97    1.83      -1.08

Math        Overall             1,250        1.40     1.30     1.08            1,250        1.02      1.53 0.67              1,801        0.13    1.34       0.10
            Black                 519        6.68     1.84     3.64              519        6.81      2.08 3.27                733        4.06    1.86       2.18
            Latino                637       -0.30     1.84    -0.16              637       -0.72      2.20 -0.38               932       -0.96    1.88      -0.51


Notes: Dependent variable is test score NPR. Reported coefficient is coefficient on voucher offer dummy. All regressions control for original 30 randomization strata.
Bootstrap standard errors are robust to correlation in residuals among students in the same family. Bold font indicates that the absolute t-ratio exceeds 1.96.
Table 3b: Estimated treatment effects, with and without controlling for baseline scores
          Controls for 30 randomization strata as defined by Mayer, Peterson and Myers, et al. (2000)

Test        Group          SubSample with Baseline Scores;                SubSample with Baseline Scores;               Full Sample;
                           Controls For Baseline Scores                   Omits Baseline Scores                         Omits Baseline Scores
First Follow-up Test:        NOBS Coefficient       S.E.     t-ratio        NOBS Coefficient       S.E.   t-ratio        NOBS Coefficient       S.E.     t-ratio
Composite Overall              1,455    1.20         0.97       1.24          1,455    0.23          1.30 0.18             2,080   -0.40         1.06      -0.38
            Black                623    4.43         1.27       3.48            623    3.87          1.73 2.24               883    2.64         1.42       1.86
            Latino               709   -0.66         1.38      -0.48            709   -2.59          1.77 -1.46            1,021   -2.05         1.56      -1.31

Reading     Overall             1,455        1.01     1.05     0.96            1,455       -0.18     1.38 -0.13             2,080       -1.17     1.18     -0.99
            Black                 623        3.47     1.57     2.21              623        2.74     1.98 1.38                883        1.46     1.72      0.85
            Latino                709       -0.70     1.45    -0.48              709       -3.02     1.88 -1.60             1,021       -2.60     1.72     -1.51

Math        Overall             1,455        1.39     1.17     1.19            1,455        0.65     1.45 0.45              2,080        0.37     1.16      0.31
            Black                 623        5.39     1.52     3.56              623        5.01     1.92 2.60                883        3.82     1.54      2.48
            Latino                709       -0.63     1.70    -0.37              709       -2.17     2.00 -1.08             1,021       -1.50     1.67     -0.90

Second Follow-up Test:
Composite Overall               1,199        0.46     1.13     0.41            1,199        0.14     1.44 0.10              1,754        0.05     1.22      0.04
           Black                  497        3.27     1.68     1.95              497        3.51     1.94 1.81                722        2.58     1.70      1.52
           Latino                 612       -0.60     1.50    -0.40              612       -2.34     1.97 -1.19               902       -1.83     1.62     -1.13

Reading     Overall             1,199        1.35     1.11     1.22            1,199        0.83     1.45 0.57              1,754        0.62     1.30      0.48
            Black                 497        3.44     1.74     1.97              497        3.50     2.06 1.70                722        2.52     1.90      1.32
            Latino                612        0.17     1.55     0.11              612       -1.75     2.05 -0.85               902       -1.17     1.73     -0.68

Math        Overall             1,199       -0.43     1.51    -0.28            1,199       -0.55     1.73 -0.32             1,754       -0.52     1.39     -0.38
            Black                 497        3.10     2.18     1.42              497        3.53     2.36 1.49                722        2.64     1.97      1.35
            Latino                612       -1.37     1.92    -0.72              612       -2.93     2.29 -1.28               902       -2.48     1.82     -1.36

Third Follow-up Test
Composite Overall               1,250        0.93     1.13     0.82            1,250        0.24     1.40 0.17              1,801       -0.31     1.18     -0.26
            Black                 519        5.50     1.61     3.42              519        5.30     1.91 2.77                733        2.87     1.69      1.71
            Latino                637       -0.95     1.57    -0.60              637       -1.86     2.00 -0.93               932       -1.35     1.66     -0.81

Reading     Overall             1,250        0.27     1.25     0.21            1,250       -0.56     1.52 -0.37             1,801       -0.95     1.25     -0.77
            Black                 519        3.97     1.87     2.13              519        3.56     2.18 1.63                733        1.53     1.83      0.84
            Latino                637       -1.85     1.73    -1.07              637       -2.90     2.15 -1.35               932       -1.81     1.78     -1.01

Math        Overall             1,250        1.59     1.28     1.24            1,250        1.05     1.52 0.69              1,801        0.33     1.32      0.25
            Black                 519        7.03     1.82     3.86              519        7.04     2.06 3.41                733        4.22     1.85      2.28
            Latino                637       -0.05     1.82    -0.03              637       -0.82     2.19 -0.38               932       -0.89     1.83     -0.48

Notes: Dependent variable is test score NPR. Reported coefficient is coefficient on voucher offer dummy. All regressions control for 30 revised randomization strata.
Bootstrap standard errors are robust to correlation in residuals among students in the same family. Bold font indicates that the absolute t-ratio exceeds 1.96.
Table 4: Estimated treatment effects, with varying controls for baseline characteristics

Test        Group       SubSample with Baseline Scores                     Full Sample                                        Full Sample                             Full Sample
                        Controls for baseline scores, cohort &             Controls for cohort & other covariates             Controls for cohort, baseline scores    Controls for cohort, baseline
                        other covariates                                   (omits baseline test scores)                       & interaction for missing scores        scores, interaction for missing
                                                                                                                                                                      scores & other covariates
First Follow-up Test:     NOBS Coefficient            S.E.       t-ratio     NOBS    Coefficient          S.E.      t-ratio    Coefficient        S.E.      t-ratio   Coefficient       S.E.       t-ratio
Composite Overall           1,455    1.73             0.92         1.88        2,080      -0.10           0.98       -0.10           0.51         0.86        0.59          0.61        0.84         0.73
            Black             623    3.96             1.33         2.98          883       2.87           1.38        2.08           2.95         1.16        2.55          2.93        1.20         2.45
            Latino            709   -0.21             1.35        -0.16        1,021      -1.86           1.37       -1.36          -0.14         1.22       -0.12         -0.44        1.20        -0.37

Reading     Overall          1,455          1.33      1.02        1.31          2,080         -0.95       1.10      -0.87            -0.12        0.98       -0.13          -0.12       0.96        -0.13
            Black              623          2.55      1.62        1.57            883          1.36       1.67       0.82             1.79        1.49        1.20           1.54       1.50         1.02
            Latino             709         -0.48      1.41       -0.34          1,021         -2.30       1.59      -1.44            -0.43        1.39       -0.31          -0.69       1.40        -0.49

Math        Overall          1,455          2.14      1.14        1.88          2,080          0.75       1.10       0.68             1.13        0.98        1.16           1.34       0.97         1.38
            Black              623          5.37      1.55        3.46            883          4.38       1.49       2.94             4.12        1.27        3.23           4.33       1.32         3.27
            Latino             709          0.05      1.74        0.03          1,021         -1.43       1.48      -0.97             0.15        1.37        0.11          -0.19       1.36        -0.14

Second Follow-up Test:
Composite Overall            1,199          0.61      1.12        0.54          1,754         -0.38       1.15      -0.33             0.29        1.04        0.28          -0.09       1.00        -0.09
          Black                497          3.53      1.67        2.11            722          2.98       1.67       1.78             2.61        1.57        1.67           2.59       1.52         1.71
          Latino               612         -1.24      1.51       -0.82            902         -2.37       1.49      -1.60            -0.92        1.32       -0.70          -1.34       1.27        -1.05

Reading     Overall          1,199          1.66      1.13        1.47          1,754          0.36       1.23       0.29             1.00        1.11        0.90           0.73       1.08         0.68
            Black              497          3.99      1.87        2.14            722          2.99       1.88       1.60             2.85        1.74        1.64           2.71       1.72         1.57
            Latino             612         -0.14      1.60       -0.09            902         -1.41       1.64      -0.86            -0.19        1.44       -0.13          -0.30       1.43        -0.21

Math        Overall          1,199         -0.45      1.47       -0.31          1,754         -1.13       1.32      -0.85            -0.43        1.23       -0.34          -0.92       1.20        -0.76
            Black              497          3.08      2.08        1.48            722          2.97       1.94       1.53             2.37        1.87        1.27           2.48       1.81         1.37
            Latino             612         -2.34      1.95       -1.20            902         -3.33       1.67      -2.00            -1.64        1.55       -1.06          -2.38       1.49        -1.60

Third Follow-up Test
Composite Overall            1,250          1.10      1.08        1.01          1,801         -0.48       1.14      -0.42             0.11        1.04        0.11          -0.04       1.00        -0.04
           Black               519          4.50      1.62        2.78            733          2.12       1.68       1.27             2.80        1.53        1.83           2.19       1.51         1.45
           Latino              637         -1.01      1.57       -0.64            932         -1.31       1.62      -0.81            -0.72        1.43       -0.50          -0.68       1.42        -0.48

Reading     Overall          1,250          0.50      1.23        0.41          1,801         -0.99       1.22      -0.82            -0.30        1.10       -0.27          -0.51       1.08        -0.47
            Black              519          3.20      1.90        1.68            733          0.84       1.82       0.46             1.70        1.67        1.02           1.05       1.65         0.64
            Latino             637         -1.91      1.75       -1.10            932         -1.63       1.78      -0.92            -1.02        1.57       -0.65          -0.97       1.58        -0.61

Math        Overall          1,250          1.69      1.25        1.36          1,801          0.04       1.27       0.03             0.52        1.20        0.43           0.42       1.16         0.36
            Black              519          5.81      1.86        3.12            733          3.41       1.88       1.81             3.90        1.74        2.23           3.32       1.74         1.91
            Latino             637         -0.11      1.82       -0.06            932         -0.98       1.77      -0.55            -0.41        1.63       -0.25          -0.39       1.62        -0.24
Notes: Dependent variable is test score NPR. Reported coefficient is coefficient on voucher offer dummy. All regressions control for original 30 randomization strata and cohort (initial grade)
dummies. The first set of columns also control for baseline test scores. The last two sets of columns control for baseline test scores and a dummy indicating whether baseline scores
are missing and an interaction between that dummy and baseline test scores. When indicated, "other covariates" included are gender, mother's education, mother's full-time or part-time
employment status, special education, gifted or talented class, welfare, log family income, student's age, mother's place of birth, English spoken at home, mother in current residence
less than one year, mother's religion Catholic, and dummies indicating whether the covariates are missing.

Bootstrap standard errors account for dependent observations among students in the same family. Bold font indicates absolute t-ratio in excess of 1.96.
   Table 5: Estimated treatment effects for all Black students
   Sample includes students whose mother or father is Black/African American (non-Hispanic)

                      SubSample w/ Baseline Test               Full Sample                                Full Sample
                      Controls for baseline scores             Controls for covariates                    Controls for covariates, baseline
                      & covariates                             except baseline scores                     scores & interaction for missing scores
   Test/Year            N Coefficient S.E. t-ratio               N Coefficient S.E.       t-ratio           N Coefficient          S.E.     t-ratio

   Year One
   Composite           684        3.52 1.27       2.76          968        1.93   1.38      1.40            968        2.19        1.14        1.92

   Reading             684        2.06 1.53       1.35          968        0.29   1.65      0.18            968        0.61        1.43        0.43

   Math                684        4.98 1.53       3.25          968        3.57   1.48      2.41            968        3.77        1.28        2.94



   Year Two
   Composite           545        2.34 1.62       1.44          787        1.83   1.63      1.12            787        1.69        1.44        1.17
   Reading             545        3.05 1.77       1.32          787        1.97   1.83      1.08            787        1.86        1.65        1.13

   Math                545        1.63 2.03       0.80          787        1.68   1.86      0.90            787        1.52        1.70        0.89



   Year Three
   Composite           572        4.10 1.61       2.54          807        1.24   1.66      0.75            807        1.52        1.46        1.04

   Reading             572        3.24 1.88       1.72          807        0.20   1.79      0.11            807        0.57        1.61        0.36
   Math                572        4.97 1.87       2.66          807        2.27   1.86      1.22            807        2.46        1.69        1.46

Notes: Dependent variable is test score NPR. Reported coefficient is coefficient on voucher offer dummy. All regressions control for 30 randomization strata,
cohort dummies, gender, mother's education, mother's full-time or part-time employment status, special education, gifted or talented class, welfare, log
family income, student's age, mother's place of birth, English spoken at home, mother in current residence less than one year, and mother's religion. The
first set of columns also control for baseline test scores. The last set of columns also control for a dummy indicating baseline scores missing and an
interaction between that dummy and baseline test scores.

Bootstrap standard errors account for dependent observations among students in the same family. Bold font indicates absolute t-ratio in excess of 1.96.
Table 6: Two-Stage Least Squares estimates of effect of years in private school, with varying controls for baseline covariates

Test         Group        SubSample with Baseline Scores                 Full Sample; Mother's Race/Ethnicity                Full Sample; Either Parent's Race/Ethnicity
                          Controls for baseline scores & covariates      Controls for covariates, baseline test              Controls for covariates, baseline test
                                                                         scores & interaction for missing scores             scores & interaction for missing scores
First Follow-up Test:        NOBS Coefficient       S.E.    t-ratio        NOBS      Coefficient     S.E.    t-ratio           NOBS Coefficient        S.E.     t-ratio

Composite    Overall          1,449        2.36     1.26      1.88            2,080         0.83     1.20      0.69             2,080         0.83     1.20       0.69
             Black              622        5.14     1.75      2.93              883         3.92     1.63      2.40               968         2.92     1.53       1.90
             Latino             704       -0.34     1.92     -0.18            1,021        -0.65     1.76     -0.37             1,117        -0.22     1.75      -0.13

Reading      Overall          1,449        1.82     1.37      1.34            2,080        -0.19     1.38     -0.14             2,080        -0.19     1.38      -0.14
             Black              622        3.31     2.10      1.58              883         2.07     2.02      1.02               968         0.82     1.91       0.43
             Latino             704       -0.67     2.00     -0.33            1,021        -1.07     2.03     -0.53             1,117        -1.05     2.02      -0.52

Math         Overall          1,449        2.89     1.58      1.83            2,080         1.85     1.39      1.33             2,080         1.85     1.39       1.33
             Black              622        6.96     2.06      3.37              883         5.78     1.81      3.20               968         5.02     1.74       2.88
             Latino             704       -0.02     2.46     -0.01            1,021        -0.24     1.98     -0.12             1,117         0.60     1.96       0.31

Second Follow-up Test:
Composite Overall             1,199        0.42     0.77      0.54            1,754        -0.07     0.72     -0.09             1,754        -0.07     0.72      -0.09
           Black                497        2.31     1.09      2.12              722         1.81     1.06      1.71               787         1.18     1.00       1.18
           Latino               612       -0.89     1.07     -0.83              902        -0.96     0.91     -1.05               984        -0.88     0.93      -0.94

Reading      Overall          1,199        1.15     0.78      1.47            1,754         0.52     0.78      0.67             1,754         0.52     0.78       0.67
             Black              497        2.60     1.22      2.14              722         1.89     1.20      1.57               787         1.30     1.14       1.13
             Latino             612       -0.10     1.14     -0.09              902        -0.21     1.03     -0.21               984        -0.72     1.05      -0.68

Math         Overall          1,199       -0.31     1.01     -0.31            1,754        -0.66     0.86     -0.76             1,754        -0.66     0.86      -0.76
             Black              497        2.01     1.35      1.49              722         1.73     1.26      1.38               787         1.06     1.18       0.90
             Latino             612       -1.68     1.38     -1.22              902        -1.71     1.07     -1.60               984        -1.05     1.10      -0.95

Third Follow-up Test
Composite Overall             1,250        0.55     0.54      1.01            1,801        -0.02     0.53     -0.04             1,801        -0.02     0.53      -0.04
            Black               519        2.23     0.81      2.75              733         1.15     0.79      1.45               807         0.78     0.75       1.04
            Latino              637       -0.52     0.79     -0.65              932        -0.35     0.73     -0.48             1,015        -0.20     0.71      -0.28

Reading      Overall          1,250        0.25     0.61      0.41            1,801        -0.27     0.57     -0.47             1,801        -0.27     0.57      -0.47
             Black              519        1.58     0.94      1.69              733         0.55     0.86      0.64               807         0.30     0.83       0.36
             Latino             637       -0.98     0.89     -1.10              932        -0.50     0.82     -0.61             1,015        -0.28     0.79      -0.36

Math         Overall          1,250        0.84     0.62      1.35            1,801         0.22     0.61      0.36             1,801         0.22     0.61       0.36
             Black              519        2.88     0.94      3.05              733         1.76     0.92      1.91               807         1.27     0.87       1.46
             Latino             637       -0.05     0.92     -0.06              932        -0.20     0.84     -0.24             1,015        -0.12     0.80      -0.15

Notes: Dependent variable is test score NPR. Reported coefficient is coefficient on years in private school. All regressions control for 30 randomization strata,
cohort dummies, gender, mother's education, mother's full-time or part-time employment status, special education, gifted or talented class, welfare, log family
income, student's age, mother's place of birth, English spoken at home, mother in current residence less than one year, mother's religion, and dummies indicating
whether the covariates are missing. The first set of columns also control for baseline test scores. The last two sets of columns also control for a dummy indicating
whether baseline scores are missing and an interaction between that dummy and baseline test scores.

Bootstrap standard errors account for dependent observations among students in the same family. Bold font indicates absolute t-ratio in excess of 1.96.
