NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT IS WRONG WITH TAYLOR RULES?
USING JUDGMENT IN MONETARY
POLICY THROUGH TARGETING RULES
Lars E. O. Svensson
Working Paper 9421
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9421
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2002

I thank Jon Faust, Dale Henderson, Bennett McCallum, Anders Vredin and Michael Woodford for many
general discussions on issues related to this paper, and Claes Berg, Hans Dillén, Giovanni Favara, Mark
Gertler, Kai Leitemo, Bennett McCallum, Edward Nelson, Glenn Rudebusch, Christopher Sims, Frank Smets,
Robert Tetlow, Edwin Truman, David Vestin, Michael Wickens, Michael Woodford, participants in
conferences at the Bank of England and Insead and in the NBER Summer Institute, and the editors and
referees for specific comments on previous versions of this paper. I also thank Annika Andreasson and
Kathleen DeGennaro for editorial and secretarial assistance. Financial support from Princeton University’s
Center for Economic Policy Studies is gratefully acknowledged. Remaining errors and expressed views are
my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Lars E. O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.

What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in
Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules
Lars E. O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 9421
December 2002
JEL No. E42, E52, E58
ABSTRACT
It is argued that inflation targeting is best understood as a commitment to a targeting rule
rather than an instrument rule, either a general targeting rule (explicit objectives for monetary
policy) or a specific targeting rule (a criterion for (the forecasts of) the target variables to be
fulfilled), essentially the equality of the marginal rates of transformation and substitution between
the target variables. Targeting rules allow the use of judgment and extra-model information, are
more robust and easier to verify than optimal instrument rules, and they can nevertheless bring the
economy close to the socially optimal equilibrium.

Lars E. O. Svensson
Department of Economics
Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
svensson@princeton.edu

1 Introduction
What are the rules for good monetary policy? Here, “good monetary policy” is used in the
conventional meaning of successfully stabilizing inflation around a low average level, with some
concern for stabilizing output around potential output, what has been called “flexible inflation
targeting” in the literature (see, for instance, the contributions to the influential Jackson-Hole
symposium organized by Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 1999).1 What answer does the
large literature on monetary-policy rules supply? Most of that literature uses a very narrow
interpretation of “policy rule.” According to this interpretation, a policy rule expresses the
central bank’s instrument (usually a short interest rate, the instrument rate; the federal funds
rate in the U.S., for instance) as an explicit function of information available to the central
bank. Such a policy rule can be called an instrument rule. In particular, most of the literature
focuses on simple instrument rules, where the instrument is a function of a small subset of the
information available to the central bank. The best-known simple instrument rule is the Taylor
rule (John Taylor 1993), where the instrument rate responds only to the inflation and output
gaps according to
it = f¯ + fπ (π t − π ∗ ) + fx xt ,

(1.1)

where it is the instrument rate in period t, f¯ is a constant, π t − π ∗ is the “inflation gap,” where
π t is (the rate of) inflation and π ∗ ≥ 0 is a given inflation target, xt ≡ yt − yt∗ is the output
gap, where yt is (log) output and yt∗ is (log) potential output, and the coeﬃcients fπ and fx
are positive. The constant f¯ equals the sum of the average short real interest rate and the
inflation target. In the original Taylor (1993) formulation, the coeﬃcients fπ and fx are 1.5 and
.5, respectively; the inflation target π ∗ is 2% (per year), the average short real interest rate is
2%, and the coeﬃcient f¯ is hence 4%.2
Much research during the last two decades has examined simple instrument rules (mostly
variants of the Taylor rule), both from a descriptive and a prescriptive perspective (see, for
instance, McCallum 1999 and the contributions in Ralph Bryant, Peter Hooper and Catherine
1
A noncontroversial objective of monetary policy would be to contribute to the welfare of the representative
citizen. This is not an operational objective, though. An increasing number of countries have instead announced
“price stability” (meaning low and stable inflation) as the primary objective for monetary policy, with some
implicit or explicit concern also for the stability of the real economy, with the view that this is the best contribution
monetary policy can make to citizens’ welfare.
2
Knut Wicksell (1898) and Dale Henderson and Warwick McKibbin (1993) have suggested other simple
instrument rules with the interest rate as the instrument. Allan Meltzer (1987) and Bennett McCallum (1988)
have suggested simple instrument rules with the monetary base as the instrument. The first empirical estimates
of interest-rate reaction functions may have been in the 1960s by William Dewald and Harry Johnson (1963) and
James Christian (1968). Recent general discussions of Taylor rules include Richard Clarida, Jordi Galı́ and Mark
Gertler (1999), Robert Hetzel (2000), Sharon Kozicki (1999) and Michael Woodford (2001).

1

Mann 1993 and Taylor 1999c). The introduction by Taylor (1999a) gives a summary of the
standard approach of specifying a model, a class of simple instrument rules and a loss function
for evaluating alternative simple instrument rules in the class. From a descriptive perspective,
it has been examined to what extent simple instrument rules are good empirical descriptions
of central-bank behavior (see, for instance, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler 1998 and John Judd and
Glenn Rudebusch 1998). From a prescriptive perspective, it has been examined how simple
instrument rules perform (in the sense of stabilizing inflation around an inflation target without
causing unnecessary output-gap variability) in diﬀerent macro models.
The research on instrument rules has contributed many important insights. These insights
include that stability of inflation and determinacy (that is, uniqueness) of equilibria in stickyprice models require the long-run response of the short interest rate to inflation to be larger
than one-to-one, the so-called “Taylor principle” (see Taylor 1999b and Woodford 2001),3 and
that interest-rate smoothing, in the sense of responding to the lagged instrument rate, may
improve performance by introducing desirable “history-dependence” that beneficially influences
private-sector inflation expectations (see Julio Rotemberg and Woodford 1997 and Woodford
1999c). Other insights are that it is better that the instrument responds to the determinants
of the target variables than to the target variables themselves (for instance, even if inflation
is the only target variable (the only variable in the loss function), it is generally better to
respond to both current inflation and the output gap, since both of these are determinants of
future inflation; see for instance, Lars Svensson 1997a and Rudebusch and Svensson 1999), and
that the response coeﬃcients in the optimal reaction function depend on the weights in the
loss function on diﬀerent target variables in sometimes nonintuitive and complex ways (see, for
instance, Svensson 1997a). One line of research has examined to what extent a given simple
instrument rule is “robust,” in the sense of performing reasonably well in diﬀerent macro models.
Given the uncertainty about which model is the best representation of reality, little would then
be lost if central banks would apply a robust simple instrument rule. Results to date, although
arguably from not too diﬀerent models of closed economies, indicate that variants of the Taylor
rule can be quite robust in this sense.4
3

Several recent papers, for instance, Jess Benhabib, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martı́n Uribe (2001),
Charles Carlstrom and Timothy Fuerst (2000) and Lawrence Christiano and Christopher Gust (1999), examine determinacy and multiplicity of equilibria under the assumption that the central bank follows Taylor-type
instrument rules.
4
McCallum has in several papers, for instance, (1988), examined robustness properties of a simple instrument
rule for the monetary base. Andrew Levin, Volker Wieland and John Williams (1999) and Rudebusch (2002a)
examine the robustness properties of Taylor-type rules.

2

Thus, the answer from most of the literature on monetary-policy rules to the question posed
above seems to be that central banks should commit to following a specific simple instrument
rule. Indeed, Federal Reserve Board Governor Yellen, in a discussion of inflation targeting at
the FOMC meeting in January, 1995, (Federal Reserve Board 1995, p. 43-44), seems to prefer
a Taylor-type rule as a suitable policy rule for the Federal Reserve System:
[I]t seems to me that a reaction function in which the real funds rate changes by
roughly equal amounts in response to deviations of inflation from a target of 2 percent
and to deviations of actual from potential output describes tolerably well what this
Committee has done since 1986. This policy... is an example of the type of hybrid
rule that would be preferable [to inflation targeting] in my view, if we wanted a rule.
I think the Greenspan Fed has done very well following such a rule, and I think that
is what sensible central banks do.
Thus, if a central bank wants to commit itself to a simple instrument rule, it should announce
the simple instrument rule and then mechanically follow it. This has the further implication
that once the decision about the instrument rule is made, the decision process of the bank is exceedingly simple and mechanical. For the Taylor rule, it just consists of regularly collecting data
on inflation and output, collecting either external estimates of potential output or constructing
internal estimates, and then calculating the output gap. (Estimating potential output is a nontrivial matter, though, and a major challenge in practical monetary policy.) Once these inputs
in the Taylor rule are available, calculating the instrument-setting is completely mechanical. In
particular, there is no room for judgment (except that judgment may enter in the estimation of
potential output). As McCallum (2000) has expressed it, policy decisions could be turned over
to “a clerk armed with a simple formula and a hand calculator.”
However, another possible answer from the literature on policy rules is that the instrument
rules proposed should not be followed mechanically. Thus, a firm commitment to the instrument
rules is not desirable. Instead, the instrument rules should be seen as mere “guidelines” for
monetary policy. This is the view expressed by Taylor, for instance in Taylor (1993) and, in
more detail, in Taylor (2000). A problem with this answer and use of simple instrument rules is
that the rule is then incomplete: some deviations are allowed, but there are no rules for when
deviations from the instrument rulse are appropriate. As discussed further below, this arguably
makes the idea of simple instrument rules as mere guidlines for monetary policy too vague to
be operational.
The contrast between these two alternative answers from most of the literature on monetarypolicy rules and actual monetary-policy practice is striking. First, monetary-policy reform in a
3

number of countries during the 1990s has to a large extent focused on (1) formulating explicit
and increasingly precise objectives for monetary policy and (2) creating an institutional setting
where the central bank is strongly committed to achieving those objectives (see, for instance,
Ben Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin and Adam Posen 1999). Thus, there has
been commitment to objectives rather than to simple instrument rules. Second, central banks
have developed very elaborate and complex decision-making processes, where large amounts of
information are collected, processed and analyzed, and where considerable judgment is exercised
(see, for instance, Donald Brash 2001). Third, any simple rules of thumb actually used are
conditions for target variables or forecasts of target variables, rather than explicit formulas for
the instrument rate. This is the case, for instance, for the rule of thumb expressed by the Bank
of England and Sveriges Riksbank (the central bank of Sweden), that normally, the interest rate
should be adjusted such that the resulting inflation forecast at an appropriate horizon (usually
about two-years ahead) is on target.5 No central bank has so far made a commitment to a simple
instrument rule like the Taylor rule or variants thereof. Neither has any central bank announced
a particular instrument rule as a “guideline.”
Thus, there appears to be a substantial gap between the research on instrument rules and the
practice of monetary policy. This paper discusses and proposes a way to bridge that gap. From
a descriptive perspective, it argues that, in order to be useful for discussing real-world monetary
policy, the concept of monetary-policy rules has to be broadened and defined as “a prescribed
guide for monetary-policy conduct,” including “targeting rules” as well as “instrument rules.”6
Furthermore, it argues that the monetary-policy practice is better discussed in terms of targeting
rules than instrument rules. A general targeting rule specifies the objectives to be achieved, for
instance, by listing the target variables, the targets (target levels) for those variables, and the
5
This rule furthermore refers to constant-interest-rate forecasts, since both the Bank of England and the
Riksbank mainly rely on such forecasts.
The rule has been stated by Charles Goodhart (2000), former member of the Bank of England Monetary Policy
Committee, as: “When I was a member of the MPC I thought that I was trying, at each forecast round, to set the
level of interest rates, on each occasion, so that without the need for future rate changes prospective (forecast)
inflation would on average equal the target at the policy horizon. This was, I thought, what the exercise was
supposed to be.”
The rule has been stated by Lars Heikensten, First Deputy Governor of the Riksbank, as: “Monetary policy is
normally conducted so as to be on target, defined in terms of the CPI, one to two years ahead.” Furthermore, any
departures from this general rule, due to transitory disturbances to inflation or real costs from a quick return of
inflation to target, will be announced by the Riksbank in advance (Lars Heikensten 1999, p. 16). Heikensten and
Anders Vredin (1998) provide more discussion of the application of the rule. Claes Berg (1999) gives an extensive
account and discussion of the Riksbank’s implementation of inflation targeting.
6
Target(ing) rules have previously been discussed by Christopher Sims (1980) (see footnote 38 below), Kenneth
Rogoﬀ (1985), Carl Walsh (1998), Svensson (1997a, 1999b), Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), Stephen Cecchetti
(1998, 2000), Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) and Svensson and Woodford (2002a). After the first versions of
this paper were written, Marc Giannoni and Woodford have provided a derivation of an optimal targeting rule
in a general linear-quadratic model in (2002a) and a detailed discussion of optimal targeting rules in the basic
New-Keynsian model in (2002b).

4

(explicit or implicit) loss function to be minimized. A specific targeting rule specifies conditions
for the target variables (or forecasts of the target variables), for instance, like the above rule
of thumb of the Bank of England and the Riksbank. From a prescriptive perspective, this
paper argues that a commitment to targeting rules has a number of advantages, for instance, in
allowing the use of all relevant information, in particular, allowing the use of judgment, being
more robust to both disturbances and model variation than instrument rules, and likely leading
to better monetary-policy outcomes than instrument rules. Presumably, this is why real-world
monetary policy and monetary-policy reform have shunned commitment to instrument rules.
Before the rational-expectations revolution in macroeconomics, the behavior of firms and
households was frequently represented by simple ad hoc reaction functions, for instance, consumption and investment functions. The rational-expectations revolution led to an emphasis on
optimizing and forward-looking behavior by private agents, and their behavior being represented
by first-order conditions, Euler conditions, derived from their objectives and constraints. Still,
the pioneers of the rational-expectations revolution continued to represent economic policy by
mechanical reaction functions, which ignores that under optimizing policy those reaction functions would be as much subject to the essence of the Lucas critique (that reaction functions are
endogenous) as mechanical reaction functions for private agents.
Monetary policy by the world’s more advanced central banks these days is at least as optimizing and forward-looking as the behavior of the most rational private agents. I find it strange that
a large part of the literature on monetary policy still prefers to represent central bank behavior
with the help of mechanical instrument rules. The concept of general and specific targeting
rules is designed to provide a discussion of monetary policy rules that is fully consistent with
the optimizing and forward-looking nature of modern monetary policy. From this point of view,
general targeting rules essentially specify operational objectives for monetary policy and specific
targeting rules essentially specify operational Euler conditions for monetary policy. In particular, an optimal targeting rule expresses the equality of the marginal rates of transformation and
the marginal rates of substitution between the target variables in an operational way.7
7

Much monetary-policy reform during the last decade can be interpreted in terms of achieving a trinity of
(1) a mandate in the form of clear objectives for monetary policy, (2) operational independence for the central
bank, and (3) accountability of the central bank for fulfilling the mandate. Operational independence (also called
instrument-independence) protects the central bank from short-term political pressure to stray from its objectives
and accountability structures strengthens the bank’s commitment to fulfilling the mandate. This trinity can be
seen as directed towards making monetary policy goal-directed and therefore optimizing, systematic and rule-like.
New Zealand since the passing of the Reserve Bank Act in 1989, provides a good example and has been a source
of inspiration for reform in many other countries. In May 2000, I was asked by the Minister of Finance of the New
Zealand Government to conduct a review of monetary policy in New Zealand. The evaluation of the goal-directed
and forward-looking monetary policy in New Zealand raised many interesting issues and is discussed in Svensson

5

The rest of the paper is outlined as follows. Section 2 presents the monetary-policy problem facing an inflation-targeting central bank, namely, to stabilize inflation around an inflation
target with (under realistic “flexible” inflation targeting) some weight also on stabilizing the
output gap. The central-bank objective is expressed as a conventional intertemporal loss function to be minimized, subject to the central bank’s information about the state of the economy
and its view of the transmission mechanism. For concreteness, two simple examples of models
of the transmission mechanism are presented, one backward-looking and one forward-looking.
Section 3 discusses a direct optimal-control approach: to solve the optimization problem for the
optimal reaction function once and for all and then make a commitment to follow that reaction
function. It is shown that even in the simple examples of the transmission mechanism used
here, the optimal reaction functions are too complex to be practicable, not to mention verifiable
(further specified in section 3). For this and a number of other reasons discussed, the direct
optimal-control approach must be judged infeasible. Section 4 discusses a commitment to a
simple instrument rule, which, although in principle verifiable, is found to be inadequate as a
positive description of real-world inflation targeting and likely to be unsuitable as a normative
recommendation for monetary policy. This section also discusses the alternative weaker proposal
that simple instrument rules should be used as mere “guidelines,” from which deviations sometimes are called for; this proposal is however found incomplete, since it doesn’t specify when
deviations are appropriate. Section 5 defines targeting rules and argues that a commitment to
a targeting rule is both an appropriate description of real-world inflation targeting and a suitable normative recommendation for future monetary-policy developments. This section, as well
as the previous two sections to some extent, also responds to recent discussion by McCallum
(2000), McCallum and Edward Nelson (2000) and Woodford (1999a) regarding the positive and
normative role of commitment to instrument rules and targeting rules. Section 6 summarizes
and presents some conclusions. Appendices A-C contain technical and other details.

2 The monetary-policy problem
In order to induce suﬃcient precision and clarity in the discussion, and to avoid the confusion and
misunderstanding in some of the literature on monetary-policy rules, it is necessary to provide
a bit of formal notation. Inflation targeting involves stabilizing inflation around an inflation
target. In practice, as discussed in a number of recent contributions (see, for instance, Federal
(2001a).

6

Reserve Bank of Kansas City 1996, 1999), inflation targeting is “flexible” inflation targeting,
in the sense that it also involves some concern about the stability of the real economy.8 These
objectives are conventionally and conveniently expressed as an intertemporal loss function to
be minimized in each period t, t = ..., −1, 0, 1, ..., consisting of the expected sum of discounted
current and future losses,

"

E (1 − δ)

∞
X
τ =0

#

δ τ Lt+τ | It , z t .

(2.1)

Here E[·|It , z t ] denotes rational expectations conditional on the central bank’s information, It ,
in period t about the state of the economy and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy,
and the bank’s “judgment,” z t , to be further specified below. Furthermore, δ (0 < δ < 1) is a
discount factor and Lt denotes the period loss in period t. The scaling by 1 − δ is practical, since
then the scaled discount factors sum to unity, so the intertemporal loss is a weighted average
of the expected period loss and hence of the same order of magnitude. The period loss is a
weighted sum of the squared inflation gap and the squared output gap,
Lt =

¤
1£
(π t − π ∗ )2 + λx2t ,
2

(2.2)

where λ > 0 is a given weight on output-gap stabilization relative to inflation stabilization.
Since the implicit output target in (2.2) is not subject to choice but given by potential output,
the output target is not “overambitious”, so there is no conspicuous reason for an inflation
bias (average inflation above the inflation target) as in the literature on the time-consistency
problem following Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1977) and Robert Barro and David
Gordon (1983). “Strict” inflation targeting would be the (unrealistic) special case of λ = 0.
Thus, for λ > 0, we have flexible inflation targeting and both inflation and the output gap
are target variables (target variables in the sense of entering the loss function). (The abovementioned FOMC discussion of inflation targeting in January 1995, Federal Reserve Board1
995, p. 38-59, is very interesting but somewhat surprising, since all FOMC members seem to
interpret inflation targeting as strict inflation targeting, and no member seems aware of the fact
that real-world inflation targeting is flexible inflation targeting.)9
Many papers assume a loss function of the form
1
(Var[π t ] + λVar[xt ]),
2
8

(2.3)

I thus here abstract from any separate objective to stabilize or smooth interest rates, an objective which is
diﬃcult to rationalize. Such objectives and their consequences are discussed separately in section 5.6.
9
Note that, since the intertemporal loss function is the expected discounted future losses, this formulation
includes the realistic case when potential output, yt∗ , is unobservable and has to be estimated.

7

the weighted unconditional variances of inflation and the output gap. This loss function can be
seen as the limit of (2.1): The limit when the discount factor approaches unity, δ → 1, can be
shown to equal10
ª 1
1©
(E[π t ] − π ∗ )2 + λE[xt ]2 + {Var[π t ] + λVar[xt ]}.
2
2

Thus, if the unconditional means fulfill E[π t ] = π ∗ and E[xt ] = 0, the limit of the intertemporal
loss function is (2.3).
The monetary-policy problem for the central bank is then to set its monetary-policy instrument each period t, it (usually a short interest rate, the “instrument rate”), so as to minimize
the intertemporal loss function (2.1), subject to the central bank’s information, It , about the
state of the economy (including its view of the transmission mechanism for monetary policy,
that is, how the instrument aﬀects the target variables) and the central bank’s judgment, z t (see
below).
For concreteness, I will use two simple examples of standard models of the transmission
mechanism, one “backward-looking” and one “forward-looking”.
2.1 Example 1: A simple backward-looking model of the transmission mechanism
This example of a simple backward-looking model of a closed economy is a variant of that in
Svensson (1997a) and Rudebusch and Svensson (1999).11 The model has a one-period control
lag for the output gap, and a two-period control lag for inflation. For reasons explained below in
section 5.4.1, it is practical (and not unrealistic) to let the period be some 3 quarters (the period
in Svensson 1997a is taken to be about a year). The main simplification of the backward-looking
model is that private-sector expectations are implicitly treated as adaptive expectations, which
simplifies the discussion considerably.
Suppose aggregate supply (the Phillips curve) is given by
π t+1 = π t + αx xt + αz zt+1 + εt+1 ,

(2.4)

where the coeﬃcient αx is positive, zt+1 is a column vector exogenous variables discussed below,
αz is a corresponding row vector of coeﬃcients multiplying the elements of zt+1 , so αz zt+1 is
the scalar product of the two vectors, and εt is an iid “cost-push” shock with zero mean and
10
11

The scaling by 1 − δ in (2.1) keeps the limit finite.
Laurence Ball (1999) has later used the same model as Svensson (1997a).

8

variance σ 2ε . Let aggregate demand (in terms of the output gap) be given by
xt+1 = β x xt + β z zt+1 − β r (rt − r̄) + η t+1 ,

(2.5)

where the coeﬃcients β x and β r are positive, β z is a row vector of coeﬃcients multiplying the
elements of zt+1 , rt is a short real interest rate given by
rt ≡ it − π t+1|t ,

(2.6)

where it is a short nominal interest rate and the central bank’s instrument, r̄ is the average
real interest rate, and η t is an iid “excess demand” shock with zero mean and variance σ 2η .12
Furthermore, qt+τ |t for any variable q denotes Et qt+τ |t ≡ E[qt+τ |It ], the rational expectation of
qt+τ conditional on the information available in period t, It . Under the assumption of symmetric
information, the private sector has the same information as the central bank, so π t+1|t is oneperiod-ahead private-sector inflation expectations, and hence it − π t+1|t is the short real interest
rate. Potential output, yt∗ , is assumed to be an exogenous stochastic process.
Let zt+1 be a vector of exogenous variables in period t + 1 that are not known in period t
and earlier periods (and potentially unobservable also on period t + 1 and later periods). It is
called the deviation. The idea is that it represents additional determinants of future inflation
(when the corresponding elements of the vector αz are nonzero) and the output gap (when
the corresponding elements of β z are nonzero) than current inflation and the output gap, or
the deviation of the true model of inflation and output-gap determination from the simple
model with the deviation equal to zero. Thus, the sequence of deviations, {zt+τ }∞
τ =−∞ can
be interpreted as potentially unobservable model perturbations, as in the literature on robust
control.13 The central bank’s estimate of zt+τ in period t is denoted by zt+τ ,t . The sequence
z t ≡ {zt+τ ,t }∞
τ =−∞ of the bank’s estimate in period t of past and future deviations is identified
with the bank’s judgment in period t. It represents the unavoidable judgment (almost) always
applied in monetary policy. Any explicit model is always taken as, at best, an approximation
of the true model of the economy, and monetary-policy makers always find it necessary to
make some judgmental adjustments to the results of any given model. The so-called “add
factors” applied to model equations in central-bank projections are one aspect of central-bank
12

A slightly more complex variant of the backward-looking model would replace the constant average real
interest rate, r̄, with an exogenous stochastic time-varying Wicksellian real natural interest rate, rt∗ , as in the
forward-looking model below.
13
See, for instance, Lars Hansen and Thomas Sargent (1998) and Alexei Onatski and James Stock (2000).
However, that literature deals with the more complex case when the model perturbations are endogenous and
chosen by nature to correspond to a worst-case scenario.

9

judgment, see David Reifschneider, David Stockton and David Wilcox (1997). The general
notation obviously allows for judgement aﬀecting both future inflation and output as well as
estimates of potential output.
One possibility is that the period-t deviation, zt , is observable in period t and later periods,
that only future deviations are not known and need to be estimated. Another possibility is that
also the current and past deviations are unobservable and need to be estimated.that future.
One simple information structure consistent with the latter case is when inflation π t , output yt ,
potential output yt∗ , and the short real rate rt are all observable in period t, but the shocks εt
and ηt are unobservable. A somewhat more complex (but very realistic) information structure
would make a time-variable component of potential output unobservable and aﬀected by the
deviation. Since what enters in the intertemporal loss function is expected current and future
period losses, the intertemporal loss function is consistent with potential output and the output
gap being unobservable. In the aggregate demand equation, the deviation could be interpreted
as an unobservable time-variable component of a Wicksellian natural real interest rate.
Given this interpretation of the deviation zt+1 , it would be completely misleading to make a
simplifying assumption like it being an exogenous autoregressive process.14 Thus, I will refrain
from such an assumption and instead leave the dynamic properties of zt+1 unspecified (except
assuming that the unconditional mean of the deviation is zero, E[zt+1 ] = 0). Instead, the focus
will be on the central bank’s judgment z t in period t of the whole sequence of future (and current
and past) deviations. For simplicity, I assume that the central bank’s judgment is exogenous
in any period t. For simplicity, I also assume that there is symmetric information in that the
private sector has the same information about the economy and the transmission mechanism, and
that the private sector’s rational expectation in period t of the sequence {zt+τ }∞
τ =−∞ , denoted
z|t ≡ {zt+τ |t }∞
τ =−∞ (the private-sector judgment), coincides with the central-bank judgment,
z t .15
Thus, I assume that π t and xt are observable and known in the beginning of period t.
Furthermore, I assume that the central bank’s instrument it is then set for the duration of
14

For instance, assuming that the deviation follows zt+1 = Γzt + θt+1 , where Γ is a matrix with eigenvalues
inside the unit circle and θt+1 is a vector of zero-mean iid shocks with constant covariance matrix.
15
Thus, under the assumption of observable inflation and output gaps and unobservable shocks εt and η t , the
central bank’s and the private sector’s estimates in period t + 1 of the unobservable cost-push and excess-demand
shocks are by (2.4) and (2.5) trivially given by
εt+1,t+1 = εt+1|t+1 = πt+1 − πt − αy (yt − yt∗ ) − αz zt+1,t+1
and

∗
η t+1,t+1 = η t+1|t+1 = yt+1 − yt+1
− β y (yt − yt∗ ) − β z zt+1,t+1 + β r (rt − r̄),

10

period t. Note that one-period-ahead inflation expectations, π t+1|t , are predetermined,
π t+1|t = π t + αx xt + αz zt+1|t ,

(2.7)

in the sense that they do not depend on the instrument setting in period t, it , and only depend
on π t , xt and zt+1|t , which in turn are predetermined because of (2.4), (2.5) and the assumption
that zt is exogenous.16
Thus, the setup implies that inflation and the output gap in the current period t are predetermined by previous decisions and current exogenous shocks (the shocks include the diﬀerence
between the deviation and the previous private-sector judgment, zt+1 −zt+1|t ). Current inflation
expectations for the next period, π t+1|t , are also predetermined by current inflation, the output
gap and the deviation according to (2.7). Actual inflation in the next period, π t+1 , will then
equal these inflation expectations plus next period’s unobservable cost-push shock, εt+1 , and
the eﬀect of any unanticipated shock to the deviation, zt+1 − zt+1|t . Next period’s output gap,
xt+1 , will be determined by the current variables, current inflation expectations, the current
instrument setting, it , next period’s deviation, zt+1 , and next period’s output-gap shock, η t+1 .
Thus, the central bank can aﬀect the output gap in the next period, but it cannot aﬀect inflation
until two periods ahead. That is, the control lags for the output gap and inflation are one and
two periods (3 and 6 quarters), respectively. As shown in Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), a
variant of this simple backward-looking model fits U.S. data quite well.
2.2 Example 2: A simple forward-looking model of the transmission mechanism
As another example of a standard model of the transmission mechanism, consider the so-called
New-Keynesian model with forward-looking aggregate-supply and aggregate-demand relations,
similar to the one used in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999). I use the variant in Svensson and
Woodford (2002a), where current inflation and output gap is not forward-looking but predetermined one period (which is easily motivated as a minimum move towards realism). Instead,
the one-period-ahead inflation and output-gap expectations (or “plans”, see below), π t+1|t and
xt+1|t , are forward-looking.17 Furthermore, I use a variant, as in Tack Yun (1996), which allows
firms to index prices to the average inflation rate rather than, somewhat arbitrary, only allowing
16

Intuitively, a variable is predetermined if it only depends on lagged variables and current exogenous shocks.
Formally, a variable is predetermined if it has exogenous one-period-ahead forecast errors.
17
Intuitively, a variable is forward-looking (non-predetermined, or a jump variable) if it depends on expectations
of future variables. Formally, a variable is forward-looking if it has endogenous one-period-ahead forecast errors.

11

constant prices between opportunities for price adjustment, as in Guillermo Calvo (1983).18 The
aggregate-supply and aggregate-demand equations are
π t+1 − π = δ(π t+2|t − π) + αx xt+1|t + αz zt+1 + εt+1 ,
∗
) + β z zt+1 + η t+1 ,
xt+1 = xt+2|t − β r (it+1|t − π t+2|t − rt+1

(2.8)
(2.9)

where π ≡ E[π t ] is the average inflation rate, εt+1 and η t+1 are iid “cost-push” and “excessdemand” shocks, and rt∗ is an exogenous Wicksellian natural interest rate corresponding to a
“neutral” real interest rate consistent with a zero output gap in the absence of deviations (see
Woodford 2000b for further discussion of the Wicksellian natural interest rate). (For simplicity,
the private-sector discount factor δ in (2.8) is taken to be the same as in the monetary-policy
loss function (2.1).) Again, the exogenous deviation zt+1 enters both equations, to emphasize
the approximative nature of the simple model and the unavoidability of central-bank judgment.
In this model, private-sector one-period-ahead “plans” for inflation and the output gap,
π t+1|t and xt+1|t , are determined in period t by
π t+1|t − π = δ(π t+2|t − π) + αx xt+1|t + αz zt+1|t ,
∗
) + β z zt+1|t .
xt+1|t = xt+2|t − β r (it+1|t − π t+2|t − rt+1|t

Thus, the one-period-ahead inflation plan depends on expected future inflation, π t+2|t , the
output-gap plan, xt+1|t , and the private-sector judgment, zt+1|t . The one-period-ahead outputgap plan depends on the expected future output gap, xt+2|t , the expected one-period-ahead
∗
∗
≡ rt+1|t − rt+1|t
, and the private-sector judgment,
real interest-rate gap, it+1|t − π t+2|t − rt+1|t

zt+1|t . Actual inflation and output gap in period t will then diﬀer from the plans because of the
unanticipated shocks,
π t+1 = π t+1|t + αz (zt+1 − zt+1|t ) + εt+1 ,
∗
∗
− rt+1|t
) + β z (zt+1 − zt+1|t ) + ηt+1 .
xt+1 = xt+1|t + β r (rt+1

Thus, in this model, the period-t expectation of the instrument in period t + 1, it+1|t , is
what aﬀects future inflation and the output gap. I will assume that the central bank in period
18
The assumption that firms can index prices to average inflation between price adjustment opportunities has
the advantage that the long-run Phillips curve becomes vertical rather than positively sloped (see also the appendix
of the working-paper version of Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2001)). In the common formulation, used
for instance in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999), the Phillips curve is instead (without the assumption of prices
predetermined one period)
πt = δπ t+1|t + αx xt ,

which implies that the long-run Phillips curve (when δ < 1) fulfills π = αx x/(1 − δ), where π and x is the average
inflation and output gap, respectively.

12

t announces what interest rate it will set in period t + 1, it+1,t . Since the central bank has no
incentive to stray ex post from any such announcement (since the interest rate does not enter
the period loss function (2.2)), I assume that it will set the actual interest rate it+1 according
to its previous announcement and that the announcement hence will be credible and equal to
the private-sector expectations,19
it+1 = it+1,t = it+1|t .

3 A direct optimal-control approach: Commitment to an optimal instrument
rule
A direct optimal-control approach to the monetary-policy problem would be to solve the monetarypolicy problem once-and-for-all for the optimal reaction function (for a given model, or, more
generally, for a given probability distribution of models). This would result in an optimal reaction function, where the instrument in period t would be a function of the information available
in period t, It , and the central bank’s judgment, z t ,
it = F (It , z t ).
The optimal reaction function referred to here is the “explicit” reaction function, in the
sense that the instrument is written as a function of current and lagged predetermined variables
and judgment only. In a linear model with predetermined and forward-looking variables and
a quadratic loss function, there is a unique form of the explicit reaction function (see David
Currie and Paul Levine 1993, Paul Söderlind 1999 and Svensson 1999b). (This is for a given
minimum set of linearly independent predetermined variables; a model can of course trivially be
expressed in terms of alternative sets of linearly independent predetermined variables). Since,
in equilibrium, the forward-looking variables will be linear functions of the predetermined variables, the instrument can of course be written as a continuum of linear functions of both the
forward-looking and the predetermined variables.20 In the literature, it is quite common to discuss such reaction functions where the instrument responds not to predetermined variables but
19
Formally, we could say that the central bank instrument in period t is really the announcement, it+1,t , of
the future interest rate, rather than the current interest rate, it .
20
Let Xt and Zt denote the column vectors of predetermined and forward-looking variables, respectively.
Disregard judgment, for simplicity. Let it = F Xt be the unique explicit reaction function (for simplicity, under
optimization under discretion; under commitment the optimal reaction function also involves Lagrange multipliers
of the forward-looking equations and thereby lags of the predetermined variables, see below) where F is a unique
row vector or a matrix, depending on whether there are one or several instruments. In equilibrium (under
discretion), the forward-looking variables will be given by Zt = GXt , where G is a unique matrix. For any matrix
K of appropriate dimension, the instrument fulfills the implicit reaction function it = KZt + (F − KG)Xt .

13

to forward-looking variables. These can be called “implicit” reaction functions, since they express a functional relation between the instrument and another endogenous non-predetermined
variable. They are indeed equilibrium conditions, which need to be solved together with the rest
of the model in order to determine the instrument setting. Thus, explicit and implicit reaction
functions, and corresponding explicit and implicit instrument rules, are conceptually distinct. In
particular, implicit instrument rules are not directly operational, since they involve an endogenous variable that depends on the instrument setting. In any realistic model, current inflation
and the output gap are predetermined, also in the intuitive sense that they cannot be aﬀected
by current monetary-policy decisions. Then a Taylor rule (with the current instrument rate
responding to current inflation and the current output gap) is an explicit reaction function. In
many (unrealistic) models, current inflation and the output gap are forward-looking variables.
Then a Taylor rule is an implicit reaction function, an equilibrium condition. McCallum, in
(1999), for instance, has emphasized a related point; that a Taylor rule in a quarterly setting
is not operational, since output and inflation in the current quarter is reported with a lag and
therefore not known in the current quarter. However, in such a setting, as discussed in Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), a Taylor rule can be reformulated in terms of responding to the
current estimates of current, yet unreported, output and inflation. As long as these estimates
rely on predetermined information, such a Taylor rule would still be an explicit instrument
rule.21 Since, in practice, data on economic variables are revised several times, all published
data, also of past economic variables, are imperfect estimates of underlying variables. However,
verification of a particular instrument rule is of course easier if it relies on published data.
Once the above optimization problem is solved and the optimal (explicit) reaction function
is determined, the central bank would then make a commitment to follow the optimal reaction
function, and follow it mechanically ever after. Thus, once the commitment is made, there is no
more optimizing. This can be called a commitment to the optimal instrument rule.
There are many problems with this approach. For a model with forward-looking variables,
the optimal reaction function is generally not time-consistent, in the sense that the central bank
has an incentive to depart from it in the future. This is the case even if the output target is
equal to potential output and not overambitious, as is the case in the period loss function (2.2).
This is because, even if there is no problem with an average inflation bias, there is a problem
with “stabilization bias” and a lack of “history-dependence,” to be further discussed below.
21
Svensson and Woodford (2002b) discuss problems when these estimates depend on forward-looking observable
variables.

14

Therefore the commitment to the optimal instrument rule in a forward-looking variable requires
a commitment mechanism, a mechanism by which the central bank can be bound to follow the
optimal reaction function in the future. This in turn requires the optimal instrument rule to be
verifiable. By this I mean that it can be objectively and unequivocally established whether the
central bank is diverging from the reaction function in question or not.22
In any realistic model, the technical problem of deriving the optimal reaction function is
overwhelmingly diﬃcult, and the resulting optimal reaction function overwhelmingly complex.
Thus, even if the optimal reaction function could be calculated, it would be far too complex to
ever be verifiable. In fact, the optimal reaction function is overwhelmingly complex even for the
simple models presented above, once the optimal response to judgment is taken into account.
3.1 The backward-looking model
For the backward-looking model, (2.4) and (2.5), appendix A, equation (A.11), shows that the
optimal reaction function is given by
it

µ
¶
1−c
β
= r̄ + π + 1 +
(π t+1,t − π ∗ ) + x xt
αx β r
βr
βz
1−c
+ zt+1,t +
αz z̃t+2,t ,
βr
αx β r
∗

where it is practical to define, for τ ≥ 0,
z̃t+τ ,t ≡

∞
X
(δc)s zt+τ +s,t ,

(3.1)

(3.2)

s=0

the discounted sum (with the discount factor δc) of judgments of future deviations in period t,
starting τ periods ahead (in this case, τ = 2). Furthermore, the coeﬃcient c, given by equations
(A.10) and (A.7), depends on the parameters of the model,23 is an increasing function c(λ) of λ,
the relative weight on output-gap variability in the loss function (2.2), and fulfills 0 ≤ c(λ) < 1,
with c(0) = 0 and c(∞) ≡ limλ→∞ c(λ) = 1. Moreover, π t+1,t denotes the central bank’s
one-period-ahead forecast of inflation, given by
π t+1,t = π t + αx xt + αz zt+1,t .

(3.3)

This inflation forecast is predetermined in period t, so it is independent of the instrument it in
period t. (Under the assumption of symmetric information, the central-bank inflation forecast,
π t+1,t , coincides with private-sector inflation expectations, π t+1|t .)
22

See Oliver Hart (1995) and Jean Tirole (1999) for discussion of the role of verifiability for commitment and
incomplete contracts.
23
The coeﬃcient c is the smaller root of the characteristic equation of the diﬀerence equation, (A.9), resulting
from the model and the first-order conditions.

15

The first row of (3.1) is not so complex, being a simple Taylor-type rule, with intercept
r̄ + π ∗ , a positive response to the (predetermined) one-period-ahead forecast of the inflation gap,
π t+1,t − π ∗ , with a coeﬃcient above unity (since 1 + (1 − c)/αx β r > 1), and a positive response to
the output gap, with the coeﬃcient β x /β r . Given (3.3), this can also be expressed as a response
to the current inflation gap, π t − π ∗ , with a coeﬃcient above unity, which is in line with the
Taylor principle mentioned above.
However, the second row of (3.1) shows the optimal response to judgment, which is quite
complex even for this simple model. Of course, with the simplifying assumption that the deviation is an AR(1) process, the second row would be simpler and consist of a response to the vector
zt,t , still with a rather complex coeﬃcient. But, as argued above, such a simplifying assumption
is totally unwarranted for any realistic form of judgment.24
3.2 The forward-looking model
For the forward-looking model, appendix B, equation (B.15), shows that the optimal interestrate decision and announcement in period t for the interest rate in period t + 1, it+1,t , is given
by
αx λ
) c(1 − c)xt,t−1
λβ r αx
β
αx
+ z zt+1,t + (1 −
)c{[1 − δc(1 − c)]αz z̃t+2,t − (1 − c)αz zt+1,t }.
βr
λβ r

∗
+ π ∗ + (1 −
it+1,t = rt+1,t

(3.5)

where As shown in appendix B, equation (B.7), the optimal policy has no average inflation bias,
so average inflation equals the inflation target,
π = π∗ .

(3.6)

The coeﬃcient c in (3.5), given by (A.10) and (B.11), although not identical to that in (3.1),
is still also an increasing function of λ, c(λ), that fulfills 0 ≤ c(λ) < 1, with c(0) = 0 and
c(∞) ≡ limλ→∞ c(λ) = 1. Furthermore, z̃t+2,t is defined as in (3.2) (for τ = 2), although with
the new coeﬃcient c(λ).
24
In the unrealistic case of strict inflation targeting, λ = 0, we have c(λ) = c(0) = 0, and the optimal reaction
function becomes
β
β
1
αz
)(πt+1,t − π∗ ) + x xt + z zt+1,t +
zt+2,t
(3.4)
it = r̄ + π ∗ + (1 +
αx β r
βr
βr
αx β r

(which corresponds to (3.1) with c(λ) = 0, when we use the convention that 00 = 1). Thus, we see how the
optimal instrument rate should respond to the one-period-ahead forecast of the inflation gap, πt+1,t − π∗ , the
current output gap, xt , the one- and two-period-ahead forecasts of the exogenous variable, zt+1,t and zt+2,t . Even
in the simple case of strict inflation targeting, judgment matters (in the form of the one- and two-period-ahead
forecasts of the deviation).

16

Thus, for the forward-looking model, the optimal reaction function is diﬀerent from a Taylor
rule. Instead, it corresponds to a response to the central bank’s forecast of the Wicksellian real
∗
, with a unit coeﬃcient, a response to the lagged forecast of the output gap,
interest rate, rt+1,t

xt,t−1 , and a quite complex response to judgment. The response to the lagged forecast of the
output gap illustrates that the optimal reaction function under commitment involves responses
to lagged states of the economy, what is called “history dependence” in Woodford (1999c).25
In a forward-looking model, such history-dependence has a beneficial impact on private-sector
expectations.
Appendix B, equation (B.16), shows that the lagged forecast of the output gap fulfills
xt,t−1 = −

∞

αx c X j
c αz z̃t−j,t−1−j .
λ

(3.7)

j=0

Thus, (3.7) can be substituted into (3.5), in which case the optimal reaction function can be
written as a complex response to current and previous judgment, in addition to the one-to-one
response to the forecast of the Wicksellian real interest rate.26
With forward-looking variables, the optimal reaction function is not time-consistent, and each
period the central bank has an incentive to temporarily depart from it. Thus, a commitment
mechanism and corresponding verifiability of the reaction function is necessary. However, even
in this exceedingly simple model of the transmission mechanism, the optimal reaction function
is quite complex, especially with regard to judgment, and certainly impossible to verify.27
25
We note that the response to the lagged output-gap forcast can be of either sign, depending on whether λ is
greater or smaller than αx /β r .
26
The lagged central-bank output-gap forecast, xt,t−1 , is in equilibrium equal to the lagged private-sector
output-gap expectation/plan, xt|t−1 , since the central bank and the private sector are assumed to have the same
information. For the purpose of this paper, since we do not discuss the issue of determinacy of equilibrium, it
does not matter whether it is the central-bank forecast or the private-sector expectation/plan that enters the
reaction function (3.5). For the issue of determinacy in this forward-looking model, this does matter. More
precisely, it matters whether the optimal reaction function is understood as a response to any realized value of
an endogenous variable, such as private-sector expectations/plans xt|t−1 , or to the actual values of the exogenous
shocks determining the equilibrium values of the endogenous variables, as in (3.7). These issues are discusssed
in detail in Svensson and Woodford (2002a). There it is shown how determinacy can be ensured under diﬀerent
implementations of inflation-forecast targeting.
27
In the unrealistic case of strict inflation targeting, λ = 0, the optimal reaction function is (see (B.17))
∗
it+1,t = rt+1,t
+

βz
αz
zt+1,t −
(zt+2,t − zt+1,t ).
βr
αx β r

Under strict inflation targeting, there is no problem with time-consistency (because there is no tradeoﬀ between
inflation- and output-gap stability). The optimal reaction function still involves response to judgment for one and
two periods ahead.

17

3.3 A commitment to the optimal instrument rule is impracticable
For several reasons, the direct optimal-control approach with a once-and-for-all calculation of
the optimal reaction function and then a commitment to this reaction function is completely
impracticable. Indeed, this conclusion seems to be part of the conventional wisdom, and a
commitment to an optimal instrument rule has no advocates, as far as I know. We have already
seen that, even in these two very simple models, the optimal reaction functions are quite complex,
as soon as there is a role for deviations from the simple model and judgment of those deviations.
This complexity makes verifiability impossible, although verifiability is necessary as soon as
there is a time-consistency problem and an incentive to temporarily depart from the optimal
reaction function. In more realistic models, the complexity increases dramatically further. The
optimal reaction function indeed requires that every conceivable contingency can be anticipated,
which is clearly impossible.
There are also more fundamental problems with the idea of a once-and-for-all commitment. If
this commitment is possible in a particular period, what is special with that period? Why didn’t
the commitment occur in a previous period, leaving no possibility to recommitment this period?
Woodford (1999a) has provided an ingenious solution to that problem, by proposing a more
sophisticated kind of commitment, “in a timeless perspective.” This involves a commitment to
recommit only to reaction functions to which one would have preferred to commit oneself far
into the past. This is a commitment not to exploit the possibility of a one-time “surprise” at the
time of the recommitment. It allows optimal recommitment, for instance when new information
about the transmission mechanism arrives, without the disadvantage of the negative eﬀect on
expectations that the possibility of surprises otherwise induces.
But Woodford’s ingenious idea does not diminish the already overwhelming problem of
enforcement and verifiability of a commitment to a complex instrument rule. For practical
purposes, the direct optimal-control approach, with either a once-and-for-all commitment or
continuous recommitment in a timeless perspective, will only be a theoretical benchmark for
evaluation purposes. It is not a coincidence that no central bank has tried to implement this
approach. For a practical monetary-policy rule, we have to look elsewhere.

18

4 Commitment to a simple instrument rule
Let me start by specifying the idea of a commitment to a simple instrument rule. The first step
is to consider a restricted class of reaction functions, namely where the instrument is a function
only of a particular small subset, I¯t , of the central bank’s information, It ,
it = f (I¯t ).
Typically, the instrument is restricted to be a linear function of the target variables (inflation
and (estimates of) the output gap) and the lagged instrument, which results in a Taylor-type
rule with interest-rate smoothing. Then the reaction function is
it = f¯ + fπ (π t − π ∗ ) + fx xt + fi it−1 ,

(4.1)

where the constant f¯ and the coeﬃcients fπ , fx and fi remain to be determined. The Taylor rule,
(1.1), is the best known special case. In the realistic situation when inflation and the output gap
are predetermined, (4.1) makes the instrument a simple function of predetermined variables,
called an explicit instrument rule in Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), Svensson (1999b) and
Svensson and Woodford (2002a).
Once the class of reaction functions is determined, the second step is to determine the
numerical values of its parameters; for the case of (4.1), the constant f¯ and the coeﬃcients fπ ,
fx and fi ). The coeﬃcients can either be chosen so that the reaction function minimizes the
intertemporal loss function (2.1) for a particular model (is optimal for a given model and the
given class of reaction functions), or such that it performs reasonably well for a few alternative
models (is “robust” over a class of models).28
For the backward-looking model above, one simple instrument rule is just to forget about
the judgment part in (3.1) and instead follow the reaction function
¶
µ
1−c
β
(π t+1,t − π ∗ ) + x xt .
it = r̄ + π ∗ + 1 +
αx β r
βr

(4.2)

As noted, this is a variant of the Taylor rule, with the predetermined one-period ahead forecast
of the inflation gap entering instead of the current inflation gap. Using the expression of the inflation forecast in (3.3), but disregarding the judgment part of (3.3), results in the corresponding
28
The contributions to the conference volume edited by Taylor, (1999c), provide many examples on commitment
to alternative simple instrument rules; see especially the introduction by Taylor (1999a). The dominance of this
approach in current research is indicated by the fact that, in this volume, only Rudebusch and Svensson (1999)
also consider targeting rules.

19

simple reaction function of current inflation and output gaps,
¶
¶
µ
µ
1−c
1 − c βx
∗
∗
(π t − π ) + αx +
xt .
+
it = r̄ + π + 1 +
αx β r
βr
βr

(4.3)

For the forward-looking model above, the obvious corresponding reaction function that disregards judgment in (3.5) would be
∗
+ π ∗ + (1 −
it+1,t = rt+1,t

αx λ
) c(1 − c)xt,t−1 .
λβ r αx

(4.4)

In this case, the obvious simple reaction function diﬀers from the Taylor rule. Also, arguably it
is not so simple, since it responds to the one-period-ahead forecast of the Wicksellian natural
interest rate, which may be diﬃcult to estimate in practice. Furthermore, it responds to the
previous one-period-ahead output-gap forecast rather than the current output gap (estimate).
All this makes it less simple and also less easy to verify.29
The third step, finally, is for the central bank to commit to the particular simple instrument
rule chosen and then follow it ever after, or at least until there is a recommitment to a new
instrument rule. More precisely, once the simple instrument rule has been specified, the central
bank’s decision process is exceedingly simple.
In the backward-looking model, if the central bank has specified the form (4.3) of the simple
instrument rule, the decision-making process thereafter can be described as follows: (1) Collect
data on current inflation and current output. (2) Estimate potential output (which as noted
above is a nontrivial step) and then subtract from output to get the current output gap. (3) Use
(4.3) to calculate it . (4) Announce and implement it . (5) In the next period, start over again.
If the central bank has specified the form (4.2) of the simple instrument rule, the decisionmaking process is somewhat more elaborate after (2): (3) One alternative is to be sophisticated,
form the judgment zt+1,t , and use this together with current inflation and the output gap to form
π t+1,t according to (3.3). Another alternative is to be unsophisticated, disregard any judgment,
and use only current inflation and the output gap in (3.3) to form π t+1,t . In the former case,
there is still some partial role for judgment, in the latter not. (4) Use π t+1,t and xt in (4.2) to
calculate it . (5) Announce and implement it . (6) In the next period, start over again.
In the forward-looking model, the steps are as follows: (1) Construct a one-period-ahead
∗
. This is a nontrivial step, comparable
forecast of the Wicksellian natural interest rate, rt+1,t

to estimating potential output. (2) Recall the one-period-ahead output-gap forecast from the
29

Also, recall that the response to the lagged output-gap forcast can be of either sign, cf. footnote 25.

20

∗
previous period, xt,t−1 . (3) Use rt+1,t
and xt+1,t in (4.4) to calculate it+1,t . (4) Construct the

one-period-ahead output-gap forecast, xt+1,t , to be used in the interest-rate decision next period.
This is a nontrivial step; it involves combining (5.5), (5.6) and (4.4) to solve for the resulting
output-gap forecast. (5) Announce it+1,t . (6) In period t + 1, implement it+1 = it+1,t and start
over again.
The fact that the simple instrument rule (4.4) relies on the lagged one-period-ahead outputgap forecast, and the fact that constructing this is not so easy, makes this simple instrument
rule still somewhat complex. A simpler instrument rule would be to follow a Taylor-type rule
with interest-rate smoothing, (4.1). As discussed in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), as long
as fπ > 1 so the Taylor principle is upheld, this results in a unique equilibrium in the forwardlooking model, although the Taylor-type rule will result in a worse outcome (a larger value of
the loss function (2.1)) than (4.4). In this case, the decision process would be the same simple
one as for the backward-looking model with the instrument rule (4.2).
4.1 Advantages of a commitment to a simple instrument rule
The advantages of a commitment to a simple instrument rule are that (1) the simplicity of the
instrument rule makes commitment technically feasible, and (2) simple instrument rules may be
relatively robust.
Suﬃcient simplicity of the instrument rule, for instance, if it is restricted to be a Taylortype rule with interest-rate smoothing like (4.1), implies that it is easily verifiable. Then, a
commitment is, in principle, feasible.
Some research indicates that a Taylor-type rule with interest-rate smoothing is relatively
robust, in the sense that it performs tolerably well for a variety of models. This idea of robust
simple instrument rules has been promoted and examined in several papers by McCallum and
recently restated in McCallum (1999). Results of Levin, Wieland and Williams (1999) for a
set of models of the U.S. economy indicate that a Taylor-type reaction function with interestrate smoothing may be relatively robust in this sense. Intuitively, in (almost) closed-economy
models where future inflation and the output gap mainly depend linearly on current inflation,
the output gap and the instrument rate, a Taylor-type instrument rule with the right coeﬃcients
will be optimal or close to optimal (as is for instance the case in the backward-model above, in
the absence of any deviations). The models examined by Levin, Wieland and Williams (1999)
are all of this type, as is the model used in Rudebusch and Svensson (1999). On the other hand,

21

even for such a restricted class of reaction functions (where the Federal funds rate only depends
on the inflation gap, the output gap and the lagged Federal funds rate), there is still considerable
variation in the suggested magnitudes for the three coeﬃcients, as is apparent from the papers
in Taylor (1999c). Thus, there is far from general agreement on what the precise coeﬃcients
should be. Furthermore, the simulations providing evidence of robustness of Taylor-type rules
all disregard the role of judgment.
4.2 Problems of a commitment to a simple instrument rule
The problems with the idea of a commitment to a simple instrument rule include that (1) the
simple instrument rule may be far from optimal in some circumstances, (2) there is no room for
judgmental adjustments and extra-model information, (3) desired development of the instrument
rule due to learning and new information will conflict with the commitment, unless sophisticated
and (arguably) unrealistic recommitment “in a timeless perspective”, as suggested by Woodford
(1999a), is allowed, and (4) in spite of all the academic work and promotion, no central bank
has actually chosen to do it, and prominent central bankers scoﬀ at the idea.
A first obvious problem for a Taylor-type rule, with or without interest-rate smoothing, is
that, if there are other important state variables than inflation and the output gap, it will not
be optimal. For a large and not so open economy as the U.S., inflation and the output gap
may be the most important state variables, and the eﬃciency loss in not responding to other
variables may in many cases be moderate (as seems to be the case for the models examined by
Levin, Wieland and Williams 1999). For a smaller and more open economy, the real exchange
rate, the terms of trade, foreign output and the foreign interest rate seem to be the minimum
essential state variables that have to be added (see, for instance, Svensson 2000), increasing the
number of response coeﬃcients that must be fixed. I am not aware of any agreed-upon levels of
the response coeﬃcients for these variables.
With forward-looking variables, the optimal reaction function is characterized by historydependence, as has been emphasized by Woodford (1999c) and as was demonstrated in (3.5)
and (3.7). The lack of history-dependence may seem to be a problem for a simple instrument
rule. However, any response to the lagged instrument rate implies some history dependence,
since (4.1) can be written
it =

∞
X
f¯
+
fij [fπ (π t−j − π ∗ ) + fx xt−j ].
1 − fi
j=0

22

(4.5)

Thus, a suitable choice of the coeﬃcient fi may allow some approximation to the optimal history
dependence and, as further discussed in Woodford (1999c), partly remedy this problem.
A second problem is that a commitment to an instrument rule does not leave any room
for judgmental adjustments and extra-model information, made explicit by the inclusion of the
deviation zt and the central-bank judgment z t above. As I believe most students of practical
monetary policy would agree with, practical monetary policy cannot (at least not yet) rely on
models only. As further discussed in Svensson (2001c), the use of judgmental adjustments and
extra-model information is both desirable in principle and unavoidable in practice. For instance,
when a rare event, like a stock market crash, an Asian crisis or the floating of the Brazilian real
occurs, central bankers may have to use their judgments rather than their models in assessing
its likely eﬀect on future inflation and output. Given the lags in the eﬀects of monetary policy,
it will be eﬃcient to respond to such an event before it shows up in the variables that enter
the simple instrument rule, like current GDP and inflation. Indeed, Taylor (1993) to a large
extent discusses the Fed’s departures from the Taylor rule and their reasons. Put diﬀerently,
a commitment to a simple instrument rule does not provide any rules for when discretionary
departures from the simple instrument rule are warranted.
A third problem with simple instrument rules would seem to be that a once-and-for-all
commitment to an instrument rule would not allow any improvement of the instrument rule
when new information about the transmission mechanism, the variability of shocks, or the source
of shocks arrives.30 A once-and-for-all commitment also faces the problem of an incentive to
exploit the initial situation, for instance, by temporarily increasing output by an initial surprise
inflation, and letting the simple reaction function apply only in the future. As a solution to the
problem of once-and-for-all commitments, Woodford (1999a) has, as discussed above in section
3.3, suggested repeated recommitment “in a timeless perspective” to new revised instrument
rules when new information arrives. The timeless perspective is a self-imposed restriction to
consider only long-run instrument rules that do not depend on the period when the commitment
is made, and by construction it eliminates any exploitation of the initial situation.31 Presumably,
though, such recommitment to a new instrument rule would have to occur relatively infrequently
and only after substantial accumulated information has arrived. Nevertheless, recommitment to
30

For a linear model of the transmission mechanism and a quadratic loss function, certainty-equivalence applies
for the optimal reaction function. That is, the reaction function does not depend on the variance of the shocks.
Certainty-equivalence does not apply for simple reaction functions, so the coeﬃcients of the optimal simple reaction
function do depend on the variance of the shocks (see Currie and Levine 1993).
31
The idea of commitment in a timeless perspective is worked out by Woodford (1999a) for optimal reaction
functions rather than simple ones (the model used is so simple that the optimal reaction function is quite simple).

23

new long-run instrument rules is at least a logically possible (and theoretically elegant) solution
to the problem of once-and-for-all commitment.
Of course, along the lines of Woodford’s recommitment in a timeless perspective, the central
bankers faced with an Asian crisis could ask: Suppose that in the past, when we designed
our current instrument rule, we had anticipated the possibility of a future Asian crisis. What
response to the crisis would we then have committed ourselves to? Answering this question
would amount to revising the simple instrument rule by incorporating this particular event.
Undertaking a substantial revision of the instrument rule may not make much sense unless the
same event is expected to occur reasonably frequently in the future, though. It would also seem
to require that the event is somehow incorporated in the models used to derive the optimal
simple instrument rule. However, if the central bank tries to incorporate too many possible
events, the instrument rule would no longer be simple, and verification of the bank’s adherence
to the rule becomes increasingly diﬃcult. Furthermore, there could be times when a relatively
swift response is called for, without leaving much time for a thorough revision of the instrument
rule. It seems that we still lack rules for when departures from the simple instrument rule are
called for, without which the simple rule is either incomplete or ineﬃcient.
Suppose a central bank went ahead and wanted to implement a commitment to a simple
instrument rule? How would it actually commit itself to the instrument rule? One extreme
possibility would be to have the Central Bank Act (or, in New Zealand, the Policy Targets
Agreement (PTA), see Svensson 2001a) include the instrument rule in a verifiable way (and
also specify suitable sanctions for departures from the rule), with revisions of the law when
new information calls for revisions of the instrument rule. A less extreme possibility would
be an Instrument-Rule Report (rather than the Inflation Reports issued by many inflationtargeting central banks), where the central bank presents its derivation and motivation of the
current instrument rule, solemnly commits itself to follow it, and invites external scrutiny of its
adherence to the rule (and criticism and embarrassment if it departs from the rule). The rule
would then be in eﬀect until a new issue of the Instrument-Rule Report presents and motivates
a new revision of the rule. Revisions would probably have to be rather infrequent to limit the
amount of discretion.
The decision-making process inside the central bank would then be quite uneven. The
infrequent revisions of the rule would be highly active and demanding periods, using all the
bank’s intellectual capacity. During the presumably long periods in-between, monetary policy

24

could be conducted by a clerk with a hand calculator, or even a pre-programmed computer.
Furthermore, the central bank would be forward-looking only at the time when it reconsiders
and recommits to a new instrument rule; in-between it would not be forward-looking but behave
in a completely mechanical way.
Thus, an obvious fourth problem is that commitment to a simple instrument rule is far
from an accurate description of current monetary policy, inflation targeting or other. Such a
monetary-policy setup does not exist in the current inflation-targeting countries, nor has it ever
existed before. No central bank has (to my knowledge) announced and committed itself to
an explicit instrument rule. No central bank has issued anything similar to an Instrument-Rule
Report. Nor does there seem to be any attempt to construct a commitment mechanism, whereby
a central bank would be obliged to follow a mechanical instrument rule. In spite of the impressive
academic work on a commitment to a simple instrument rule, I doubt that we will ever see such
an arrangement materialize. Certainly, prominent current and previous central bankers seem
skeptical and maintain that some amount of discretion is inevitable. As Alan Blinder (1998)
puts it,
Rarely does society solve a time-consistency problem by rigid precommitment... Enlightened discretion is the rule.
As stated by Mervyn A. King (1999),
Mechanical policy rules are not credible... No rule could be written down that
describes how policy would be set in all possible outcomes. Some discretion is inevitable. But that discretion must be constrained by a clear objective to which policy
is directed...
As expressed by Bernanke and Mishkin (1997):
Inflation targeting does not represent [a commitment to] an ironclad policy rule...
Instead, inflation targeting is better understood as a policy framework...
But do not simple instrument rules fit actual central-bank behavior well? Several researchers,
for instance, Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1998) and Judd and Rudebusch (1998), have found
that variants of Taylor-type rules with interest-rate smoothing fit U.S. data reasonably well.
The interpretation of this finding is not obvious, though. First, the similarity of the outcome
of policy decisions with a simple instrument rule is completely consistent with the forwardlooking goal-directed behavior by the central bank, say in the form of discretionary periodby-period optimization, in a situation where inflation and the output gap are important state
25

variables. That is, the simple instrument rule is a reduced form rather than a primitive, the
endogenous end point rather than the exogenous starting point of monetary policy. Second, even
the best empirical fits leave one third or more of the variance of changes in the federal funds
rate unexplained.32 Thus, departures from the simple instrument rules are substantial and ask
for an explanation.
4.3 A simple instrument rule as a “guideline”
As discussed above, a firm commitment to a simple instrument rule is associated with a number
of problems, and it has, for apparently good reasons, never been tried out in the real world.
However, another interpretation of the role of simple instrument rules is as a much looser commitment: An instrument rule should not be followed mechanically; instead it should be seen as a
“benchmark” or a “guideline” for assessing instrument-rate decisions. This is the interpretation
and use of policy rules that Taylor himself has proposed for the Taylor rule, for instance in the
classic article (1993) proposing the Taylor rule, and, in more detail, in (2000).
Taylor (2000, p. 443) defines a “monetary policy rule” as “simply a contingency plan that
specifies as clearly as possible the circumstances under which a central bank should change
the instruments of monetary policy” and mentions the Taylor rule as an example. Thus, his
definition of monetary policy rules is restricted to include instrument rules only. Furthermore,
as to the use of such monetary policy rules, he states, (2000, p. 445-446):
[J]ust because monetary policy rules can be written down as a mechanical-looking
mathematical equation does not imply that central banks should follow them mechanically.
To the contrary, most proposals for monetary policy rules suggest that the rules
be used as guidelines, or general policy frameworks... Because some discretion is
needed to implement the policy rule, the mathematical form becomes an approximation, much like the simplifying assumptions that underlie the models that are used
for policy evaluation... [D]espite the mathematical form, I proposed this rule [the
Taylor rule] in the early 1990s as a benchmark or guideline for assessing interest rate
decisions. At a minimum, discretion is needed to assess monthly data on commodity
prices, employment, industrial production and other variables, in order to estimate
(or predict) the current quarterly inflation rate and the output gap.
Moreover, there will, on occasion, be a need to change the interest rate because of
some special factor that cannot be included in the policy rule. Liquidity crises in
financial markets will usually require such discretion. The 1987 stock market break
32
Judd and Rudebusch (1998), for instance, estimate reaction functions for the Federal Reserve System during
the terms of Arthur Burns, Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan. The best fit is for Greenspan’s term (sample
1987:1—1997:4) and the partial-adjustment form ∆it = γ(i∗t − it−1 ) + ρ∆it−1 , where i∗t is given by a Taylor-type
rule, i∗t = f¯ + fπ (πt − π ∗ ) + fy (yt − y ∗ ). The best adjusted R2 is 0.67.

26

in the United States is one example. Before the stock market break of 1987, the Fed
was increasing the federal funds rate, apparently because inflation and the output
gap were increasing. But when liquidity became a concern after the break in the
market, the Fed lowered the interest rate and thereby provided more liquidity. After
the liquidity concerns dissipated, the Fed returned to its tightening mode. By doing
so it was able to contain the rise in inflation much earlier than in similar periods in
the 1970s. It is important to point out that such discretionary actions are relative to
the benchmark policy rule–the Taylor rule in this example. Hence, even with these
discretionary actions the policy rule has substantive content for the decisions.
I believe this quote leads to some hard questions about the idea of a simple instrument rule
as a guideline. First, the discretion mentioned about using available information to estimate
current quarterly inflation and output gap concerns constructing the given arguments of the
Taylor rule, not the Taylor rule itself, the reaction function. Thus, this is not actually an
example of a deviation from the instrument rule. Second, the quote states that deviations from
the instrument rule will be needed “on occasion” because of some special factor (other than
the inflation and output gap included in the rule). The one example given in this quote is
liquidity crises in financial markets, more precisely the 1987 stock market break. In Taylor
(1993), two other examples of reasons for deviation from the rule is given: the oil-price shock
after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in late 1990, and the increase in long interest rates in early 1990,
possibly related to anticipations of German unification and related increased fiscal expenditure
and investment in Germany. These examples seems to refer to rather big and rare events. Does
this mean that the instrument rule should be followed mechanically except when similar big
events occur? If so, this would seem to imply that it should be followed mechanically most of
the time, since such big events (fortunately) are relatively rare.
More generally, I find the idea of a simple instrument rule as a mere guideline not suﬃciently
specific to be operational. When shall the rule be followed, and when not? More precisely, there
are no rules for when deviations from the instrument rule are appropriate. This seems to create
an inherent lack of transparency. How can outside observers then judge whether a deviation is
appropriate or not?
Nevertheless, one could possibly imagine a central bank announcing that “we are going to use
the following explicit instrument rule as our guideline, and we will carefully explain and motivate
any deviation from the rule.” But so far, no central bank has announced any instrument rule as
a guideline.
Still, the fact that historical examples of successful policy are similar to variants of simple

27

instrument rules, the fact that variants of simple instrument rules perform reasonably well in
a variety of diﬀerent models, together with the fact that they can be derived as optimal in
some circumstances (for instance, in the backward-looking model above in the absence of any
deviation) imply that these simple instrument rules can serve a useful role as rough guidelines,
in that large departures from them have better to have good explanations. But they are not
more than very rough guidelines. They are not suﬃcient as rules for good monetary policy.
Thus, although alternative instrument rules can serve as very rough guidelines,33 and decisions ex post may sometimes be similar to those prescribed by the simple instrument rules, a
commitment to a simple instrument rule (even with Woodford’s recommitment in a timeless perspective) does not seem to be a realistic substitute for the forward-looking decision framework
applied by inflation-targeting central banks. Indeed, instead of making infrequent forwardlooking decisions at the time of the infrequent recommitment to a new simple instrument rule,
it seems that central banks instead choose to be continuously forward-looking and have a regular
cycle of decision-making. To quote Alan Greenspan (1994),
Implicit in any monetary policy action or inaction, is an expectation of how the
future will unfold, that is, a forecast.
The belief that some formal set of rules for policy implementation can eﬀectively
eliminate that problem is, in my judgment, an illusion. There is no way to avoid
making a forecast, explicitly or implicitly.34
Therefore, I will turn, in section 5, to a, in my mind, better way of describing current inflation
targeting, namely as a commitment to a targeting rule, more precisely, a “forecast-targeting
rule.” Before that, I will comment on a particular instrument rule that has been suggested as
an alternative to Taylor-type rules, namely so-called “forecast-based” instrument rules, which
sometimes is considered (misleadingly, in my mind) corresponding to “inflation-forecast targeting”.
33
See, for instance, the contributions in Taylor (1999c) and, with regard to the performance of a Taylor rule for
the Eurosystem, Stefan Gerlach and Gert Schnabel (1998), Gert Peersman and Frank Smets (1998) and Taylor
(1999d).
34
Alan Budd (1998), which alerted me to this quote, contains an illuminating and detailed discussion of the
advantages of explicitly considering forecasts rather than specifying reaction functions from observed variables to
the instrument.

28

4.4 A commitment to a “forecast-based” instrument rule
A particular class of reaction functions involves the instrument rate responding to a T -periodahead inflation forecast, of the form
it = f¯ + fπ (π t+T,t − π ∗ ) + fi it−1 .

(4.6)

This class of reaction functions has been referred to as forecast-based (instrument) rules and
is promoted by, for instance, Nicoletta Batini and Andrew Haldane (1999). Variants of it are
used in the Quarterly Projection Model (QPM) of Bank of Canada, (Donald Coletti, Benjamin
Hunt, David Rose, and Robert Tetlow 1996), Richard Black, Tiﬀ Macklem and Rose (1997),
and the Forecasting and Policy System (FPS) of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, (Black,
Vincenzo Cassino, Aaron Drew, Eric Hansen, Hunt, Rose, and Alasdair Scott 1997). For a
forecast-horizon T suﬃciently long, the inflation forecast is no longer predetermined but depends
on the instrument. For such a horizon, the forecast in most applications have been taken to
be an equilibrium, or “rule-consistent,” forecast, meaning that it is an endogenous rationalexpectations forecast conditional on an intertemporal equilibrium of the model. Thus, this
reaction function is really an equilibrium condition that has to be satisfied by simultaneously
determined variables. This is called an implicit instrument rule in Rudebusch and Svensson
(1999), Svensson (1999b) and Svensson and Woodford (2002a).
The reaction function (4.6) is sometimes said to represent “inflation-forecast targeting”; a
more precise and consistent terminology is “responding to an inflation forecast.” In this paper,
as in Rogoﬀ (1985), Walsh (1998), Svensson (1997a, 1999b), Rudebusch and Svensson (1999),
Cecchetti (1998, 2000), Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999) and Svensson and Woodford (2002a),
“targeting variable Yt ” means minimizing a loss function that is increasing in the deviation
between the variable and a target.35 In contrast, in some of the literature “targeting variable
Yt ” refers to a reaction function where the instrument responds to the same deviation. As
discussed in Svensson (1999b, section 2.4), these two meanings of “targeting variable Yt ” are
not equivalent. The reason is that it is generally better (in the sense of minimizing the loss
function) that the instrument responds to the determinants of the target variables than to
the target variables themselves (for instance, even if inflation is the only target variable (the
only variable in the loss function), it is generally better to respond to both current inflation
35
This is completely in line with Jan Tinbergen’s (1952) classic treatment, where a “target variable” is defined
as a variable that enters the objective function and a “target” is the value of a target variable that optimizes the
objective function.

29

and the output gap, when both these are determinants of future inflation; see, for instance,
Svensson (1997a), Rudebusch and Svensson (1999), and the optimal reaction function under
strict inflation targeting (3.4) in footnote 24). Note also that, in the forward-looking model, the
optimal reaction function (3.5) does not respond to any of the current target variables but to
their determinants. Thus, it seems advisable not to confuse “responding to variable Yt ” with
“targeting variable Yt .”
Above, simple instrument rules were criticized for, among other things, not taking judgment
into account. However, the forecast-based instrument rule of the form (4.6) seems less sensitive to
criticism on this point. The equilibrium forecast that enters the rule can in principle incorporate
all relevant information, in particular, the judgment, z t . Nevertheless, it is unsuitable for other
reasons. A first reason, as already noted, is that it is (when responding to equilibrium forecasts)
an equilibrium condition rather than an operational explicit reaction function of predetermined
variables. Still, it could be a desirable equilibrium condition. More precisely, it could be a
desirable specific targeting rule, a reformulated first-order condition for optimal policy.36 A
second reason is then that, unfortunately, the forecast-based instrument rule of the form (4.6)
is not an optimal targeting rule for the conventional loss function (2.1) with (2.2). As explained
in some detail in Svensson (2001d), one can work backwards and find the intertemporal loss
function in period t for which (4.6) is an optimal first-order condition. It is of the form
1
Lt = [δ T (π t+T,t − π ∗ )2 + λi (it − ı̄)2 + λ∆i (it − it−1 )2 ].
2
This loss function is such that, in each period, the central bank puts weight on both instrumentrate stabilization and instrument-rate smoothing, λi > 0 and λ∆i > 0 (that is, the instrument
rate has to be a separate target variable and enter the loss function directly, which, as noted in
section 5.6, is diﬃcult to rationalize). Furthermore, the central bank must be concerned with
stabilizing the inflation gap at a fixed horizon T only. Thus, in contrast with the conventional
intertemporal loss function (2.1) with (2.2), the central bank does not consider any tradeoﬀ
between inflation gaps at diﬀerent horizons. Indeed, the implied loss function for the forecastbased instrument rule does not fulfill the minimum requirement of being time-consistent in the
classical sense of Robert Strotz (1955-56), and in any period the central bank will, with this
36
Indeed, when (4.6) is used in in the QPM of the Bank of Canada (Coletti, Hunt, Rose, Tetlow 1996) and
the FPS of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Black, Cassino, Drew, Eric Hansen, Hunt, Rose, Scott 1997), the
interest rate is a 3-month interest rate, which is strictly speaking not an instrument rate but a market interest
rate over which the central bank has less than perfect control. In that case, strictly speaking, (4.6) is not an
“instrument” rule or a “reaction function,” but a “targeting” rule.

30

loss function, regret previous decisions made. In addition, the implied loss function does not
incorporate any concern for output-gap stability (except indirectly through the horizon T ).
A third reason is that, in line with the above, as demonstrated by Levin, Wieland and
Williams (2001), in simulations on diﬀerent macro models, the performance of this particular
forecast-based instrument rule, as long as it does not utilize quite short forecast horizons (making
the forecast virtually predetermined), is inferior and nonrobust, when evaluated according to
(2.1) with (2.2) or the special case (2.3). All together, the forecast-based instrument rule of the
form (4.6) is quite problematic, in spite of its entrenched position in the QPM of the Bank of
Canada (Coletti, Hunt, Rose and Tetlow 1996) and the FPS of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
(Black, Cassino, Drew, Eric Hansen, Hunt, Rose, and Scott 1997). (See also the discussion in
section 5.5 below.)
However, arguably a reaction function when the instrument responds to the unchangedinterest-rate forecasts (of both inflation and the output gap) make more sense and can be seen
as a first-order Taylor expansion (around an unchanged interest rate) of the optimal specific targeting rules to be discussed below, even if the central bank does not have a separate instrumentrate stabilization and/or smoothing objective, see appendix C below, equations (C.1) and (C.2),
as well as Per Jansson and Vredin (2000) and Rudebusch and Svensson (1999).

5 Commitment to a targeting rule
5.1 Generalizing monetary-policy rules
Thus, I find that a commitment to a simple instrument rule is not a good description of current
inflation targeting, nor does the concept of instrument rules seem suﬃcient to discuss monetarypolicy rules. Instead, as argued in Svensson (1999b), the concept of monetary-policy rules needs
to be broadened.
In order to discuss alternative decision frameworks for monetary policy, it is practical to have
a consistent classification of such decision frameworks. To repeat, as in Rudebusch and Svensson
(1999), Svensson (1999b) and Svensson and Woodford (2002a), a “monetary-policy rule” is
interpreted broadly as a “prescribed guide for monetary-policy conduct.”37 This allows not only
the narrow “instrument rules” but also the broader, and arguably more relevant, “targeting
rules”. In line with Tinbergen (1952), “target variables” are operational goal variables and
37

Indeed, the first definition of “rule” in Merriam-Webster (1996) is “a prescribed guide for conduct or action.”

31

variables that enter a loss function, a function that is increasing in the distance of the target
variables from prescribed “targets” (target levels). “Targeting” is minimizing such a loss function.
A “general targeting rule” is a high-level specification of a monetary-policy rule that specifies
operational objectives, that is, the target variables, the targets and the loss function to be
minimized. A “specific targeting rule” is instead expressed directly as an operational condition
for the target variables (or for forecasts of the target variables).38
5.2 Forecast targeting
“Forecast targeting” refers to using forecasts of the target variables eﬀectively as intermediate
target variables, as in King’s (1994) early characterization of inflation targeting, and means
minimizing a loss function where forecasts enter as arguments. Monetary policy aﬀects the
economy with considerable lags. Current inflation and output are, to a large extent, determined
by previous decisions of firms and households. Normally, current monetary-policy actions can
only aﬀect the future levels of inflation and the output gap, in practice with substantial lags
and with the total eﬀects spread out over several quarters. This makes forecasts of the target
variables crucial in practical monetary policy.
Assume that the transmission mechanism is approximately linear, in the sense that the future
target variables depend linearly on the current state of the economy and the instrument (as in
38

Sims (1980), while discussing the implications of the Robert Lucas (1976) critique for VAR studies, provides
an early endorsement of targeting rules rather than instrument rules (although without using these names). As
an example of monetary policy, Sims first (1980, p.13) specifies assumptions, under which “... the optimal form
for macropolicy will be stabilization of the price level.” He then continues (brackets denote my comments): “If we
could agree on a stable model in which all forms of shock to the aggregate price level were specified a priori, then
it would be easy in principle to specify an appropriate function mapping past values of observed macrovariables
into current levels of policy variables in such a way as to minimize price variance [that is, to specify the optimal
instrument rule]. However, if disturbances in the economy can originate in a variety of diﬀerent ways, the form of
this policy reaction function may be quite complicated. It is much easier simply to state that [the] policy rule is to
minimize the variance of the price level [that is, as a general targeting rule]. Furthermore, if there is uncertainty
about the structure of the economy, then even with a fixed policy objective function, widely understood, the
form of the dependence of policy on observed history will shift over time as more is learned about (or as opinions
shift about) the structure of the economy. One could continually re-estimate the structure and, each period,
re-announce an explicit relation of policy variables to history [that is, re-announce the instrument rule]. However
it is simpler to announce the stable objective function once [that is, the general targeting rule] and then each
period solve only for this period’s policy variable values instead of computing a complete policy reaction function
[that is, the instrument rule need not be explicitly stated]. This is done by making conditional projections from
the best existing reduced from model, and picking the best-looking projected future time path [that is, by general
forecast targeting]. Policy choice is then most easily and reliably carried out by comparing the projected eﬀects
of alternative policies and picking the policy which most nearly holds the price level constant [that is, fulfills the
specific targeting rule].”
Summarizing the argument, Sims (1980, p.14) again states: “... an optimal policy regime and the present
regime in most countries are both most naturally specified in terms of the eﬀects of policy on the evolution of the
economy [that is, in terms of the targeting rule], rather than in terms of the nature of the dependence of policy
on the economy’s history [that is, in terms of the instrument rule].”
In consistency with this, reviewing the Taylor (1999c) conference volume, Sims also concludes (2001, p.566):
“It seems to me that the call by RS [Rudebusch and Svensson 1999] for thinking about rules this way [as targeting
rules instead of instrument rules] is one of the most important ideas in the book.”

32

the above examples of the two simple backward- and forward-looking models). Furthermore,
assume that any uncertainty about the transmission mechanism and the state of the economy
shows up as “additive” uncertainty about future target variables, in the sense that the degree
of uncertainty about future target variables only depends on the horizon but not on the current
state of the economy and the instrument setting. (This is the way the deviation enters in the
backward- and forward-looking models used above.) Finally, let the intertemporal loss function
be quadratic. It is then a standard result in optimal-control theory that so-called certaintyequivalence applies, and that optimal policy need only focus on conditional mean forecasts
of the future target variables, forecasts conditional on the central bank’s current information
and a particular future path for the instrument.39 Since this means treating the forecasts as
(intermediate) target variables (that is, putting forecasts of the target variables in the loss
function), the procedure can be called “forecast targeting.”
This decision-making process in the central bank then involves making conditional forecasts
of inflation and the output gap, conditional on diﬀerent paths of the central bank’s instrument
rate, using all relevant information about the current and the future state of the economy
and the transmission mechanism.40 Then, the instrument-rate path is chosen, for which the
corresponding conditional forecasts minimize the intertemporal loss function, which, in practice,
means that the inflation forecast returns to the inflation target and that the corresponding
conditional output-gap forecast returns to zero at an appropriate pace. If the inflation forecast
is too high relative to the inflation target at the relevant horizon (but the output-gap forecast
is acceptable), the instrument-rate path needs to be raised; if the conditional inflation forecast
is too low, the instrument-rate path needs to be lowered. The chosen instrument-rate path is
then the basis for the current instrument setting. In regular decision cycles, the procedure is
then repeated. If no new significant information has arrived, the forecasts and the instrumentrate path are the same, and instrument-rate setting follows the same instrument-rate path.
(The time-consistency problem that arises when there are forward-looking variables is further
discussed below.) If new significant information has arrived, the forecasts and the instrumentrate path are updated. This is essentially the procedure recommended by Blinder (1998) and
referred to as “dynamic programming” and “proper dynamic optimization.” Compared to many
39

For proof of the certainty-equivalence theorem for optimal-control theory, see Gregory Chow (1975) for
models with predetermined variables only and Currie and Levine (1993) for models with both predetermined and
forward-looking variables.
40
See Brash (2001) and Svensson (2001a) for a discussion of the decision-making process of the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, which provides a prime example of forecast targeting.

33

other intertemporal decision problems that households, firms and investors solve one way or
another (usually without the assistance of a sizeable staﬀ of PhDs in economics), this particular
decision problem is, in principle, not overly complicated or diﬃcult.
Forecast targeting requires that the central bank has a view of what the policy multipliers
are, that is, how instrument-rate adjustments aﬀect the conditional inflation and output-gap
forecasts. But it does not imply that forecasts must be exclusively model-based. Instead, it
allows for extra-model information and judgmental adjustments, as well as very partial information about the current state of the economy. It basically allows for any information that is
relevant for the inflation and output-gap forecasts.
5.3 A commitment to a general forecast-targeting rule
Let me be more specific. Let it = {it+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 denote an instrument plan in period t. Conditional on the central bank’s information in period t, It (including its view of the transmission mechanism, etc.), and its judgment, z t , and conditional on alternative instrument plans
it , consider alternative (mean) forecasts for inflation, π t = {π t+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 , and the output gap,
t
∗t
xt = {xt+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 (consisting of the diﬀerence between y , the (mean) output forecast, and y ,

the (mean) potential-output forecast). That is, π t+τ ,t = E[π t+τ | it , It , z t ], etc.41 Furthermore,
consider the intertemporal loss function in period t applied to the forecasts of the target variables, that is, when the forecasts are substituted into the intertemporal loss function (2.1) with
(2.2),
Lt =

∞
X
τ =0

δτ

¤
1£
(π t+τ ,t − π ∗ )2 + λx2t+τ ,t .
2

(5.1)

By a commitment to a general forecast-targeting rule, I mean a commitment to minimize a
loss function over forecasts of the target variables. For an intertemporal quadratic loss function
like (5.1), in principle this requires that the inflation target, π ∗ , the relative weight on outputgap stabilization, λ, and the discount factor, δ, are specified. In practice, the loss function is not
specified in this detail, and the central bank has some discretion over the translation of the stated
objectives into a loss function, for instance, how the Reserve Bank of New Zealand interprets the
41

Constructing conditional forecasts in a backward-looking model (that is, a model without forward-looking
variables) is straightforward. Constructing such forecasts in a forward-looking model raises some specific difficulties, which are explained and resolved in the appendix of the working-paper version of Svensson (1999b).
The conditional forecasts for an arbitrary interest-rate path derived there assume that the interest-rate paths are
“credible”, that is, anticipated and allowed to influence the forward-looking variables. Eric Leeper and Tao Zha
(1999) present an alternative way of constructing forecasts for arbitrary interest-rate paths, by assuming that
these interest-rate paths result from unanticipated deviations from a normal reaction function.

34

PTA (see Svensson 2001a).42 Each period t, conditional on the central bank’s forecasting model,
information It and judgment z t , the bank then finds the combination of forecasts and instrument
plan that minimizes (5.1), the optimal forecasts and instrument plan, denoted (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ), and
then makes the current instrument decision according to the current optimal instrument plan
(the current instrument decision will be given by ı̂t,t in the backward-looking model and ı̂t+1,t
in the forward-looking model).
As stated, this decision-making process implies discretionary minimization each period of
a well-defined intertemporal loss function. The process will result in an endogenous reaction
function for the current instrument decision, a function F (It , z t ) of the central bank’s information and judgment. This reaction function need not be specified explicitly, and it need not be
followed mechanically. For a model without forward-looking variables, the resulting endogenous
instrument-setting will follow the optimal reaction function derived under the direct optimalcontrol approach discussed above. For a model with forward-looking variables, this decisionmaking process will result in a diﬀerent reaction function than the optimal one, to be further
discussed below.
More precisely, how does the central bank find the optimal forecasts and instrument plan?
One possibility is that, conditional on the information It and the judgment z t , the central bank
staﬀ generates a set of alternative forecasts (π t , xt ) for a set of alternative instrument plans it .
This way, the staﬀ constructs the “feasible set” of forecasts and instrument plans. The decisionmaking body of the central bank then selects the combination of forecasts that “looks best,” in
the sense of achieving the best compromise between stabilizing the inflation gap and stabilizing
the output gap, that is, implicitly minimizes (5.1).
5.3.1 The backward-looking model
In the backward-looking model, the central bank’s forecasting model in period t will be given by
(2.4)—(2.6), where the corresponding forecasts are substituted for actual values (and forecasts of
the shocks are set equal to zero),
π t+τ +1,t = π t+τ ,t + αx xt+τ ,t + αz zt+τ +1,t ,

(5.2)

xt+τ +1,t = β x xt+τ ,t + β z zt+τ +1,t − β r (it+τ ,t − π t+τ +1,t − r̄),

(5.3)

42
In Svensson (2001b, 2002a), I argue that the time has come for central banks to announce explicit loss
functions, including the relative weight λ on output-gap stabilization.

35

for τ ≥ 0. Thus, the forecasts fulfilling (5.2) and (5.3) are conditional on the central bank’s
t
judgment, z t ≡ {zt+τ ,t }∞
τ =−∞ , and alternative instrument plans, i . As is shown in appendix

A, equation (A.5), a central bank minimizing the intertemporal loss function will implicitly be
satisfying the first-order condition
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ =

λ
(δxt+τ +1,t − xt+τ ,t )
δαx

(5.4)

for τ ≥ 1. This is the implicit condition for forecasts of the inflation and output gaps “looking
good.” Combining (5.4) with (5.2) and (5.3) leads to the optimal forecasts and instrument path,
(π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ), and to the instrument-rate decision, ı̂t,t , each period t. This instrument-rate decision
will be consistent with (3.1), the complex optimal reaction function for this model. However, the
commitment to the general targeting rule means that the central bank never need to make this
reaction function explicit; instead it just repeatedly solves its optimization problem each period
and implements its instrument-rate decision. In particular, the instrument setting incorporates
the central bank’s judgment in an optimal way.
5.3.2 The forward-looking model
In the forward-looking model, the central bank’s forecasting model will be
π t+τ +1,t − π = δ(π t+τ +2,t − π) + αx xt+τ +1,t + αz zt+τ +1,t ,
∗
xt+τ +1,t = xt+τ +2,t − β r (it+τ +1,t − π t+τ +2,t − rt+τ
+1,t ) + β z zt+τ +1,t ,

(5.5)
(5.6)

∗
∞
for τ ≥ 0, given the central bank’s forecast of the natural real interest rate, r∗t ≡ {rt+τ
,t }τ =0 ,

and its judgment z t . With forward-looking variables, straight-forward discretionary optimization
each period t of the loss function (5.1) encounters the time-consistency problem: Even in the
absence of any new information in period t + 1, the optimal instrument-rate setting in period
t + 1 will deviate from the optimal instrument-rate plan in period t.
Under the assumption that the central bank instead anticipates the result of future optimization each period, time-consistency is assured. Appendix B then shows (equation (B.18)
for τ = 0), that the central bank will each period t set the instrument rate so as to implicitly
achieve the first-order condition
π t+1,t − π ∗ = −

λ
xt+1,t .
αx

(5.7)

Combining this first-order condition with (5.5) will result in optimal forecasts, (π̂ t , x̂t ). Combining these forecasts with (5.6) will result in the optimal instrument path, ı̂t . The optimal
36

instrument-rate decision, it+1,t , is then given by it+1,t = ı̂t+1,t , which follows from combining
∗
and zt+1,t . The implied reaction function need
(5.6) for τ = 0 with x̂t+1,t , x̂t+2,t , π̂ t+2,t , rt+1,t

never be made explicit. It is shown in appendix B, equation (B.21), that the implied reaction
function is given by
∗
+ π∗ +
it+1,t = rt+1,t

c̃
βr λ

[β r λ − αx (1 − δc̃)]αz z̃t+2,t +

αx c̃αz zt+1,t + λβ z zt+1,t
.
βr λ

(5.8)

This reaction function is clearly diﬀerent from the optimal reaction function, (3.5), although
there is still no average inflation bias (under the assumption that the unconditional mean of
the deviation is zero), so average inflation equals the inflation target and (3.6) holds.43 The
coeﬃcient c̃ is diﬀerent from the coeﬃcient c of the optimal reaction function. It is still a
function of the relative weight λ on output gap stabilization, fulfills 0 ≤ c̃(λ) < 1, and is now
given by
c̃(λ) ≡

λ
λ + α2x

(5.9)

(see (B.20)). Moreover, z̃t+2,t is defined as in (3.2), but with the coeﬃcient c̃ substituted for c.
Thus, under discretionary forecast-targeting in the forward-looking model, the resulting instrument setting described by (5.8) will diﬀer from the optimal reaction function (3.5). This
illustrates that discretionary optimization results in stabilization bias (the response to shocks in
(5.8) is diﬀerent from that in (3.5)) and a lack of history-dependence (since there is no response
to previous shocks in (5.8)).
The reason why discretionary optimization does not result in the optimal outcome is that,
in the decision-period t − 1, an increase in the two-period-ahead inflation forecast for t + 1,
π t+1,t−1 , increases the one-period-ahead forecast, π t,t−1 , via (5.5) when t − 1 is substituted for
t and τ = 1. However, in the decision-period t, the inflation forecast for t + 1, π t+1,t , can
be increased without any eﬀect on inflation in period t, since the latter is now predetermined.
Therefore, the tradeoﬀ (the marginal rate of transformation) involved in adjusting the inflation
forecast for t + 1 is diﬀerent between decision periods t − 1 and t.
5.3.3 A “commitment to continuity and predictability”
As discussed in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), a commitment to a modified general targeting
rule can solve the time-consistency problem and avoid the loss from discretionary optimization.
43

If the unconditional mean of the deviation is zero, it follows from (2.8) that the unconditional mean of the
output gap is zero, E[xt ] = 0. Using this and taking the unconditional mean of (5.7) results in E[πt+1,t ] = π∗ .

37

More precisely, let Ξt,t−1 denote the shadow price (the Lagrange multiplier of (5.5) in (B.1),
appendix B) of the one-period ahead aggregate-supply relation in period t − 1. That is, Ξt,t−1
measures the increase in value of the intertemporal loss function resulting from an increase in
the one-period-ahead inflation forecast in period t − 1, π t,t−1 , due, for instance, to a change
in judgment or an anticipated shock. Modify the general targeting rule by adding the term
Ξt,t−1 (π t+1,t − π ∗ ) to the loss function (5.1) each period t, which results in
∞
X
τ =0

δτ

¤
1£
(π t+τ ,t − π ∗ )2 + λx2t+τ ,t + Ξt,t−1 (π t+1,t − π ∗ ).
2

(5.10)

This can be interpreted as a commitment to a general targeting rule that involves “continuity
and predictability,” in that the previous cost in period t − 1 of adjusting the forecast for period
t + 1 is taken into account. It internalizes the cost of disappointing private-sector expectations
in period t − 1 of inflation in period t + 1, by incorporating the cost of the resulting eﬀect on
inflation in period t, had the change in π t+1,t been anticipated in period t − 1. It is very much in
line with the transparency, predictability and continuity emphasized in actual inflation targeting
(see, for instance, King 1997).44

45

As shown in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), the central bank will then each period t choose
the instrument-rate plan it+1,t so as to implicitly achieve the first-order condition
π t+1,t − π ∗ = −

λ
(xt+1,t − xt,t−1 ).
αx

(5.11)

According to this first-order condition, the one-period-ahead inflation-gap forecast shall be proportional to the negative of the change in the current one-period-ahead output-gap forecast from
the previous period, with the proportionality factor λ/αx . As shown in appendix B, equation
(B.9), this is the optimal first-order condition, and combining it with the forecasting model (5.5)
and (5.6) will result in the optimal forecasts and instrument plan. Consequently, the implied
instrument decision will fulfill (3.5) and be consistent with the optimal reaction function.46
44

An increase dπ t+1,t−1 > 0 of the two-period-ahead inflation forecast in period t − 1 would, everything else
equal, also increase the one-period-ahead inflation forecast in period t−1, by dπt,t−1 = δdπt+1,t , by (5.5) for τ = 0
in period t − 1 (since expectations of inflation in period t + 1 aﬀects inflation in period t). The present-value cost
of this in period t − 1 is ϕt,t−1 δdπt+1,t , the Lagrange multiplier of the same (5.5) for τ = 0 in period t − 1. The
present-value in period t of this is then ϕt,t−1 dπ t+1,t . Thus, the second term in (5.10) amounts to internalizing in
period t the consequences for the inflation forecast for period t of adjusting the inflation forecast for period t + 1,
had such an adjustment been anticipated in period t − 1.
45
Adding a linear term to the loss function is similar to the linear inflation contracts discussed in Walsh
(1995) and Torsten Persson and Guido Tabellini (1993). Indeed, the term added in (5.10) corresponds to a statecontingent linear inflation contract, which, as discussed in Svensson (1997b), can remedy both stabilization bias
and average-inflation bias.
46
The observant reader notes that the modified loss function making the discretion equilibrium optimal is
related to the idea of recursive contracts by Albert Marcet and Ramon Marimon (1999).

38

5.3.4 Advantages and problems of a commitment to a general targeting rule
A commitment to a general targeting rule means specifying clear objectives for monetary policy.
Clear objectives in the form of a well-specified loss function is often taken for granted in research
on monetary policy. Nevertheless, in practical monetary policy, specifying clear objectives is a
substantial achievement. In practice, discretion in monetary policy has often meant discretion
also with respect to the objectives, as is still the case to some extent for the Federal Reserve
System. Specifying explicit objectives, together with operational independence and eﬀective
accountability structures is rightly considered essential in an eﬀective monetary-policy setup
(see Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen 1999 and Svensson 2001a).
A major advantage with a commitment to a general targeting rule is also that the central
bank is free to use all information deemed essential to achieve its objective. In particular, it
allows the central bank to exercise its judgment and extra-model information, as demonstrated
in the backward- and forward-looking models used in the examples above.
What are the problems with a commitment to a general targeting rule? One problem is
that the objectives may still not be suﬃciently well specified not to be open to interpretation.
For instance, the relative weight on output-gap stabilization in flexible inflation targeting, the
λ in (2.2), is not directly specified by any inflation-targeting central bank (as mentioned, I
argue in Svensson 2001b, 2002a that it should be specified.) In practice, evaluation of inflationtargeting monetary policy is left with examining reported forecasts of the inflation and output
gaps and assessing whether they “look good” and provide a reasonable compromise between
keeping inflation close to target and the output-gap movements necessary for this (as was the
case for me in Svensson 2001a).
A second potential problem, emphasized by Woodford (1999a), is the potential consequences
of the discretionary optimization under a commitment to a general targeting rule, more precisely
that such discretionary optimization is not fully optimal in a situation with forward-looking
variables. As we have seen, discretionary optimization results in stabilization bias and a lack
of history dependence.47 The practical and empirical importance of the ineﬃciency caused by
discretionary optimization is not obvious, though. It is perfectly possible that, in realistic models
with considerable inertia and strong backward-looking elements, this ineﬃciency is overwhelmed
by benefits from both specifying clear objectives for monetary policy and allowing all relevant
47

The remedies Woodford (1999a) suggests are actually commitments to alternative specific targeting rules–
although they are not called so.

39

information and judgment to bear on monetary-policy decisions. Simulations by McCallum and
Edward Nelson (2000) and David Vestin (2001) do not reject the hypotheses that the ineﬃciency
is relatively small.
Furthermore, the discretion involved in a commitment to a general targeting rule may be
constrained by a few more sophisticated mechanisms. The emphasis in inflation targeting on
predictability and transparency may be interpreted as a commitment to not surprising the private
sector, eﬀectively similar to the “commitment to continuity and predictability” introduced above
which enforces the commitment equilibrium. As discussed in Jon Faust and Svensson (2000),
increased transparency may increase the reputational costs of deviating from announced goals
and this way enforce a policy closer to the optimal commitment.48
Remaining problems with a commitment to a general targeting rule can potentially be solved
by a commitment to a specific targeting rule, though.
5.4 A commitment to a specific forecast-targeting rule
A specific targeting rule specifies a condition for the forecasts of the target variables, which can
formally be written as
G(π t , xt ) = 0,

(5.12)

where G(·, ·) is a vector-valued function (possibly). This condition may be an optimal first-order
condition, or an approximate first-order condition. Indeed, the optimal specific targeting rule expresses the equality of the marginal rates of transformation and the marginal rates of substitution
between the forecasts of the target variables in an operational way. Then, the monetary-policy
problem consists of finding the combination of forecasts and instrument path, (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ), that is
consistent with the central bank’s forecasting model and fulfills the specific targeting rule, (5.12).
Thus, in contrast to a commitment to a general targeting rule, once the condition (5.12) has
been specified, finding the optimal forecasts and instrument plan is not a matter of minimizing
a loss function but finding the solution to a system of diﬀerence equations.49
48

Indeed, both these mechanisms arguably provide some foundations for McCallum’s (1997) loosely specified
idea of “just do it.”
49
Alternatively, we can say that the central bank has a new (intermediate) intertemporal loss function to
mimimize in period t, namely the inner product G(π t , xt )0 G(πt , xt ), the minimum of which occurs for (5.12).
Thus, to each specific targeting rule, we can assign a trivial general targeting rule.

40

5.4.1 The backward-looking model
In the backward-looking model, the optimal specific targeting rule for the forecasts π t and xt
in period t is the first order condition for an optimum, (5.4) for τ ≥ 1, derived in appendix A,
equation (B.5). When the discount factor is close to unity, δ ≈ 1, the specific targeting rule can
be written approximately as
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ =

λ
(xt+τ +1,t − xt+τ ,t ).
αx

(5.13)

That is, the inflation-gap forecast should be proportional, with the factor λ/αx , to the forecast
of the change in the output gap.
This specific targeting rule follows directly from the equality of the marginal rate transformation of the output gap into inflation (following from the aggregate-supply relation, (5.2)) and
the marginal rate of substitution of inflation for the output gap (following from the intertemporal loss function, (5.1)). More precisely, in order to specify the relevant marginal rate of
transformation from the output gap into inflation, consider the output-gap changes necessary
for an increase in the two-period-ahead inflation forecast, dπ t+2,t > 0, while holding the inflation
forecast at all other horizons constant, dπ t+j,t = 0, j 6= 2. From the aggregate-supply relation,
(5.2), for τ = 1, we realize that the one-period-ahead output-gap forecast has to be increased,
dxt+1,t > 0, resulting in an increase of the two-period-ahead forecast, fulfilling
dπ t+2,t = αx dxt+1,t > 0.

(5.14)

Furthermore, in order to keep the three-period-ahead inflation forecast unchanged, dπ t+3,t = 0,
we realize from (5.2) for τ = 2, that the two-period-ahead output-gap forecast must be reduced,
dxt+2,t = − dπ t+2,t /αx = − dxt+1,t < 0,
where I have used (5.14). Thus, we need a combination of an increase in the one-period-ahead
and reduction in the two-period-ahead output-gap forecasts to get a change in the two-periodahead inflation forecast only. It is practical to have a compact notation for such combinations,
so I let them be denoted by the vector
x̃t+1,t ≡ (xt+1,t , xt+2,t ) ≡ (1, −1)xt+1,t .

(5.15)

Now, let MRT(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) denote the marginal rate of transformation of the combination
of output-gap forecasts x̃t+1,t into the two-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+2,t . By (5.14), it
41

obviously fulfills

¯
dπ t+2,t ¯¯
= αx .
MRT(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) ≡
dxt+1,t ¯dxt+2,t =− dxt+1,t

(5.16)

Thus we have found the relevant marginal rate of transformation. It is a generalization of the
standard marginal rate of transformation since it involves the transformation of a combination
of variables, rather than a single variable, into another variable.
It remains to find the corresponding marginal rate of substitution. Let MRS(π t+j,t , xt+k,t )
denote the (standard) marginal rate of substitution of inflation in period t + j, π t+j,t , for the
output gap in period t + k, xt+k,t . By (5.1), it fulfills
¯
δ k λxt+k,t
dπ t+j,t ¯¯
MRS(π t+j,t , xt+k,t ) ≡
=− j
.
¯
dxt+k,t dLt =0
δ (π t+j,t − π ∗ )

(5.17)

Let MRS(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) denote the (generalized) marginal rate of substitution of π t+2,t for the

combination of output-gap forecasts x̃t+1,t . It will be given by the sum of the marginal rates
of substitution of π t+2,t for the separate changes in the output-gap forecasts (an increase one
period ahead, an equal decrease two periods ahead), hence
¯
dπ t+2,t ¯¯
MRS(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) ≡
dxt+1,t ¯dLt =0, dxt+2,t =− dxt+1,t

= MRS(π t+2,t , xt+1,t ) + MRS(π t+2,t , xt+2,t )(− 1).

Combining this with (5.17) gives
MRS(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) =

λ(δxt+2,t − xt+1,t )
.
δ(π t+2,t − π ∗ )

Thus, we have found the relevant marginal rates of transformation and substitution between
the target variables. Equalizing these,
MRT(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) = MRS(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ),
gives (5.4) for τ = 1. Repeating the argument above for π t+3,t , etc., results in (5.4) for τ ≥ 1.
Once the optimal specific targeting rule has been specified, the decision-making process of the
central bank each period t is then to find inflation- and output-gap forecasts that are consistent
with the specific targeting rule. This means combining (5.4) (or its approximation (5.13)) with
the forecasting model, (5.2) and (5.3) for the judgment z t , and finding the appropriate inflationand output-gap forecasts and the corresponding instrument path. In particular, this can be
done in a two-step procedure. First, the specific targeting rule is combined with the Phillips
curve, (5.2), and the optimal inflation- and output-gap forecasts, (π̂ t , x̂t ), are determined. Then
42

these forecasts are used in the aggregate-demand relation, (5.3), to infer the corresponding
instrument path, ı̂t . Again, the optimal instrument setting in period t is then given by it = ı̂t,t .
This instrument setting will be consistent with the optimal reaction function, (3.1), but this
reaction function need not be made explicit. Indeed, given (5.3) for τ = 0, the judgment z t and
the optimal forecasts π̂ t and x̂t , the optimal instrument-rate setting in period t is given by
ı̂t,t = r̄ + π t+1,t −

1
β
β
x̂t+1,t + x xt + z zt+1,t .
βr
βr
βr

(5.18)

The specific targeting rule can be formulated, using the approximation (5.13), as: “Select the
instrument path so that the marginal rate of transformation of the output gap into inflation and
the marginal rate of substitution of inflation for the output gap are equal, more specifically, that
the inflation-gap forecast equals the proportion λ/αx of the change in the output-gap forecast.”
The central bank then need not optimize but just solve diﬀerence equations.
We note that the targeting rule (5.4) only depends on the parameters δ (the discount factor),
λ (the relative weight on output-gap stabilization) and αx (the eﬀect of the output gap on inflation, the slope of the short-run Phillips curve). In particular, the targeting rule is independent
of the coeﬃcients in the vectors αz and β z . That is, it is independent of how the deviation
aﬀects inflation and output, and hence also of the judgment, the forecast of the deviations. Furthermore, the targeting rule (5.4) is independent of all the parameters of the aggregate-demand
relation, (5.3). Indeed, the targeting rule only depends on the loss function, (5.1), via the
marginal rate of substitution between inflation and the output gap (hence on the parameters
δ and λ), and the aggregate-supply relation, the Phillips curve (5.2), via the marginal rate of
transformation between inflation and the output gap (hence on the parameter αx ). Since the
marginal rates of transformation only depend on the derivatives of the aggregate-supply relation
with respect to inflation and the output gap, the additive judgement (the “add factors”) do not
appear in the optimal targeting rule. This illustrates the relative robustness of targeting rules
(relative to optimal reaction functions and instrument rules) suggested in Svensson (1997a) and
further examined and confirmed in Svensson and Woodford (2002a).50
50

For the case of strict inflation targeting, λ = 0, the specific targeting rule (5.4) simplifies to the trivial
πt+2,t = π∗ .

That is, the two-period-ahead inflation should equal the inflation target. From (5.2) for τ = 1, it follows that the
optimal one-period-ahead output-gap forecast, x̂t+1,t , must fulfill
x̂t+1,t = −

1
(π t+1,t − π∗ + αz zt+2,t ).
αx

Using this in (5.18) will result in the desired instrument setting, ı̂t,t , which will be consistent with the reaction
function (3.4). Again, this reaction function need never be made explicit.

43

A simple specific targeting rule As noted above and in footnote 5, the Bank of England
and Sveriges Riksbank have formulated a simple specific targeting rule, “set the instrument
rate so that a constant-interest-rate inflation forecast about two-years ahead equals the inflation
target.” This can be seen as an attempt to formulate an operational and simple targeting rule,
not necessarily optimal but hopefully not far from being optimal. If the two-year horizon is seen
as longer than the minimum horizon at which inflation can be aﬀected, it can be interpreted as
corresponding to flexible rather than strict inflation targeting. Since it takes a minimum of two
periods to aﬀect inflation in the simple model, and since I have assumed above that the period
is 3 quarters, let me interpret the approximate two-year horizon as three periods (9 quarters).
Thus, this simple rule can be interpreted as
π t+3,t = π ∗ ,

(5.19)

where the 3-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+3,t , is taken to be conditional on a constant
interest rate, in this case corresponding to it+1,t = it,t = it . The implied reaction function
resulting from this simple targeting rule is derived in appendix A.1, equation (A.17).
Clearly, the simple targeting rule (5.19) is generally diﬀerent from the optimal specific targeting rule (5.4) or (5.13). Consequently, the implied reaction function derived in appendix A.1
is diﬀerent from the optimal reaction function (3.1), corresponding to this simple targeting rule
not being optimal. In addition to not being optimal, there are a number of additional problems
with using constant-interest-rate forecasts, as discussed in Donald Kohn (2000).
A special case: Aggregate supply independent of judgment Consider the unrealistic
special case when the aggregate-supply relation, (2.4) and (5.2), is independent of judgment,
αz ≡ 0, so judgment only aﬀects the aggregate-demand relation, β z 6= 0. Combination of the
optimal targeting rule (5.4) with the aggregate-supply relation (5.2) then results in a diﬀerence
equation for the inflation forecast that fulfills (see (A.8) in appendix A)
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = cτ (π t+1,t − π ∗ )

(5.20)

for τ ≥ 1. Here the coeﬃcient c = c(λ), 0 ≤ c(λ) < 1, is an increasing function of the relative
weight λ on output-gap stabilization, as reported in section 3.1 and derived in appendix A. This
specific targeting rule has been emphasized in Svensson (1997a, 1999b). It shows that, under
flexible inflation targeting (λ > 0 and 0 < c(λ) < 1), the inflation forecast should be brought
back to the inflation target gradually and exponentially (if the predetermined one-period-ahead
44

inflation forecast, π t+1,t , deviates from the inflation target). Furthermore, the higher the relative
weight on output-gap stabilization, the larger the coeﬃcient c(λ), and the slower the approach
towards the inflation target.
But this simple and intuitive specific targeting rule for the backward-looking model is only
valid under the special and unrealistic assumption of aggregate supply independent of judgment.
(Therefore, in retrospect, I wish that I had not emphasized this particular targeting rule, (5.20),
that much, for instance, in Svensson 1997a, 1999b.) Without that assumption, the judgment
enters in a complicated way in (5.20), as seen in (A.8). Thus, the still simple (5.4) is the
more general form of the specific targeting rule for the backward-looking model, valid also when
judgment aﬀects the aggregate-supply relation.
5.4.2 The forward-looking model
For the forward-looking model, appendix B, equation (B.5), shows that the optimal specific
targeting rule is
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = −

λ
(xt+τ +1,t − xt+τ ,t )
αx

(5.21)

for τ ≥ 0. For τ = 0, as discussed briefly in appendix B, equation (B.10), xt,t is interpreted as
given by
xt,t ≡ xt,t−1 ,

(5.22)

the one-period-ahead output-gap forecast in the previous period, xt,t−1 (and not the current
output gap, xt ), in order to be optimal in a timeless perspective.51
Again, this specific targeting rule can be derived directly from the equality of the marginal
rate transformation of the output gap into inflation (following from the aggregate-supply relation,
51
Expressed in terms of one-period-ahead private-sector expectations/plans, the consolidated first-order condition for an optimum in a timeless perspective is

π t+1|t − π ∗ = −

λ
(xt+1|t − xt|t−1 ).
αx

If the optimal specific targeting rule is seen as a forecast of this first-order condition in period t, it can be written
π t+1,t − π ∗ = −

λ
(xt+1,t − xt|t−1 ),
αx

under the assumption that the lagged private-sector outputput-gap forecast xt|t−1 is directly observable by the
central bank in period t. In line with this, xt,t in (5.21) should be interpreted as given by
xt,t ≡ xt|t−1
instead of (5.22). Since, as noted in section 3.2, in equilibrium, the one-period-ahead central-bank forecast and the
one-period-ahead private-sector expecation/plan will be equal, this distinction does not matter for the purpose of
this paper. It does matter for determinacy issues in the forward-looking model, as discusssed in detail in Svensson
and Woodford (2002a).

45

(5.5)) and the marginal rate of substitution of inflation for the output gap (following from the
intertemporal loss function, (5.1)). Again, because the marginal rate of transformation depends
on the derivatives of the aggregate-supply relation with respect to inflation and the output gap,
the judgment part and the aggregate-demand relation do not appear.
The relevant marginal rates of transformation and substitution can thus be found with a
similar argument as above for the backward-looking model in section 5.4.1. Consider the sequence of output-gap forecast changes required to increase the two-period-ahead inflation forecast, dπ t+2,t > 0, while holding the inflation forecast at other horizons constant, dπ t+j,t = 0,
j 6= 2. From (5.5) for τ = 0, we see that any increase in the two-period-ahead inflation
forecast, dπ t+2,t > 0, everything else equal, will increase the one-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+1,t , since one-period-ahead inflation depends on expectations of two-period-ahead inflation. Keeping π t+1,t constant then requires a fall in the one-period-ahead output gap forecast,
dxt+1,t = − δdπ t+2,t /αx < 0. Thus, we have
dπ t+2,t = −

αx
dxt+1,t > 0.
δ

(5.23)

Furthermore, from (5.5) for τ = 1, we see that constancy of π t+3,t then requires an increase
in the two-period-ahead output-gap forecast, dxt+2,t = − dπ t+2,t /αx = − dxt+1,t /δ. Thus, the
relevant combination, x̃t+1,t , of one- and two-period-ahead output-gap forecasts is x̃t+1,t ≡
(xt+1,t , xt+2,t ) ≡ (1, − 1/δ)xt+1,t . By (5.23), it follows that the relevant marginal rate of transformation of this combination x̃t+1,t into π t+2,t is given by
¯
dπ t+2,t ¯¯
αx
.
=−
MRT(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) ≡
¯
dxt+1,t dxt+2,t =− dxt+1,t /δ
δ

(5.24)

By a similar argument as for the backward-looking model in section 5.4.1, the relevant

marginal rate of substitution of π t+2,t for this combination x̃t+1,t will be
¯
dπ t+2,t ¯¯
MRS(π t+2,t , x̃t+1,t ) ≡
=
dxt+1,t ¯dLt =0, dxt+2,t =− dxt+1,t /δ

1
= MRS(π t+2,t , xt+1,t ) + MRS(π t+2,t , xt+2,t )(− )
δ
λ(xt+2,t − xt+1,t )
,
=
δ(π t+2,t − π ∗ )

with the use of (5.17). Equality of the marginal rate of transformation and the marginal rate
of substitution then results in (5.21) for τ = 1. Repeating the same argument for π t+3,t , etc.,
results in (5.21) for τ ≥ 1. Repeating the same argument for π t+1,t , taking into account the
46

hypothetical eﬀect on π t,t−1 if this had been anticipated (that is, considering optimality in the
time-less perspective), results in (5.21) for τ = 0 with (5.22).
Thus, the central bank should find the inflation and output-gap forecasts that fulfill the
specific targeting rule (5.21) with (5.22). This is done by combining the specific targeting rule
with the forward-looking Phillips curve, (5.5), which results in the optimal forecasts, π̂ t and x̂t .
From the aggregate-demand relation, (5.6), for τ = 0, the optimal instrument decision is given
by
∗
+ π ∗ + (π̂ t+2,t − π ∗ ) +
ı̂t+1,t = rt+1,t

1
β
(x̂t+2,t − x̂t+1,t ) + z zt+1,t .
βr
βr

The resulting instrument decision will be consistent with the optimal reaction function, (3.5).
Again, the optimal reaction function need never be made explicit.
We note that the optimal specific targeting rule for the forward-looking model, (5.21) with
(5.22), is diﬀerent from the optimal specific targeting rule for the backward-looking model,
(5.4). Comparing (5.21) to the approximation (5.13) for δ ≈ 1, we see that the right side is
the same but have opposite signs. This is because the marginal rate of transformation between
inflation and the output gap, the dynamic tradeoﬀ between the target variables, is diﬀerent for
the two aggregate-supply relations, cf. (5.16) and (5.24). As has been observed in the literature,
the dynamics of the backward-looking and the forward-looking Phillips curves (5.2) and (5.5)
are quite diﬀerent. A steady increase in inflation corresponds to a positive output gap in the
backward-looking Phillips curve but a negative output gap in the forward-looking one (see Ball
1994 and Gregory Mankiw 2001).
The simple specific targeting rule like (5.19) raises additional issues and problems in a
forward-looking model, as discussed in appendix B.2 and by Kai Leitemo (2000).
A commitment to a specific price-level targeting rule Consider a commitment to an
alternative specific targeting rule, related to price-level targeting. First, let pt denote (the log
of) the price level in period t (so π t ≡ pt − pt−1 ) and define a (log) price-level target path in
period t, p∗t = {p∗t+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 , according to
p∗t,t ≡ p∗t,t−1 + π ∗ + pt − pt|t−1 ,
p∗t+τ ,t ≡ p∗t,t + π ∗ τ .

(5.25)
(5.26)

This price-level target path starts from p∗t,t and then increases at a rate equal to the inflation
target. Since the starting point is adjusted by the unanticipated shock to the price level, pt −
47

pt|t−1 = εt + αz (zt − zt|t−1 ), some base drift is allowed to occur. Second, specify the specific
price-level targeting rule as
pt+τ +1,t − p∗t+τ +1,t = −

λ
xt+τ +1,t
αx

(5.27)

for τ ≥ 0. That is, the price-level-gap forecast should be proportional to the negative of the
output-gap forecast. By first-diﬀerencing (5.27) with respect to τ for τ ≥ 1 and a given t and
using (5.26), we directly get (5.21) for τ ≥ 1. By first-diﬀerencing (5.27) with respect to t for
τ = 0 and using (5.25) and (5.26) and the fact that, in equilibrium, pt,t−1 = pt|t−1 , we get (5.21)
for τ = 0 and (5.22). Thus, the price-level targeting rule (5.27) implies the inflation targeting
rule (5.21) and (5.22).
It is easy to show that (5.27) will result if the central bank minimizes a loss function corresponding to flexible price-level targeting under discretion. This illustrates the close relation
between optimal inflation targeting under commitment and price-level targeting under discretion previously discussed by Svensson (1999c), Vestin (2000), Svensson and Woodford (2002a)
and Smets (2000).
5.4.3 Advantages and problems of a commitment to a specific targeting rule
A commitment to a specific targeting rule has the obvious advantage of providing a more specific, more operational, and more easily verifiable commitment than a commitment to a general
targeting rule. This way it provides stronger accountability. The optimal specific targeting
rule can also overcome any ineﬃciency caused by discretionary optimization, while retaining
the flexibility in allowing all relevant information and judgment to bear on the monetary-policy
decision. Compared to the benchmark of a commitment to the optimal instrument rule, it is
more robust, in the sense of only depending on part of the model of the transmission mechanism,
namely the marginal rate of transformation between the target variables.
A potential disadvantage, however, is that a specific targeting rule, in order to be optimal,
depends on the precise marginal rate of transformation, the dynamic tradeoﬀ between the target
variables. Therefore, it is not robust to diﬀerent models of the aggregate-supply relation, as is
apparent in the examples of the backward-looking and forward-looking models used above. Thus,
it is clearly less robust than a commitment to a general targeting rule.
The simple specific targeting rule of the Bank of England and Sveriges Riksbank discussed
above is at most a rather preliminary attempt to formulate an operational specific targeting rule
48

and raises a number of problems, as discussed in Kohn (2000) and Leitemo (2000).
5.5 Some criticism
McCallum, for instance in (2000), and McCallum and Nelson, for instance in (2000), have several
times criticized various aspects of and defended alternatives to ideas presented in this paper.
First, as a defense of instrument rules involving responses to target variables only, they have
suggested that there is a benefit to discussing monetary policy without reference to explicit loss
functions. At the same time, the results of these instrument rules have been evaluated in terms
of the resulting variances of inflation and the output gap. But this is equivalent to using a loss
function consisting of a weighted sum of the variances of inflation and the output gap, (2.3), for
diﬀerent values of the weight λ. It seems more transparent to me, then, to be explicit about
such a loss function.52

53

Second, McCallum and Nelson have also argued that targeting rules can be replaced by
obvious instrument rules, thereby implying that targeting rules are redundant. Consider, for
instance, the targeting rule (5.21) with (5.22) with τ = 0 for the forward-looking model above,
which can be written
π t+1,t − π ∗ +

λ
(xt+1,t − xt,t−1 ) = 0.
αx

The idea is that this can be replaced by an instrument rule of, for instance, the form
½
·
¸¾
λ
∗
it = (1 − fi ) r̄ + π t + γ π t+1,t − π +
(xt+1,t − xt,t−1 ) + fi it−1 ,
αx

(5.28)

(5.29)

where the response coeﬃcient, γ, is very large (McCallum and Nelson 2000 in simulations suggest
γ ≥ 50) and in the limit approaches infinity. Such an instrument rule would ensure that the
term within the square brackets is arbitrarily close to zero and hence fulfills the targeting rule
(5.28). However, as discussed in detail in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), this is a dangerous
52
A common way of evaluating the outcome of alternative instrument rules is to plot the result in a graph
with unconditional inflation variance on the horisontal axis and unconditional output-gap variance on the vertical
axis and then examine the result in relation to the “Taylor curve” (see Taylor 1979) of eﬃcient combinations of
the two variances. This is of course equivalent to using a loss function of the form (2.3), with diﬀerent relative
weights λ ≥ 0. Indeed, a common way to find the Taylor curve is to optimize over a class of reaction functions
for values of λ from zero to infinity. See, for instance, Rudebusch and Svensson (1999) and several other papers
in Taylor (1999c).
Taylor (1979) plotted the standard deviations along the axes; plotting the variances has the advantage that the
(negative) slope at a preferred point on the Taylor curve can be interpreted as revealing 1/λ in the loss function
above, since indiﬀerence curves for the loss function (2.3) correspond to straigth lines with (negative) slope 1/λ.
53
Another problem with restricting simple rules to respond to target variables only is, as noted above, that the
general principle is that it is best to respond to the main determinants of the (forecasts) of the target variables.
The set of these main determinants is likely to include more variables than the current target variables; indeed,
the current target variables may not be among the determinants at all (which is the case when the target variables
are forward-looking variables).

49

and completely impracticable idea. It is completely inconceivable in practical monetary policy
to have reaction functions with very large response coeﬃcients, since the slightest mistake in
calculating the argument of the reaction function would have grave consequences and result in
extreme instrument-rate volatility. (Such interest-rate volatility does not arise in McCallum and
Nelson’s 2000 simulations because no mistakes are allowed for.) The fact that McCallum has
long argued for robust instrument rules makes this idea even more surprising.54
Third, McCallum and Nelson have also argued that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand provides an example of a central bank that is committed to an instrument rule, as an argument in
favor the practical relevance of instrument rules. It is true that the Reserve Bank uses a reaction
function of the form (4.6) in its Forecasting and Policy System (FPS) in order to generate an
endogenous future interest-rate path. However, for the first few quarters of this interest-rate
path, the interest rate is set by discretion and judgment, and the reaction function is only used
further into the future. Hence, it is not the case that the current interest-rate decision, or even
the first few quarters of the interest-rate path, is given by the reaction function. Brash (2001)
and Svensson (2001a) provide some further details on the decision-making process of the Reserve
Bank.55
5.6 Interest-rate stabilization and smoothing and exchange-rate smoothing
The discussion of instrument rules and targeting rules here has, except briefly in the discussion
of the forecast-based instrument rule (4.6) in section 4.4, been under the assumption of no
separate monetary-policy objectives of interest-rate stabilization and/or smoothing. That is,
only inflation and the output gap has been considered target variables and hence entered the
loss function, and only (forecasts of) inflation and the output gap have entered the specific
targeting rules discussed.
I find the case for explicit instrument-rate stabilization and/or smoothing objectives quite
weak (see Brian Sack and Wieland 1999 for further discussion and empirical evidence). Such
objectives would correspond to adding the term λi (it − ı̄)2 + λ∆i (it − it−1 )2 , where λi and
λ∆i are positive weights and ı̄ denotes the average instrument-rate level, in the period loss
function (2.2). Possible adverse consequences for financial markets of interest-rate volatility,
54

Furthermore, on a more technical note and as examined in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), stability properties of the model are not invariant between (5.28) and (5.29).
55
In my review of the operation of monetary policy in New Zealand, (2001a), I actually criticize the Reserve
Bank for its use of this form of a reaction function and suggest that it considers alternatives, with reference to
the same problems as those reported in section 4.4.

50

beyond the real eﬀects represented by output-gap stabilization, are hardly convincing, except in
special circumstances with an exceptionally weak financial sector. A desire to avoid too large
interest-rate surprises would rather correspond to a term of the form λi (it − it|t−1 )2 , where
it|t−1 denotes previous market expectations of the instrument rate, but with a systematic and
transparent monetary policy as in current inflation targeting, instrument-rate surprises are small
anyhow. In practical monetary policy, there are recent conspicuous deviations from instrumentrate smoothing, in Fed interest-rate reductions in the first half of 2001 and previously Willem
Buiter’s voting in the Bank of England MPC. Deviations from Milton Friedman’s (1969) optimal
quantity of money could motivate a quadratic interest-rate term (cf. Woodford 1999b), but
since most money pays some interest these days, the distortion would seem to be minor, and
it is diﬃcult to see that such costs could be significant compared to the costs of variability
of inflation and the output gap. Woodford (1999c) has shown that an instrument-smoothing
objective under discretion can induce a desirable history-dependence of monetary policy. In
the perspective of this paper, though, a commitment to an optimal specific targeting rule is
a more direct way of achieving such history-dependence. The practical importance of historydependence also remains to be established, as noted above. Rudebusch (2002b) suggests that
the high coeﬃcient on the lagged federal funds rate in estimated Fed reaction functions can be
explained by the Fed reacting to persistent shocks rather than to some separate interest-rate
smoothing objective.56
If interest-rate stabilization and/or smoothing nevertheless is a separate monetary policy
objective, the interest rate in question is also a target variable. Most of the above-mentioned
reason for such objectives would probably apply to something like a 3-month money-market
interest rate, rather than the instrument rate (which is typically a repo rate or an overnight
rate). Then this market interest rate becomes an additional target variable, separate from, but
related to (via the expectations hypothesis, for instance) the instrument rate.
The more target variables, the more complex the specific targeting rules. In particular, if
an interest rate is a target variable, the targeting rules not only depend on the loss function
and the Phillips curve, but also on the aggregate-demand relation, since the latter involves the
tradeoﬀs between output and interest rates. It would still be the case that additive judgement,
as in the backward- and forward-looking example models used here, would not enter explicitly
56
Even though the PTA for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand states that the Reserve Bank “shall seek to avoid
unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate,” I must confess that I, in my evaluation
(2001a), did not much consider stability of interest rates as a separate objective.

51

in the targeting rules. In this respect, the optimal targeting rule would still be simpler than the
optimal instrument rule, since the judgment would enter the latter, in addition in a complex
way, as we have seen in the above example models. In case the instrument rate enters the loss
function, so the instrument rate rather than a somewhat longer market rate is a target variable,
the targeting rule would be indistinguishable from an implicit forecast-based instrument rule
(although, for a reasonable loss function, of diﬀerent form than (4.6)).
As an example, consider the case of instrument-rate stabilization, when the term λi (it+τ ,t −ı̄)2
is added within the bracket in the intertemporal loss function (5.1), corresponding to a separate
objective to stabilize the instrument rate around its mean, ı̄. Then the instrument rate is also
a target variable. For the backward-looking model, in section 5.4.1 above I specified the required
changes (dxt+1,t , dxt+2,t ) = (1, − 1)dxt+1,t in the output-gap forecast for a change in the twoperiod-ahead inflation forecast only. By the aggregate-demand relation, (5.3), for τ = 0 and
τ = 1, these require changes in the instrument rate that fulfill
1
dxt+1,t < 0,
βr
1
αx β r + 1 + β x
= dπ t+2,t − (dxt+2,t − β x dxt+1,t ) =
dxt+1,t > 0,
βr
βr
1
β
β
= dπ t+3,t − (dxt+3,t − β x dxt+2,t ) = x dxt+2,t = − x dxt+1,t < 0.
βr
βr
βr

dit,t = −
dit+1,t
dit+2,t

Thus, the relevant linear combination of target variables now includes these instrument rates and
is given by x̃t+1,t ≡ (xt+1,t , xt+2,t , it,t , it+1,t , it+2,t ) ≡ [1, − 1, − 1/β r , (αx β r +1+β x )/β r , − β x /β r ]xt+1,t .
With this interpretation of x̃t+1,t , the relevant marginal rate of transformation of x̃t+1,t into π t+2,t
is still given by (5.16). The calculation of the relevant marginal rate of substitution of π t+2,t for
this combination x̃t+1,t must now take into account the required changes in the instrument rate
and the marginal rates of substitution of π t+j,t for it+l,t ,
MRS(π t+j,t , it+l,t ) = −

δ l λi (it+l,t − ı̄)
.
δ j (π t+j,t − π ∗ )

This results in
MRS(π t+j,t , x̃t+1,t ) =

λ(δxt+2,t − xt+1,t )
δ(π t+2,t − π ∗ )
+

λi [(it,t − ı̄) − δ(αx β r + 1 + β x )(it+1,t − ı̄) + δ 2 β x (it+2,t − ı̄)]
. (5.30)
δ 2 β r (π t+2,t − π ∗ )

Equality of the marginal rate of transformation (5.16) and substitution (5.30), and repeating

52

the argument for π t+3,t , etc., then implies the optimal specific targeting rule
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ =

λ
(δxt+τ +,t − xt+τ ,t )
δαx
λi
+ 2
[δ 2 β x (it+τ +1,t − ı̄) − δ(αx β r + 1 + β x )(it+τ ,t − ı̄) + (it+τ −1,t − ı̄)]
δ αx β r
(5.31)

for τ ≥ 1. The decision problem then consists of combining (5.31) with both the aggregatesupply and aggregate-demand relations, (5.2) and (5.3), and solving for the optimal combination
of inflation, output-gap and instrument-rate forecasts, (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ), and then implementing ı̂t,t .
For the forward-looking model, similar reasoning results in the relevant linear combination of
target variables x̃t+1,t ≡ (xt+1,t , xt+2,t , it,t , it+1,t , it+2,t ) ≡ [1, −1/δ, 1/β r , −(αx β r + 1 + δ)/δβ r ,
1/δβ r ]xt+1,t and the optimal specific targeting rule
λ
(xt+τ +1,t − xt+τ ,t )
αx
λi
[(αx β r )(it+τ ,t − ı̄) − δ(it+τ +1,t − it+τ ,t ) + (it+τ ,t − it+τ −1,t )] (5.32)
−
δαx β r

π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = −

for τ ≥ 0, with (5.22) and it,t ≡ it,t−1 , it−1,t ≡ it−1,t−2 . The decision problem then consists
of combining (5.32) with both the aggregate-supply and aggregate-demand relations, (5.5) and
(5.6), and solving for the optimal combination of inflation, output-gap and instrument-rate
forecasts, (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ), and then implementing ı̂t+1,t .57
Are (5.31) and (5.32) targeting rules or instrument rules? Since the instrument rate appears,
they are also “implicit” instrument rules. They are not “explicit” instrument rules, since the
relations do not express the instrument as function of predetermined variables only, but as an
equilibrium condition for endogenous variables. However, (5.31) and (5.32) are fundamentally
targeting rules, in the sense that only variables who are target variables enter there. The
instrument rate being a separate target variable is a necessary condition for it to appear in
these rules. If we set λi = 0, so the instrument rate no longer is a separate target variable, the
instrument rate no longer appears in the specific targeting rule.
One can conceive of a separate objective of exchange-rate smoothing, meaning the addition
to the period loss function of a term λ∆s (st − st−1 )2 , where λ∆s is a positive weight and st is
the log of the nominal exchange rate, so st − st−1 is the rate of currency depreciation (when
57
Note that (5.32) is the same optimal first-order condition as equation (32) in Giannoni (2000). Giannoni
assumes a loss function with interest-rate stabilization (λi > 0) and uses the forward-looking model with current
inflation and output being forward-looking variables rather than predetermined. Giannoni and Woodford (2002b)
have recently provided a detailed discussion of targeting rules when the instrument rate is one of the target
variables.

53

the exchange rate is measured as units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency). It is
certainly possible for central banks to smooth exchange rates somewhat, at the cost of increased
variability in the other target variables, inflation and the output gap. One can also conceive of
separate objectives of real-exchange-rate smoothing, or even stabilization of a real-exchange-rate
gap between the real exchange rate and a “potential” real exchange rate. Additional separate
objectives makes monetary policy more ambitious and the corresponding decision problem, and
the corresponding specific targeting rule more complex, in a similar way as interest-rate stabilization causes more complexity. It therefore makes commitment and verification more diﬃcult.
I see no good reasons for separate exchange-rate objectives, nominal or real, under flexible inflation targeting in advanced countries.58 As discussed in some detail in Svensson (2000), in
an open economy with CPI inflation targeting, there may nevertheless be some implicit realexchange-rate smoothing, depending on the share of imported final goods and the degree of
exchange-rate pass-through.59
5.7 Distribution forecast targeting
Under the above assumptions of a quadratic loss function and an essentially linear transmission
mechanism, together with additive uncertainty, the certainty-equivalence result implies that the
mean forecasts are the relevant target variables, regardless of the degree of uncertainty. When
the uncertainty about the transmission mechanism is “nonadditive,” that is, there is uncertainty
about the policy multipliers, or if the transmission mechanism is characterized by significant
nonlinearities, certainty-equivalence no longer applies, and the mean forecasts of the target
variables are not suﬃcient. Instead, the “balance of risks” and indeed the whole probability
distribution of the target variables matter. As discussed in Svensson (1999a, 2001c), forecast
targeting can then be generalized from mean forecast targeting to distribution forecast targeting.
Distribution forecast targeting would then consist of constructing conditional probability distributions of the target variables instead of mean forecast only. Thus, for a given instrument-rate
path, the central bank would construct the joint conditional density function of the random path
of inflation and the output gap, conditional upon all information available in period t, the judg58
In emerging market economies, foreign currency debt, vulnerable balance sheets and related threats to
financial stability may arguably motivate some separate weight on exchange-rate smoothing.
59
For simplicity, assume a unitary immediate exchange-rate pass-through to the CPI of a small open economy.
Its CPI inflation, πct , can then be written as πct = πt + ω(qt − qt−1 ), where π t is inflation in domestically produced
goods and services in the CPI, ω is the share of imported goods in the CPI, and qt is the log real exchange
rate, so qt − qt−1 is real currency depreciation. Then the term (π ct − π∗ )2 in the period loss function is equal to
(πt − π∗ )2 + ω2 (qt − qt−1 ) + 2ωπ t (qt − qt−1 ), so the square of real currency depreciation implicitly enters the loss
function.

54

ment, and a given instrument-rate path. Then, the intertemporal loss function is evaluated with
the help of this conditional probability distribution. First, this can be done informally, by the
decision-making body of the bank. In this case, the decision-making body could be presented
with the probability distributions of the target variables for a few alternative instrument-rate
paths and then decide which path and distribution provides the best compromise. This is,
in principle, the same problem that any economic agent is assumed to solve in countless applications of decision-making under uncertainty. Second, given a numerical representation of
the probability distributions and a specification of the parameters of the loss function, the loss
function can easily be evaluated numerically.
Inflation-targeting central banks already seem to consider the whole probability distribution
of the forecast, by considering the “balance of risks.” Furthermore, the Bank of England and
the Riksbank have developed sophisticated methods for constructing confidence intervals for the
forecasts published in their Inflation Reports (see Mårten Blix and Peter Sellin 1998 and Erik
Britton, Paul Fisher and John Whitley 1998). The Bank of England presents fan charts for
both inflation and output, and the Riksbank gives confidence intervals for its inflation forecasts.
Furthermore, scrutiny of the motivations for instrument-rate changes (including the minutes
from the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee and the Riksbank’s Executive Board)
indicate that both banks occasionally take properties of the whole distribution into account in
their decisions, for instance, when the risk is unbalanced and “downside risk” diﬀer from “upside
risk.”
However, the point forecasts (the center of the confidence intervals) reported and published
by the Bank of England and the Riksbank are, by tradition, mode forecasts (that is, the most
likely outcome), rather than mean forecasts. When the probability distribution is asymmetric,
these two diﬀer. Hence, one interpretation of the adjustment of the mode because of the balance
of risk, is that it is just a way of constructing the mean, in which case the procedure is still one
of mean forecast targeting rather than true distribution forecast targeting. It would be more
transparent to always let the reported point forecasts be the mean forecasts rather than the
mode forecasts, and then explicitly report whether the balance-of-risk considerations imply that
the banks are deviating from mean forecast targeting.

55

6 Summary and conclusions
This paper starts from the observation that most recent research on monetary-policy rules is
restricted to consider a commitment to a simple instrument rule, where the central-bank instrument is a simple function of available information about the economy, like the Taylor rule.
Alternatively, as proposed by Taylor, for instance, in (1993, 2000), the proposed simple instrument rules are only to be used as “guidelines” and that deviations from the rules are sometimes
called for. The paper argues that a commitment to a simple instrument rule is inadequate as
a description of current monetary policy, especially inflation targeting. Furthermore, it argues
that the proposal to use simple instrument rules as mere guidelines is incomplete and too vague
to be operational. First, monetary-policy reform in the last two decades is better described as
the formulation of clear objectives for monetary policy and the creation of institutional commitment to those objectives. Second, inflation-targeting central banks have developed elaborate
decision-making processes, in which huge amounts of data are collected and processed, conditional inflation- and output-gap forecasts are constructed with the exercise of considerable
judgment and extra-model information, and an instrument decision is reached with the help
of those forecasts. This process can to a large extent be seen as inflation-forecast targeting,
setting the instrument so that the corresponding conditional inflation forecast, conditional on
all relevant information and judgment, is consistent with the inflation target and the output-gap
forecast not indicating too much output-gap variability. Third, no central bank has made an
explicit commitment to a simple instrument rule. Instead, some prominent current and former
central bankers seem highly skeptical about the idea. Neither has any central bank announced
that a particular simple instrument rule is used as a guideline. Fourth, the proposal to use
instrument rules as guidelines is incomplete and too vague to be operational, since it does not
provide any rules for when deviations from the rule are appropriate.
The paper attempts to bridge the gap between the recent literature’s focus on simple instrument rules and the actual monetary-policy practice by inflation-targeting central banks. It
argues that, in order to be more useful, the concept of monetary-policy rules should be broadened beyond the narrow instrument rules and also include targeting rules. It argues that, both
from a descriptive and a prescriptive perspective, inflation targeting is better understood as a
commitment to a targeting rule, either a general targeting rule in the form of clear objectives
for monetary policy or a specific targeting rule in the form of a condition for (the forecasts of)
the target variables. The optimal specific targeting rule is actually an operational specification
56

of the equality of the marginal rates of transformation and the marginal rates of substitution
between the target variables. Targeting rules have the important advantage that they allow
the use of judgment and extra-model information. They are also more robust and easier to
verify than optimal instrument rules, but they can nevertheless bring the economy close to the
socially optimal equilibrium. These ideas are illustrated with the help of two simple examples
of the transmission mechanism. Some recent defense of commitment to simple instrument rules
and criticism of forward-looking monetary policy and targeting rules by McCallum, Nelson and
Woodford are also addressed.
Whereas simple instrument rules, like variants of the Taylor rule, may to some extent serve as
very rough benchmarks for good monetary policy, they are very incomplete rules, because they
don’t specify when the central bank should or should not deviate from the simple instrument rule.
Such deviations, by discretion and judgment, have been and will be frequent, in a descriptive
perspective (recall that simple instrument rules at most explain two thirds of the empirical
variance of interest-rate changes), and they should be frequent, from a normative perspective
(since the simple instrument rules are not optimal and do not take judgement into account).
In contrast, targeting rules should be much more complete rules, because there are few good
reasons to deviate from them, since they allow the use of judgment and extra-model information.
Macroeconomics long ago stopped modeling private economic agents as following mechanical rules for consumption, saving, production and investment decisions; instead, they are now
normally modeled as optimizing agents that achieve first-order conditions, Euler conditions.
It is long overdue to acknowledge that modern central banks are, at least when it comes to
the inflation targeters, optimizing to at least the same extent time as private economic agents;
therefore their behavior can be better modeled with the help of targeting rules than with simple
instrument rules.
As stated (several times) above, optimal specific targeting rules simply state the equality of
the marginal rates of transformation and the marginal rates of substitution between the target
variables in an operational way. Since the marginal rates of transformation depend only on
the derivatives of the transmission mechanism with respect to the target variables, the optimal
specific targeting rules are inherently simpler and more robust than the optimal instrument rules,
which depend on all aspects of the transmission mechanism. In particular, additive judgement
and “add factors” do not enter in the formulation of the specific targeting rules, because they do
not appear in the derivatives. Still, the optimal specific targeting rules are fully consistent with

57

the use of judgment and extra-model information, since these enter into the construction of the
forecasts that have to fulfill the specific targeting rule. In contrast, the optimal instrument rules
have to include judgment explicitly, making them overwhelmingly complex and, in practice,
impossible to verify.
In conclusion, then, what are the rules for good monetary policy, the initial question posed
in this paper? My suggestion is: (1) Specify operational objectives, the general targeting rule.
That is, specify the target variables, the targets, and the relative weight(s) on stabilizing the
target variables around their targets. (2) Estimate the dynamic tradeoﬀs between the target
variables, the marginal rates of transformation. In the standard case when the target variables
are inflation and the output gap, this means estimating a Phillips curve. (3) Given these
marginal rates of transformation and the marginal rates of substitution from the loss function,
calculate a first-order condition for optimal policy, that is, a specific targeting rule. If this
specific targeting rule is too complicated to be operational, simplify. In most cases, this will
result in an operational condition for the forecasts of the target variables. (4) Estimate the
rest of the transmission mechanism, that is, the dynamic impact of the instrument rate on
the target variables. (5) Conditional on the estimated transmission mechanism and on current
information and judgment, construct a set of forecast paths for the target variables for a set
of alternative instrument-rate paths. Select the forecasts and the instrument paths that best
fulfill the specific targeting rule, and set the current instrument rate accordingly. (6) When
estimates of the marginal rates of transformation between the target variables are updated,
revise the specific targeting rule correspondingly. (7) Explain all this in transparent monetarypolicy reports, modeled on the Monetary Policy Statements of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand,
or the Inflation Reports of the Bank of England and the Riksbank.
These rules for good monetary policy acknowledge that the specific targeting rules, the Euler
conditions of monetary policy, will depend on the transmission mechanism via the marginal rates
of transformation between the target variables. Therefore, they allow for revisions of the specific
targeting rules when the estimate of these marginal rates of transformation change. This way,
the overall rules for good monetary policy are robust, but the specific targeting rule is allowed
to change with the estimated marginal rates of transformation.
There may be cases when the dynamic tradeoﬀs between the target variables are too complex
to result in a simple operational specific targeting rule. In such cases, the central bank may
have to abandon an attempt to find a specific targeting rule and instead have to rely on the

58

general targeting rule, namely selecting the forecasts and the instrument path that best seem
to minimize the intertemporal loss function. Although this can be done in more informal and
intuitive ways, given numerical representations of the alternative forecasts and a specified loss
function, the loss function can always be evaluated numerically for each forecast alternative, in
order to assist the decision-making body of the bank in finding the best alternative.
Further research on general and specific targeting rules should both lead to a better understanding of actual monetary-policy practice and also better contribute to the further improvement of that practice: Regarding general targeting rules, how can central banks be more specific
about the loss function they (explicitly or implicitly) apply?60 Regarding flexible inflation targeting, how can central banks specify the other objective(s) besides stabilizing inflation and the
relative weight(s) on this (these) objective(s)? Regarding specific targeting rules, is it possible
to provide more optimal, but still operational, targeting rules than the Bank of England’s and
the Riksbank’s “the constant-interest-rate inflation forecast about two years ahead should equal
the inflation target?” For instance, given an empirical forward- and backward-looking Phillips
curve, is there an operational close-to-optimal specific targeting rule involving inflation- and
output-gap forecasts? How robust is such a specific targeting rule to realistic revisions of the
Phillips curve? If some fraction of the current research on simple instrument rules were directed
towards the study of targeting rules, we would soon know the answers to these questions.

A The backward-looking model
In period t, consider finding the combination of forecasts and instrument plan, (π t , xt , it ), that
minimizes (5.1) subject to (5.2), (5.3) and the judgment z t .
Given that the only target variables are π t and xt , this minimization can be simplified
into two stages. The first stage is to minimize (5.1), conditional on π t , π t+1,t , xt and z t and
including only the constraint (5.2). This results in optimal forecasts, π̂ t ≡ {π̂ t+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 and
x̂t ≡ {x̂t+τ ,t }∞
.
The
second
stage
is
then
to
use
these
optimal
forecasts
in
(5.3),
which
implies
τ =0
it+τ ,t = r̄ + π t+τ +1,t −

1
β
β
xt+τ +1,t + x xt+τ ,t + z zt+τ +1,t ,
βr
βr
βr

(A.1)

to infer the optimal instrument plan ı̂t = {ı̂t+τ ,t }∞
τ =0 . The optimal instrument setting in period
t is then ı̂t = ı̂t,t , and ı̂t+τ ,t can be seen as a forecast of future instrument setting conditional on
current information (and the current judgment).
Consider the Lagrangian corresponding to stage 1,
Lt =
60

∞
X

1
δ τ { [(π t+τ ,t −π ∗ )2 +λx2t+τ ,t ]+δΞτ +1,t (π t+τ +1,t −π t+τ ,t −αx xt+τ ,t −αz zt+τ +1,t )}, (A.2)
2
τ =0

Svensson (2001b, 2002a) provide some suggestions on this point.

59

where Ξτ +1,t is the Lagrange multiplier of the constraint (5.2). Note that π t , xt , π t+1,t and
zt+τ ,t are predetermined for τ ≥ 1, and consider the first-order conditions for an optimum, with
respect to π t+τ +1,t and xt+τ ,t for τ ≥ 1. They are
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ + Ξτ +1,t − δΞτ +2,t = 0

(A.3)

λxt+τ ,t − δαx Ξτ +1,t = 0

(A.4)

with respect to π t+τ +1,t , and
with respect to xt+τ ,t . From (A.4), we have
Ξτ +1,t =

λ
xt+τ ,t .
δαx

Using this in (A.3), we can write a consolidated first-order condition as
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ +

λ
(xt+τ ,t − δxt+τ +1,t ) = 0.
δαx

(A.5)

In order to find the equilibrium, rewrite (5.2) as
xt+τ ,t =

1
(π t+τ +1,t − π t+τ ,t − αz zt+τ +1,t )
αx

(A.6)

and use this to eliminate xt+τ ,t in (A.5). This results in a diﬀerence equation for π t+τ +1,t ,
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ +

λ
[(π t+τ +1,t − π t+τ ,t − αz zt+τ +1,t ) − δ(π t+τ +2,t − π t+τ +1,t − αz zt+τ +2,t )] = 0.
δα2x

For the case of flexible inflation targeting, λ > 0, rewrite the diﬀerence equation as
1
αz
(π t+τ +2,t − π ∗ ) − 2a(π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ ) + (π t+τ ,t − π ∗ ) = − (zt+τ +1,t − δzt+τ +2,t ),
δ
δ
where

1 α2x
+
(A.7)
δ
λ
is given, it is natural to express the diﬀerence equation in terms of the inflation
2a ≡ 1 +

(since π t+1,t
forecasts).
By standard methods, the solution to this diﬀerence equation can be shown to fulfill
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = c(π t+τ ,t − π ∗ ) + αz wt+τ +1,t

(A.8)

for τ ≥ 1 (recall that π t+1,t is predetermined). Here, the coeﬃcient c fulfills 0 < c < 1 and is
the smaller root of the characteristic equation,
1
= 0;
δ

(A.9)

1
a2 − .
δ

(A.10)

µ2 − 2aµ +
hence given by
c≡a−

r

60

Furthermore, c is an increasing function of λ, c(λ), which fulfills c(0) = limλ→0 c(λ) = 0,
c(∞) ≡ limλ→∞ c(λ) = 1. Finally, the vector wt+τ +1,t is given by
wt+τ +1,t ≡ c

∞
X
(δc)s (zt+τ +1+s,t − δzt+τ +2+s,t )
s=0

= czt+τ +1,t − cδ(1 − c)

∞
X
(δc)s zt+τ +2+s,t
s=0

= zt+τ +1,t − (1 − c)z̃t+τ +1,t ,
where
z̃t+τ ,t ≡

∞
X
(δc)s zt+τ +s,t .
s=0

For the case of strict inflation targeting, λ = 0, we have c(0) = 0, z̃t+τ ,t ≡ zt+τ ,t and
wt+τ +1,t = 0, so the (A.8) is replaced by
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = 0
for τ ≥ 1.
It follows from (A.6) and (A.8), that the corresponding output-gap forecast is
1
[− (1 − c)(π t+τ ,t − π ∗ ) + αz (wt+τ +1,t − zt+τ +1,t )]
αx
1−c
= −
[(π t+τ ,t − π ∗ ) + αz z̃t+τ +1,t ] .
αx

xt+τ ,t =

By (A.1), the optimal interest setting in period t then follows
1
β
β
xt+1,t + x xt + z zt+1,t
βr
βr
βr
1−c
β
β
= r̄ + π t+1,t +
[(π t+1,t − π ∗ ) + αz z̃t+2,t ] + x xt + z zt+1,t
α β
βr
βr
µ x r ¶
1−c
β
(π t+1,t − π ∗ ) + x xt
= r̄ + π ∗ + 1 +
αx β r
βr
β
1−c
+ z zt+1,t +
αz z̃t+2,t .
βr
αx β r

it = r̄ + π t+1,t −

(A.11)

A.1 A constant-interest-rate inflation forecast
By (5.2) we have that the one-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+1,t is given by
π t+1,t = π t + αx xt + αz zt+1,t

(A.12)

and cannot be aﬀected by the current instrument. In contrast, by (5.3), the one-period-ahead
output-gap forecast, xt+1,t , is given by
xt+1,t = β r π t+1,t + β x xt + β z zt+1,t − β r (it − r̄)
and can be aﬀected by the current instrument.

61

(A.13)

The two-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+2,t , will by (5.2) and (A.13) be given by
π t+2,t = π t+1,t + αx xt+1,t + αz zt+2,t
= π t+1,t + αx [β r π t+1,t + β x xt + β z zt+1,t − β r (it − r̄)] + αz zt+2,t

= (1 + αx β r )π t+1,t + αx β x xt + αx β z zt+1,t + αz zt+2,t − αx β r (it − r̄).

(A.14)

Thus, we see that the two-period-ahead inflation forecast depends on the one-period-ahead
inflation forecast, π t+1,t , the current output gap, xt , the one- and two-period-ahead forecasts of
the deviation, zt+1,t and zt+2,t , and the current interest rate relative to the average real interest
rate, it − r̄.
Let us also note that the two-period-ahead output-gap forecast, xt+2,t , is given by
xt+2,t = β r π t+2,t + β x xt+1,t + β z zt+2,t − β r (it+1,t − r̄)

= β r [(1 + αx β r )π t+1,t + αx β x xt + αx β z zt+1,t + αz zt+2,t − αx β r (it − r̄)]

+ β x [β r π t+1,t + β x xt + β z zt+1,t − β r (it − r̄)] + β z zt+2,t − β r (it+1,t − r̄)

= (1 + αx β r + β x )β r π t+1,t + (αx β r + β x )β x xt
+ (αx β r + β x )β z zt+1,t + (αz β r + β z )zt+2,t
− (αx β r + β x )β r (it − r̄) − β r (it+1,t − r̄)

(A.15)

Thus, the two-period-ahead output-gap forecasts depends on the one-period-ahead inflation forecast, π t+1,t , the current output gap, xt , the one- and two-period-ahead forecast of the deviation,
zt+1,t and zt+2,t , and the current and one-period-ahead forecasts of the interest rate, it and it+1,t .
Construct the 3-period-ahead inflation forecast,
π t+3,t = π t+2,t + αx xt+2,t + αz zt+3,t
= (1 + αx β r )π t+1,t + αx β x xt + αx β z zt+1,t + αz zt+2,t − αx β r (it − r̄)
+ αx [(1 + αx β r + β x )β r π t+1,t + (αx β r + β x )β x xt ]

+ αx [(αx β r + β x )β z zt+1,t + (αz β r + β z )zt+2,t ] + αz zt+3,t
− αx [(αx β r + β x )β r (it − r̄) + β r (it+1,t − r̄)]

= [1 + αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r ]π t+1,t + αx (1 + αx β r + β x )β x xt
+ αx (1 + αx β r + β x )β z zt+1,t + [αx (αz β r + β z ) + αz ]zt+2,t + αz zt+3,t
− αx (1 + αx β r + β x )β r (it − r̄) − αx β r (it+1,t − r̄).

(A.16)

Consider the constant interest rate, it = it+1,t , for which π t+3,t = π ∗ . This implies the
equation,
π ∗ = [1 + αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r ]π t+1,t + αx (1 + αx β r + β x )β x xt
+ αx (1 + αx β r + β x )β z zt+1,t + [αx (β r αz + β z ) + αz ]zt+2,t + αz zt+3,t
− αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r (it − r̄).
Solving for it gives the reaction function
it = r̄ + π ∗ + fπ (π t+1,t − π ∗ ) + fx xt + fz1 zt+1,t + fz2 zt+2,t + fz3 zt+3,t ,

62

(A.17)

where
fπ ≡
fx ≡
fz1 ≡
fz2 =
fz3 =

1 + αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r
> 1,
αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r
(1 + αx β r + β x )β x
> 0,
(2 + αx β r + β x )β r
(1 + αx β r + β x )β z
,
(2 + αx β r + β x )β r
αx (β r αz + β z ) + αz
,
αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r
αz
.
αx (2 + αx β r + β x )β r

(A.18)
(A.19)
(A.20)
(A.21)
(A.22)

B The forward-looking model
Consider the Lagrangian in period t for the problem of minimizing (5.1) subject to (5.5),
∞
X

1
δ τ { [(π t+τ ,t −π ∗ )2 +λx2t+τ ,t ]+Ξt+τ ,t [δ(π t+1+τ ,t −π)+αx xt+τ ,t +αz zt+τ ,t −(π t+τ ,t −π)]}
2
τ =0
(B.1)
where Ξt+τ ,t is the Lagrange multiplier for the constraint (5.5) for period t + τ , considered in
period t. Diﬀerentiating with respect to π t+τ +1,t and xt+τ +1,t gives the first-order conditions

Lt =

π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ − Ξt+τ +1,t + Ξt+τ ,t = 0,
λxt+τ +1,t + αx Ξt+τ +1,t = 0

(B.2)
(B.3)

for τ ≥ 0, together with the initial condition
Ξt,t = 0.

(B.4)

Eliminating the Lagrange multipliers leads to the consolidated first-order condition
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ +
for τ ≥ 1 and

λ
(xt+τ +1,t − xt+τ ,t ) = 0
αx

π t+1,t − π ∗ +

λ
xt+1,t = 0
αx

(B.5)

(B.6)

for τ = 0. Thus, finding the optimal forecasts is reduced to the problem of finding π t , xt and
t
t
Ξt ≡ {Ξt+τ ,t }∞
τ =1 that satisfy (5.5) and (B.2)—(B.4), or, equivalently, π and x that satisfy (5.5),
(B.5) and (B.6).
By taking the unconditional mean of (B.5), it follows that there is no average inflation bias
E[π t+τ ,t ] = π ∗ .

(B.7)

As noted in Woodford (1999a) and discussed in detail in Svensson and Woodford (2002a),
these first-order conditions define a decision procedure that will not be time-consistent (under
the case of flexible inflation targeting, λ > 0). This can be seen from the fact that the initial
condition (B.4) and the corresponding first-order condition for τ = 1, (B.6), are diﬀerent from
that for τ ≥ 2, (B.5). This results because, in deciding on π t+1,t , the central bank takes the
63

previous period’s forecast π t+1,t−1 as given, and lets π t+1,t deviate from it without assigning any
specific cost to doing so. As a result, the forecasts in period t are not generally consistent with
the forecasts made in period t − 1, even if no new information is received in period t.
To see this, suppose that the forecasts π t−1 and xt−1 were constructed in period t −1 so as to
minimize the intertemporal loss function (5.1) with t − 1 substituted for t. The same procedure
in period t−1 as above then resulted in the same first-order conditions (B.5) and (B.6), although
with t − 1 substituted for t. Thus, in period t − 1, the first-order condition for τ = 2 was
π t+1,t−1 − π ∗ +

λ
(xt+1,t−1 − xt,t−1 ) = 0.
αx

(B.8)

Without any new information in period t relative to period t−1, we should have π t+1,t = π t+1,t−1
and xt+1,t = xt+1,t−1 for intertemporal consistency. From (B.6) and (B.8) it is apparent that
this will not be the case, unless by chance xt,t−1 = 0.
As discussed in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), time-consistency is ensured under optimization “in a timeless perspective,” which corresponds to imposing the initial condition
Ξt,t = Ξt,t−1
for the Lagrange multiplier Ξt,t . That is, the multiplier Ξt,t is set equal to the shadow cost of
the one-period-ahead inflation forecast from the previous period.
Equivalently, (B.6) is replaced by
π t+1,t − π ∗ +

λ
(xt+1,t − xt,t−1 ) = 0,
αx

(B.9)

where xt,t−1 is the one-period-ahead output-gap forecast from the previous period. Equivalently,
we can let (B.5) apply for τ ≥ 0 instead of τ ≥ 1, with the initial condition
xt,t = xt,t−1

(B.10)

imposed. That is, in the first-order condition (B.5), xt,t does not denote the current output gap,
xt , but the forecast one period ago of the current output gap, xt,t−1 .
For the case of flexible inflation targeting (λ > 0), substituting (B.5) into (5.5) leads to the
diﬀerence equation
1
αx
αz zt+τ +1,t
xt+τ +2,t − 2axt+τ +1,t + xt+τ ,t =
δ
δλ
for τ ≥ 0, where
1 α2
(B.11)
2a = 1 + + x
δ
δλ
(note that (B.11) is similar to (A.7) except that the last term diﬀers). (Since xt,t is given (by
B.10), it is natural to express the diﬀerence equation in terms of the output-gap forecasts.)
By standard methods, it can be shown that the solution to the diﬀerence equation, the
optimal output-gap forecast, fulfills
xt+τ +1,t

∞

αx c X
= cxt+τ ,t −
(δc)s αz zt+τ +1+s,t
λ s=0
αx c
αz z̃t+τ +1,t ,
= cxt+τ ,t −
λ

64

(B.12)

where z̃t+τ +1,t is defined as in (3.2) and c (0 ≤ c < 1) is the smaller root of the characteristic
equation (A.9) and hence again is given by (A.10) (but with a given by (B.11)), is an increasing
function c(λ) of λ, and fulfills c(0) = 0, c(∞) = 1.61
The optimal inflation forecast then fulfills, by (B.5),
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ =

λ
(1 − c)xt+τ ,t + cαz z̃t+τ +1,t .
αx

(B.13)

The optimal interest-rate path will by (5.5) and (B.5) follow
1
β
(xt+τ +2,t − xt+τ +1,t ) + z zt+τ +1,t
βr
βr
αx
β
∗
∗
= rt+τ
)(π t+τ +2,t − π ∗ ) + z zt+τ +1,t
+1,t + π + (1 −
λβ r
βr
α
λ
αx
β
x
∗
∗
= rt+τ
) (1 − c)xt+τ +1,t + (1 −
)cαz z̃t+τ +2,t + z zt+τ +1,t .
+1,t + π + (1 −
λβ r αx
λβ r
βr
(B.14)

∗
∗
∗
it+τ +1,t = rt+τ
+1,t + π + (π t+τ +2,t − π ) +

The optimal interest-rate decision in period t for the interest rate in period t + 1 is then given
by (note the loose relation to “forecast-based” instrument rules)
αx
β
)(π t+2,t − π ∗ ) + z zt+1,t
λβ r
βr
αx λ
∗
= rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + (1 −
) c(1 − c)xt,t
λβ r αx
β
αx
+ z zt+1,t + (1 −
)c{[1 − δc(1 − c)]αz z̃t+2,t − (1 − c)αz zt+1,t },
βr
λβ r

∗
it+1,t = rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + (1 −

(B.15)

where we use that the two-period-ahead inflation forecast is given by
π t+2,t − π ∗ =
=
=
=

λ
(1 − c)xt+1,t + cαz z̃t+2,t
αx
i
h
λ
αx c
αz z̃t+1,t + cαz z̃t+2,t
(1 − c) cxt,t −
αx
λ
λ
(1 − c)cxt,t − c(1 − c)(αz zt+1,t + δcαz z̃t+2,t ) + cαz z̃t+2,t
αx
λ
c(1 − c)xt,t + c{[1 − δc(1 − c)]αz z̃t+2,t − (1 − c)αz zt+1,t },
αx

where I have used that
z̃t+1,t ≡

∞
X
(δc)s zt+1+s,t ≡ δcz̃t+2,t + zt+1,t .
s=0

Note that, by (B.12),
xt,t = xt,t−1
= cxt−1,t−2 −
= −

∞

αx c
αz z̃t,t−1
λ

αx c X j
c αz z̃t−j,t−1−j .
λ

(B.16)

j=0

61
If the smaller root of (A.9) with (A.7) as a function of λ is denoted ĉ(λ), the smaller root of (A.9) with
(B.11) is obviously ĉ(δλ), for fixed δ.

65

For the case of strict inflation targeting (λ = 0), we have
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = 0
for τ ≥ 0 from (B.5). From (5.5) then follows
αx xt+τ +1,t + αz zt+τ +1,t = 0
and

αz
zt+τ +1,t .
αx
The optimal instrument-rate decision in period t is then given by
xt+τ +1,t = −

1
β
(xt+2,t − xt+1,t ) + z zt+1,t
βr
βr
β
αz
∗
= rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + z zt+1,t −
(zt+2,t − zt+1,t ).
βr
αx β r

∗
it+1,t = rt+1,t
+ π∗ +

(B.17)

B.1 The discretion case
As discussed in Svensson and Woodford (2002a), the first-order condition under discretion is
π t+τ +1 − π ∗ = −

λ
xt+τ +1,t
αx

(B.18)

for τ ≥ 0. Combining (B.18) with (5.2) gives the diﬀerence equation
−

λ
δλ
xt+τ +1,t = − xt+τ +2,t + αx xt+τ +1,t + αz zt+τ +1,t .
αx
αx

The solution will fulfill
xt+τ +1,t = δc̃xt+τ +2,t −
= −

αx c̃
αz zt+τ +1,t
λ

αx c̃
αz z̃t+τ +1,t ,
λ

(B.19)

and
π t+τ +1,t − π ∗ = c̃αz z̃t+τ +1,t

where z̃t+τ +1,t is defined as in (3.2) (with c̃ replacing c), and
0 ≤ c̃ = c̃(λ) ≡

λ
< 1.
λ + α2x

(B.20)

The corresponding reaction function is
1
β
(xt+2,t − xt+1,t ) + z zt+1,t
βr
βr
1
β
∗
rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + (π t+2,t − π ∗ ) + (xt+2,t − xt+1,t ) + z zt+1,t
βr
βr
1 αx c̃
β
∗
αz (z̃t+2,t − z̃t+1,t ) + z zt+1,t
rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + c̃αz z̃t+2,t −
βr λ
βr
1 αx
β
∗
c̃αz (z̃t+2,t − δc̃z̃t+2,t − zt+1,t ) + z zt+1,t
rt+1,t
+ π ∗ + c̃αz z̃t+2,t −
βr λ
βr
α
c̃α
z
+
λβ
c̃
x
z t+1,t
z zt+1,t
∗
[β r λ − αx (1 − δc̃)]αz z̃t+2,t +
. (B.21)
rt+1,t
+ π∗ +
βrλ
βr λ

∗
+ π t+2,t +
it+1,t = rt+1,t

=
=
=
=

66

B.2 A constant-interest-rate inflation forecast
As explained in the appendix of the working-paper version of Svensson (1999b), constructing
constant-interest-rate forecasts in a forward-looking model requires some special considerations
(see also Leitemo 2000). Basically, some assumptions must be made about future policy in order
to construct determinate forecasts. The forecasts will not be rational-expectations forecasts, in
that the constant-interest-rate path will not materialize even in the absence of new information
or new judgment.
Here is an example:
In period t, impose the conditions that the interest rate is constant 3 periods ahead,
it+1,t = it+2,t = it+3,t .

(B.22)

Furthermore, assume that we like to find the constant interest rate (for the next 3 periods) for
which the corresponding 3-period-ahead inflation forecast is on target,
π t+3,t = π ∗ .

(B.23)

We must make some assumptions about the economy after period 3 in order to have a
determinate solution. Assume, for instance, that policy is optimal from (t + 4, t) onwards (where
(t + τ , t) denotes period t + τ seen from the forecasting done in period t). Then π t+4,t , xt+4,t
and it+4,t are given by (B.13), (B.12) and (B.14), respectively. In particular, they depend on
xt+3,t , which remains to be determined.
By (5.5) for (t + 3, t), given that π t+4,t is a function of xt+3,t , and given (B.23) and zt+3,t ,
we can solve for xt+3,t . Then π t+4,t and xt+4,t are determined.
By (5.6) for (t + 3, t), given xt+4,t , xt+3,t , π t+4,t , and zt+3,t , we get it+3,t and, by (B.22),
also it+1,t and it+2,t . From now on, we can exploit the simple recursivity of the forward-looking
model:
By (5.6) for (t + 2, t), given xt+3,t , (B.23), zt+2,t , and it+2,t , we get xt+2,t .
By (5.5) for (t + 2, t), given (B.23), xt+3,t and zt+3,t we get π t+2,t .
By (5.6) for (t + 1, t), given xt+2,t , π t+2,t , zt+2,t , and it+1,t , we get xt+1,t .
By (5.5) for (t + 1, t), given π t+2,t , xt+1,t and zt+1,t we get π t+1,t .
Thus, we have found (π t , xt , it ) for which (B.23) and (B.22) holds.
Suppose this procedure is followed each period t and it+1,t is implemented in each period t+1.
In period t + 1, even in the absence of any new information (any change in the judgment), the
resulting it+2,t+1 will diﬀer from it+2,t , since in period t + 1 (B.23) is replaced by π t+4,t+1 = π ∗ .
Thus, we will have π t+2,t+1 and xt+2,t+1 diﬀering from π t+2,t and xt+2,t . In particular, rational
plans by the private sector will incorporate rational interest-rate expectations of the time-varying
interest rate, so it+2|t = E[it+2,t+1 |It ] 6= it+1,t . Consequently, the private-sector plans π t+1|t and
xt+1|t will diﬀer from the constant-interest-rate forecasts π t+1,t and xt+1,t .
This will typically not fulfill (B.5) and not be optimal. This may not even be close to
optimal. Leitemo (2000) provides more details. Kohn (2000) provides a more general discussion
of constant-interest-rate forecasts.

C An optimal reaction function with response to forecasts for an unchanged
interest rate
This appendix shows how a forecast-based instrument rule involving precisely defined unchangedinterest-rate rather than equilibrium forecasts can be derived from the optimal targeting rule.
67

C.1 The backward-looking model
For the backward-looking forward-looking model, let (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ) be the optimal equilibrium forecasts and instrument-rate path. For a given i, let [π̄ t (i), x̄t (i), ı̄t (i)] correspond to an equilibrium
where it,t = i but it+τ ,t is optimal for τ ≥ 1 (conditional on it,t = i). Then, for ı̄t (i), (A.5) will
be fulfilled for τ ≥ 1, but not for τ = 0 (except if i = ı̂t,t ). An unchanged interest rate in period
t then corresponds to i = it−1 . We realize that we have
π̂ t+2,t = π̄ t+2,t (it−1 ) − a(ı̂t,t − it−1 ),
x̂t+1,t = x̄t+1,t (it−1 ) − b(ı̂t,t − it−1 ),

x̂t+2,t = x̄t+2,t (it−1 ) − d(ı̂t,t − it−1 ),
where a ≡ − ∂ π̄ t+2,t (it−1 )/∂i and b ≡ − ∂ x̄t+1,t (it−1 )/∂i and d ≡ − ∂ x̄t+2,t (it−1 )/∂i are the
derivatives of π t+2,t and xt+1,t with respect to i at the equilibrium (π̄ t (it−1 ), x̄t (it−1 ), ı̄t (it−1 )).
The coeﬃcients a, b and c are endogenously determined in the equilibrium, but once determined,
they are constant, due to the linearity of the model. Since π̂ t+2,t , x̂t+2,t and x̂t+1,t fulfill (A.5)
for τ = 1, we have
[π̄ t+2,t (it−1 )−π ∗ −a(ı̂t,t −it−1 )]+

λ
{[x̄t+1,t (it−1 )−b(ı̂t,t −it−1 )]−δ[x̄t+2,t (it−1 )−d(ı̂t,t −it−1 )]} = 0.
δαx

It follows that we can write
ı̂t,t − it−1 =

1
[π̄ t+2,t (it−1 ) − π ∗ ]
a + λ(b − δd)/δαx
λ/αx
[δx̄t+2,t (it−1 ) − x̄t+1,t (it−1 )].
−
a + λ(b − δd)/δαx

(C.1)

It follows that the optimal change in the interest rate from period t − 1 to t, ı̂t,t − it−1 , can
be seen as a linear response to the deviation of a two-period-ahead forecast from the inflation
target, π̄ t+2,t (it−1 ) − π ∗ , and to the two-period-ahead forecast of the modified change in the
output gap, δx̄t+2,t (it−1 ) − x̄t+1,t (it−1 ).
C.2 The forward-looking model
For the forward-looking model, let (π̂ t , x̂t , ı̂t ) be the optimal equilibrium forecasts and instrumentrate path. Recall that in the forward-looking model, the relevant decision in period t concerns
it+1,t . For a given i, let [π̄ t (i), x̄t (i),ı̄t (i)] correspond to an equilibrium where it+1,t = i but it+τ ,t
is optimal for τ ≥ 2 (conditional on it+1,t = i). Then, for ı̄t (i), (B.5) will be fulfilled for τ ≥ 2,
but not for τ = 1 (except if i = ı̂t+1,t ). Now, a decision in period t of an unchanged interest rate
corresponds to i = it . We realize that we have
π̂ t+1,t = π̄ t+1,t (it ) − a(ı̂t+1,t − it )

x̂t+1,t = x̄t+1,t (it ) − b(ı̂t+1,t − it ),

where a ≡ − ∂ π̄ t+1,t (it )/∂i and b ≡ − ∂ x̄t+1,t (it )/∂i are the derivatives of π t+1,t and xt+1,t
with respect to i at the equilibrium [π̄ t (i), x̄t (i), ı̄t (i)]. (Note that xt,t = xt,t−1 is the previous
optimal forecast in period t − 1 and is not aﬀected by i.) Again, the coeﬃcients a, b and c
are endogenously determined in the equilibrium but constant, once determined, because of the
linearity of the model. Since π̂ t+1,t and x̂t+1,t fulfill (B.5) for τ = 1, we have
[π̄ t+1,t (it ) − π ∗ − a(ı̂t+1,t − it )] +

λ
[x̄t+1,t (it ) − b(ı̂t+1,t − it ) − xt,t−1 ].
αx
68

It follows that we can write
ı̂t+1,t − it =

1
λ/αx
[π̄ t+1,t (it ) − π ∗ ] +
[x̄t+1,t (it ) − xt,t−1 ].
a + λb/αx
a + λb/αx

(C.2)

It follows that the optimal change in the interest rate from period t to t + 1, ı̂t+1,t − it , can
be seen as a linear response to the one-period-ahead forecast of the inflation gap, π̄ t+1,t (it ) − π ∗ ,
and the change in the forecast of output gap, x̄t+1,t (it) − xt−1,t (relative not to the previous
unchanged-interest-rate forecast x̄t,t−1 (it−1 ) but to the previous optimal forecast, xt,t−1 ), where
both forecasts for period t + 1 are conditional on an unchanged instrument rate, it+1,t = it .

69

References
Ball, Laurence. 1994. “Credible Disinflation with Staggered Price Setting,” Amer. Econ. Rev.
84, pp. 282—289.
Ball, Laurence. 1999. “Eﬃcient Rules for Monetary Policy,” Int. Finance 2:2, pp. 63—64.
Barro, Robert and David Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model,” J Polit. Economy 91, pp. 589—610.
Batini, Nicoletta and Andrew G. Haldane. 1999. “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy,” in Monetary Policy Rules. John B. Taylor, ed. Chicago: Chicago U. Press.
Benhabib, Jess; Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martı́n Uribe. 2001. “Monetary Policy and
Multiple Equilibria,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 91, pp. 167—186.
Berg, Claes. 1999. “Inflation Forecast Targeting: The Swedish Experience,” Sveriges Riksbank
Econ. Rev. 3/1999, pp. 40—66.
Bernanke, Ben S.; Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen. 1999. Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton: Princeton U. Press.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1997. “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
Monetary Policy?” J. Econ. Perspect. 11, pp. 97—116.
Black, Richard; Vincenzo Cassino, Aaron Drew, Eric Hansen, Benjamin Hunt, David Rose, and
Alasdair Scott. 1997. “The Forecasting and Policy System: The Core Model,” Research
Paper No. 43, Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Wellington.
Black, Richard; Tiﬀ Macklem and David Rose. 1997. “On Policy Rules for Price Stability,” in
Price Stability, Inflation Targets, and Monetary Policy. Tiﬀ Macklem, ed. Ottawa: Bank
of Canada, pp. 411—461.
Blinder, Alan S. 1998. Central Banking in Theory and Practice. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Blix, Mårten and Peter Sellin. 1998. “Uncertainty Bands for Inflation Forecasts,” Sveriges
Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 65.
Brash, Donald T. 2001. “Making Monetary Policy: A Look behind the Curtains,” speech in
Christchurch, New Zealand, January 26, 2001.
Britton, Erik; Paul Fisher and John Whitley. 1998. “The Inflation Report Projections: Understanding the Fan Chart,” Bank Engl. Quart. Bull. 38, pp. 30—37.
Bryant, Ralph C.; Peter Hooper and Catherine L. Mann, eds. 1993. Evaluating Policy Regimes:
New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Budd, Alan. 1998. “Economic Policy, with and without Forecasts,” Bank Engl. Quart. Bull.
38, pp. 379—384.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” J. Monet.
Econ. 12, pp. 383—398.

70

Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst. 2000. “Forward-Looking Versus BackwardLooking Taylor Rules” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 00-09.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. 1998. “Central Bank Policy Rules: Conceptual Issues and Practical Considerations,” in Current Issues in Monetary Economics. Helmut Wagner, ed. Heidelberg:
Physica-Verlag, pp. 121—140.
Cecchetti, Stephen G. 2000. “Making Monetary Policy: Objectives and Rules,” Oxford Rev.
Econ. Pol. 16:4, pp. 43—59.
Chow, Gregory C. 1975. Analysis and Control of Dynamic Economic Systems. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Christian, James W. 1968. “A Further Analysis of the Objectives of American Monetary
Policy,” J. Finance 23, 465—477.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Christopher J. Gust. 1999. “Taylor Rules in a Limited Participation Model,” NBER Working Paper 7017.
Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galı́ and Mark Gertler. 1998. “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
Some International Evidence,” Europ. Econ. Rev. 42, pp. 1033—1067.
Clarida, Richard; Jordi Galı́ and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A
New Keynesian Perspective,” J. Econ. Lit. 37, pp. 1661—1707.
Coletti, Donald; Benjamin Hunt, David Rose and Robert Tetlow. 1996. “Bank of Canada’s
New Quarterly Projection Model. Part 3, The Dynamic Model: QPM,” Technical Report
No. 75, Bank of Canada, Ottawa.
Currie, David and Paul Levine. 1993. Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic Policy Coordination. Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press.
Dewald, William G. and Harry G. Johnson. 1963. “An Objective Analysis of the Objectives of
American Monetary Policy, 1952—61,” in Banking and Monetary Studies. Deane Carson,
ed. Homewood: Richard D. Irwin, pp. 171—189.
Faust, Jon W. and Lars E.O. Svensson. 2000. “Credibility and Transparency: Monetary Policy
with Unobservable Goals,” Int. Econ. Rev., forthcoming.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 1996. Achieving Price Stability. Kansas City: Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 1999. New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Kansas
City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 2002. Rethinking Stabilization Policy. Kansas City:
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, forthcoming.
Federal Reserve Board. 1995. Federal Open Market Committee Transcripts, FOMC Meeting
January 31-February 1, 1995, www.federalreserve.gov/fomc/transcripts.
Friedman, Milton. 1969. The Optimal Quantity of Money and Other Essays. New York:
Aldine De Gruyter.

71

Gerlach, Stefan and Gert Schnabel. 1998. “The Taylor Rule and Average Interest Rates in the
EMU-11 Area: A Note,” working paper, Bank for International Settlements.
Giannoni, Marc P. 2000. “Optimal Interest-Rates Rules in a Forward-Looking Model, and
Inflation Stabilization versus Price-Level Stabilization,” working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York.
Giannoni, Marc P. and Michael Woodford. 2002a. “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. General
Theory,” working paper.
Giannoni, Marc P. and Michael Woodford. 2002b. “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: II. Applications,” working paper.
Goodhart, Charles A.E. 2000. “The Inflation Forecast,” working paper, London School of
Economics.
Greenspan, Alan. 1994. “Discussion,” in The Future of Central Banking. Forrest Capie,
Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadt eds. Cambridge: Cambridge U.
Press.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 1998. “Alternative Representation of Discounted
Robust Linear Quadratic Control,” working paper.
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford: Oxford U. Press.
Henderson, Dale W. and Warwick J. McKibbin. 1993. “A Comparison of Some Basic Monetary
Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Diﬀerent Degrees of Instrument
Adjustment and Wage Persistence,” Carnegie-Rochester Conf. Ser. Public Pol. 39, pp.
221—317.
Heikensten, Lars. 1999. “The Riksbank’s Inflation Target–Clarification and Evaluation,”
Sveriges Riksbank Quart. Rev. 1/1999, pp. 5—17.
Heikensten, Lars and Anders Vredin. 1998. “Inflation Targeting and Swedish Monetary
Policy–Experience and Problems,” Sveriges Riksbank Quart. Rev. 4/1998, 5—33.
Hetzel, Robert L. 2000. “The Taylor Rule: Is It a Useful Guide to Understanding Monetary
Policy?” Fed. Reserve Bank Richmond Econ. Quart. 86:2, pp. 1—33.
Jansson, Per and Anders Vredin. 2000. “Forecast-Based Monetary Policy in Sweden 1992—
1998: A View from Within,” working paper, Sveriges Riksbank.
Judd, John P. and Glenn D. Rudebusch. 1998. “Taylor’s Rule and the Fed: 1970—1997,” Fed.
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Econ. Rev. 1998:3, pp. 3—16.
King, Mervyn A. 1994. “Monetary Policy in the UK,” Fiscal Studies 15, No. 3, pp. 109—128.
King, Mervyn A. 1997. “The Inflation Target Five Years On,” Bank Engl. Quart. Bull. 37(4),
434—442.
King, Mervyn A. 1999. “Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old,” in New Challenges
for Monetary Policy. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 11—57.

72

Kohn, Donald L. 2000. “Report to the Non-Executive Directors of the Court of the Bank
of England on Monetary Policy Processes and the Work of Monetary Analysis,” Federal
Reserve Board, October 18, 2000. Reprinted in Bank Engl. Quart. Bull. 41, pp. 35—49.
Kozicki, Sharon. 1999. “How Useful Are Taylor Rules for Monetary Policy?” Fed. Reserve
Bank Kansas City Econ. Rev., 1999:2, pp. 5—33.
Kydland, Finn and Edward Prescott. 1977. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans,” J Polit. Economy 85, pp. 473—490.
Leeper, Eric M. and Tao Zha. 1999. “Identification and Forecasting: Joint Inputs to Policy
Analysis,” working paper.
Leitemo, Kai. 2000. “Targeting Inflation by Constant-Interest-Rate Forecasts,” working paper,
Norges Bank.
Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland and John C. Williams. 1999. “Robustness of Simple Monetary
Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” in Monetary Policy Rules. John B. Taylor ed.
Chicago: Chicago U. Press.
Levin, Andrew; Volker Wieland and John C. Williams. 2001. “The Performance of ForecastBased Monetary Policy Rules,” working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conf. Ser. Public Pol. 1, pp. 19—46.
Macklem, Tiﬀ, ed. 1997. Price Stability, Inflation Targets, and Monetary Policy. Ottawa:
Bank of Canada.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2001. “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoﬀ Between Inflation and
Unemployment,” Econ. J. 111, pp. 45—61.
Marcet, Albert and Ramon Marimon. 1999. “Recursive Contracts,” working paper, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona.
McCallum, Bennett T. 1988. “Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy,” CarnegieRochester Conf. Ser. Public Pol. 29, pp. 173—204.
McCallum, Bennett T. 1997. “Crucial Issues Concerning Central Bank Independence,” J.
Monet. Econ. 39, pp. 99—112.
McCallum, Bennett T. 1999. “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Handbook
of Macroeconomics. John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds. Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
McCallum, Bennett T. 2000 “The Present and Future of Monetary Policy Rules,” Int. Finance
3, pp. 273—286.
McCallum, Bennett T. and Edward Nelson. 2000 “Timeless Perspective vs. Discretionary
Monetary Policy in Forward-Looking Models,” working paper.
Meltzer, Allan H. 1987. “Limits of Short-Run Stabilization Policy,” Econ. Inquiry 25, pp.
1—13.

73

Merriam-Webster. 1996. Webster’s Tenth New Collegiate Dictionary, Springfield: MerriamWebster.
Onatski, Alexei and James H. Stock. 2000. “Robust Monetary Policy Under Model Uncertainty
in a Small Model of the U.S. Economy,” NBER Working Paper No. 7490.
Peersman, Gert and Frank Smets. 1998. “Uncertainty and the Taylor Rule in a Simple Model
of the Euro-Area Economy,” working paper.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 1993. “Designing Institutions for Monetary Stability,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conf. Ser. Public Pol. 39, pp. 53—84.
Reifschneider, David L.; David J. Stockton and David W. Wilcox. 1997. “Econometric Models
and the Monetary Policy Process,” Carnegie-Rochester Conf. Ser. Public Pol. 47, pp.
1—37.
Rogoﬀ, Kenneth. 1985. “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary
Target,” Quart. J. Econ. 100, pp. 1169—1189.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford. 1997. “An Optimization-Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997,
pp. 297—346.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2002a. “Assessing Nominal Income Rules for Monetary Policy with
Model and Data Uncertainty,” Econ. J. 112, pp. 402—432.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2002b. “Term Structure Evidence on Interest Rate Smoothing and
Monetary Policy Inertia,” J. Monet. Econ. 49, pp. 1161—1187.
Rudebusch, Glenn D. and Lars E.O. Svensson. 1999. “Policy Rules for Inflation Targeting,”
in Monetary Policy Rules. John B. Taylor, ed. Chicago: Chicago U. Press, pp. 203—246.
Sack, Brian and Volker Wieland. 1999. “Interest-Rate Smoothing and Optimal Monetary
Policy: A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence,” working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
Sims, Christopher A. 1980. “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica 48, pp. 1—48.
Sims, Christopher A. 2001. “A Review of Monetary Policy Rules,” J. Econ. Lit. 39, pp.
562—566.
Smets, Frank. 2000. “What Horizon for Price Stability,” ECB Working Paper No. 24.
Söderlind, Paul. 1999. “Solution and Estimation of RE Macromodels with Optimal Policy,”
Europ. Econ. Rev. 43, pp. 813-823.
Strotz, Robert H. 1955-56. “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,”
Rev. Econ. Stud. 23, pp. 165—180.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 1997a. “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets,” Europ. Econ. Rev. 41, pp. 1111—1146.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 1997b. “Optimal Inflation Targets, ‘Conservative’ Central Banks, and
Linear Inflation Contracts,” Amer. Econ. Rev. 87, pp. 98—114.

74

Svensson, Lars E.O. 1999a. “How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an Era of Price
Stability?” in New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
,Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 195—259.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 1999b. “Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,” J. Monet.
Econ. 43, pp. 607—654. Working-paper version with unabridged appendix available at
www.princeton.edu\˜svensson.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 1999c. “Price Level Targeting vs. Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?” J.
Money, Credit, Banking 31, pp. 277—295.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2000. “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting,” J. Int. Econ. 50, pp. 155—
183.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2001a. “Independent Review of the Operation of Monetary Policy: Report
to the Minister of Finance,” www.princeton.edu\˜svensson.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2001b. “The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function,” in Central Banking,
Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart. Paul Mizen, ed.,
Edward Elgar, forthcoming.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2001c. “Price Stability as a Target for Monetary Policy: Defining and
Maintaining Price Stability,” in The Monetary Transmission Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe. Deutsche Bundesbank, ed. New York: Palgrave, pp.
60—102.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2001d. “Requiem for Forecast-Based Instrument Rules,” working paper.
Svensson, Lars E.O. 2002a. “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization”, in New Challenges for
Monetary Policy. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Kansas City: Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City.
Svensson, Lars E.O. and Michael Woodford. 2002a. “Implementing Optimal Policy through
Inflation-Forecast Targeting,” working paper.
Svensson, Lars E.O. and Michael Woodford. 2002b. “Indicator Variables for Optimal Policy,”
J. Monet. Econ., forthcoming.
Sveriges Riksbank. 2001. Inflation Report 1/2001.
Taylor, John B. 1979. “Estimation and Control of A Macroeconomic Model with Rational
Expectations,” Econometrica 47, pp. 1267—1286.
Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conf.
Ser. Public Pol. 39, 195-214.
Taylor, John B. 1999a. “Introduction,” in Monetary Policy Rules. John B.Taylor, ed. Chicago:
Chicago U. Press.
Taylor, John B. 1999b. “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in Monetary Policy
Rules. John B. Taylor, ed. Chicago: Chicago U. Press.
Taylor, John B., ed. 1999c. Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: Chicago U. Press.

75

Taylor, John B. 1999d. “The Robustness and Eﬃciency of Monetary Policy Rules as Guidelines
for Interest Rate Setting by the European Central Bank,” J. Monet. Econ. 43, pp. 655—
679.
Taylor, John B. 2000. “Using Monetary Policy Rules in Emerging Market Economies,” in
Stabilization and Monetary Policy: The International Experience, Bank of Mexico, pp.
441—457.
Tinbergen, Jan. 1952. On the Theory of Economic Policy. Amsterdam:North-Holland.
Tirole, Jean. 1999. “Incomplete Contracts: Where Do We Stand?” Econometrica 67, pp.
741—781.
Vestin, David. 2000. “Price-Level Targeting versus Inflation Targeting in a Forward-Looking
Model,” working paper.
Vestin, David. 2001. “The Size of the Commitment Problem”, working paper.
Walsh, Carl. 1995. “Optimal Contracts for Independent Central Bankers,” Amer. Econ. Rev.
85, pp. 150—167.
Walsh, Carl E. 1998. Monetary Theory and Policy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wicksell, Knut. 1898. Geldzins und Güterprise. Jena: Gustav Fischer. English translation
1936: Interest and Prices. Reprinted 1965. New York: Augustus M. Kelley, Bookseller.
Woodford, Michael. 1999a. “Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an
Era of Price Stability?” in New Challenges for Monetary Policy.Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 277—316.
Woodford, Michael. 1999b. “Inflation Stabilization and Welfare,” working paper.
Woodford, Michael. 1999c. “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” NBER Working Paper No.
7261.
Woodford, Michael. 2000a. “Pitfalls of Forward-Looking Monetary Policy,” Amer. Econ. Rev.:
Papers and Proceedings 90, pp. 100—104.
Woodford, Michael. 2000b. “A Neo-Wicksellian Framework for the Analysis of Monetary
Policy,” working paper.
Woodford, Michael. 2001. “The Taylor Rule and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Amer. Econ.
Rev.: Papers and Proceedings 91, pp. 232—237.
Yun, Tack. 1996. “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,”
J. Monet. Econ. 37, pp. 345—370.

76

