                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE COSTS OF WRONGFUL-DISCHARGE LAWS

                                           David H. Autor
                                         John J. Donohue III
                                          Stewart J. Schwab

                                         Working Paper 9425
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9425


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2002




We are indebted to Joshua Angrist, David Card, Lawrence Katz, Alan Krueger, Thomas Miles, Andrew
Morriss and seminar participants at the NBER Labor Studies Summer Institute, UC Berkeley, NYU Law
School, Stanford Law School, and the American Law and Economics Association for excellent suggestions.
We gratefully acknowledge the excellent research assistance of Rashida Adams, Michael Anderson, Simone
Berkowitz, Sarah Bernett, Douglas Bosley, Craig Estes, Rose Francis, Scott Hemphill, Carolyn Heyman,
Joshua Linn, Joshua Mayes, Marci Reichbach, and Leslie West, and the research coordination of Rose
Merendino. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David H. Autor, John J. Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including, © notice, is given to the source.
The Costs of Wrongful-Discharge Laws
David H. Autor, John J. Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab
NBER Working Paper No. 9425
December 2002
JEL No. E24, J23, J32, J38, J83, K12, K31

                                           ABSTRACT

       We estimate the effects on employment and wages of wrongful-discharge protections in the
United States. Over the last three decades, most U.S. state courts have adopted one or more
common law wrongful discharge doctrines that limit employers’ discretion to terminate workers at-
will. Using this cross-state variation with a difference-in-difference framework, we find robust
evidence of a modest negative impact (–0.8 to –1.6 percentage points) of one wrongful-discharge
doctrine, the implied-contract exception, on employment to population rates in state labor markets.
The short-term impact is most pronounced for female, younger, and less-skilled workers, while the
longer term costs appear to be borne by older and more-educated workers – those most likely to
litigate under this doctrine. We find no robust employment or wage effects of two other widely
recognized wrongful-discharge laws: the public -policy and good-faith exceptions. Published
findings in the literature range from no effect to very large negative effects. We reanalyze the two
leading studies and find the discrepancies can be explained by methodological shortcomings in the
one case and limitations in the coding of key court decisions in the other.

David H. Autor                        John J. Donohue III                     Stewart J. Schwab
Department of Economics               School of Law                           School of Law
MIT, E52-371                          Stanford University                     Cornell University
50 Memorial Drive                     Stanford, CA 94305-8610                 Ithaca, NY 14583
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347              and NBER
and NBER                              jjd@stanford.edu
dautor@mit.edu
    What is the price of protection? This paper estimates the social costs, in terms of potentially lower

employment and wages, of common law efforts to protect American workers from wrongful-discharge. The

cost of employment protection is a controversial issue. It is virtually received wisdom that the stagnant

employment performance of many European economies during the 1980s and 1990s – ‘Eurosclerosis’ – can

be attributed to the significant employment protection given European workers (cf., Lazear, 1991;

Blanchard and Wolfers, 1999). According to this argument, employment protection is a double -edged

sword. It provides employment security to incumbent workers but makes employers reluctant to hire,

leading to a stagnant labor market with potentially lower employment and wage levels. Among the

obstacles to testing this hypothesis is the difficulty in obtaining high quality data for cross-country

comparisons.

    In this paper, we study the impacts of employment protection in the U.S. setting. Several scholars have

examined the effects of American federal employment laws on employment and unemployment. Acemoglu

and Angrist (2001) and DeLeire (2000) present evidence that the Americans with Disabilities Act decreased

employment of disabled persons. Oyer and Schaefer (2000, 2002) conclude that the federal Civil Rights Act

of 1991 increased the frequency of mass layoffs and raised the returns to experience for workers who have a

downward sloping ‘age-litigation’ profile. Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaauw (2001) also evaluate the costs

of federal anti-discrimination laws. A major hurdle for each of these studies is that the federal statutes at

issue apply all at once to the entire country. It is difficult to separate the effects of the statute from all other

changes occurring at that time (cf., Donohue, 1998; Donohue and Heckman, 1991).

    This paper overcomes some of these methodological challenges by evaluating employment protections

that arise in various U.S. states at various times, thus providing greater variation with which to more

accurately establish causal relationships. The United States, uniquely in the industrialized world, has long

had a legal presumption that workers can be fired “at will” – that is, for any time and for any reason, good

or bad. In the last two to three decades, however, most state courts have adopted one or more common law

‘wrongful-discharge’ protections that weaken the employment-at-will presumption. States vary greatly in

the timing and extent of their recognition of these wrongful-discharge laws. Three states – Florida, Georgia,


                                                                                                                       1
and Rhode Island – have never altered the employment at will doctrine. Ten states now recognize each of

three broad classes of exception to the at-will doctrine : the Implied-contract, Public -policy, and Good-faith

exceptions (their precise meaning is defined below). A few states have rejected prior adoptions (see

Appendix Table 1). 1 This variability in the extent and timing of states’ recognition of wrongful-discharge

laws allows for empirical testing of their impacts on employment and wages.

    We are not the first to explore these effects. In a widely cited line of research, Dertouzos and Karoly

(1992 and 1993) used an instrumental variables framework to test whether wrongful-discharge laws

affected state-level employment. They found surprisingly large impacts. Dertouzos and Karoly estimate that

states adopting a tort-based cause of action (that is, one in which plaintiffs may sue employers for punitive

damages) suffered a 3 percent reduction in aggregate state employment – roughly equivalent to a 10 percent

employer side tax on wages – with an additional 1 or 2 percent employment decline for states also adopting

a contract-based protection (that is, one in which plaintiffs may sue only for economic losses).2 These

findings have not gone unchallenged. Morriss (1995) criticized Dertouzos and Karoly’s legal variables.

More recently, Thomas Miles (2000) used a differences-in-differences approach to estimate the impact of

the wrongful-discharge doctrines. He reports “no statistically significant effects on either employment or

unemployment,” but does not comment on the source of the discrepancy between his findings and those of

Dertouzos and Karoly. 3

    Our paper joins this debate at two points. First, we provide a comprehensive reevaluation of the impacts



1
  To date, only Montana (in 1987) has passed a statute establishing a good-cause standard for all employment
terminations. All other employment at will exceptions are common law doctrines, i.e., case law. In 1991, the Uniform
Law Commissioners proposed a Model Employment Termination Act similar to the Montana statute, but no state has
yet adopted it. In 1996, the Arizona legis lature passed a statute affirming employment at will. Krueger (1991) provides
a perceptive econometric study of the consideration of exceptions to the doctrine of employment at will by state
legislatures.
2
  Dertouzos and Karoly (1988) earlier examined the direct costs of wrongful-discharge litigation in California. They
found these direct costs to be modest, amounting to some $100 per termination. See also Dertouzos and Karoly (1992;
p. xi) (presenting findings of 1988 study).
3
  In related work, Kugler and Saint-Paul (forthcoming) find that a state’s adoption of wrongful-discharge doctrines
significantly slows the job-to-job flows of unemployed relative to employed workers. Autor (2003 forthcoming) and
Miles (2000) find that employers increased demand for temporary help agency employment when states adopted
common law exceptions to employment at will.

                                                                                                                       2
of wrongful-discharge doctrines on employment and wages using richer data and (we believe) a more

complete coding of the case law than previous work. Second, we evaluate why the leading papers on this

topic have reached opposing conclusions – ranging from no effect to very large negative effects – and

provide a reconciliation of these findings.

    As with the Miles and Dertouzos and Karoly studies, our key explanatory variables are the precedent

setting cases that establish the wrongful-discharge laws recognized in each state and time period. We differ

from previous studies, however, by using legal and employment data observed at monthly intervals, by

measuring wage as well as employment impacts, and by exploring these impacts separately by education

and gender demographic subgroups over the near and longer term. We apply robust estimation techniques

throughout and test the consistency and generality of our findings across specifications and time periods.

    Although we had anticipated that our reanalysis would reconfirm the null hypothesis accepted by

Thomas Miles, we instead find a modest but robustly negative impact of one wrongful-discharge doctrine –

the Implied-contract exception – on the employment to population rate in state labor markets. This impact,

which averages –0.8 to –1.6 percent, is present for all education and gender groups, and is detectable among

states adopting at several time intervals during the sample. The short term impact is most pronounced for

females, and younger and less-educated workers. In the long term, however, the costs of implied-contract

protection appear to be borne by older and more-educated workers – those most likely to litigate.

    We also find some evidence that the Good-faith exception reduced state employment levels by a similar

magnitude, but this evidence is far less robust. Finally, we find that both doctrines (Implied-contract and

Good-faith) have a weakly positive association with wages – that is, observed wages of employed workers

tend to rise by 0.5 to 1.5 percentage points after adoption of these doctrines. One interpretation of this

finding is that employment protection strengthens worker bargaining power, leading to higher wages and

lower employment levels (cf., Blanchard and Portugal, 2000). However, a more parsimonious explanation

that we favor – and provide some evidence to support) – is that the negative employment impacts of the

wrongful-discharge laws are borne by the lowest-wage workers within given demographic groups, leading

to an upward composition bias in observed wages.

                                                                                                              3
     To reconcile the substantial discrepancies between our findings and the prior literature, we reanalyze

the work of Dertouzos and Karoly (1992) and Miles (2000). We find that the exceedingly large

disemployment effects estimated by Dertouzos and Karoly – three to five times the magnitude of our

estimates – appear driven by problematic instrumental variables that are spuriously correlated with regional

employment trends that substantially predate states’ adoption of wrongful-discharge laws. By contrast, the

differences between our findings and those of the methodologically similar Miles’s study are primarily

explained by discrepancies in the coding of key court cases. By making warranted modifications to these

analyses, we demonstrate that these prior results may be reconciled with our own.

I.    Wrongful-discharge laws

A. Common law exceptions to employment at will: Definition and legal significance

     Since the heyday of employment at will in the early part of the 20th century, legislatures and courts have

restricted employers’ discretion to terminate workers at-will in several ways. Broad federal statutes prohibit

employers from firing workers on the basis of union activity, race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age,

or disability. 4 Specific federal and state statutes prevent employers from terminating workers for a variety of

precisely defined impermissible reasons, such as to avoid pension benefits from accruing, or to retaliate

because a worker reported occupational safety and health violations or served as a juror.5

     In addition to these statutory restrictions, state courts have over the last 30 years substantially modified

the employment at-will doctrine. These modifications, which we refer to as wrongful-discharge laws, are

commonly classified in three categories: (1) the tort of wrongful-discharge in violation of public -policy

(‘Public -policy exception’); (2) the implied-in-fact contract not to terminate without good cause (‘Implied-

contract exception’); and (3) the implied covenant to terminate only in good-faith and fair dealing (‘Good-


4
 National Labor Relations Act § 8(a)(3), 29 U.S.C. §158(a)(3) (enacted 1935) (prohibiting discrimination on the basis
of union status); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e to 2000e-17 (prohibiting discrimination
on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin); Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, 29
U.S.C. §§ 621-634; Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 – 12213.
5
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 § 510, 29 U.S.C. § 1140 (prohibiting discrimination against
employees because they might obtain benefits in a pension or welfare plan); Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970 § 11, 29 U.S.C. 660(c) (prohibiting discrimination against employees exercising rights under OSHA); New York
Judiciary Law § 519 (prohibiting discharge of employee due to absence from employment for jury service).

                                                                                                                     4
faith exception’). We define these in turn and discuss their significance.

      As of 1999, all but seven states recognized the tort of wrongful-discharge in violation of public -policy.

Classic violations of this ‘retaliatory discharge’ doctrine include firing a worker for refusing to perform an

illegal act, such as perjuring himself on behalf of the company; for exercising a statutory right, such as

filing a workers’ compensation claim; or for performing a public obligation, such as serving on a jury. As

Schwab (1996) discusses, courts tend to apply this exception to the at-will doctrine when the termination

clearly affects third parties, thereby justifying the judicial interference with the at-will employment contract.

Successful plaintiffs can recover compensatory damages for lost earnings, as well as damages for pain and

suffering, and punitive damages in appropriate cases.

      Because the public -policy exception is widely recognized (43 states) and provides for full

compensatory and punitive damages, it is sometimes viewed as the most significant exception to the at-will

doctrine. In point of fact, however, successful public-policy cases – particularly those with multi-million-

dollar judgments – are rare, albeit highly public ized. The reason for their rarity is that courts have typically

limited the scope of public -policy cases to clear violations of express legislative commands (e.g., the duty to

perform jury service, the right to file a workers’ compensation claim) rather than violations of a vaguer

sense of public interest. Some legal scholars have argued accordingly that the attention given this doctrine

in the popular and business press exceeds its legal and economic significance (see Edelman et al 1992).

      Only 11 states now recognize a second doctrine, the covenant of good-faith and fair dealing. 6 A classic

illustration of this exception is the case of Fortune v. National Cash Register Co. in which the employer

fired a salesperson who had completed a substantial sale just before his commission was due. The court

ruled that the employer had deprived the plaintiff of the “benefit of his bargain” in bad faith. 7 Like the

public-policy exception, the good-faith doctrine could have sweeping employer consequences. In its

broadest form, this exception can be read as a general prohibition against terminating any worker for any

reason other than ‘just cause’ – that is, economic necessity or poor performance. Most courts, however,

6
    Oklahoma and New Hampshire recognized good-faith as a distinct action in the past.



                                                                                                                    5
have limited application of the good-faith exception to grossly unfair ‘timing’ cases such as Fortune, where

the termination deprives the worker of a specific promised benefit such as a sales commission or an

imminently-vesting pension. 8 Hence, the onus of this doctrine is probably somewhat less than was

originally anticipated by employers and legal scholars.

       Finally, 43 states recognize a third exception to employment at will, the implied-contract doctrine. This

exception arises when, through words or actions, an employer implicitly promises not to terminate a worker

without good cause. A landmark decision establishing this exception was the 1980 case of Toussaint v. Blue

Cross & Blue Shield , in which the Michigan Supreme Court held that an employer’s indirect statements

about the manner in which it made termination decisions can create legally binding employment contracts.9

In Toussaint, the plaintiff successfully sued for breach of contract by citing an internal personnel policy

handbook indicating that it was Blue Cross’s policy to terminate employees only for just cause. Although

Toussaint was unaware of the handbook when hired, the court held that the handbook implied a binding

contract. Courts in 23 other states issued similar decisions over the next 5 years.

       An equally influential 1981 California case, Pugh v. See’s Candies, further expanded the implied-

contract notion by finding that workers are entitled to ongoing employment even in the absence of written

statements if contractual rights are implied in fact through the context of the employment relationship. 10

This context may include longevity of service, a history of promotion or salary increases, general company

policies as exemplified by treatment of other employees, or typical industry practices. Cumulatively, these

court decisions generated substantia l uncertainty surrounding termination, resulting in numerous cases


7
    364 N.E.2d 1251 (Mass. 1977).
8
  While Fortune did not reach the issue, some state courts allow tort damages (including punitive) for breaches of the
good-faith covenant in employment contracts. During our period of study, California recognized a broader set of good-
faith obligations that is hard to distinguish from a general obligation not to fire without good cause. The leading
California case is Foley v. Interactive Data Corp., 765 P.2d 373 (Cal. 1988), in which a bank employee was fired for
reporting to upper management that the FBI was investigating his immediate supervisor for embezzlement from a prior
employer. The court declared these facts could amount to a breach of the covenant of good-faith and fair dealing, but
held that only contract damages, not full tort damages, were recoverable. In Guz v. Bechtel National, Inc., 8 P.3d 1089
(Cal. 2000), after our period of study, the court restricted good-faith claims to those like the Fortune case.
9
    292 N.W.2d. 880 (Mich. 1980).
10
     171 Cal. Rptr. 917 (Cal. Ct. App. 1981).

                                                                                                                     6
where courts found that employees held implied-contractual employment rights that employers had not

subjectively intended to offer.

     The employer costs of the implied-contract exception are difficult to assess, however. Since implied-

contract cases lead only to contractual damages (e.g., punitive damages are excluded), the threat of a

spectacular jury award is low. In addition, an employer can potentially insulate itself from implied-contract

claims by rewriting employment contracts and handbooks to clearly state that all employment contracts are

at will. 11 However, unlike the public -policy and good-faith doctrines, which penalize individual instances of

unethical employer behavior, the implie d-contract doctrine can pervasively affect an employer’s personnel

practices. By imbuing employer handbooks with the status of legal contracts, the implied-contract doctrine

has the potential to reclassify an employer’s entire workforce as not at will, causing the employer to alter

how it handles all hiring and firing decisions.

     Unfortunately, no comprehensive data exist on the number or outcome of wrongful-discharge cases

under these three doctrines.12 Two findings in the literature suggest, however, that the implied-contract

exception may have altered employers’ hiring practices (leaving aside temporarily the Dertouzos and

Karoly analysis, to which we return below). First, Miles (2000) and Autor (2003) find that employers

substantially increased their use of temporary help agency workers shortly after their states adopted

implied-contract exceptions. Second, Kugler and Saint Paul (forthcoming) find that the hiring odds of

unemployed workers declined after courts in their states recognized the implied-contract exception. Though

neither of these results speaks to the core of our analysis – the impact of these doctrines on employment and

wages levels – they do indicate that employers were aware of the implied-contract exception (at a

minimum) and took steps to mitigate litigation risks.13

11
  It remains a complex legal question, however, whether an employer that once issued a handbook or other promise of
job security can modify it to create at-will employment. Several courts have held that such unilateral changes by the
employer are not binding on incumbent employees that have previously received promises of job security.
12
  Nor would this caseload data provide a complete measure of the economic costs of wrongful-discharge laws since
the observed caseload is an equilibrium function of employer decisions to avert or settle suits (supply) and employee
incentives to file suits (demand).
13
   We attempted to test whether adoption of a wrongful-discharge exception by a state increased the number of law
firms listing employment law as a specialty using firm-practice data from the Martindale-Hubbell listings of lawyers.

                                                                                                                        7
B. Hypothesized effects on the labor market

     As discussed by Lazear (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1997), the theoretical impact of firing

restrictions on employment levels is ambiguous. In a frictionless labor market with costless courts, the

Coase theorem applies. Imposition of employer-side firing costs are fully undone by efficient worker-firm

bargains, such as the posting by workers of a bond equal to firing costs. Where the Coasean result does not

hold, firing restrictions reduce employers’ incentives both to hire new workers and fire incumbent workers

(Donohue, 1989). Accordingly, firing restrictions dampen employment fluctuations, which may raise or

lower employment levels in the short term. Over the longer term, if employment protection raises

employment costs without yielding corresponding productivity increases, employment levels and/or wages

are likely to fall. This is particularly true if wrongful-discharge laws encourage rent-seeking behavior by

employees or induce employers to retain unproductive workers due to fear of litigation.

     Not all (non-Coasean) employment protection adversely impacts labor market efficiency, however.

Employment protection can be usefully viewed as a mandated employment benefit that, while costly for

employers to provide, is also valued by employees (Summers, 1989). By raising employer costs, mandated

employment protection shifts labor demand inward. But to the degree that workers value the mandated

benefit, labor supply simultaneously shifts outward, muting the adverse employment impact. If employees

value the benefit at its full marginal cost, wages will in theory fall to cover the cost of providing the benefit

and employment levels will be unaffected (see, for example, Gruber, 1994). 14

     While the overall impact of erosions of the at-will doctrine on employment or unemployment is not

clear a priori, existing evidence suggests that the impact may differ for different groups of workers. Several



Because much of these data had to be hand-coded, we were only able to obtain data on three years (1979, 1985, and
1992-93). We found that the adoption of the good-faith exception by California and Montana, generally regarded as
the two states most aggressively eroding employment at will during this period, significantly increased the share of
employment specialties in those states relative to both all practices and to tax specialities. Perhaps because of the
crudity of the measures and the few years, we were unable to detect consistent patterns in other states or for the tort or
implied-contract exceptions. Details and tables are available from the authors upon request.
14
   Moreover, as several authors have argued, the presence of adverse selection in the labor market may cause
employers to provide inefficiently low levels of job security (Aghion and Hermalin, 1990; Levine, 1991). Imposition
of firing restrictions could therefore raise employment while reducing wages. This would correspond to a case where
workers value job security more at the margin than it costs employers to provide.

                                                                                                                         8
authors find that the employment of younger, less-educated workers appears most likely to be harmed by

wrongful-discharge protections, while older and more-educated workers appear to benefit (OECD, 1999,

Chapter 2; Jolls, 2000; Bertola, Blau and Kahn, 2002). We examine these disparate impacts in depth below

and find important differences by demographic group which depend on the time horizon examined.

II.    Data sources and model specification

A. Data sources

      To measure employment and earnings, we draw on the complete CPS monthly files for the years 1978

to 1999. These file s provide individual labor-force data for approximately 100,000 adults per survey month

and also contain wage data for one-quarter of the employed sub-sample beginning in 1979. 15 We calculate

the employment to population ratio (or its log) and median log hourly or full-time weekly wages of

currently employed workers for eight demographic groups in each state and time period: two genders, two

education groups (high school or less, some college or more), and two age groups (18 – 39, 40 – 64).16

      To maximize usable variation in the timing of the adoption of wrongful-discharge laws, we code the

legal and employment variables at monthly frequency, as was done by Morriss (1995). Hence, if two states

adopt a wrongful-discharge doctrine 11 months apart within the same calendar year, our estimates

accurately account for this substantial difference in timing. Because the outcome data are observed at high

frequency, serial correlation is a major concern. Following the recommendations of Bertrand, Duflo and

Mullainathan (2002), we apply Huber-White robust standard errors clustered by state throughout. 17 These

allow for arbitrary error correlations among observations within states, both over time and among

demographic groups.

      For our legal variables, we developed a taxonomy of wrongful-discharge law prevailing in each state


15
  Individuals may appear up to four times in one calendar year in the employment sample (not the wage sample),
though their labor force status may differ on each occasion. Our estimation procedure takes account of potential serial
correlation among observations within each state sample.
16
  Because the wage sample is less than one quarter the size of the employment sample, we use median wages to
reduce the influence of outliers. Results using mean wages instead are, however, quite similar.
17
   Except in Table 4, in which we provide disaggregated estimates by adopter cohorts, in which case there are
relatively few state clusters. Here, we cluster the standard errors by state for contiguous time periods but assume
independence across non-contiguous periods (always at least 13 months apart).

                                                                                                                          9
and month-year for the two-decade period from 1978 to 1999. As Morriss (1995) discusses, it is not always

easy to date when a state has adopted a particular at-will exception. Our objective is easily stated, however.

We envision management-side employment lawyers reading the advance sheets and writing awareness

letters to their clients when major changes occur in the common law. Thus, we are interested in the first

court decision in a state that would trigger a client letter warning about a law change. In practice, our

independent assessment of the legal doctrines in this area for the 50 states largely agrees with Morriss’s list

of relevant cases, although we had to update the list through the 1990s.18 In Section V, we test the

sensitivity of our conclusions by employing classifications developed by Dertouzos and Karoly (1992),

Morriss (1995), and Walsh and Schwarz (1996) – the last used by Miles (2000).

B. Model specification

     Because the common-law wrongful-discharge doctrines were adopted in different months and years by

most U.S. states during the 1980s and 1990s, we have potentially many ‘experiments’ to exploit. Our

empirical approach is to contrast the change in employment and wages of demographic subgroups within

states adopting a given wrongful-discharge doctrine in a given period to states not adopting any doctrine

during the same time period.

     To implement this difference-in-difference design, we need to select a ‘before’ and ‘after’ period for

pre-post comparisons. Although we could use the entire 1978 – 1999 panel to calculate these contrasts for

each state, this approach has two disadvantages. First, because states adopted exceptions as early as 1979

and as late as 1998, the long panel approach implies that for some states, observations from 19 years before

or after adoption would be used to form a pre/post contrast. This is unappealing. Second, the long panel

approach exacerbates the serial correlation issue noted above. To mitigate these issues, we primarily use a

five-year pre-post window. The 24 calendar months prior to adoption of a doctrine are designated as the

pre-period; months 13 to 36 following adoption are designated as the post-period; and the first 12 months

immediately following adoption are excluded from the sample, to allow for an adjustment interval. We


18
   Although we use the three-part division of the at-will exceptions in the body of our analysis, we explored the
relevance of the tort/contract distinction on which Dertouzas and Karoly focus. We did not find this distinction to be


                                                                                                                     10
explore the sensitivity of our results to this set of choices below.

       To form a control sample of non-adopting states, we include the maximal set of state-month

observations for corresponding calendar months (rounded to the nearest calendar year) for states that did not

adopt any of the three doctrines during the relevant pre/post treatment time interval. Note that this design

implies some states serve as treatment states in one period and control states in another, although never

within a five-year window surrounding treatment.

       The basic econometric model that we estimate is

(1)        Yst = α + β 1 Ls + β 2 Post st + γ ⋅ Post st ⋅ Ls + ε st ,

where Yst is employment or earnings for a demographic group in state s and time period t , Ls is a time-

invariant dummy variable equal to one if a state will adopt a given exception during the pre/post sample

interval and Post st is a dummy variable equal to one in months 13 to 36 following adoption. The

coefficient of interest, γ , is an estimate of the pre-post change in the outcome variable in adopting states

relative to the corresponding change in non-adopting states. All estimates are weighted by the sum of

sample weights in the state-year-month-demographic cell, reflecting the estimated count of U.S. residents or

employed persons in the cell for employment and earnings respectively.

       We enrich this basic model in three ways. First, in place of the common main effect and pre-treatment

indicators (α and Ls ), we add main effects for each state and their interactions with a treatment indicator

variable.19 Second, to non-parametrically account for common national shocks to employment overall and

by demographic group, we also include dummy variables for each monthly calendar time period interacted

with indicator variables for each of the eight demographic groups in the sample.20 Finally, to account for

common regional shocks to employment, we also estimate models that include interactions between

calendar-year dummies and indicator variables denoting the nine Census geographic regions. With these


relevant or empirically robust. Supplemental tables are available from the authors on request.
19
  If a state serves in both the control and treatment groups in a given model, we also include a state x treatment
dummy equal to one in the 24 months immediately preceding treatment.
20
     In the full sample, this corresponds to 8 groups x 22 years x 12 months = 2,122 dummy variables.

                                                                                                                     11
region controls included, the parameter γ is identified only by the contemporaneous contrast in

employment or wage outcomes in adopting versus non-adopting states located in the same geographic

regions.

III. Impacts on employment and earnings

     Before estimating equation (1), we provide a visual summary of the data in Figures 1 through 6. These

depict estimated log employment to population rates (Figures 1 – 3) and log median wage levels (Figures 4

– 6) in adopting relative to non-adopting states at monthly intervals in the 48 months prior through 96

months following adoption of each doctrine. Wage and employment levels in the first full month following

adoption are normalized at zero.21 The dashed lines in each figure represent robust 90 percent confidence

intervals for each monthly point estimate.

     These figures provide initial evidence that one wrongful-discharge doctrine, the implied-contract

exception, did indeed affect state employment levels. As is visible in Figure 1, relative (log) employment to

population rates for both males and females dip by approximately 1.5 to 2 percent over the 2 years

following adoption of the implied-contract exception, reaching a nadir after approximately 30 months. By

contrast, Figures 2 and 3 provide little evidence that the public -policy or good-faith exceptions affected

employment. One cannot make strong inferences from these figures, however. As is visible from the wide

standard-error bands, the monthly point estimates are relatively noisy. In addition, these models do not

include the full set of controls that we (later) use for estimating equation (1). Nevertheless, the formal

analysis of employment below largely bears out the impression given by the figures.

     Figures 4 through 6 repeat this exercise for median log weekly earnings of full-time workers. Because


21
  These figures plot the coefficient and 90 percent confidence bands from estimates of parameters γ τ from the
following equation:

                           ∑γ
                             96

Ystj = δ s + φ t + π j +              τ   ⋅ L s,t−τ +ε stj ,
                           τ = − 48


where, as above, Ystj , is the outcome variable for a given demographic group, state, and time period, δ s , φ t and π j
are vectors of state, time, and demographic group main effects, and L st is a dummy variable that assumes the value of
one (only) in the month that a state adopts a given doctrine (the impact of each doctrine is estimated simultaneously).
Huber-White standard errors allow for arbitrary error correlations within states.

                                                                                                                           12
the samples used for these estimates are less than one-fourth as large as the employment estimates, there is a

great deal more variability in these observations. These figures provide little prima facie evidence that

wrongful-discharge doctrines affected wage levels of employed workers.

A. Initial estimates: Employment and Wages

    Table 1 presents estimates of equation (1) for emplo yment and wages. What emerges clearly from the

estimates in this table is that adoption of the implied-contract exception is associated with a modest but

meaningful reduction in employment. In column 1 of Panel A, we estimate that adoption of the implied-

contract doctrine reduces overall employment to population by 2.0 percent in the second and third years

following adoption (t = 4.1). When controls are added to the model to absorb region-by-year employment

shocks (column 2), the point estimate and its standard error are both reduced by approximately half,

indicating that the implied-contract doctrine was typically adopted when employment conditions were at

slightly above-average levels (a fact also suggested in Figure 1). The employment impact is estimated at –

1.0 percentage points, which is highly significant (t = 3.2).

    The next two rows of the table repeat these estimates for the public -policy and good-faith doctrines.

The public -policy doctrine is associated with a small reduction in employment, but these reductions are

never significant. The point estimates for the good-faith doctrine are of approximately equal magnitude to

those for the implied-contract association. These coefficients are marginally significant and are not typically

robust to inclusion of region-by-year controls. Since there are fewer good-faith adoptions than for other

doctrines (13 for good-faith versus 43 and 34 for implied-contract and public -policy), there may be

inadequate statistical power to reliably detect its impacts.

    As one specification check, columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 replace the log employment-to-population ratio

measure with its level. The outcome variable is now the percentage point change in employment to

population rather than its percentage change. Under this specific ation, the implied reductions in




                                                                                                             13
employment to population are very slightly smaller, while statistical significance is unaffected.22

     Panel B of Table 1 presents comparable estimates for both median log hourly and full-time weekly

wages. In no case are the point estimates statistically significant. However, a notable pattern is that

doctrines that appear to reduce employment (implied-contract and, to a lesser degree, good-faith) are

associated with a modest increase in median wages of employed workers. One explanation for this pattern

is that workers whose employment is reduced by adoption of a wrongful-discharge law are typically below

the median earners in their state-demographic cell. Hence, their removal from the observed earnings sample

raises the median wage slightly. We provide further evidence on the relevance of this explanation below.

B. Does the specific doctrine matter?

     Given the generally negative estimated employment impact of each category of doctrine, one potential

interpretation of these results is that it is not the specific doctrine that matters but simply the fact that any

wrongful-discharge doctrine has been adopted. To examine this issue, we estimate in Table 2 a set of

models that compare the impacts of an ‘any doctrine’ variable against a disaggregated set of three doctrine

variables. As with the previous models, we specify the two-year period prior to law change as the pre-

treatment period and the two-year period commencing one year after law change as the post-treatment

period. 23

     The first two columns of Table 2 confirm that, on average, adopting any doctrine appears to lower

employment by between 0.5 and 1.0 percent, with the smaller point estimate corresponding to the model in

which region by time effects are controlled. In addition to the any-doctrine dummy, Columns 3 and 4 add



22
   We also estimated Table 1 without using the CPS sampling weights, which yielded comparable results, as shown in
Appendix Table 2. By comparison with the weighted estimates, this table shows: 1) the point estimates for the
Implied-contract exception are about 2/3rds as large in absolute magnitude for employment and still highly
significant; 2) the Public-policy and Good-faith exceptions are also negative and marginally but not robustly
significant; 3) the wage estimates are simi lar; and 4) the R-squareds are lower, consistent with the inefficiency of the
weighting (or lack thereof).
23
   An additional wrinkle in this specification is that several states adopt multiple doctrines within a five year window
and hence the pre- and post- periods are not unique. In estimating these models, we include all relevant pre- and post-
treatment observations for a given state – meaning that some treatment and control periods overlap – and include, as in
equation (1), treatment and treatment x post effects for each doctrine. Control observations are selected identically to
Table 1 models.

                                                                                                                       14
an indicator variable for each of the three doctrines. Notably, the any-doctrine dummy is positive in these

specifications while each of the three individual doctrine dummies is negative and, in most cases,

significant. This suggests that it is not simply the presence of any doctrine that reduces employment levels;

the specific doctrine does matter.

    Because the net effect of a doctrine in columns 3 and 4 is the sum of its individual dummy and the any-

doctrine dummy, it is useful to eliminate the any-doctrine dummy to get a clearer picture. This is done in

columns 5 and 6. When the impact of all doctrines is estimated jointly, the implied-contract doctrine

remains robustly negative and similar in magnitude to the Table 1 estimates. The good-faith doctrine again

proves non-robust to inclusion of region-by-year controls.

    Panel B of the table performs the same exercise for wage outcomes. As above, the any-doctrine dummy

does not survive inclusion of individual doctrine controls. The data again provide modest evidence of a

positive wage impact of the implied-contract and, more sizably, the good-faith doctrine.

C. Checking for composition bias in the wage estimates

    Estimates of the impact of wrongful-discharge laws on wages may suffer from composition bias: since

wages are only observed for currently employed workers, wrongful-discharge laws will raise observed

wages if they differentially reduce employment of low-wage workers. One means to test the relevance of

this explanation is to adjust wage observations for selective withdrawal. We do this following Chandra

(2002) by estimating median wages within state-year-month-demographic cells across all potential workers

– employed and non-employed – and assigning a wage of zero to non-employed. This ‘inclusive median’

approach stands in contrast to the standard ‘exclusive median’ calculations used above, which removed

non-employed from the samples. Because the inclusive median implicitly assumes that non-employed

workers would earn below the median wage in their respective state -time-demographic group cell, it places

the estimated median lower in the distribution of cell wages. One shortcoming with this approach is that if

50-plus percent of potential workers in a cell are non-employed, the median cell wage will be zero and

hence the cell must be discarded, which excludes most female cells as well as cells with high participation

variability. Consequently, we limit our analysis in this section to males and, for comparability, apply the

                                                                                                              15
same cell exclusions to both the exclusive and inclusive medians.

     Panel A of Table 3 presents difference-in-difference wage estimates for conventional exclusive hourly

wage medians akin to Tables 1 and 2. These estimates echo the earlier finding that observed wages rise

significantly after adoption of a wrongful-discharge doctrine, particularly the implied-contract exception

(see column 6). Panel B presents comparable models for the inclusive medians. These estimates effectively

reverse the positive wage finding. In many cases, the point estimates for the impact of adoption of a

wrongful-discharge law on wages are now negative. In no case are the estimates significantly positive.

     This set of results suggests that employment declines associated with adoption of a wrongful-discharge

law could potentially generate significant upward composition bias in observed wages. Given the sensitivity

of the wage estimates to composition bias, we focus the remainder of the analysis on employment.

D. Cohort effects in adoption?

     The preceding estimates pool all years of data to increase the precision of the estimates. The cost of this

approach is that it masks any temporal heterogeneity in the economic impact of the doctrines. Table 4

studies this potential heterogeneity by tabulating the effect of each exception on employment and earnings

for the following adoption ‘cohorts’: 1980 to 1983, 1984 to 1987, 1988 to 1992, and 1993 to 1998. 24

     The 15 states that adopted the implied-contract exception during 1980 to 1983 experienced a decline of

–0.5 to –1.9 percent in employment during months 13 through 36 following adoption (the smaller estimate

corresponding to the model with region by year controls). The 18 states that adopted this exception between

1984 and 1987 also experienced similarly large employment declines. By contrast, we do not find robust

evidence that the final set of 10 states that adopted the doctrine between 1988 and 1992 experienced any

negative effect on employment, although the direction is generally negative.

     The next four columns of Table 4 repeat these estimates for states adopting the public -policy and good-

faith exceptions. These estimates give rise to widely varying signs and magnitudes for each doctrine and


24
  Adoption cohort dates refer to the year a wrongful-discharge doctrine is enacted; the pre- and post-periods used to
form the employment contrast are as with prior estimates the surrounding five years (2 prior to adoption, 3 post
adoption, with the first omitted). We do not study adoptions prior to 1980 to allow for the two year pre-treatment
period. No implied-contract or public-policy exceptions were adopted after 1992.

                                                                                                                    16
time period, and are quite sensitive to the inclusion of region by year controls. This set of findings reduces

our confidence that the good-faith exception adversely affected employment levels, except perhaps for the

initial cohort of adopting states in the early 1980s.

     An interesting pattern that emerge s from Table 4 is that the implied-contract and good-faith doctrines

appear to have had smaller (or zero) employment impacts among later adopting states. One explanation for

this pattern is that early adopting states may have been those that were most aggressive in their pursuit of

employee rights and thus experienced greater negative effects on employment. Another explanation is that

employers in later adopting states anticipated the eventual adoption of the doctrines and hence largely

responded in advance, thereby causing the regression estimates for the late adoptions to understate the total

effect. A third possibility is that the state level impact of the law differs when few states have previously

adopted the exception than when most states have already done so. Employment declines found for early

adopters may partly reflect decisions by employers to locate in other states, a possibility that is largely

foreclosed when most states have already adopted an exception. The diminishing effects also suggest a

fourth explanation offered by Edelman, Abraham and Erlanger (1992). These authors argue that

professional (non-academic) law journals and personnel journals overstated the threat posed by the implied-

contract doctrine, leading to excessive management changes. Benefiting from the experience of these early

adopters, employers in later adopting states might have reacted less severely to adoption of wrongful-

discharge doctrines.25

E. Longer term impacts and alternative timing assumptions

     In our baseline specification, we use the 24 months prior to adoption as our pre-treatment period and the

months 13 to 36 following adoption as the post-treatment period. In Table 5, we measure longer term

impacts of the wrongful-discharge doctrines and additionally explore the sensitivity of our findings to

alternative choices of pre- and post periods.


25
  For example, Business Week in July 1985 ran a rather alarming cover article on “The Revolution in Employee
Rights” that stated, “To minimize liability, corporations have to treat each dismissal as though it were under a ‘just
cause’ provision of a contract” (Hoerr et al, 1985).

                                                                                                                         17
     The first column of Table 5 repeats our baseline specification for employment from Table 1. Columns 2

through 6 of the table move the post-adoption treatment window closer to the point of adoption by 1 year

(i.e., immediately thereafter) and then outward by 1, 2, 4, and 6 years respectively. In the final column,

column 6, the post-treatment period is years 7 and 8 following adoption. These estimates indicate that the

employment effect of the implied-contract doctrine reaches a maximum in the two years following

adoption, and this impact appears to gradually diminish thereafter. By years 7 and 8, the estimated

employment reduction is considerably smaller than the baseline and is insignificant (a pattern also

suggested by Figure 1). By contrast, the estimated negative effect of the good-faith doctrine increases with

time, but this effect is never significant.

     To test the sensitivity of the results to the selection of the pre-treatment period, columns 7 and 8 of the

table adjust the pre-treatment interval outward by 1 and 2 years respectively (using the baseline post-

treatment period of years 1 and 2 following adoption). Column 7 compares employment in years 2 and 3

prior to adoption to employment in years 1 and 2 following adoption, and column 8 performs this

comparison for years 4 and 3 prior to adoption. Changing the pre-treatment window does not greatly affect

the pattern of results but does reduce the precision of the estimates. When region by year dummies are

included, the implied-contract doctrine no longer has a significant employment effect.

IV. Are all workers equally affected?

     Like their European counterparts, U.S. wrongful-discharge laws disproportionately protect workers

with longer tenure and higher wages. Long-tenure workers are typically able to make a prima facie case that

their jobs provided an expectation of ongoing employment (in the case of the implied-contract doctrine), or

an expectation of future benefits for current service (good-faith doctrine). In addition, court awards tend to

be roughly proportional to prior earnings – particularly in implied-contract cases – and hence high wage

workers have a greater incentive to litigate.26 Since the protections offered by wrongful-discharge doctrines



26
  This is particularly true because attorneys’ fees are usually arranged on a contingency basis; the attorney receives a
percentage of the award if the case is successful and typically no payment otherwise. Consistent with these facts,
Dertouzos, Holland and Ebener (1988) find that plaintiffs in wrongful-discharge cases are typically male (69 percent),

                                                                                                                      18
are not equally distributed among worker groups, it is useful to ask whether the employment impacts also

differ among demographic subgroups.

     We explore this possibility in Table 6 by examining the relationship between the adoption of wrongful-

discharge laws and the employment rate of each of the 8 demographic groups that were pooled in the above

analysis. Consistent with the above, the results in Table 6 confirm that the implied-contract doctrine lowers

employment rates across the board. But the size of the impact differs substantially by demographic group.

The largest impacts are uniformly found for female, less-educated (high school or less), and younger (under

age 40) workers. These impacts are in the range of –1.0 to –2.7 percentage points. Young, less-educated

females fare worst of all. Notably, the one demographic group for whom there is no evidence of an

employment impact (for either gender) is older, more-educated workers. We also find modestly robust

evidence (large point estimates, large standard errors) of a negative impact of the good-faith exception on

employment rates. But this impact is only detected for women and younger, less-educated men.

     As a group, the Table 6 results appear consistent with a number of OECD studies that find that

employment protections tend to differentially harm employment of females, less-experienced workers and

less-skilled workers (Bertola, Blau and Khan, 2002; OECD, 1999). Yet, in the U.S. context, these results

appear something of a puzzle. U.S. wrongful-discharge doctrines increase the expected cost of employing

high-tenure, high-wage workers. These higher costs should lower the employment and earnings of these

groups and raise demand for workers who are close substitutes – low-wage and short-tenure employees

who are unlikely to (successfully) litigate.27 Yet, this is opposite to what we find. Why do wrongful-

discharge laws harm the employment rates of less protected workers?

     Two rationales are found in the literature. One is that less protected groups – females, less-educated,

and younger workers – have greater opportunity costs of work (i.e., better opportunities in home production,

school enrollment, and leisure) and accordingly their labor supply is relatively elastic. If employment


hold executive or managerial positions (53 percent), have 6 or more years of tenure (48 percent), and earn
considerably above the median wage.
27
  This may indeed be what occurred with the surge in demand for temporary help employment after adoption of
implied-contract exceptions in various states (Autor, 2003).

                                                                                                               19
protection is chosen to maximize worker welfare, it will optimally price many of these workers out of the

labor market, raising their wages and reducing their employment (Bertola, Blau and Khan, 2002). An

alternative explanation offered by Lindbeck and Snower (1988) and Saint Paul (2002) is that employment

protection is typically adopted to protect incumbent (‘insider’) workers who, on average, are likely to be

older, more-skilled males. These protections reduce productivity and generate rents for incumbents, while

weakening earnings and employment prospects for younger, less-skilled, and less attached labor force

participants (‘outsiders’). Both theories therefore offer a rationale for why women, younger and less-skilled

workers are harmed by employment protection. Do they fit the U.S. facts?

     In case of the first theory, the intervening mechanism by which employment protection lowers

employment of ‘more elastic’ workers is by raising their relative wages. This prediction does not seem to fit

the U.S. case. In particula r, it is unclear how U.S. wrongful-discharge laws could disproportionately raise

employment costs for the ‘elastic’ groups since these workers are provided relatively less employment

protection. And while our data offer some weak evidence that the wages of elastic groups do increase after

adoption of wrongful-discharge doctrines, we view this evidence as primarily driven by selection of low-

wage workers into non-employment. Hence, in our view, the first explanation does not appear viable.

     The second, ‘insider-outsider’ explanation is more promising. If wrongful-discharge laws successfully

deter employers from terminating higher wage and longer tenure workers (‘insiders’) and further employers

are not able to reduce the wages of protected groups in the short run, employers will presumably need to

reduce hiring of some worker groups to maintain employment levels. In this case, wrongful-discharge laws

will protect the jobs of more senior workers but the cost will be borne by younger workers who are not

hired in their place. This is roughly the mechanism posited by the insider/outsider models.28

     Over the longer term, however, employers should prefer to reduce employment of senior workers

relative to less expensive alternatives. Although this longer run outcome is presumably difficult to measure


28
  More generally, if adoption of wrongful-discharge laws induces any general employer reluctance to hire new
workers, this impact will first be visible in a decline in the employment rates of high turnover worker groups –
females, and younger and less-educated workers. Noting that younger and less-educated workers also comprise a



                                                                                                                   20
in aggregate data, we make a preliminary effort in Table 7. Here, we estimate long-run difference-in-

difference models for state level employment by demographic group where we contrast the change in

employment in adopting versus non-adopting states in years five and six following law adoption relative to

years two and one prior to adoption. 29 As would be expected, the point estimates in this table are not

precisely estimated. Nevertheless, a noteworthy pattern is that the estimated long-run negative effects of the

implied-contract doctrine on the employment of older and more-educated workers are generally larger than

those for younger, less-educated worker (and in many cases, larger than the short-run estimates from Table

6). Similarly, the long-run estimates for younger and less-educated workers are generally substantially

smaller than the short run estimates, and in some cases weakly positive.30

     In net, our estimates confirm patterns from the OECD that employment protection does reduce

employment of less protected worker groups – females, and younger and less-educated individuals – at least

in the short run. While less decisive, our longer term evidence suggests that the harms in terms of reduced

employment tend to accrue to the workers whose expected employment costs are raised by these doctrines.

This result may suggest an important difference between employment protections provided in the OECD

and United States. Whereas OECD employment protections typically bar terminations of senior workers

except under very limited circumstances, the wrongful-discharge doctrines recognized in the United States

provide no such formal employment security. Rather, they make it feasible for certain workers to litigate

after termination at considerable monetary and psychic cost, and with limited certainty of redress. By

raising expected employment costs of senior workers without providing them formal job security, U.S.

wrongful-discharge laws may make it more likely that employment of protected groups is ultimately

reduced.


disproportionate share of the unemployed, this explanation is consistent with Kugler and Saint Paul’s (forthcoming)
finding that exit rates from unemployment slow after states adopted implied-contract doctrines.
29
  Hence, these specifications are identical to column 5 of Table 5 but are estimated separately by demographic group.
Estimates using an alternative long-run post-period of years 7 and 8 following adoption produced qualitatively similar
results and are available on request.
30
   The exception to the claims of the last two sentences is caused by the relatively large negative (albeit statistically
insignificant) long-term effect from the implied-contract exception for young, low-education males (column 2 of Table
7).

                                                                                                                      21
V.     Reconciling with previous studies

      Our finding that unjust-dismissal laws – the implied-contract exception in particular – have had a

modest but economically meaningful adverse impact on state employment rates stands in contrast to two

published papers exploring the same questions. The first, a widely cited study by Dertouzos and Karoly

(1992 and 1993, D&K hereafter), found that states’ adoption of exceptions to employment at will over 1980

to 1987 reduced aggregate state employment by 4 to 5 percentage points, with even larger reductions in

employment in the service and financial sectors. The magnitude of these estimates, roughly three to five

times as large as our estimates, garnered considerable attention in academic journals and policy debates.31

More recently, Thomas Miles (2000), using a methodology more comparable to our own, found no effect of

unjust-dismissal doctrines on aggregate employment or unemployment. To understand the source of the

discrepancies between these two studies and our own findings, we reanalyzed both papers.

A. The Dertouzos and Karoly study

      Our difference-in-difference methodology estimates the impacts of wrongful-discharge doctrines by

contrasting contemporaneous employment and wage changes in adopting versus non-adopting states. D&K

eschew this source of variation, arguing that the adoption of state laws may be driven by the ‘supply and

demand’ for legal doctrines. To correct for this postulated endogeneity, D&K employ a set of instrumental

variables to predict states’ adoption of wrongful-discharge doctrines and then use these predicted values in

place of the actual laws.

      Specifically, D&K estimate an equation of the form

(2)       ln( empst ) = α + γ ⋅ Lˆ jt + φ s + δ t + ε st ,

where ln emp st is log total employment in state s and year t , and L̂ jt is the predicted probability of the

presence of each doctrine in the state and year. This predicted probability is estimated from a log odds

regression of the observed law variables, L jt , on a set of instrumental variables, Z st , and vector of year


31
  For example, during his gubernatorial campaign, California Governor Pete Wilson prominently cited Dertouzos and
Karoly’s conclusions in support of tort reform (Hopper, 1995).

                                                                                                                 22
dummies δ t .

(3)       Pr[ L st = 1] = Pr[Z st′ β + δ t > −ε st ] .

      The instruments used by D&K in estimating equation (3) include whether a state had a Republican

governor, the state’s level and change in union membership, the state’s change in lawyers per capita, the

fraction of bordering states recognizing a similar doctrine, and an indicator for whether a state had a right to

work law in 1980. As D&K’s estimates of equation (3) indicate, these latter two variables are indeed highly

correlated with states’ propensity to adopt common law exceptions. A potential confound, however, is that

both measures are also likely to have a direct correlation with employment levels that does not emanate

from their influence on law adoption.

      The source of our concern is visible in Figures 7 and 8. As noted by Blanchard and Katz (1992) and

depicted in Figure 7, employment growth in the South has exceeded that in the non-South for the past six

decades. This trend substantially predates the adoption of unjust dismissal laws and likely stems from

factors including the advent of air conditioning (which increased habitability and manufacturing

productivity in the South, most notably in tobacco and printing), and civil-rights-era legislation that

increased wages and employment of Southern blacks (Arsenault, 1984; Donohue and Heckman, 1991).32

Moreover, as is shown in Figure 8, Southern states were last and least likely to adopt wrongful-discharge

doctrines, meaning that their fraction of bordering states adopting exceptions was also much lower.

Furthermore, 85 percent of Southern states had a right-to-work law in 1980 versus only 25 percent of non-

Southern states.33

      Given the positive correlation between Southern region and employment growth and the negative

correlation between Southern region and adoption of wrongful-discharge doctrines, it is a near certainty that

32
   There is no formal agreement on which are the Southern states. We use Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Georgia,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, New Mexico, North and South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. Non-
Southern states include all other U.S. states except for DC and, due to lack of employment data extending to 1939,
Alaska, Hawaii, Illinois, Michigan, and Minnesota. Growth rates calculated in Figure 7 use each state’s share of South
or non-South employment in 1939 as base weights.




                                                                                                                   23
equation (2), a regression of state employment growth on predicted law adoption, will indicate that

wrongful-discharge laws reduce employment ( γˆ < 0 ). Intuitively, because the relative probability of

adopting an exception is lower in the South (relative to the non-South) while relative employment growth is

higher, D&K’s instrumental variable estimates will indicate that wrongful-discharge reduce employment

levels. Yet, this correlation may primarily arise because wrongful-discharge laws were adopted in states that

had been experiencing slower growth for decades. If this concern is well founded, the solution is also

straightforward: permitting each state to assume its own time trend in employment will control for smooth

growth rates that are otherwise a potential source of bias.34

     To explore this possibility, we made a substantial effort to replicate D&K’s core results using their cited

data sources, classification of case law, and empirical methods. While unfortunately, we were unable to

reproduce their findings exactly, we believe our results are sufficiently comparable to allow us to explore

the main substantive issues.35 Table 8 presents a summary of the findings. The first column replicates

D&K’s basic instrumental-variables specification. This specification estimates the impact of three

wrongful-discharge laws on the log of state employment during 1980 – 1987: the Implied-contract

exception or Good-faith exception with contract remedy (IC/GF), the broad Public -policy or Good-faith

exception with tort remedy (PP/GF), and the narrow Public -policy exception (NPP).36 The estimated impact

of these doctrines on state employment is quite large. The IC/GF doctrine is estimated to reduce

employment by close to 4.5 percentage points and the PP/GF doctrine by an additional 3.0 percentage



33
  These patterns are abundantly evident in Tables 3.3 and 3.4 of D&K (1992), which contain their first stage IV
estimates. In all specifications, the fraction of neighboring states adopting a given doctrine is a strong positive
predictor of own-state adoption, and the presence of a right-to-work law is a strong negative predictor.
34
   Where the fixed-effects estimator controls for fixed state differences in the level of employment, adding a linear
trend controls for fixed state differences in trends in employment growth.
35
  D&K did not provide their original data or programs but kindly shared their mapping of state borders developed for
the IV estimates. Disconcertingly, we uncovered more than a dozen coding errors in this mapping. In addition, D&K
somewhat unconventionally coded Alaska as bordering Idaho, Oregon, Montana, and Washington state, and Hawaii as
bordering California, Nevada, and Oregon. In the service of replication, we employ their original mapping.
36
   The first stage estimates for these models (estimates available from the authors) replicate the central pattern noted
above from D&K’s models: the fraction of neighboring states adopting a given doctrine is a strong positive predictor
of own-state adoption, and the presence of a right-to-work law is a strong negative predictor.

                                                                                                                        24
points. Both coefficients are statistically significant.37

     To the degree that the instrumented state-law variables are simply proxying persistent employment

trends as suggested above, inclusion of linear state trend variables will reduce this source of bias. Column 2

adds these trends and an F-test of their joint significance rejects the null hypothesis at well below the 1

percent level. Inclusion of the trend variables reduces the magnitude of the estimated impacts of the state

laws by approximately 60 percent and renders the coefficients insignificant. Notably, the standard errors of

the law variables are little affected, indicating that the trend variables are not simply introducing collinearity

that reduces the precision of the estimates. These results suggest that the D&K estimates are substantially

biased.

     The subsequent two columns of Table 8 provide an additional specification check. One unusual control

included in D&K’s estimates of equation (2) is the log of state gross product (and its change). Controlling

for this variable is difficult to justify; if unjust dismissal laws reduce employment, they are likely to reduce

output as well. 38 Column 3 drops the output variable from the basic D&K model, yielding large and difficult

to interpret coefficients on the instrumented law variables. Apparently, the estimates are quite sensitive to

inclusion of this variable. Notably, when in column 4 state trends are added to the model excluding the state

output measure, the estimated impacts of the laws return to reasonable magnitudes and are in this case

insignificant. These findings again suggest that the D&K IV approach is non-robust.

     To contrast the D&K IV approach to our difference-in-difference methodology, we estimate in panel B

of Table 8 a series of models in which we use as above the actual law changes Lst as independent variables

rather than their predicted values but continue to use D&K’s coding of the law and other dependent and


37
   As noted, our replication results differ from D&K. While they find (Table 5.2) that the PP/GF doctrine has the
largest negative impact on employment (2.1 log points versus 1.4 log points), we find a larger impact on IC/GF. Our
estimates for the NPP doctrine are quite comparable. Following D&K, we do not use a true IV procedure but insert
predicted values from the first-stage (predictive) equation into the second stage estimates. This procedure is likely to
exaggerate the precision of the estimates because it does not account for the fact that the independent variables are
predicted rather than observed. In addition, we follow D&K in not including all covariates from the second stage
estimates in the first stage models (in particular, the first stage estimates exclude state dummies). This method again
violates standard practice.




                                                                                                                       25
independent variables. In column 1 of the second panel, we find a positive and significant effect of the

IC/GF doctrine on state employment levels, opposite to D&K’s IV estimates. However, when we condition

on state specific trends, this effect reverses sign and becomes negatively significant at 0.8 percentage

points.

     Because of our concern about the validity of conditioning on state output in these employment models,

we drop the output measures in the final two columns. This yields estimates that are more stable and also

more consistent with our findings above. Without conditioning on state trends, we find a small negative

impact on the IC/GF doctrine on state employment. Adding trends, the magnitude increases to –1.5 percent,

roughly one-third the size of the D&K IV estimate but comparable to our estimates from Table 2.

     In summary, we believe that a more appropriate treatment of D&K’s data leads to essentially the same

conclusions as our analysis in Section III. By contrast, our reanalysis of the D&K methodology does not

support D&K’s findings of very large adverse employment effects of wrongful-discharge laws, nor does it

confirm the validity of their conclusion that good-faith and tort doctrines are the source of these adverse

effects.

B. The importance of legal classification: The Thomas Miles study:

     In a careful recent study, Thomas Miles (2000) concluded that wrongful-discharge laws had no effect

on aggregate employment or unemployment for the years 1964 to 1995. Using Miles’s original data, we

replicated these findings to understand the source of the discrepancies.39 Of the potential causes we

explored, one was found to be consequential: the classification of case law developed by Walsh and

Schwarz (1996) and used in the Miles study. Simply using the Miles data and specifications but replacing

the Walsh-Schwarz legal variables with our own led to the inference that the implied-contract exception had


38
   In fact, wages paid by state are an input into the Bureau of Economic Analysis’ calculations of gross state product.
(see http://www.bea.gov/bea/regional/data.htm). Hence, the GSP measure is almost certain to have a mechanical
correlation with state employment.
39
   We thank Thomas Miles for generous assistance with data and questions. Key differences from our approach are
that the Miles study: 1) used a classification of case law developed by Walsh and Schwarz (1996); 2) used as a
dependent variable log state employment (like Dertouzos and Karoly); 3) did not test a specification that included
state-specific employment trends; 4) employed a sample that extended from 1964 to 1994; 5) used unweighted as



                                                                                                                      26
reduced employment in adopting states.40

       While this finding resolves the proximate puzzle, it raises a deeper concern. Do our findings hinge on

technical points of case law where other scholars could readily disagree? To answer this question, we

compared the findings using our own (‘ADS’) legal classification to the set of results we would have

obtained using the classifications of wrongful-discharge law developed by all other previous authors. These

include: Dertouzos and Karoly (1992), Morriss (1995), and Walsh and Schwarz (1996, WS hereafter). To

perform this test, we coded each previous classification and estimated a set of models for log state

employment to population rates comparing the results from each. To follow the earlier analyses, we

aggregate our data to annual (rather than monthly) observations and apply the long panel difference-in-

difference approach.41 Specifically, we estimate a model of the form

(4)         ln( emp / pop) stj = α + γ ⋅ L jt + φs + δ t + π j + ε stj ,

where the dependent variable is the log employment to population ratio of the eight demographic groups

used in the previous models, and φ s , δ t , and π j are main effects for states, years and demographic groups.

In keeping with our concern about state and regional employment trends, we also estimate a specification

that includes linear time trends for each state and demographic group. Because each legal classification

scheme was compiled for a different time period – reflecting the point at which the researchers completed

their studies – we present the results of regressions run over the same time period used by the other

scholars. This provides a pure test of the importance of the differences in the alternative legal

classifications. Table 9 presents these results.

       Panel A of the table presents baseline estimates using the ADS classification for the full period of our

sample, 1978 to 1999. Consistent with our estimates of equation (1) in Tables 1 and 2, we find a negative

impact of both the implied-contract and good-faith doctrines on state employment rates. The second


opposed to population-weighted regressions; and 6) included a number of state, demographic and policy covariates
absent from our analysis, such as the fraction of neighboring states recognizing a given doctrine.
40
     A table of replication results is available from the authors.
41
     Morriss (1995) also uses monthly data. The other authors do not.

                                                                                                                   27
specification adds controls for state and demographic trends. As above, we find that the impact of the

implied-contract doctrine is robust to these trend measures while the good-faith doctrine is not.

    Panel B of the table presents estimates of four models using the years, 1978 – 1989, the time period for

which we have the Morriss legal classification scheme. Whether we used our legal scheme or Morriss’ has

very little impact on the regression coefficients for the three legal exceptions. The implied-contract doctrine

is shown to have a negative and statistically significant effect on the employment rate in all four

regressions. Similarly, there is little variance in the estimates for the public -policy exception, which change

little across columns and are wholly insignificant in all four regressions. Both classifications also show a

statistically negative effect of the good-faith doctrine on employment for the period 1978 and 1989, but in

neither case is this finding robust to state and demographic trend controls.

    Panel C compares the ADS to the D&K classification (now for the slightly shorter 1980 – 1987 time

period used by D&K) and reveals a generally similar pattern. If one compares the two models that include

the state and demographic group time trends, columns 2 and 4 of panel C, the direction of the findings

remains the same, though the ADS coefficients are larger. Since greater noise in the coding of these

independent variables would tend to attenuate the point estimates, the finding that our effects tend to be

larger may suggest that the ADS coding is somewhat more precise.

    In the final panel, we compare our results with the Walsh and Schwarz (WS) scheme for the years 1978

to 1994 (i.e., the beginning of the ADS sample to the end the WS sample). As with our discussion of the

Miles’ results, the greatest discrepancies are found here. Using the WS classification, we find that the

implied-contract exception has a positive albeit insignificant effect on employment levels in both

specifications. In our assessment, this discrepancy potentially derives from a number of overt deficiencies

in the WS classification. This classification appears to overlook leading cases and misclassify several

others. To test the possible importance of these shortcomings, we correct only what we view as the six

leading flaws in the WS classification. As is visible in the final columns of Table 9, these corrections almost

entirely account for the discrepancies between the WS and ADS results.

    To summarize, in two of three instances, our primary results are robust to the use of wrongful-discharge

                                                                                                               28
classification schemes developed by other authors. In the one case where our results substantially differ, we

believe this can be traced to important oversights by the scholars who developed the classification.

VI. Conclusion

    We find ourselves taking a middle position between those who suggest that the adoption of exceptions

to employment at will has had a major negative impact on employment (particularly Dertouzos and Karoly,

1992) and those who submit that the exceptions have had no impact (Miles, 2000). We find a statistically

significant negative impact on employment, but it emanates from only one of the legal exceptions – the

implied-contract doctrine – and its adoption causes a decline of from 0.8 to 1.7 percent in the ratio of

employment to population, which is between one-third and one-fifth the estimated magnitude offered by

Dertouzos and Karoly.

    While the matter can never be free from doubt in statistical studies of this kind, the robustness of our

findings across a number of different specifications, demographic groups, time periods, and classifications

of the case law suggests that our findings have uncovered a true causal effect of adoption of the implied-

contract exception. At the same time, our findings also suggest that the impact of the implied-contract

exception for the ten states that adopted it after 1987 has fallen substantially when compared to the

estimated effect for the 33 states adopting between 1980 and 1987. We are uncertain whether this implies

that the early adopters had a more aggressive legal posture than the later adopters (a cohort effect) or

whether the ability to shift employment away from an implied-contract state simply dampens over time as

more states adopt the exception (a substitution effect). If the latter, then our modest estimates of the

negative impact on employment would slightly exaggerate the overall impact on employment because

reductions in one state would to some extent lead to offsetting increases in employment in other states.

    Those steeped in the view that low transaction costs would give rise to a Coasean invariance prediction

might be surprised by the finding that the implied-contract doctrine reduces employment when it would

seem simple changes to personnel policies could easily negate the legal effectiveness of this exception.

Conversely, others might see the apparent inability to contract costlessly around legal rules as further

confirmation that the invariance prediction of the Coase Theorem frequently does not obtain in labor

                                                                                                               29
markets (Donohue 1989). The declining effect of the implied-contract exception over time may suggest

another possibility – that over time employers did learn how to fully circumvent the legal rule through

appropriate disclaimers.

    We stress that our paper does not attempt to provide an overall assessment of wrongful-discharge law.

We have not offered any evaluation of the benefits of such laws to workers and the public. The fact that

there is some reduction in employment – for women, younger workers, and less-educated men in the short

term, and potentially for older and more educated workers in the longer term – underscores that legal

protections do not come costlessly. Still, we see little robust evidence of a wage cost associated with the

adoption of the implied-contract exception. Finally, we note that if workers valued the benefit of the

implied-contract exception highly, one would expect to see a larger drop in wages because wage effects of

the adverse demand shift caused by the burden to employers would be augmented by the benign supply shift

caused by the perceived benefit to employees. The absence of a wage effect may imply that there was not a

strong supply response to the implied-contract exception, suggesting that workers did not greatly value this

benefit ex ante.




                                                                                                              30
                                             References

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist. 2001. “Consequences of Employment Protection? The Case of the
      Americans with Disabilities Act.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5), October, 915 – 957.

Aghion, Phillipe and Benjamin Hermalin. 1990. “Legal Restrictions on Private Contracts can Enhance
       Efficiency.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations. 6(2), Fall, 381 – 409.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. 1999. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.” In Orley C.
        Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, Netherlands:
        North-Holland.

Arsenault, Raymond. 1994. “The End of the Long Hot Summer: The Air Conditioner and Southern
       Culture.” The Journal of Southern History, 50(4), 597 – 628.

Autor, David H. forthcoming 2003. “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal Doctrine to
        the Growth of Employment Outsourcing.” Journal of Labor Economics.

Bertola, Giuseppe, Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn. 2002. “Labor Market Institutions and Demographic
        Employment Patterns.” mimeograph, European University Institute, June.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “How Much Should We Trust
        Difference-in-differences Estimates?” NBER Working Paper #8841, March.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. “What We Know and Do Not Know About the
       Natural Rate of Unemployment,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 51 – 72.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, 1.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Pedro Portugal. 2000. “What Hides Behind an Unemployment Rate:
       Comparing Portuguese and U.S. Labor Markets.” American Economic Review, 91(1), 187 – 207.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Justin Wolfers. 1999. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
       European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence.” The Economic Journal. 110, March, C31 –
       C33.

Chandra, Amitabh. 2002. “Is the Convergence in the Racial Wage Gap Illusory?” mimeograph, Dartmouth
       College, January.

DeLeire, Thomas. 2000. “The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act.”
       Journal of Human Resources, 35(4), 693 – 715.

Dertouzos, James N., Elaine Holland, and Patricia Ebener. 1988. The Legal and Economic Consequences of
       Wrongful Termination. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.

Dertouzos, James N. and Lynn A. Karoly.1992. Labor-Market Responses to Employer Liability. Santa
       Monica, CA: Rand.




                                                                                                        31
Dertouzos, James N. and Lynn A. Karoly. 1993. “Employment Effects of Worker Protection: Evidence
       from the United States.” in Christoph F. Buechtemann, editor. Employment Security and Labor
       Market Behavior: Interdisciplinary Approaches and International Evidence. Ithica, NY: ILR Press.

Donohue, John J. III. 1989. “Diverting the Coasean River: Incentive Schemes to Reduce Unemployment
      Spells,” 99, Yale Law Journal, 549.

Donohue, John J. III. 1998. “Did Miranda Diminish Police Effectiveness?” 50, Stanford Law Review, 1147.

Donohue, John J. III and James Heckman. 1991. “Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of Civil
      Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks.” Journal of Economic Literature, 29, December,
      1603 – 1643.

Donohue, John J. III and Peter Siegelman. 1993. “Law and Macroeconomics: Employment Discrimination
      Litigation over the Business Cycle,” Southern California Law Review, 66, 709-65.

Edelman, Lauren B., Steven E. Abraham, and Howard S. Erlanger. 1992. “Professional Construction of
      Law: The Inflated Threat of Wrongful-discharge,” Law & Society Review, 26, 47-83.

Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits.” American Economic Review,
        84(3), 622 – 41.

Hahn, Jinyong, Petra Todd, and Wilbert van der Klaauw. 2001. “Identification and Estimation of Treatment
        Effects with a Regression-Discontinuity Design,” Econometrica, 69(1), 201-209.

Hoerr, John, Willaim G. Glaberson, Daniel B. Moskowitz, Vicky Cahan, Michael A.Pollaock, and Jonathan
        Tasini. 1985. “Beyond Unions: A Revolution in Employment Rights is in the Making.” Business
        Week , July 8, 72 – 77.

Hopper, Martyn. 1995. “California Needs Tort Reform.” The Sacramento Bee, June 10.

Jolls, Christine. 2000. “Accommodation Mandates,” Stanford Law Review, 53(2), 223 – 306.

Jung, David. J. and Richard Harkness.1988. “The Facts of Wrongful-discharge,” Labor Lawyer, 4, 257.

Kamiat, Walter. 1996. “Labor and Lemons: Efficient Norms in the Internal Labor Market and the Possible
       Failures of Individual Contracting,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 144, 1953.

Krueger, Alan B. 1991. “The Evolution of Unjust-Dismissal Legislation in the United States,” Industrial &
       Labor Relations Review, 44(4), 644-660.

Kugler, Adriana and Gilles Saint-Paul. Forthcoming. “How Do Firing Costs Affect Worker Flows in a
        World with Adverse Selection?” Journal of Labor Economics..

Lazear, Edward P. 1991. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        105(3), 699 – 726.

Levine, David I. 1991. “Just-Cause Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse Selection,”
        Journal of Labor Economics, 9, 294 – 305.



                                                                                                       32
Lindbeck and Snower. 1988. “Cooperation, Harassment, and Involuntary Unemployment: An Insider-
       Outsider Approach.” American Economic Review, 78(1), 167 – 188.

Madrian, Brigitte C. and Lars Lefrgen. 2000. “An Approach to Longitudinally Matching Current Population
       Survey (CPS) Respondents.” Journal of Economics and Social Measurement, 26(1), 31 – 62.

Miles, Thomas J. 2000. “Common Law Exceptions to Employment at Will and U.S. Labor Markets.”
        Journal of Law, Economics and Organizations, 16(1), 74 – 101.

Morriss, Andrew P. 1995. “Developing a Framework for Empirical Research on the Common Law: General
        Principles and Case Studies of the Decline of Employment-at-Will,” Case Western Reserve Law
        Review, 45, 999 – 1148.

OECD Employment Outlook: 1999. 1999. Paris, France: OECD.

Olson, Walter (1997) The Excuse Factory: How Employment Law is Paralyzing the American Workplace.
       (New York: Free Press).

Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer. 2000. “Layoffs and Litigation.” Rand Journal of Economics, 32(2), Summer,
       345 – 358.

Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer. 2002 “Litigation Costs and Returns to Experience.” American Economic
       Review, 92(3), 683 – 705.

Saint Paul, Gilles. 2002. “The Political Economy of Employment Protection.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 110(3), 672 – 704.

Schwab, Stewart J. 1996. “Wrongful-discharge Law and the Search for Third-Party Effects,” Texas Law
      Review, 74(7), 1943 - 1978.

Schwab, Stewart J. 1993. “Life-Cycle Justice: Accommodating Just Cause and Employment At Will,”
      Michigan Law Review, 92(1), 8 - 62.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1989. “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits.” American Economic
      Review, 79(2), May, 177 – 183.

Walsh, David J. and Joshua L. Schwarz. 1996. “State Common Law Wrongful-discharge Doctrines: Up-
       Date, Refinement, and Rationales.” American Business Law Journal, 33, 645 – 689.

Willborn, Steven L., Stewart J. Schwab and John F. Burton, Jr. 1998. Employment Law: Cases and
       Materials. Charlottesville, VA: Lexis Law Publishing (2nd. ed.).




                                                                                                      33
                                                             Legal Appendix

    State                      Public Policy                            Implied Contract                            Good Faith
      Alabama                                                 Hoffman-LaRoche v. Campbell, 512
                                                              So. 2d 725 (Ala. 1987 July).

        Alaska    Knight v. American Guard & Alert, 714       Eales v. Tanana Valley Medical            Mitford v. Lasala, 666 P.2d 1000
                  P.2d 788 (Alaska 1986 February).            Surgical Group, 663 P.2d 958 (Alaska      (Alaska 1983 May).
                                                              1983 May).

       Arizona    Wagenseller v. Scottsdale Memorial          Leikvold v. Valley View Community         Wagenseller v. Scottsdale Memorial
                  Hosp., 710 P.2d 1025 (Ariz. 1985 June).     Hosp., 688 P.2d 201 (Ariz. App. 1983      Hosp., 710 P.2d 1025 (Ariz. 1985
                                                              June), vacated, 688 P.2d 170 (Ariz.       June).
                                                              1984).
     Arkansas     MBM Co. v. Counce, 596 S.W.2d 681           Jackson v. Kinark Corp., 669 S.W.2d
                  (Ark. 1980 March).                          898 (Ark. 1984 June). D& K uses
                                                              Griffen v. Erickson, 642 S.W.2d 308
                                                              (Ark. 1982).

     California   Petermann v. Int’l Brotherhood of           Drzewiecki v. H&R Block, 101 Cal.         Cleary v. American Airlines, 168
                  Teamsters, 344 P.2d 25 (Cal. Ct. App.       Rptr. 169 (Cal. Ct. App. 1972 March).     Cal. Rptr. 722 (Cal. Ct. App. 1980
                  1959 September).                                                                      October), modified to remove tort
                                                                                                        damages by Foley v. Interactive
                                                                                                        Data Corp., 765 P.2d 373 (Cal.
                                                                                                        1988).

      Colorado    Winther v. DEC Int’l Inc., 625 F. Supp.     Brooks v. TWA, 574 F. Supp. 805 (D.
                  100 (D. Colo. 1985 September). D&K          Colo. 1983 October). D&K uses Salimi
                  uses Cronk v. Inter-Mountain Rural          v. Farmers Ins. Group, 684 P.2d 619
                  Electric Ass’n., 765 P.2d 619 (Colo. Ct.    (Colo. Ct. App. 1988).
                  App. 1988).

Connecticut       Sheets v. Teddy’s Frosted Foods, 427        Finley v. Aetna Life, 499 A.2d 64         Magnan v. Anaconda Indus., 429
                  A.2d 385 (Conn. 1980 January).              (Conn. Ct. App. 1985 October),            A.2d 492 (Conn. Super. Ct. 1980
                                                              reversed on other grounds, 520 A.2d       June), reversed on other grounds,
                                                              208 (Conn. 1987) (upholding implied       479 A.2d 781 (Conn. 1984). D&K
                                                              contract exception) D&K uses              uses Cook v. Alexander &
                                                              Magnan v. Anaconda Indus., 479            Alexander, 588 A.2d 1295 (Conn.
                                                              A.2d 781 (Conn. 1984).                    Ct. App. 1985).

     Delaware     Henze v. Alloy Surfaces (Del. 1992                                                    Merril v. Crothall-American, 606
                  March). D&K uses no case.                                                             A.2d 96 (Del. Sup. Ct. 1992 April).
                                                                                                        D&K uses no case.

        Florida
       Georgia

        Hawaii Parnar v. Americana hotels, 652 P.2d           Kinoshita v. Canadian Pacific Airlines,
               625 (Haw. 1982 October).                       724 P.2d 110 (Haw. 1986 August).

         Idaho    Jackson v. Minidoka Irrigation District,    Jackson v. Minidoka, 563 P.2d 54          Metcalf v. Intermountain Gas. Co.,
                  563 P.2d 54 (Idaho 1977 April).             (Idaho 1977 April).                       778 P.2d 744 (Idaho 1989 August).

Notes:
‘
    D&K’ stands for Dertouzos and Karoly (1992).
    Bold text indicates that our classification differs from D&K.
   State                       Public Policy                           Implied Contract                           Good Faith
      Illinois    Kelsay v. Motorola, 384 N.E.2d 353 (Ill.   Carter v. Kaskaskia Community Action
                  1978 December).                            Agency, 322 N.E.2d 574 (Ill. App. Ct.
                                                             1974 December). D&K uses Duldulao
                                                             v. St. Mary of Nazareth Hosp.
                                                             Center, 505 N.E.2d 314 (Ill. 1987).

      Indiana     Frampton v. Central Indiana Gas Co,        Romak v. Public Service Co., 511
                  297 N.E.2d 425 (Ind. 1973 May).            N.E.2d 1024 (Ind. 1987 August).

           Iowa   Northrup v. Farmland Ind., 372 N.W.2d      Young v. Cedar County Work Activity
                  193 (Iowa 1985 July).                      Center, 418 N.W.2d 844 (Iowa 1987
                                                             November).

      Kansas      Murphy v. City of Topeka, 630 P.2d 186     Allegri v. Providence-St. Margaret
                  (Kan. Ct. App. 1981 June).                 Health Center, 684 P.2d 1031 (Kan. Ct.
                                                             App. 1984 August).

    Kentucky      Firestone Textile Co. v. Meadows, 666      Shah v. American Synthetic Rubber
                  S.W.2d 730 (Ky. 1983 November).            Co., 655 S.W.2d 489 (Ky. 1983
                                                             August). D&K has no case.

    Louisiana                                                                                          Barbe v. A.A. Harmon & Co, 705
                                                                                                       So. 2d 1210 (La. 1998 January).
                                                                                                       D&K has no case.

       Maine                                                 Terrio v. Millinocket Community
                                                             Hospital, 379 A.2d 135 (Me. 1977
                                                             November). D&K uses Larrabee v.
                                                             Penobscot Frozen Foods, 486 A.2d 97
                                                             (1984).

    Maryland      Adler v. American Standard Corp., 432      Staggs v. Blue Cross, 486 A.2d 798
                  A.2d 464 (Md. 1981 July).                  (Md. Ct. Spec. App.), cert. denied, 493
                                                             A.2d 349 (Md. 1985 January).

Massachusetts     McKinney v. National Dairy Council,        Hobson v. McLean Hospital Corp., 522      Fortune v. National Cash Register
                  491 F. Supp. 1108 (D. Mass. 1980 May).     N.E.2d 975 (Mass. 1988 May). D&K          Co., 364 N.E.2d 1251 (Mass. 1977
                  D&K uses Cort v. Bristol Meyers Co.        uses Jackson v. Action for Boston         July).
                  431 N.E.2d 908 (Mass. 1982).               Comm. Dev., 525 N.E.2d 411 (Mass.
                                                             1988).

    Michigan      Sventko v. Kroger, 245 N.W.2d 151          Toussaint v. Blue Cross, 292 N.W.2d
                  (Mich. 1976 June).                         880 (Mich. 1980 June).
   Minnesota      Phipps v. Clark Oil & Refining Co., 396    Pine River State Bank v. Mettille, 333
                  N.W.2d 588 (Minn. Ct. App. 1986            N.W.2d 622 (Minn. 1983 April).
                  November), aff’d 408 N.W.2d 569
                  (Minn. 1987).

  Mississippi Laws v. Aetna Finance Co., 667 F. Supp.        Bobbitt v. The Orchard, Ltd., 603 So.
              342 (N.D. Miss. 1987 July). D&K use            2d 356 (Miss. 1992 June).
              no case.

     Missouri     Boyle v. Vista Eyewear, 700 S.W.2d 859     Arie v. Intertherm, 648 S.W.2d 142
                  (Mo. Ct. App. 1985 November).              (Mo. Ct. App. 1983 January).
                                                             Exception overturned by Johnson v.
                                                             McDonnell Douglas Corp., 745 S.W.2d
                                                             661 (Mo. Sup. Ct. 1988 February).
                                                             D&K includes Arie but not Johnson.
    State                       Public Policy                          Implied Contract                           Good Faith
     Montana       Keneally v. Sterling Orgain, 606 P.2d     Montana Wrongful Discharge from           Gates v. Life of Montana Insurance
                   127 (Mont. 1980 January).                 Employment Act, Mont. Code Ann. 39-       Co., 638 P.2d 1063 (Mont. 1982
                                                             2-901 to 914 (1987 June).                 January).
     Nebraska      Ambroz v. Cornhusker Square, 416          Morris v. Lutheran Medical Center, 340
                   N.W.2d 510 (Neb. 1987 November).          N.W.2d 388 (Neb. 1983 November).

      Nevada       Hansen v. Harrah’s, 675 P.2d 394 (Nev.    Southwest Gas Corp. v. Ahmad, 668         K-Mart Corp. v. Ponsock, 732 P.2d
                   1984 January).                            P.2d 261 (Nev. 1983 August).              1364 (Nev. 1987 February).
       New         Monge v. Beebe Rubber Co., 316 A.2d       Panto v. Moore Business Forms, 547        Monge v. Beebe Rubber Co., 316
   Hampshire       549 (N.H. 1974 February) (only contract   A.2d 260 (N.H. 1988 August).              A.2d 549 (N.H. 1974 February).
                   damages); Cloutier v. A&P, 436 A.2d                                                 Eliminated as separate cause of
                   1140 (New Hamp. 1981) (allows tort                                                  action in Howard v. Dorr Woolen
                   damages).                                                                           Co., 414 A.2d 1273 (N.H. 1980
                                                                                                       May). D&K uses Monge but not
                                                                                                       Howard.
   New Jersey      Pierce v. Ortho Pharm. Corp., 417 A.2d    Woolley v. Hoffmann-LaRoche, Inc.,
                   505 (N.J. 1980 July).                     491 A.2d 1257 (N.J. 1985 May).

 New Mexico        Vigil v. Arzola, 699 P.2d 613 (N.M. Ct.   Forrester v. Parker, 606 P.2d 191 (N.M.
                   App. 1983 July), reversed on other        1980 February).
                   grounds, 687 P.2d 1038 (N.M. 1984).

    New York None. D&K uses Chin v. AT&T, 96                 Weiner v. McGraw-Hill, Inc., 443
             Misc. 2d 1070, 410 N.Y.S.2d 737                 N.E.2d 441(N.Y. 1982 November).
             (1978) (contract damages only), until
             the public policy exception was clearly
             rejected by NY’s highest court in
             Murphy v. American Home Products
             Corp., 448 N.E.2d 86 (N.Y. 1983).
North Carolina     Sides v. Duke Univ., 328 S.E.2d 818
                   (N.C. Ct. App. 1985 May).

 North Dakota      Krein v. Marian Manor Nursing Home,       Hammond v. North Dakota State
                   415 N.W.2d 793 (N.D. 1987 November).      Personnel Bd., 345 N.W.2d 359 (N.D.
                                                             1984 February). D&K uses Bailey v.
                                                             Perkins Restaurants, Inc., 398
                                                             N.W.2d 120 (N.D. 1986).

            Ohio   Adopted, Goodspeed v. Airborne            West v. Roadway Express, In.c, 115
                   Express, Inc., 121 L.R.R.M. (BNA) 3216    L.R.R.M. (BNA) 4553 (Ohio Ct. App.
                   (Ohio Ct. App. 1985 February);            1982 April).
                   rejected, Phung v. Waste Management
                   Inc., 491 N.E.2d 1114 (Ohio 1986
                   April); adopted, Greely v. Miami Valley
                   Maintenance Contractors, Inc., 551
                   N.E.2d 981 (Ohio 1990 March). D&K
                   does not include Greely.

    Oklahoma       Burk v. K-Mart Corp., 770 P.2d 24         Langdon v. Saga Corp., 569 P.2d 524       adopted, Hall v. Farmers Insurance
                   (Okla. 1989 February).                    (Okla. Ct. App. 1976 December). D&K       Exchange, 713 P.2d 1027 (Okla.
                                                             uses Hinson v. Cameron, 742 P.2d 24       1985 May); rejected, Burk v. K-
                                                             (Okla. 1987).                             Mart Corp., 770 P.2d 24 (Okla.
                                                                                                       1989 February). D&K gives no
                                                                                                       case here.
    State                       Public Policy                           Implied Contract                         Good Faith
       Oregon      Nees v. Hocks, 536 P.2d 512 (1975         Yartzoff v. Democrat-Herald Publ. Co.,
                   June).                                    576 P.2d 356 (Ore. 1978 March).

 Pennsylvania      Geary v. United States Steel Corp., 319
                   A.2d 174 (Pa. 1974 March). D&K uses
                   Reuther v. Fowler & Williams, Inc.,
                   386 A.2d 119 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1978).

 Rhode Island      None. D&K uses Volino v. General
                   Dynamics, 539 A.2d 531 (R.I. 1988).

South Carolina     Ludwick v. This Minute of Carolina,       Small v. Springs Industries, Inc., 357
                   Inc., 337 S.E.2d 213 (S.C. 1985           S.E.2d 452 (S.C. 1987 June).
                   November).
 South Dakota      Johnson v. Kreiser’s Inc., 433 N.W.2d     Osterkamp v. Alkota Mfg, Inc., 332
                   225 (S.D. 1988 December) (contract        N.W.2d 275 (S.D. 1983 April)
                   damages). D&K uses Trombollo v.
                   Dunn, 342 N.W.2d 23 (1984).

    Tennessee      Clanton v. Clain-Sloan Co., 677 S.W.2d    Hamby v. Genesco Inc., 627 S.W.2d
                   441 (Tenn. 1984 August).                  373 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1981 November).
                                                             D&K cites no case.

        Texas      Sabine Pilot Serv. Inc. v. Hauck, 672     Johnson v. Ford Motor Co., 690 S.W.2d
                   S.W.2d 322 (Tex. Civ. App. 1984 June),    90 (Tex. Civ. App. 1985 April). D&K
                   affirmed, 687 S.W.2d 733 (Tex. 1985).     cites no case.

            Utah   Berube v. Fashion Centre, 771 P.2d 1033   Rose v. Allied Development, 719 P.2d
                   (Utah 1989 March).                        83 (Utah 1986 May). D&K cites no
                                                             case.

     Vermont       Payne v. Rozendaal, 520 A.2d 586 (Vt.     Sherman v. Rutland Hospital, Inc. 500
                   1986 September). D&K uses Jones v.        A.2d 230 (Vt. 1985 August). D&K uses
                   Keough, 409 A.2d 581 (Vt. 1979).          Benoir v. Ethan Allen, Inc., 514 A.2d
                                                             716 (Vt. 1986).

      Virginia     Bowman v. State Bank of Keysville, 331    Frazier v. Colonial Williamsburg
                   S.E.2d 797 (Va. 1985 June).               Foundation, 574 F. Supp. 318 (E.D. Va.
                                                             1983 September). D&K cites no case.
  Washington       Thompson v. St. Regis Paper Co., 685   Roberts v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 568
                   P.2d 1081 (Wash. 1984 July). D&K uses P.2d 764 (Wash. 1977 August).
                   Roberts v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 568
                   P.2d 764 (Wash. 1977).

 West Virginia     Harless v. First National Bank, 246       Cook v. Heck’s Inc., 342 S.E.2d 453
                   S.E.2d 270 (W. Va. 1978 July).            (W. Va. 1986 April).
    Wisconsin      Ward v. Frito-Lay, Inc., 290 N.W.2d 536   Ferraro v. Koelsch, 368 N.W.2d 666
                   (Wis. Ct. App. 1980 January). D&K         (Wis. 1985 June).
                   uses Brockmeyer v. Dun & Bradstreet,
                   325 N.W.2d 70 (Wis. Ct. App. 1982).

    Wyoming        Griess v. Consolidated Freightways, 776   Mobil Coal Producing Inc., v. Parks,     Wilder v. Cody Country Chamber of
                   P.2d 752 (Wyo. 1989 July). D&K uses       704 P.2d 702 (Wyo. 1985 August).         Commerce, 868 P.2d 211 (Wyo.
                   Allen v. Safeway Stores, Inc., 699 P.2d                                            1994 January).
                   277 (Wyo. 1985).
                                                                         4.0
                                             A. Males

100 x Relative Employment/Population                                     3.0


                                                                         2.0

                                                                         1.0


                                                                         0.0
                                       -48      -36       -24     -12          0      12     24      36      48     60        72   84   96
                                                                        -1.0

                                                                        -2.0

                                                                        -3.0

                                                                        -4.0       Month Relative to Adoption

                                                      Point Estimate                  Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                         4.0
                                             B. Females

                                                                         3.0
100 x Relative Employment/Population




                                                                         2.0


                                                                         1.0


                                                                         0.0
                                       -48      -36       -24     -12          0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                        -1.0


                                                                        -2.0


                                                                        -3.0


                                                                        -4.0       Month Relative to Adoption

                                                        Point Estimate                Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

    Figure 1. State Employment to Population Rates Pre- and Post- Adoption of Implied Contract
            Exception: Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                                                          4.0
                                                A. Males

   100 x Relative Employment/Population                                   3.0


                                                                          2.0


                                                                          1.0


                                                                          0.0
                                          -48      -36       -24   -12           0     12      24     36      48     60        72   84   96
                                                                          -1.0


                                                                          -2.0


                                                                          -3.0


                                                                          -4.0       Month Relative to Adoption

                                                         Point Estimate                Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                          4.0
                                                B. Females

                                                                          3.0
   100 x Relative Employment/Population




                                                                          2.0


                                                                          1.0


                                                                          0.0
                                          -48      -36       -24   -12           0     12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                         -1.0


                                                                         -2.0


                                                                         -3.0


                                                                         -4.0        Month Relative to Adoption

                                                         Point Estimate                Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

Figure 2. State Employment to Population Rates Pre- and Post- Adoption of Public Policy Exception:
                  Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                                                         8.0
                                               A. Males

  100 x Relative Employment/Population                                   6.0


                                                                         4.0


                                                                         2.0


                                                                         0.0
                                         -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                         -2.0


                                                                         -4.0


                                                                         -6.0

                                                                                    Month Relative to Adoption
                                                                         -8.0

                                                        Point Estimate                Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                         8.0
                                               B. Females

                                                                         6.0
  100 x Relative Employment/Population




                                                                         4.0


                                                                         2.0


                                                                         0.0
                                         -48      -36       -24   -12           0     12      24     36      48     60         72   84   96
                                                                        -2.0


                                                                        -4.0


                                                                        -6.0

                                                                                    Month Relative to Adoption
                                                                        -8.0

                                                        Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

Figure 3. State Employment to Population Rates Pre- and Post- Adoption of Good Faith Exception:
                 Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                                                          12.0
                                                    A. Males
      100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage                                   9.0


                                                                              6.0


                                                                              3.0


                                                                              0.0
                                              -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                              -3.0


                                                                              -6.0


                                                                              -9.0


                                                                         -12.0           Month Relative to Adoption


                                                             Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                          12.0
                                                    B. Females

                                                                              9.0
   100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage




                                                                              6.0


                                                                              3.0


                                                                              0.0
                                              -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                              -3.0


                                                                              -6.0


                                                                              -9.0


                                                                         -12.0           Month Relative to Adoption

                                                             Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval
Figure 4. Median Log Full-Time Weekly Wages Pre- and Post- Adoption of Implied Contract Exception:
                  Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                                                                     12.0
                                                            A. Males
  100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage                                               9.0


                                                                                      6.0


                                                                                      3.0


                                                                                      0.0
                                                      -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12      24     36         48   60       72   84   96
                                                                                      -3.0


                                                                                      -6.0


                                                                                      -9.0


                                                                                 -12.0           Month Relative to Adoption

                                                                     Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                                  12.0
                                                            B. Females

                                                                                      9.0
              100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage




                                                                                      6.0


                                                                                      3.0


                                                                                      0.0
                                                      -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48       60       72   84   96
                                                                                     -3.0


                                                                                     -6.0


                                                                                     -9.0


                                                                                 -12.0           Month Relative to Adoption

                                                                     Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

Figure 5. Median Log Full-Time Weekly Wages Pre- and Post- Adoption of Public Policy Exception:
                 Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                                                         20.0
                                                   A. Males
  100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage                                  15.0


                                                                         10.0


                                                                          5.0


                                                                          0.0
                                          -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                          -5.0


                                                                     -10.0


                                                                     -15.0


                                                                     -20.0           Month Relative to Adoption


                                                         Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

                                                                      20.0
                                                B. Females

                                                                      15.0
  100 x Relative Log Median Hourly Wage




                                                                      10.0


                                                                          5.0


                                                                          0.0
                                          -48      -36       -24   -12           0      12     24      36     48      60        72   84   96
                                                                         -5.0


                                                                     -10.0


                                                                     -15.0


                                                                     -20.0           Month Relative to Adoption

                                                         Point Estimate                 Robust 90 Percent Confidence Interval

Figure 6. Median Log Full-Time Weekly Wages Pre- and Post- Adoption of Good Faith Exception:
                Monthly Leads and Lags 4 Years Prior to 8 Years Post Adoption
                                               650

                                               600

                                               550
Employment Growth Relative to 1939 (percent)




                                               500

                                               450
                                                                                             Southern States
                                               400

                                               350

                                               300
                                                                                                           Non-Southern States
                                               250

                                               200

                                               150

                                               100

                                                50

                                                 0
                                                 1939   1944   1949   1954   1959   1964   1969   1974   1979   1984   1989      1994   1999

                                                         Figure 7. Employment Growth in Southern vs. Non-Southern States,
                                                                                  1939 - 1999
100%




80%


                                      Non-Southern States

60%

                                                                   Southern States


40%




20%




 0%
   1953      1958     1963     1968      1973      1978     1983    1988      1993    1998


  Figure 8. Percent of States Recognizing One or More Wrongful Discharge Laws, 1953 - 1998
                                                  Table 1:
Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Employment and
Earnings for Years 1978 - 1999: Contrasting Outcomes in Years Two and Three Following Adoption
                       of Doctrine to Years One and Two Prior to Adoption

                                A. 100 X Employment Measure                 B. 100 x Log Earnings Measure
                            ln(Emp/Pop)             Emp/Pop          Median FT Weekly          Median Hourly
                           (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)         (1)      (2)            (3)      (4)

      Implied Contract    -1.98      -1.04     -1.24      -0.59       0.71    0.88            0.53    0.98
                         (0.48)     (0.33)    (0.34)     (0.20)      (0.67) (0.54)           (0.80) (0.63)
                   R2    0.917      0.921     0.925      0.929       0.871 0.873             0.868 0.871
                    n                    52,224                          48,424                  49,192
         Public Policy    -0.50      -0.29     -0.29      -0.17       -0.05    0.06           -0.12    -0.03
                         (0.66)     (0.29)    (0.44)     (0.20)      (0.53) (0.35)           (0.49) (0.36)
                   R2    0.914      0.918     0.922      0.927       0.867 0.870             0.863 0.867
                    n                    55,488                           51,264                  52,140
           Good Faith     -1.17      -1.06     -0.75      -0.71       0.86    0.80            0.81    1.38
                         (0.55)     (0.73)    (0.37)     (0.45)      (1.21) (0.74)           (1.39) (0.89)
                   R2    0.912      0.917     0.920      0.925       0.866 0.869             0.865 0.868
                    n                    55,296                          48,296                  49,088
Region x year dummies      No        Yes         No       Yes          No         Yes         No        Yes

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error correlation within states.
Each entry is from a separate weighted regression in which the dependent variable is the state-month
employment to population ratio (or its log), median log hourly wage or full-time weekly (35+ hours) wage in
50 U.S. states (excluding District of Columbia) for 8 demographic cells: male/female x ages 18-39/ 40-64 x
high school or less/ some college or more education. Employment is estimated from complete combined
Current Population Survey monthly files for 1978 - 1999. Earnings are estimated from CPS Outgoing
Rotation Group samples for 1979 - 1999. All models include state main effects, and indicators for each
demographic group in each time period in the sample (in calendar months). Models with region x year
dummies also include interactions between 9 Census region dummies (1 omitted) and individual calendar
year dummies.

Treatment sample includes state-month-demographic group observations for 1 to 24 months prior and 13 -
36 months following adoption of relevant doctrine in adopting states (months 0 - 12 following adoption are
omitted). Control sample includes maximal set of state-month-demographic group employment or earnings
observations for corresponding calendar months (rounded to nearest calendar year) for states that did not
adopt any of the three doctrines during the relevant pre/post treatment time interval. The coefficient
reported is the interaction between treatment status (i.e., adopting a doctrine) and an indicator for 13 - 36
months post adoption. Models are weighted by sum of CPS sampling weights in each state x year x month
x demographic group cell. In cases where an earnings cell for a state x month x demographic group is
empty, the state x demographic group panel is dropped (21 years x 12 months = 252 observations). There
are no empty employment cells.
                                                         Table 2:
 Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Employment and Earnings
           for Years 1978 - 1999: Contrasting the Impact of any Doctrine Versus Specific Doctrines

                                A. 100 X ln(Employment/Population)          B. 100 x Median Full Time Log Weekly Earnings
                          (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)      (5)      (6)    (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)

         Any Doctrine     -0.97 -0.46 1.79 0.83                             0.39 0.62 0.88 0.88
                         (0.40) (0.21) (0.52) (0.53)                       (0.37) (0.30) (1.73) (0.77)
      Implied Contract                    -3.31 -1.55 -1.70 -0.80                           -0.59 -0.23 0.31 0.59
                                         (0.66) (0.59) (0.47) (0.29)                       (1.51) (0.79) (0.43) (0.41)
         Public Policy                    -1.92 -1.04 -0.41 -0.31                           -0.97 -0.59 -0.52 0.07
                                         (0.62) (0.51) (0.58) (0.27)                       (1.59) (0.73) (0.50) (0.42)
           Good Faith                     -2.78 -0.89 -1.30 -0.24                           0.44 0.84 1.10 1.48
                                         (0.68) (0.65) (0.41) (0.60)                       (1.70) (1.00) (0.96) (0.76)
                   R2    0.910 0.915 0.910 0.915 0.910 0.924               0.860 0.866 0.860 0.862 0.860 0.866
                    n                   76,832                                            72,166
Region x year dummies     No     Yes      No      Yes       No       Yes    No     Yes      No       Yes      No      Yes

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error correlation within states. Dependent
variables, samples, and weights are as in Table 1. The coefficients reported are the interactions between treatment
status (i.e., adopting any doctrine or a specific doctrine) and an indicator for 13 - 36 months post adoption.
                                                        Table 3:
Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Median Log Hourly Earnings of
                     Males: Contrasting Estimates Excluding and Including Non-Employed.

                                A. 100 x Median Log Hourly Wage:                 B. 100 x Median Log Hourly Wage:
                                       Employed Males Only                                   All Males
                          (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)    (6)     (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)    (6)

         Any Doctrine     0.35 1.32 0.69 1.86                             -0.86 1.11 1.87 2.54
                         (0.53) (0.43) (1.46) (1.32)                     (0.85) (0.60) (1.35) (1.27)
      Implied Contract                   -0.46 -0.16 0.20 1.53                            -3.85 -1.63 -2.14 0.70
                                        (1.35) (1.45) (0.74) (0.68)                      (1.71) (1.26) (1.33) (0.92)
         Public Policy                   -0.59 -1.00 -0.29 0.53                           -1.39 -0.99 -0.04 1.16
                                        (1.24) (1.35) (0.74) (0.58)                      (1.59) (1.59) (1.19) (0.76)
           Good Faith                    -0.20 -1.13 0.40 0.52                            -2.94 -1.54 -1.27 0.71
                                        (1.80) (2.22) (1.52) (1.87)                      (1.82) (1.80) (1.76) (1.64)
                   R2    0.855 0.865 0.855 0.865 0.855 0.865             0.820 0.831 0.820 0.831 0.820 0.831
                    n                   21,534                                          21,534
Region x year dummies     No     Yes      No     Yes      No       Yes     No     Yes      No     Yes      No       Yes

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error correlation within states. Samples,
specifications and weights are as in Table 2. Medians in Panel A are calculated only for employed males. Those in Panel
B are calculated for all males within the relevant demographic categories; those with zero earnings are assumed to fall
below the median. In state-year-month-demographic group cells where more than 50 percent of potential workers are not
employed, the state-demographic panel for that group is dropped (21 years x 12 months) in both Panel A and Panel B of
the table.
                                 Table 4:
 Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful
Discharge Laws on Employment to Population Rates: Estimates
                      by Adopter Cohorts

                    Dependent Variable: 100 x ln(Employment/Population)


                    Implied Contract    Public Policy     Good Faith
                      (1)     (2)       (1)      (2)      (1)    (2)

     1980 - 1983     -1.92 -0.51        -0.40 0.35        -1.31 -0.87
                    (0.52) (0.18)      (0.63) (0.44)     (0.61) (0.39)
              R2    0.931 0.932        0.932 0.933       0.938 0.939
               n        21,408             19,872            17,184
  States adopting          15                 11               6
     1984 - 1987     -1.69 -0.75        -1.40 -0.18       -3.08 2.25
                    (0.88) (0.44)      (0.85) (0.33)     (0.71) (1.14)
              R2    0.928 0.930        0.929 0.931       0.934 0.936
               n        19,104             18,720            11,904
  States adopting         18                 17                 3
     1988 - 1992     -1.92 -0.09        2.33 0.12         1.61 0.88
                    (1.00) (0.83)      (0.67) (0.44)     (0.38) (0.73)
              R2    0.905 0.909        0.901 0.905       0.901 0.905
               n        22,176            27,840            19,680
  States adopting          10                 6                2
     1993 - 1998     n/a        n/a     n/a        n/a    0.49 -0.13
                                                         (0.15) (0.60)
              R2                                         0.885 0.886
               n                                            17,856
  States adopting          0                  0                2

    Region x year    No         Yes     No         Yes    No       Yes
        dummies


Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for
unrestricted error correlation among contiguous time periods within
each state. Dependent variables, specifications, and weights are
identical to Table 2.
                                                                        Table 5:
  Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on Log Employment to Population Rates for Years 1978 -
                            1999: Testing Sensitivity to Selection of Pre- and Post- Adoption Treatment Periods.

                                                             Dependent Variable: 100 x ln(Employment/Population)

                      Baseline
 Pre-Treat Period   Yrs - 2 and -1    Yrs -2 and -1    Yrs -2 and -1    Yrs -2 and -1    Yrs -2 and -1    Yrs -2 and -1     Yrs -3 and -2    Yrs -4 and -3
Post-Treat Period    Yrs 1 and 2      Yrs 0 and 1      Yrs 2 and 3      Yrs 3 and 4       Yrs 5 and 6      Yrs 7 and 8      Yrs 1 and 2      Yrs 1 and 2

                          (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)              (8)

 Implied Contract    -1.70 -0.80 -1.14 -0.52 -1.61 -0.75 -1.32 -0.71 -0.89 -0.89 -0.21 -0.68 -1.72 -0.49 -1.62 -0.23
                    (0.47) (0.29) (0.39) (0.26) (0.48) (0.37) (0.53) (0.45) (0.63) (0.53) (0.82) (0.81) (0.59) (0.36) (0.75) (0.37)

    Public Policy    -0.41 -0.31 -0.12 -0.18 -0.31 -0.12 -0.08 -0.22 0.44 -0.50 0.89 -0.16 -0.39 -0.40 -0.23 -0.03
                    (0.58) (0.27) (0.38) (0.27) (0.72) (0.27) (0.76) (0.30) (0.76) (0.32) (0.79) (0.36) (0.75) (0.31) (0.85) (0.36)

      Good Faith     -1.30 -0.24 -0.71 -0.12 -1.91 -0.57 -1.71 -0.81 -1.13 -0.95 -1.38 -1.75 -0.84 1.05 -0.49 1.06
                    (0.41) (0.60) (0.39) (0.49) (0.45) (0.44) (0.61) (0.78) (0.86) (1.23) (0.98) (1.30) (0.49) (0.41) (0.78) (0.58)

              R2    0.910 0.924 0.914 0.918 0.908 0.913 0.907 0.911 0.906 0.911 0.907 0.911 0.909 0.914 0.909 0.914
               n       76,832      72,656      77,096      78,392      75,848      67,880      73,160      70,424
   Region x year
       dummies
                     No         Yes   No         Yes   No         Yes   No         Yes   No         Yes    No         Yes   No         Yes   No         Yes

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error correlation within states. Samples, specifications and weights are
identical to Table 3 except, as noted, the selection of pre- and post- treatment intervals for law adoption.
                                     Table 6:
  Short-Term Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful
  Discharge Laws on Log Employment to Population Rates by Gender, Age
                        and Education Subgroups.

                         Dependent Variable: 100 x ln(Employment/Population).

                                               A. Males

                       High School or Less                 Some College or More
                  Ages 18 - 39     Ages 40 - 64       Ages 18 - 39      Ages 40 - 64
                  (1)      (2)     (1)      (2)       (1)      (2)      (1)      (2)

      Implied     -1.89 -0.49      -1.97 -0.95       -0.92 0.27         -0.81 -0.40
     Contract    (1.01) (0.50)    (0.49) (0.37)     (0.40) (0.33)      (0.56) (0.42)
 Public Policy    -0.36 0.50       -0.66 -0.88       0.19 0.20          0.13 0.21
                 (1.04) (0.45)    (0.78) (0.55)     (0.53) (0.37)      (0.61) (0.37)
  Good Faith      -2.21 -1.52      0.17 2.00         0.12 1.19          0.62 1.41
                 (1.23) (0.66)    (1.11) (0.94)     (0.43) (0.48)      (0.49) (0.86)
           R2    0.658 0.740      0.601 0.670       0.584 0.645        0.470 0.531
            n       9,604            9,604             9,604              9,604
Region x year     No     Yes        No       Yes      No      Yes       No        Yes
    dummies
                                              B. Females

                       High School or Less                 Some College or More
                  Ages 18 - 39     Ages 40 - 64       Ages 18 - 39      Ages 40 - 64
                  (1)      (2)     (1)      (2)       (1)      (2)      (1)      (2)

      Implied     -2.65 -1.80      -2.30 -1.30       -1.68 -1.25        0.15 0.51
     Contract    (1.06) (0.86)    (0.88) (0.74)     (0.39) (0.38)      (0.65) (0.65)
 Public Policy    -0.40 -0.49      -0.29 0.04        -1.01 -1.29        0.15 -0.37
                 (0.97) (0.89)    (0.97) (0.92)     (0.53) (0.45)      (1.02) (0.89)
  Good Faith      -3.12 -1.61      -0.29 1.78        -1.66 -1.43        -3.74 -2.66
                 (1.05) (1.51)    (0.69) (1.86)     (0.64) (0.91)      (0.91) (1.28)
           R2    0.755 0.799      0.744 0.779       0.667 0.712        0.674 0.704
            n       9,604            9,604             9,604              9,604
Region x year     No     Yes        No       Yes      No      Yes       No        Yes
    dummies

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error
correlation within each state. Separate regressions in each column contrast
employment of the specified demographic group in years one and two following
adoption of a doctrine relative to years two and one prior to adoption of the
doctrine. Samples, specifications, and weights are identical to Table 2.
                                     Table 7:
  Long-Term Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful
  Discharge Laws on Log Employment to Population Rates by Gender, Age
                        and Education Subgroups

                         Dependent Variable: 100 x ln(Employment/Population).

                                               A. Males

                       High School or Less                 Some College or More
                  Ages 18 - 39     Ages 40 - 64       Ages 18 - 39      Ages 40 - 64
                  (1)      (2)     (1)      (2)       (1)      (2)      (1)      (2)

      Implied     -0.17 -0.59      -0.99 -0.27       -0.31 0.14         -0.44 -0.46
     Contract    (0.99) (0.81)    (0.81) (0.65)     (0.48) (0.42)      (0.84) (0.58)
 Public Policy    0.74 -0.17       -0.21 -1.31       0.55 -0.38         -0.16 -0.60
                 (1.25) (0.62)    (0.90) (0.78)     (0.68) (0.37)      (0.63) (0.45)
  Good Faith      -0.21 -1.42      1.37 2.12         0.70 -0.39         0.56 0.53
                 (0.93) (1.37)    (1.30) (1.60)     (0.59) (1.04)      (0.48) (0.74)
           R2    0.627 0.707      0.589 0.650       0.580 0.644        0.484 0.539
            n       9,481            9,481             9,481              9,481
Region x year     No     Yes        No       Yes      No      Yes        No       Yes
    dummies
                                              B. Females

                       High School or Less                 Some College or More
                  Ages 18 - 39     Ages 40 - 64       Ages 18 - 39      Ages 40 - 64
                  (1)      (2)     (1)      (2)       (1)      (2)      (1)      (2)

      Implied     0.23 0.00        -3.39 -3.41       -0.75 -0.80        -2.40 -1.96
     Contract    (0.97) (0.72)    (1.64) (1.43)     (0.72) (0.62)      (0.79) (0.88)
 Public Policy    1.12 -0.41       1.07 0.99         0.15 -1.32         0.68 0.45
                 (1.28) (0.98)    (1.43) (1.03)     (0.67) (0.63)      (0.91) (0.57)
  Good Faith      -5.83 -4.06      1.52 0.69         -3.04 -2.09        -2.20 -0.85
                 (2.44) (2.89)    (1.29) (2.44)     (1.58) (1.72)      (0.96) (1.17)
           R2    0.757 0.802      0.761 0.799       0.680 0.725        0.706 0.738
            n       9,481            9,481             9,481              9,481
Region x year     No     Yes        No       Yes      No      Yes        No       Yes
    dummies

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error
correlation within each state. Separate regressions in each column contrast
employment of the specified demographic group in years five and six following
adoption of a doctrine relative to years two and one prior to adoption of the
doctrine.
                                                    Table 8:
 Replication of Dertouzos & Karoly, 1993, The Estimated Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on
                             Log State Employment, 1980 – 1987.

                                               Dependent Variable: 100 x Log State Employment

                               A. Replication of D-K's Instrumental              B. Replication of D-K using a
                                       Variables Estimates                  Difference-in-Difference Estimator

                                (1)      (2)          (3)       (4)        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)

 Implied Contract or Good      -4.44    -1.45       -14.53 -1.13          0.97        -0.75        -0.42     -1.46
  Faith (Contract) Doctrine   (1.26)   (0.94)       (2.39) (1.70)        (0.44)      (0.36)       (0.91)    (0.67)
   Broad Public Policy or      -3.00    -1.26        3.48     -5.83       -1.13       0.46         -0.15     0.00
Good Faith (Tort) Doctrine    (1.50)   (1.58)       (2.91)   (2.86)      (0.60)      (0.58)       (1.22)    (1.05)
     Narrow Public Policy      0.03     -0.55        -5.19    0.05        0.16        0.43         0.27      -0.73
                Doctrine      (0.94)   (0.96)       (1.82)   (1.73)      (0.40)      (0.32)       (0.74)    (0.56)
   100 x Log(Gross State       0.73     0.77                              0.76        0.77
                Product)      (0.02)   (0.03)                            (0.02)      (0.03)
 100 x ∆ Log(Gross State       -0.42    -0.40                             -0.42       -0.40
                Product)      (0.04)   (0.03)                            (0.04)      (0.03)
      State-Specific Time
 Trends included in model
                               No       Yes           No       Yes         No         Yes          No        Yes

  F-Test of significance of
 state-specific time trends
                                        0.00                   0.00                   0.00                   0.00

            R2                0.9997 0.9999         0.9989 0.9999        0.9997 0.9999           0.9987 0.9997

n =400 (50 states x 8 years). Column (1) tabulates authors' replication of Dertouzas and Karoly (1993),
Table 8-4, column (2), an instrumental variables estimate of the impact of exceptions to employment at
will on log state employment. Columns (2) - (4) test the sensitivity of the D&K findings to minor
specification checks. Columns (5) - (8) estimate these models using a difference-in-difference estimator.
Following D&K, estimates are unweighted, and OLS standard errors are not adjusted for instrumentation
of employment at will exceptions. Instruments include: whether a state has a right to work statute,
whether a state has a republican governor, the percentage change in lawyers per capita, the percentage
of neighboring states recognizing each doctrine and the square of this measure, the percentage
unionized, the change in percentage unionized, and the change in the percentage unemployment.
                                                                                       Table 9:
                            Robustness Tests of the Impact of State Common Law Exceptions on Employment to Population:
      Using Legal Classifications of Autor, Donohue Scwab, Morriss, Dertouzos and Karoly, Walsh and Schwarz, and Walsh and Schwarz Corrected.

                                                                                      Dependent Variable: 100 x ln(Employment/Population)

                        A. Baseline: ADS      B. Comparison with Morriss,                    C. Comparison with D&K,                   D. Comparison with Walsh & Schwarz,
                           1978 - 1999            Years: 1978 - 1989                            Years: 1980 - 1987                             Years: 1978 - 1994

                                                  ADS                 Morriss, 1995          ADS                 D&K, 1992           ADS                 W&S         W&S Corrected

                          (1)     (2)       (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)     (1)         (2)           (3)    (4)    (1)         (2)     (3)         (4)    (5)     (6)

                         -0.59 -0.92        -0.95 -1.18           -0.92 -1.27          -1.08 -1.33           0.04 -0.68        -0.58 -1.34        0.41 0.10           -0.11 -0.86
     Implied Contract
                        (0.30) (0.33)      (0.30) (0.37)         (0.30) (0.38)        (0.35) (0.42)         (0.29) (0.38)     (0.30) (0.34)      (0.29) (0.32)       (0.30) (0.37)
                         0.45 0.36          -0.31 -0.26           -0.33 -0.28          -0.40 -0.55           -0.51 -0.30       0.40 -0.18         0.38 -0.25          0.38 0.25
        Public Policy
                        (0.28) (0.31)      (0.29) (0.30)         (0.29) (0.29)        (0.37) (0.37)         (0.42) (0.42)     (0.29) (0.30)      (0.32) (0.31)       (0.30) (0.32)
                         -1.88 0.29         -1.23 -0.67           -0.97 -0.35          -1.35 -0.58           -0.76 -0.39       -1.68 0.69         -1.09 0.91          -1.18 1.22
          Good Faith
                        (0.54) (0.41)      (0.35) (0.43)         (0.36) (0.39)        (0.34) (0.42)         (0.35) (0.38)     (0.49) (0.42)      (0.57) (0.48)       (0.49) (0.46)

State & Demographic       No     Yes        No          Yes           No      Yes      No          Yes           No    Yes     No          Yes    No       Yes        No     Yes
  Group Time Trends

                  R2     0.91    0.94      0.94     0.95          0.94        0.95    0.95      0.96         0.95      0.96   0.92     0.95      0.92      0.95      0.92    0.95
                    n       8,800                             4,800                                      3,200                                       6,800

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for clustering of errors across demographic group observations within states by year. Eight demographic
groups are used in each state-year (male/female x high school or less/some college or more x ages 18-39/40-64). State, year, and demographic group main effects
are included in all models. Models in even numbered columns also contain linear state and demographic group specific time trends. Samples are calculated from
complete CPS monthly files for years 1978 to 1999. All regressions are weighted by gender/age/education group's share of total population in each year. Adoption of
legal doctrines is lagged by one year.
                                                                                    Appendix Table 1:
                                                                Wrongful Discharge Laws by Region, State and Year

                                                 Key:     C      Implied Contract         P     Public Policy           G     Good Faith

                     1978   1979   1980   1981    1982   1983     1984   1985   1986     1987    1988   1989    1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999
New England
 Connecticut                       PG     PG      PG     PG       PG     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG

 Maine                C      C      C      C       C      C        C      C         C     C       C      C       C      C       C      C      C      C      C      C      C      C
 Massachusetts        G      G     PG     PG      PG     PG       PG     PG         PG   PG     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 New Hampshire       PG     PG      P      P       P      P        P      P         P     P      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Rhode Island
 Vermont                                                                 CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
Middle Atlantic
 New Jersey                         P      P       P      P        P     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 New York                                          C      C        C      C         C     C       C      C       C      C       C      C      C      C      C      C      C      C
 Pennsylvania         P      P      P      P       P      P        P      P         P     P       P       P      P      P       P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
East North Central
 Illinois            CP     CP     CP     CP      CP     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Indiana              P      P      P      P       P      P        P      P         P    CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Michigan             P      P     CP     CP      CP     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Ohio                                              C      C        C      C         C     C       C      C      CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Wisconsin                          P      P       P      P        P     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
West North Central
 Iowa                                                                    P          P    CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Kansas                                    P       P      P       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Minnesota                                                C        C      C         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Missouri                                                 C        C      C         CP   CP       P       P      P      P       P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
 Nebraska                                                 C        C      C         C    CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 North Dakota                                                      C      C         C    CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 South Dakota                                             C        C      C         C     C      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
South Atlantic
 Delaware                                                                                                                      PG     PG     PG     PG     PG     PG     PG     PG
 Florida
 Georgia
 Maryland                                  P       P      P        P     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 North Carolina                                                           P         P     P       P       P      P      P       P      P      P      P      P      P      P      P
 South Carolina                                                           P         P    CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Virginia                                                 C        C     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 West Virginia        P      P      P      P       P      P        P      P         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
                                                                                    Appendix Table 1:
                                                                Wrongful Discharge Laws by Region, State and Year

                                                 Key:     C      Implied Contract         P     Public Policy           G     Good Faith

                     1978   1979   1980   1981    1982   1983     1984   1985   1986     1987    1988   1989    1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999

East South Central
 Alabama                                                                                  C       C      C       C      C       C      C      C      C      C      C      C      C
 Kentucky                                                CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Mississippi                                                                              P       P       P      P      P       P     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Tennessee                                 C       C      C       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
West South Central
 Arkansas                           P      P       P     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Louisiana                                                                                                                                                                G      G
 Oklahoma             C      C      C      C       C      C        C     CG         CG   CG      CG      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Texas                                                             P     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
Mountain
 Arizona                                                  C        C     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 Colorado                                                 C        C     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Idaho               CP     CP     CP     CP      CP     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 Montana                            P      P      PG     PG       PG     PG         PG   CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 Nevada                                                   C       CP     CP         CP   CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 New Mexico                         C      C       C     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Utah                                                                               C     C       C      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Wyoming                                                                  C         C     C       C      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
Pacific
 Alaska                                                  CG       CG     CG         CG   CG      CG     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 California          CP     CP     CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG CPG
 Hawaii                                     P   P   P   P   CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP  CP
 Oregon              CP     CP     CP     CP      CP     CP       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP
 Washington           C      C      C      C       C      C       CP     CP         CP   CP      CP      CP     CP     CP      CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP     CP


Source: Authors' analysis of case law.
                                            Appendix Table 2:
   Unweighted Difference-in-Difference Estimates of the Impact of Wrongful Discharge Laws on
  Employment and Earnings for Years 1978 - 1999: Contrasting Outcomes in Years Two and Three
            Following Adoption of Doctrine to Years One and Two Prior to Adoption

                                A. 100 X Employment Measure                  B. 100 x Log Earnings Measure
                            ln(Emp/Pop)             Emp/Pop           Median FT Weekly          Median Hourly
                           (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)         (1)       (2)            (3)      (4)

      Implied Contract     -1.34     -0.80     -0.82       -0.43       0.46    0.03            0.03    0.59
                          (0.38)    (0.29)    (0.27)      (0.18)      (0.50) (0.75)           (0.87) (0.59)
                    R2    0.889     0.893     0.901       0.905       0.825 0.820             0.817 0.824
                     n                   52,224                           48,424                  49,192
          Public Policy    -0.29     -0.60     -0.16       -0.38       -0.60    0.20           -0.69    -0.16
                          (0.40)    (0.29)    (0.27)      (0.19)      (0.54) (0.44)           (0.60) (0.51)
                    R2    0.887     0.891     0.898       0.902       0.815 0.821             0.813 0.819
                     n                   55,488                            51,264                  52,140
           Good Faith      -0.88     -0.80     -0.58       -0.51       0.04    1.43            0.17    1.97
                          (0.48)    (0.65)    (0.36)      (0.44)      (1.02) (0.89)           (1.20) (0.91)
                    R2    0.882     0.886     0.892       0.897       0.809 0.815             0.810 0.817
                     n                   55,296                           48,296                  49,088
Region x year dummies      No        Yes         No        Yes          No         Yes          No       Yes

Huber-White robust standard errors in parentheses allow for unrestricted error correlation within states.
Dependent variables, samples, and specificiations are identical to Table 1. Weighting differs. Each state-year-
month observation is given equal weight , with the 8 demographic cells within each state weighted
proportionate to their share of state population.
