                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                R&D AND THE PATENT PREMIUM

                                            Ashish Arora
                                           Marco Ceccagnoli
                                           Wesley M. Cohen

                                          Working Paper 9431
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9431


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




Corresponding author: Marco Ceccagnoli. A previous version of this research is part of Marco Ceccagnoli’s
Ph.D. dissertation (Carnegie Mellon University, 2001). We wish to thank Melissa Appleyard, James Bessen,
Tim Bresnahan, Richard Gold, Shane Greenstein, Bronwyn Hall, Thomas Hellmann, Rebecca Henderson,
Ulrich Kamecke, Mark Schankerman, Bill Vogt, Rosemarie Ziedonis for helpful comments and suggestions
and seminar participants at the American Economic Association 2002 meeting, NBER March 2002
productivity workshop, WZB-CEPR Berlin 2002 conference on Innovation Policy, Harvard Business School
2002 strategy conference, Academy of Management 2002 conference, Haas School at UC Berkeley, Santa
Anna School of Advanced Studies in Pisa, INSEAD, Duke University, and H. J. Heinz III School of Public
Policy and Management at Carnegie Mellon University. Financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation and the National Science Foundation (Award No. SES-9976384) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2003 by Ashish Arora, Marco Ceccagnoli, and Wesley M. Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including, © notice, is given to the source.
R&D and the Patent Premium
Ashish Arora, Marco Ceccagnoli, and Wesley M. Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 9431
January 2003
JEL No. O31, O32, O34

                                           ABSTRACT

       We analyze the effect of patenting on R&D with a model linking a firm's R&D effort with
its decision to patent, recognizing that R&D and patenting affect one another and are both driven
by many of the same factors. Using survey data for the U.S. manufacturing sector, we estimate the
increment to the value of an innovation realized by patenting it, and then analyze the effect on R&D
of changing that premium. Although patent protection is found to provide a positive premium on
average in only a few industries, our results also imply that it stimulates R&D across almost all
manufacturing industries, with the magnitude of that effect varying substantially.


Ashish Arora                                  Marco Ceccagnoli
Heinz School                                  Strategy Department
Carnegie Mellon University                    INSEAD
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                          77305 Fontainebleau
ashish@andrew.cmu.edu                         France
                                              marco.ceccagnoli@insead.edu

Wesley M. Cohen
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
Durham, North Carolina 27708
and NBER
wcohen@duke.edu
1. Introduction

Industrial R&D is widely seen as a key driver of productivity and economic growth. In 2000, U.S.

firms spent almost 180 billion dollars on industrial R&D, in large part because they expected to

appropriate a substantial part of the return. Many believe that patent rights are essential to the

protection of this return to innovation and are consequently a key inducement to R&D. This belief in

the importance of patents and intellectual property protection has, over the past twenty years,

underpinned a trend towards a strengthening of patent protection. In 1982, the Court of Appeals for

the Federal Circuit was established to make patent protection more uniform and, indirectly,

strengthen it. In the early 1980's we have also witnessed an expansion of what can be patented,

when the courts decided that life forms and software were both patentable. Patent coverage has

been recently extended to business methods as well. Partly stimulated by the shifting policy

environment, patents have also become a growing preoccupation of management (cf. Grindley and

Teece [1997]). Indeed, consultants are urging top management to exploit their patents more

aggressively—to the point of characterizing the untapped knowledge capital of firms as “Rembrandts

in the attic” (Rivette and Kline [2000]). Curiously enough, these changes in policy and managerial

practice and perception have proceeded despite a limited understanding of the effect of patents--no

less stronger patents--on R&D and, in turn, on technical advance.

In this paper, we begin to address this gap in the literature by analyzing the effect of patenting on

R&D in a two-step process. We first estimate what we call the patent premium, defined as the

proportional increment to the value of innovations realized by patenting them. We then analyze the

effect of changing the premium on R&D. To accomplish this, we develop a structural model linking a

firm’s R&D effort with its decision to patent, recognizing that R&D and patenting affect one another

and are both driven by many of the same factors. Our model accounts for the effect on R&D

incentives of both the direct appropriability incentive due to patents, and the impact on R&D

productivity of R&D-related information flows originating from other firms’ patent disclosures. It also

recognizes that stronger patents for a firm means that its rivals also enjoy stronger patent protection,

to the firm’s possible detriment.


                                                                                                          1
We estimate the model using unique data drawn from the 1994 Carnegie Mellon Survey on Industrial

R&D in the United States. The Carnegie Mellon Survey data provide measures of not only R&D and

patenting — which tend to be widely available — but also on firms’ evaluations of the effectiveness

of patents in protecting the returns to innovation, and a measure of the use of patents — namely the

share of innovations that are patented. The availability of a measure for firms’ patent propensities

implies that we can explicitly model the determinants of innovation separately from the determinants

of the decision to patent. In contrast, prior literature has either focused on either the production of

innovations (sometimes measured by the number of patents) or the patent decision (more typically,

the patent renewal decision).1 Thus, in an advance over the literature, we can empirically distinguish

between how the patent premium affects patenting and R&D, respectively.

Our analysis, however, only considers the impact of patenting on the R&D of incumbents. Thus, we

do not consider the impact of patenting on entry and the innovation that may be associated with it.

Indeed, in some industries such as drugs, patents may well promote entry by research intensive

firms, while in others, such as semiconductors and telecommunications equipment, pervasive cross

licensing of patent portfolios may well deter it (cf. Shapiro [2000]). Similarly, we do not consider the

role that patents may play in enhancing industry R&D efficiency by fostering the emergence of

specialized technology service or research firms, as observed, for example, in biotechnology,

semiconductors, scientific instruments and chemicals (cf. Arora, Fosfuri and Gambardella [2001]).

Though different in its objective, methods and data from our study, the empirical literature that

estimates the value of patent rights using patent renewal data (e.g., Pakes [1986], Schankerman

and Pakes [1986])—particularly Schankerman’s [1998] estimation of the value of the cash subsidy to

R&D conferred by patent protection in France--provides a valuable touchstone for that part of our

analysis in which we estimate the patent premium. Aside from our focus on the U.S. rather than


1
  Using data from a 1993 survey on the innovative activities of Europe's largest industrial firms, Arundel and Kabla
[1998] find that firms’ patent propensities (the percentage of innovations for which a firm applies for a patent) are
positively related to firm size and to the degree of patent effectiveness. Using the same data for the French firms,
Duguet and Kabla [1998], find that the information disclosed in a patent application lowers the firm’s propensity to
patent and the number of patent applications, while a desire to acquire a stronger position in technology negotiations
and the avoidance of infringement suits are associated with a higher number of patent applications. However, these
studies do not address the question of the relationship between patenting and R&D behavior.

                                                                                                                     2
Europe, our work differs from this earlier effort in that we develop and test a model that ties together

the R&D and patenting decisions. We share with Schankerman, however, the goal of estimating a

patent premium-cum-subsidy. Our respective datasets, samples and variables differ, however, in

important ways that lead us to expect different estimates.2 We are able, however, to reconcile our

results with those of Schankerman’s [1998], which is heartening given the differences in data and

approach.

The paper is organized as follows. Following a background section, in section 2 we present a model

of R&D and patenting behavior. Section 3 presents the empirical specification of the model to be

estimated. Section 4 describes the data and measures used for estimation, whereas section 5

discusses a variety of estimation issues. Section 6 contains estimation results and their discussion.

A conclusion follows in section 7.

Background

There are theoretical as well as empirical reasons to question whether patent rights advance

innovation in a substantial way in most industries. The rationale for patent protection is to augment

the incentives to invent by conferring the right to exclude others from making, using or selling the

innovation in exchange for the disclosure of the details of the patented innovation. Although the

prospect of monopoly rents should induce inventive effort, the costs of disclosure can more than

offset the prospective gains from patenting (cf. Horstmann et al. [1985]). In theory, the effect of

“stronger” patents on firms’ incentives to invest in innovation are less clear once one recognizes that

“stronger” patents mean that not only any given firm’s patents but also those of its rivals are

stronger. For example, policies that broaden the scope of patents do not unambiguously increase

the expected rents due to inventive activity when a rival working in the same technological domain

may, as a consequence, be able to limit a firm’s ability to commercialize its innovations (cf. Jaffe


2
  For example, while offering many advantages, Schankerman’s use of patent renewal data mean that his estimates
are conditioned upon firms having already patented, and therefore cannot consider costs that would tend to affect the
initial decision to patent but not renewal, such as those associated with patent disclosures. In contrast, our sample
permits a consideration of the initial decision to patent. Also, we allow a firm to file multiple patents for an innovation
(i.e., a new or improved product or process) as distinct from the common assumption of one patent per invention.
This distinction turns out to be important for interpreting our results and reconciling ours with his.

                                                                                                                          3
[2000], Gallini [2002]). Merges and Nelson [1990] and Scotchmer [1991] further argue that broad

patent protection may slow the rate of technical change by impeding subsequent innovations where

technologies develop cumulatively.

Empirical work also suggests that the inducement provided by patents for innovation is small. The

empirical studies of Scherer et al [1959], Taylor and Silberston [1973], and Mansfield [1986] suggest

that patent protection may not be an essential stimulus for the generation of innovation in most

industries. Levin et al. [1987] and, more recently, Cohen et al. [2000] suggest that in most industries

patents are less featured than other means of protecting innovations, such as first mover

advantages or secrecy.

Other concerns have been raised. Lerner [1995] suggests that patent litigation is especially

burdensome for small firms and startups with less access to finance, conceivably undermining their

contributions to technical advance. Heller and Eisenberg [1998] have claimed that in the domain of

genetics, patentability has been extended to such fine-grained notions of invention that the patents—

and patent owners--covering any new product innovation may now be so numerous that the

negotiations necessary to commercialization may well break down. Indeed, Cohen et al. [2000]

suggest that in industries such as electronics there can be hundreds of patentable elements in one

product, with the consequence that no one firm is likely to hold all the rights necessary for a

product’s commercialization. As argued by Cohen et al. [2000] for “complex product” industries

generally and Hall and Ziedonis [2001] for the semiconductor industry in particular, such mutual

dependence commonly spawns extensive cross-licensing. Although the kind of breakdown

suggested by Heller and Eisenberg does not occur in these industries, the prospect of extensive

cross-licensing, and the associated use of patents as bargaining chips may stimulate patent portfolio

races among industry incumbents that can act as a barrier to entry to firms that possess relatively

few patents.

We should not, therefore, assume that patent rights necessarily induce innovation. Nor, however,

should we assume the contrary. First, that patents are less featured than other means of protecting

innovations in the majority of industries does not imply that they yield little return in those industries;

                                                                                                              4
their effect on R&D incentives may be considerable. Levin et al. [1987], Mansfield [1986], and Cohen

et al. [2000] also observe that in selected U.S. manufacturing industries, such as drugs or medical

equipment, patents are indeed critical to the protection of innovations. Moreover, in contrast to the

findings for the U.S., Japanese firms report patents to be among the most important means of

protecting their innovations (Cohen et al. [2002]).

2. A firm level model of R&D and patenting

We focus on a typical product innovation that is the output of an R&D project. We also assume that

such a product innovation may have multiple patentable elements. Figure 1 provides a schematic

representation of our model of the decision to patent, to invest in R&D, and the structure of payoffs.

If a firm applies for patent protection it earns xijvi - c, where the subscript i indexes firms (i=1,…,n),

and j indexes innovations (j=1,…,m). The patent premium is defined as the incremental payoff due to

patent protection as compared to the value of an innovation without patent protection, vi.3 A patent

premium less than one would actually reflect an expected loss, possibly because information

disclosure costs may be large relative to benefits. We assume that the patent premium, xij, has a

component, εij, that varies across innovations within a firm, and is normally distributed with variance

σ2, and a fixed, firm specific component, µi. The patent premium, xij=εij+µi, is thus normally

distributed with mean µi and variance σ2 (cf. Figure 2a).

The patent premium will likely vary across innovations within a firm. For example, some patents are

easier to invent around than others. Moreover, the premium may vary depending on how a firm

intends to use a given patent, including, for example, as a basis for licensing or perhaps as a

bargaining chip in a cross-licensing negotiation. Our specification also assumes, implicitly, that

differences in the expected probability that patent protection will be obtained are incorporated in the

patent premium itself.




3
 For example, xij=1.2 means that the value from patenting an innovation is 20% higher than the value without a
patent, gross of the cost of applying for patent protection.

                                                                                                                 5
We do not allow for unobserved heterogeneity in the value of an innovation without patent protection

across firms, nor across innovations within a firm.4 Also, we assume c to be constant across firms

and across innovations. The reasons and the implications are discussed in section 5.4 below.

In light of data limitations and for analytic tractability, we also do not model strategic interactions

between rivals, and their possible impact on the patent premium and the value of an innovation

without patent protection. However, the model incorporates the indirect competitive effects of rivals’

patenting. To the extent that patents held by others reduce the returns from patenting a particular

innovation, the own patent premium, xij, should be lower. Our empirical specification also controls for

the effect of rivals’ patents by including a measure of rivals’ patent effectiveness among the

determinants of the value of an innovation when not patented.

2.1. The decision to patent

Let y be a binary variable taking the value of 1 if, given an innovation, a firm applies for patent

protection and zero otherwise. We assume that the firm observes xij , the patent premium specific to

the innovation. Given an innovation, y = 1 if the expected net benefit from patenting is greater than

the expected net benefit without patenting, i.e:

(1)          y = 1 if and only if (ε ij + µ i )v i − c > v i ,

If πij is the probability of applying for patent protection given an innovation, (1) implies that

                                       c                            c             
                                                                                           µ −1 c
(2)         π ij = E ( y = 1) = 1 − F    + 1 − µ i  = Pr  ε ij >                = Φ(Z i )
                                                                          + 1 − µ i  = Φ i   −
                                       vi                           vi                 σ     σv i
where Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function of εij, σ its standard deviation, and
           µ i − 1 c . With data grouped at the firm level, the percentage of innovations for which a firm
    Zi =          −
              σ     σv i
applies for patent protection, πi (i.e., its patent propensity), equals:
(3)          π i = Φ(Z i ) + η ip
with ηip representing sampling error. Note that we allow firms to file for more than one patent per

innovation. Thus, patent propensity is understood as the probability of applying for at least one

patent conditional on an innovation.


4
    We can allow for both kinds of heterogeneity in vi in a restricted version of our model, as discussed in Section 5.4.

                                                                                                                            6
Though we assume that the premium is normally distributed, the observed distribution of patent

premia, xij*, is truncated normal and positively skewed, as shown in Fig. 2b, where 1+c/vi is the cut-

off value for applying for patent protection, and µ*i is the mean of the conditional distribution. Thus,

our specification is consistent with the finding reported in the literature that the distribution of patent

values is positively skewed (e.g., Scherer and Harhoff [2000]). Figures 2a and 2b also illustrate the

point that even when the average patent premium µi is less than unity, a firm may still patent a

fraction of its innovations. Put differently, even if patent protection is not profitable for most of a firm’s

innovations, this does not imply that patent protection is not valuable to the firm. Rather, a firm would

tend to apply for patent protection for a minority of its innovations, as described in equation (2).

2.2. The production of innovations

The innovation production function is specified as:

(4)       mi = dri β e si + ηim + ηˆim

where mi is the number of innovations, ri is the R&D expenditure, d is a constant scale parameter,

and si are the factors affecting the average productivity of R&D, such as information flows from other

firms, universities and government research labs, and β is the elasticity of the number of innovations

with respect to R&D. We also assume that other unobserved firm-specific factors affect the

productivity of R&D. In particular, η im and   η̂im are i.i.d. normal errors, with zero mean and variance

σ η2 and σ η2ˆ , respectively. The former is observed by the firm but not the econometrician, whereas
      m        m




the latter is unobserved by both the firm and the econometrician and represents the stochastic

component affecting the R&D process.

2.3. The optimal level of R&D

The firm maximizes the expected profit from its innovative activity, that is the expected payoff per

innovation, hi, multiplied by the expected number of innovations, E(mi), net of the cost of R&D,

measured as the dollars spent on R&D, ri. Thus, the firm’s objective is:

(5)       Max [hi E(mi) - ri],
          ri


                                                                                                              7
                                                        ση2ˆ
with E (mi ) = dr i β e ω +si +ηim and ω =                  m   ; hi, the expected value per innovation, can be expressed as
                                                          2

a function of the value of the innovation and the payoff from patenting, weighted by the probabilities

of applying for a patent and not applying, where the decision to patent is made optimally after

observing the patent premium, xij:

                                                                    c
                                                                       +1− µ i
                      ∞                                             vi

(6)       hi =
                 c
                      ∫ [(ε   ij                 ]
                                   + µ i )vi − c φ (ε ij )dε ij +       ∫ v φ (ε
                                                                       −∞
                                                                            i          ε = Φ(Z i )( µ i*vi − c) + (1 − Φ(Z i ))vi
                                                                                   ij )d ij

                    +1− µ i
                 vi


where φ(εij) is the standard normal p.d.f. of εij, and µ*i is the mean of the “conditional patent premium”

distribution:

                              c                      φ (− Z i ) 
(7)       µi* = µi + E (ε ij | ε ij >
                                 + 1 − µi ) = µi + σ            
                              vi                      Φ(Z i ) 
With further simplification and substitutions we obtain:

                                            1
(8)      hi = σv i φ (− Z i ) + Φ(Z i )Z i + 
                                            σ
The equilibrium level of R&D for firm i is found by solving (5):


                  [                             ]
                                                  1
(9)       ri = β dh i e ω + s i +η im            1− β


The first and the second order conditions imply 0<β<1, implying diminishing returns to R&D.5

3. Unobserved variables and empirical specification

We model the innovation-specific random component of the patent premium, εij, as a latent variable

observed by the firm at the time of patenting, but not the econometrician. We observe the patent

propensity, the total number of patent applications and the R&D investments of the firm. We do not

observe the other firm and innovation specific variables: cost of patenting, value of an innovation, the

productivity of R&D, the firm specific average patent premium, and the number of innovations. We

do have R&D lab, firm and industry specific cross-section data. Accordingly, we specify the

estimating equations as follows.




                                                                                                                                    8
3.1. Number of innovations

We first transform the innovation equation into an estimable relationship. We thus multiply both sides

of the innovation production function (4) by the firm patent propensity,                π i , and obtain an equation

explaining the number of patent applications, ai:

                            β    si + ηim + ηˆim
(10)         ai = π i ki dri e
with ki≥1 being the number of patent applications per innovation. We have measures of both patent

propensity and the number of patent applications for all firms in our sample, including those who did

not apply for patent protection, for whom both ai and π i are simply zero. We do not observe the

average number of patent applications per innovation, ki, and thus set ki=Kκ, where K represents

industry dummies and κ is a vector of unknown parameters to be estimated. Thus, ki varies only

across industries.

3.2. The patent premium

We do not observe µi, the firm-specific component of the patent premium. We thus treat it as a firm-

specific constant to be estimated. To do so, we use a self-reported measure of the percentage of a

firm’s innovations for which patent protection was rated effective. This measure groups all firms into

one of five patent effectiveness classes. In the empirical analysis, discussed in section 4 below, we

assume that firms in a given patent effectiveness class have the same average patent premium, µi.

We also allow for possible measurement error and the possibility that our measure of patent

effectiveness is correlated with other unobserved factors affecting R&D productivity and estimate a

specification where we instrument for patent effectiveness.

3.3. The value of an innovation, and the cost of applying for a patent

We do not observe the value of the innovation if not patented, vi, nor the cost of applying for patent

protection c. Accordingly we set vi=Vα, where V represents vectors of firm and industry

characteristics and α a vector of unknown parameters to be estimated. We also set the cost of


                                        ω + s +η                                                     ω + s + ηim
                                                                                                          i
    The f.o.c. for (5) is β r β − 1dh e          im − 1 = 0 , and the S.O.C. is (β − 1)β r β − 2dh e
5
                                             i                                                                   <0
                             i       i                                                    i       i
                                                                                                                       9
protection c=δ, a constant to be estimated. We assume c includes the patent application fees, legal

fees for drafting and prosecuting patent applications and the opportunity cost of the time of the R&D

engineers and scientists who help draft the patent application. Moreover, as noted above, the firm

may apply for more than one patent per innovation.

3.4. Other factors affecting R&D productivity

R&D productivity is assumed to be a function of firm and industry specific factors such as the

underlying scientific and technological knowledge base and information flows from other firms and

universities (see Jaffe [1986] and Cohen [1995], among others). More formally, we set:

(11)     si = λ1Si1+ λ2Si2 + λ3Si3 ,

where the λ ‘s are parameters to be estimated and S i1, S2i, and S3i are firm specific variables:

S i1 :   vector of organizational characteristics conditioning the firm’s R&D productivity;
S i2:    measure of information flows from other firms (rivals, suppliers, customers, other);
S i3:    measure of information flows from universities and government research labs.

We also allow for unobserved firm-specific capabilities to affect both the production of innovations

and the knowledge spillovers benefiting the R&D lab. More specifically, the scientific and technical

capabilities of the lab’s researchers, which are observed by the firm but not the econometrician and

captured by ηim in (4), are likely to be correlated with the amount of incoming information flows from

firms and universities, Si2 and Si3. In the subsequent model estimation we instrument for both types

of flows. Moreover, since patents disclose information and thus contribute to the stock of potentially

useful technological knowledge, we include a measure of information flows due to patent disclosures

to instrument for spillovers.

3.5. The system of equations to be estimated

Taking logs of the R&D and patent equations, (9) and (10) respectively, and using the patent

propensity equation (3), we obtain an estimable system of non-linear simultaneous equations6:




6
 We include the non-patentees because they contribute to estimation of the patent propensity and the R&D
equation, but not the second equation in (12). Indeed, for non-patentees both sides of equation (10) are null.

                                                                                                                 10
                         µ −1       c 
              π = Φ i            −         +η
               i         σ         σv        ip
(12)                                 i 
                log a i − log π i = (log k i + log d ) + s i + β log r i + η ia
               

                          1− β
                                 (
                log r = 1 γ + logh + s +η
                                          i     )
                                                 i    ir
               
where:
v i = Vα , c = δ , s i = S λ ;
γ = log β + log d + ω;
η ia = η im + ηˆ im + ξ ia ;
          1
η ir =        η im +ξ ir ;
         1− β

ξ ia , ξ ir represent measurement error in the product patent application and product R&D measures

respectively and ηip represents sampling error.

The relationships between the endogenous and exogenous variables are summarized in Figure 3,

which shows how the decision to patent and to invest in R&D are jointly determined. Estimation of

the three equations as a system allows the estimation of key parameters, such as σ, as well as the

separate identification of the parameters associated with the cost of patent protection and the value

of an innovation.7 Since thes equations have a number of common parameters, estimating them

together also provides greater efficiency in estimation.

4. Data and measures

We use data from the Carnegie Mellon survey (CMS) on industrial R&D (Cohen, W., Nelson, R., and

J. Walsh [2000]).8 The population sampled is that of all R&D labs located in the U.S. conducting

R&D in manufacturing industries as a part of a manufacturing firm. The sample was randomly drawn

from the eligible labs listed in the Directory of American Research and Technology (Bowker [1995])

or belonging to firms listed in Standard and Poor's Compustat, stratified by 3-digit SIC industry. Valid

responses were received from 1,478 R&D units, with a response rate of 54%.9 The respondents

were R&D lab managers who were asked to answer questions with reference to the "focus industry"


7
  We discuss system versus single equation estimation in the next section.
8
  The survey was administered in 1994 by sending questionnaires by mail and conducting follow-ups by telephone.
See Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh [2000].
9
  The raw response rate was 46%. A non-respondent survey found, however, that 28% of the non-respondents in the
U.S. were not in the target population (for example, they did no manufacturing). After correcting the sample size
accordingly for ineligible cases, the U.S. response rate was adjusted upward to 54%.

                                                                                                               11
of their R&D unit, where focus industry was defined as the principal industry for which the unit was

conducting its R&D. The data refer to the 1991-’93 period.

In our theory above, we have taken the “firm” as our unit of analysis and shall continue to do so to

simplify exposition. However, the empirical unit of analysis is the business unit within a parent firm,

operating in the “focus industry” of the responding R&D lab. In the empirical analysis, we explicitly

distinguish between business unit and firm level measures. Indeed, as discussed below, we exploit

the different industry sectors to which the business unit and the parent firm belong to develop

instruments for reported patent effectiveness.

For the analysis we restricted the sample to firms with business units with 10 or more employees.

After dropping observations with missing data for the variables of interest, we obtain a sample of 737

R&D units.10 This sample includes firms ranging from fewer than 10 to over 700,000 employees, with

annual sales ranging from more than $100,000 to over $130 billion. The median firm has 3,000

employees and annual sales of over $500 million. The average firm has 21,841 employees and

sales of $4.3 billion. The average firm R&D intensity (R&D dollars divided by total sales) is 5.2%.

The business units range from 10 employees to 448,000, with annual sales from zero to about $90

billion. The median business unit has 550 employees and $100 million in sales. The average

business unit has 6,168 employees and sales of about $1 billion. Table 1 provides summary

statistics for the variables used for estimation.


4.1. Measures of the endogenous variables

PRODUCT R&D: Recall that we estimate the model for the case of product innovations. To compute

the product R&D expenditures we multiply company-financed R&D unit expenditures in dollars in the

most recent fiscal year by the percentage of the R&D unit’s effort devoted to new or improved

products. The sample average product R&D expenditure for a business unit is about $8 million.




10
  The sample of 737 observations also reflects the exclusion of 6 R&D units reporting more than 20 patent
applications per million dollars of R&D, (the 99th percentile value of the distribution).

                                                                                                            12
PRODUCT PATENT PROPENSITY: R&D managers were asked to state the percentage of R&D

unit’s product innovations in the 1991-’93 period for which they applied for patent protection. Patent

propensities in the sample range from zero to 100%, with a simple, unweighted mean of 32%.

PRODUCT PATENT APPLICATIONS: R&D managers were also asked to state the total number of

patent applications generated by the R&D lab during 1991-‘93. To calculate the annual number of

product patent applications we first multiply the total number of patent applications by an adjustment

factor based on survey reported measures of the percentage of R&D unit effort devoted to product

innovations and the reported product and process patent propensities, as described in the appendix.

The resulting number is then divided by three, yielding the annual number of product patent

applications, whose sample average is 6.4, with actual values ranging from zero to 283.


4.2. The patent premium

EFFECTIVENESS OF PATENT PROTECTION: Respondents were asked to indicate the

percentage of their product innovations for which patent protection had been effective in protecting

their firm's competitive advantage from those innovations during the prior three years. There were

five mutually exclusive response categories. We further assume that all respondents reporting the

same level of patent effectiveness have a common (unknown and to be estimated) value of µi. In

particular, we can set:

        µi −1
(13)          = τ1Ti1+ τ2Ti2 + τ3Ti3 + τ4Ti4 + τ5Ti5
         σ

with the τ's being five coefficients to be estimated, and the T’s dummy variables defined as:

Ti1 =1 if patent protection was rated effective for 0-10% of the firm’s product innovations,
 = 0 otherwise;
Ti2 =1 if patent protection was rated effective for 11-40% of the firm’s product innovations,
 = 0 otherwise;
Ti3 =1 if patent protection was rated effective for 41-60% of the firm’s product innovations,
 = 0 otherwise;
Ti4 =1 if patent protection was rated effective for 61-90% of the firm’s product innovations,
 = 0 otherwise;
Ti5 =1 if patent protection was rated effective for over 90% of the firm’s product innovations,
 = 0 otherwise.


                                                                                                       13
Thus each coefficient reflects one of five discrete levels of the average patent premium:

(14)    µ1 = τ1σ + 1 ; µ 2 = τ 2 σ + 1 ; µ3 = τ 3 σ + 1 ; µ 4 = τ 4 σ + 1 ; µ5 = τ 5 σ + 1 .


Note the importance of σ (the standard deviation of the distribution of the patent premium within

firms) for the estimate of the patent premium. We initially assume σ to be uniform across firms and

industries but later relax this assumption by allowing for inter-industry differences in σ.

Since our analysis hinges upon our measurement of patent effectiveness, it is worth considering the

interpretation and limitations of our survey-based measure. Since our setup assumes that the patent

premium reflects all the ways in which a firm profits from its patents, there is some concern about

whether the reported effectiveness scores accurately reflect this. As Cohen et al. [2000] find, firms

patent for reasons that often extend beyond directly profiting from a patented innovation through its

commercialization or licensing. In addition to the prevention of copying, firms also patent to prevent

rivals from patenting related innovations (i.e., “patent blocking”), use patents in negotiations, and to

prevent suits. Here, the issue is whether the respondents’ scoring of patent effectiveness misses

some of the latter, conventionally less appreciated, motives for patenting.

In a corollary exercise, we estimated an ordered probit model to analyze the relationship between

firms' reasons to patent and the respondents' patent effectiveness scores. We found that the

magnitude of the coefficient for conventional motives for patenting such as licensing are comparable

to those for less conventional reasons, such as using patents to induce rivals to participate in cross-

licensing negotiations or for building patent fences (i.e., patenting substitutes) around some core

innovation. However, one reason for patenting that had no significant effect on respondents patent

effectiveness scores was the motive of the prevention of infringement suits—that is, defensive

patenting. Thus, we suggest that with the possible exception of defensive patenting, our

effectiveness measure appears to reflect the broad range of uses of patents observed across the

manufacturing sector. It is still plausible that measurement error, in the form of misclassification

across the response scale categories, exists. The impact on our results of such measurement error

should be, however, mitigated when, as discussed below, we instrument for patent effectiveness.


                                                                                                        14
4.3. Value of an innovation

BUSINESS UNIT AND FIRM SIZE: Business unit size, measured by the natural logarithm of the

number of business unit employees, and overall firm size, measured by the natural logarithm of the

total employees of the lab’s parent firm, are both included as determinants of vi.11 Firms may profit

from an innovation by incorporating it in its own output, so that the payoff is increasing in business

unit output (Cohen and Klepper [1996]). We also include overall firm size since large overall size,

especially where it reflects greater diversification, may increase the expected value of an innovation

by providing economies of scope (cf. Cohen [1995] for a review of the R&D-size relationship, and

Cockburn and Henderson, [2001], showing that scope increases the success probability of drug

development R&D).

TOTAL NUMBER OF RIVALS AND TECHNOLOGICAL RIVALS: The effect of competition on the

expected returns to inventive activity is not clear a priori (e.g., Needham [1975]). On the one hand,

rivals capable of both generating innovations and capturing some of the benefits of incumbents’

R&D, what we refer to as technological rivals, are expected to diminish the value of a firm’s

innovation through imitation or introduction of a substitute product, once the potential positive effect

of entry on R&D productivity via incoming R&D spillovers is held constant. Competitive pressure

from the rest of the rivals, on the other hand, has ambiguous effects on R&D incentives. Although

average returns to R&D fall with the increase in the number of such rivals, marginal returns to R&D

may increase (Boone [2000], Ceccagnoli [2001]), implying that increases in the number of

competitors may be associated with increases in R&D.

The CMU survey provide measures for both the total number of rivals and technological rivals, as

categorical variables in the following ranges: 0,1-2, 3-5, 6-10, 11-20, or >20 competitors.12 These

responses were recoded to category midpoints. These variables vary across respondents within




11
   Business unit employees is reported by R&D managers from the CMU survey, whereas total firm employees were
obtained from sources such as Compustat, Dun and Bradstreet, Moody’s, and Ward’s.
12
   Technological rivals are defined in the CMS questionnaire as the number of U.S. competitors capable of
introducing competing innovations in time that can effectively diminish the respondent’s profits from an innovation,
with reference to the lab’s focus industry.

                                                                                                                  15
industries because they represent each respondent’s assessment of his or her focus industry

conditions, often reflecting a particular niche or market segment.

RIVALS’ PATENT EFFECTIVENESS: The effectiveness of rivals’ patents can have a variety of

effects on the value of R&D investments. The most obvious one is that by diminishing the

"technology space" in which a firm can work without infringing rivals’ patents, increases in the patent

effectiveness of a rival’s patents should reduce the expected value of the firm’s innovations. In terms

of our model, this would decrease R&D investments.

However, our model is in some sense the “reduced form” version of an equilibrium of more complex

market interactions in which increases in rival patent effectiveness may spawn offsetting incentive

effects. For example, if one considers the strategic interactions characteristic of patent races, an

increase in the effectiveness of rivals’ patents may actually increase the marginal payoff to own R&D

by increasing rival R&D (cf. Reinganum [1989]). In the end, we can only hope to estimate a “net”

effect and have no clear prior on the qualitative impact of rival patent effectiveness. Nonetheless, we

clearly need to control for such an effect and accordingly, we include, among the determinants of vi,

the % of firms in an industry - excluding the respondent - in each of the five patent effectiveness

classes, thus allowing this measure to vary across respondents in an industry.13

GLOBAL, FOREIGN, PUBLIC: We include binary variables indicating whether the firm owning the

lab is GLOBAL (sells products in Japan or Europe), is FOREIGN (the respondent R&D lab is located

in the U.S. but the parent firm is located abroad), or it is PUBLIC (publicly traded companies), as

controls, to reflect possible differences in market opportunities and cost of capital.

INDUSTRY FIXED EFFECTS: We include 19 industry dummy variables to control for industry-level

effects of demand and technological opportunity in vi, constructed using the SIC code assigned to

the focus industry of each respondent, where focus industry was defined as the principal industry for

which the unit was conducting its R&D. The dummies are based on industry groupings described in

table A1 in the appendix.




                                                                                                       16
4.4. Factors affecting R&D productivity

INFORMATION FLOWS FROM OTHER FIRMS: We do not directly measure information flows from

rivals, and other firms such as suppliers and customers. However, the CMS contains several

variables reflecting two key dimensions of the spillover mechanism: a) the frequency with which a

respondent R&D lab obtains useful technical information from, respectively, rivals, customers and

suppliers in the U.S.; b) the contribution of information flows from rivals, customers, and suppliers to

suggesting or completing R&D projects. We employed factor analysis to develop a single factor-

based measure of information flows from other firms. The Appendix provides the details.

In an earlier version of this paper, we treated information flows from other firms as the dependent

variable in an additional fourth equation in our system to highlight a possible positive impact on own

R&D productivity of the disclosures associated with patents. However, we found that patent

disclosures appeared to have no measurable impact on information flows from other firms, and

therefore no measurable effect on R&D productivity. It is unclear whether patent disclosures truly

have little effect on the information flows from others that affect firms’ R&D productivity, or whether

the lack of an observable effect reflects that our measures are too imprecise to discern it. We do not

specify a fourth equation but we do continue to treat information flows from other firms as potentially

correlated with the error terms in both the patent application and R&D equations.

INFORMATION FLOWS FROM UNIVERSITIES: We lack a direct measure here as well. The CMS

provides measures which reflect two key dimensions of this variable: a) the frequency with which the

R&D lab obtains useful technical information from universities or government research labs in the

U.S.; b) the contribution of information flows from universities or government research labs to

suggesting or completing R&D projects. We construct a single factor-based measure of flows from

universities, as described in the Appendix. We also instrument for this variable, as explained below.

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN ORGANIZATION: We include a measure of one feature of the

way in which the R&D process is managed within the firm, namely a dummy variable indicating


13
     Using alternative measures, such as the average patent effectiveness (computed using categorical range


                                                                                                              17
whether computer network facilities are used within the firm to facilitate the interaction between R&D

and other functions. This variable is intended to reflect progressive managerial practices more

generally and should increase si and, in turn, R&D productivity.14


5. Estimation
We estimate our non-linear system of equations (12) with the method of nonlinear three stage least

squares (NL3SLS ) using the sample of 737 observations, imposing the cross-equation restrictions15.


5.1 Inter-industry versus intra-industry sources of variation
We allow vi, the value of an innovation, to have an industry-specific fixed effect. Similarly, the patent

application equation allows for the average number of patents per innovation to vary across

industries. Given the inclusion of these industry fixed effects in these two equations of our structural

model, each of our estimating equations has at least one complete set of industry dummies. One

may nonetheless wonder whether our results are driven primarily by inter-industry variation in key

variables. Cross-industry variation is indeed important, but as table 2 shows, there is very significant

intra-industry variation in our key variables as well. Indeed, for patent applications, R&D, patent

propensity and patent effectiveness, cross-industry variation represents less than 20% of the total

variation.16 Thus, our results do not primarily reflect inter-industry differences in these key variables.


5.2 Sources of variation in patent effectiveness

Another concern for estimation is that sources of variation in patent effectiveness across

respondents within an industry may be correlated with unobserved variations in R&D productivity

and spillovers. It is plausible, for example, that managers who manage their patent holdings in a


midpoints) at the industry level (excluding the respondent) does not make a difference to the results.
14
   We experimented with measures of other characteristics of the R&D organization within firms, namely whether the
firm rotated their R&D personnel through other functional areas in the firm, such as marketing, and whether the firm
used project-teams with cross-functional participation.
15
   NL3SLS is a moments type estimator, where instrumental variables are used to form the moment equations
(Gallant [1987], p. 427-444). We used the exogenous variables included in the equations, additional instruments to be
explained below, and the squares and cross-products of the continuous exogenous variables as instruments.
16
   We also estimated the system of equation (12) within the drugs and chemicals industries (SIC 28), including
biotechnology companies, and the computer and electronics industries (SIC 36 – electronics and electrical
equipment, plus SIC 357 – computers, and selected firms belonging to 4-digit electronic instruments), thus allowing
all the parameters to vary across these two samples. The privately financed product R&D performed by these two
industry clusters amount to more than 60% of the total in our sample, although the smaller number of observations



                                                                                                                  18
more sophisticated way also manage their R&D expenditures more effectively, for example by

providing strong incentives to generate patentable innovations. Similarly, technical areas where

patent protection is more effective may also have more productive R&D because of their greater

proximity to science (Arora and Gambardella, 1994). Arguably, this may also increase spillovers

from universities and firms.

There is a related concern. Levin et al. [1987] and Cohen et al. [2000] point out that firms use

appropriability mechanisms, such as lead time and secrecy, in addition to patents. These other

mechanisms may be substitutes or complements for patenting.17 Thus systematic differences across

firms in the effectiveness of alternative appropriability mechanisms may also be a source of variation

in reported patented effectiveness. Insofar as these alternative mechanisms also condition vi, the

average value of an innovation, this may bias our estimate of the patent premium. Although we have

reported effectiveness scores for each of these alternative mechanisms, we do not have any

measure of their actual use--in contrast to patents, where we do observe use in the form of the

propensity to patent and numbers of patent applications. In a corollary analysis, we estimated a

model in which the effectiveness of other appropriation strategies, such as the use of secrecy or

lead-time advantage, were included among the determinants of v. There was no qualitative change

in the results, suggesting that, insofar as the use of such alternative strategies is correlated with their

reported effectiveness, any bias due to the omission of other strategies, is likely to be small.18

We also directly address the possibility that our patent effectiveness measure may be correlated with

the errors in the R&D and patent equations by instrumenting for patent effectiveness. To do so, we

exploit differences in the focus industry of the R&D lab (i.e., the industry sector of the business unit)

and the primary industry of which the parent firm. We posit that factors that condition patent



per sample (156 and 184 respectively) often results in large standard errors. In general, the estimates are similar to
those reported here and consistent with the idea that our results are not driven by inter-industry differences.
17
   An implication of this observation is that our estimate of the patent premium reflects the incremental payoff to
patenting when the firm optimally adjusts its use of other mechanisms. This is similar to estimating the long run
impact of a change in a given factor price on the profit function. This impact assumes that the firm optimally changes
not only the use of the factor whose price has changed, but also of the other factors inputs. Effectiveness measures
can, in this instance, be analogized to factor prices.
18
   Consistent with this result, Cohen et al. [2000] find no significant correlation between the effectiveness of patents
and that of any of the other appropriabilty mechanisms, such as secrecy or use of lead time advantage.

                                                                                                                      19
effectiveness and patenting behavior in the primary industry of the parent firm will reflect the firm’s

broad approach to intellectual property management, and thereby affect the perceived effectiveness

of patents in all the product markets in which the firm participates. We have in mind notions such as

how carefully scientists and researchers document their work; how skillfully the in-house lawyers

manage patent prosecution; and how effectively researchers and in-house lawyers communicate.

Simply put, our instrumentation strategy is based on the premise that a business unit whose parent

firm operates, for example, in the pharmaceutical industry, where sophisticated management of

intellectual property and a belief in its value is the norm, will perceive a higher effectiveness of

patents than an otherwise identical business unit whose parent firm is in textiles.

Although we do not have information about the management of intellectual property for the parent

firm of each R&D lab, roughly half of the responding business units belonged to an SIC different

from that of the primary SIC of the parent firm. We thus use industry averages of the patent

effectiveness and other survey-based dummy variables on the reasons to patent (and not to patent)

for the primary industry of the parent firm as instruments for each respondent patent premium

dummy class.19 We report estimates from the two specifications—one where we do not instrument

for the patent effectiveness variable and another where we do instrument. Both are qualitatively

similar. However, arguably, the endogenous patent effectiveness specification is theoretically more

defensible and we shall focus on those estimates.

5. 3 Endogeneity of the spillover measures

As noted, we instrument for information flows from other firms and universities. For information flows

from other firms, we use two instruments. The first measures the technology overlap with rivals’ R&D



19
   We use as instruments for the 5 patent effectiveness dummies, % of respondents in the industry (of the parent firm)
that have a positive value for the following ten indicator variables, available from the CMU survey: 1) the five patent
effectiveness indicator variables (five instruments); 2) whether the amount of information disclosed in a patent
application was a reason not to patent for a firm; 3) whether the ease of legally inventing around was a reason not to
patent; 4) whether the prevention of other firm's attempts to patent a related innovation ("patent blocking") was a
reason to patent; 5) whether the earning of licensing revenue was a reason to patent; 6) whether the prevention of
suits was a reason to patent. The R-squares from the first stage regression of the five patent effectiveness dummies
on the instruments are 0.26, 0.17, 0.14, 0.21,and 0.26 respectively. We also experimented with using predicted
patent effectiveness from an ordered probit regression of patent effectiveness on the above and other exogenous
variables as instruments for the actual patent effectiveness scores, with very similar results.

                                                                                                                    20
projects, which should increase information flows from other firms.20 As an additional instrument we

construct a survey-based measure of the exogenous stock of patent-related knowledge relevant to

the lab, which reflects information flows due to patent disclosures.21 To instrument for the university-

related information flows, we used the total R&D spending of doctoral granting institutions by state

and field of science and engineering22, assigned to each respondent according to the state in which

it is located and its reported rating of the importance of science and engineering field.23


5.4 Unobserved heterogeneity in the value of innovations across and within firms

Note that though we allow for unobserved firm heterogeneity in R&D productivity (and through that,

in the patent application equation), we do not permit unobserved heterogeneity across firms in vi.

Allowing for firm specific unobserved heterogeneity in vi would require us to move to maximum

likelihood type estimation method because it would imply additively non-separable error terms, thus

ruling out instrument variable based estimators. Maximum likelihood is an unattractive option

because the nonlinearities present in our model, simple as it is, in practice pose convergence

problems even for non-linear least squares estimation.


As noted above, we also do not allow for unobserved heterogeneity across innovations within a firm.

Since we do not observe innovation-specific characteristics, this seems like a sensible way to

proceed. In the same spirit, we assume a constant cost of applying for patent protection, although it


20
   The CMU survey asks a subjective assessment of the percent of projects started by the R&D unit with the same
technical goals as an R&D project conducted by at least one of its competitors. The responses categories are:
1=0%;2=1-25%;3=26-50%;4=51-75%;5=76-100%. Responses were then recoded to category midpoints.
21
   Each respondent is assigned the total number of R&D employees multiplied by the average patent propensity of the
industry for which the field of science rated the most important contribution to R&D is the same as that indicated by
the R&D lab. More formally, the instrument is constructed as follows: Qi=Σjaijpjrj with i=1,…,N, denoting R&D units; j
denoting industries; pj is the industry average product patent propensity; rj is the sum of R&D employees in industry j; aij
is a respondent specific dummy equal to 1 if wij = Wj , zero otherwise where: wij is a character variable representing the
lab’s reported field of science and engineering whose research findings contributed the most to its R&D activity during
the most recent three years (possible fields include Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Computer Science, Materials Science,
Medical and Health Science, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Mathematics); Wj
is the modal value of wij in industry j. All measures available from CMS.
22
   University R&D expenditures have been taken from 1993 NSF/SRS Survey of Scientific and Engineering
Expenditures at Universities and Colleges.
23
   The CMU science and engineering fields noted above have been aggregated taking average scores of their
importance to match the NSF publication more aggregated fields (engineering, physical sciences, math & computer
sciences, life sciences). The importance score assigned to each field is then used to compute a weighted average of
the university R&D spending by state to be assigned to each observation as an instrument for the survey based
measure of information flows from universities.

                                                                                                                         21
is plausible that this cost may vary across firms and even across innovations. Insofar as such

heterogeneity is significant, it may be picked up to some extent in the estimated variance of the

patent premium. To explore this possibility, we formulate and estimate a version of our model where

we allowed for unobserved heterogeneity across innovations and across firms.



In particular, we develop a model in which the cost of patent application is assumed to vary with the

value of the innovation, that is where we set cij=ρijvij and vij = ψij + vi χi, where ψij captures the

unobserved innovation-specific error in the value of the innovation and χi is an unobserved (by us)

firm specific error. If the error terms are assumed to be independent, we derive a tractable model

with unobserved heterogeneity across innovations within a firm and across firms in the net value of

an innovation. In this specification, the only change of consequence is that the patent propensity

equation contributes only to the estimation of the ratio of the patent premium and σ, and vi is

estimated only from the R&D equation. It is clear that with this specification, we can only identify the

patent premium net of the cost of patenting.24 Estimating this specification yields the same

qualitative results as those reported here. The absolute levels of the patent premia and the impact of

changes in the patent premium on R&D are, however, somewhat smaller.


5.5 Estimation of the constant terms in the patent application and R&D equations

Our model is estimated using a restricted version of the innovation production function, by setting d

equal to unity in (4). A violation of this restriction would imply that our estimates of ki, the number of

patent applications per innovation per firm, are only identified up to a scale parameter. The other

estimates of the model would not be affected and a violation of this assumption would not affect the

central results of the paper, with the exception of the constant in R&D equation. Indeed, to the extent

that d is not equal to unity, it will be incorporated by the constant ω in the R&D equation in (12).




24
  Specifically, an innovation is patented if xij vij -ρij vij > vij, which is equivalent to (xij-ρij-1) > 0. We define the net
                                                2
patent premium equal to xij-ρij=υij+νi ~N(νi ,συ ). Details of the model and estimation results are contained in the
appendix and also available at http://faculty.insead.edu/ceccagnoli/research/premiumapp.htm.

                                                                                                                                 22
We were also unable to estimate ω itself, the other component of the constant in the R&D equation,

possibly because vi and c both contain constant terms, in addition to σ itself, and the only source of

identification is the non-linearity in the functional form. We adopted two different approaches. The

first was to do a preliminary grid search on the value of ω. Assuming that d=1, our model suggests

that ω is bounded below by zero, but without an a priori upper bound the grid search cannot be

definitive. We find that the objective function is insensitive to values of ω ranging from 0 to 5. We

also find that virtually all structural parameter estimates and simulation results (such the impact on

R&D of changing patent effectiveness) are insensitive to the value of ω, except the cost of patent

application, c, and the estimated value of an innovation, vi. Even here, the ratio of the estimated

average value of an innovation to the cost of patenting is not sensitive to the value ofω. A second

approach is to assume that the different error components in the patent application equation are

independent, so that we can also bound the constant ω from above and use the grid search to

determine its value, as well as check the sensitivity of the results. We report here the results from

this latter procedure, which yields a value ω = 0.47.25

The upshot of the foregoing discussion is twofold. First, we estimate the number of patents per

innovation only up to a scale parameter. Second, the data do not permit us to estimate a constant

term unique to the R&D equation. This does not, however, affect the key structural parameter

estimates such as the patent premium or the elasticity of innovations with respect to R&D. Indeed,

only the estimated level of the average value of the innovation and the cost of patenting are sensitive

to the value of the constant term in the R&D equation. Thus, since the principal results of the paper,




25
     Under the assumption of independent errors, the estimated error of the patent applications equation is
Var(η ) = Var(η ) + Var(ηˆ ) + Var(ξ ) ,
                                which, divided by 2, represents an upper bound for ω = σηˆ / 2 . To actually estimate the
     ai        mi         mi        ai                                                     mi


upper bound we use an iterative procedure. We estimate the model setting ω = 0, and then calculate the upper bound
for ω using the estimates of the variance of the patent applications equation. Then we re-estimate the system and the
upper bound until the value converges. We thus find that ω is bounded between 0 and 0.47 for the endogenous
premium case and 0-0.48 for the exogenous case. Even in this case the grid search reveals that the objective
function is insensitive to these ranges, but either the lower bound or the upper bound are slightly more likely
according to the convergence measures. Given that ω is unlikely to be null for theoretical reasons, we set the
constant equal to the upper bound.

                                                                                                                       23
namely the patent premium and the impact of increasing the premium on R&D, depend chiefly on

the ratio of value to cost rather than on their levels, our main results are unaffected.




5.6 Other issues

Heteroscedasticity

The existence of a heteroscedastic sampling error in the patent propensity equation suggests the

use of heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors. One way to implement the correction is to

estimate the system with the generalized method of moments (GMM). However, we failed to get

convergence with GMM estimation. We thus estimated the model with NL3SLS, but the estimates

are not robust to heteroscedasticity. The use of logarithms in the patent and R&D equation should,

however, mitigate the problem.

Variance of the patent premium

Given the importance of the variance of the patent premium for our estimates, and the likelihood that

variation across innovation in the patent premium (for a given firm) may be systematically higher in

some industries (e.g., pharmaceuticals) than others (e.g., semiconductors), we also estimated a

specification allowing σ to vary across industries.

Outliers

Our sample already reflects the trimming of 1% of the observations with unrealistically high levels of

patents per million dollars of R&D investment. We also tried a more conservative trimming procedure

by excluding observations with patents per million dollars R&D above the median plus twice the

interquartile range. Estimation with the more conservative trimming procedure led to parameter

estimates that are similar to the one presented here.



6. Results

In this section, we first review single equation estimates of our model. We subsequently present the

estimates of the structural parameters, focusing on the elasticity of product innovations with respect

to R&D, the determinants of the value of an innovation, the determinants of R&D productivity and the

                                                                                                     24
cost of applying for patent protection. We then consider in detail the distribution of the estimated

patent premium and the impact of increasing the premium on both R&D and patent propensity.


6.1 Single equation estimates

Before moving to the structural estimates, we report the single equation OLS and IV estimates in

tables 3a and 3b. Note that since key parameters such as σ and µi are identified through cross

equation restrictions, the single equations cannot be directly compared to the corresponding

structural equations. We report these here to provide a sense of the robustness of some of the

estimates, especially for β and R&D elasticity, and to probe the sources of identification of some of

the key parameters.


Note that when the patent propensity equation is estimated alone, one cannot identify µi − 1 unless c
                                                                                           σ

is exogenously specified. We thus report the estimate obtained by setting Zi=Xβ in (3), where the X

includes the various determinants of the value of an innovation and the patent effectiveness

dummies, including a constant. From table 3a (first 2 columns), one can see that increasing patent

effectiveness implies an increase in patent propensity, although only the first three coefficients are

significantly different from one another, as is the case when we estimate the entire system, as

discussed below. Moreover, various elasticities, such as that of patent propensity with respect to

covariates such as business unit size, are close to those obtained from the system estimates.

The patent application equation (10) clearly shows that the marginal R&D productivity parameter, β,

is identified directly, not through cross equation restrictions. Table 3a shows the related single patent

applications equation estimates. In particular, we obtain an estimate of β of 0.57, consistent with

estimates of 0.53-0.55 obtained from the system, imposing all the cross equation restrictions.

Finally, since the R&D equation requires hi, the expected value of an innovation, we cannot estimate

corresponding structural parameters. We first estimated a reduced form linear relationship between

the log of R&D and all the variables included in the system (determinants of v and s and the patent

effectiveness dummies, including a full set of industry dummies). Results shown in table 3b, first two


                                                                                                         25
columns, show that increasing patent effectiveness increases R&D, although the fourth and fifth

effectiveness classes are not statistically different from each other. Moreover, an increase in patent

effectiveness from the lowest to the highest class is associated with an increase in predicted log

R&D by 0.6, reflecting about a 40% increase in R&D.26 Interestingly enough, our system estimates

imply an effect of a similar magnitude. Estimates of specifications of the R&D equation where we

control for patent propensity (table 3b, 3rd and 4th columns) show that increases in patent

effectiveness are associated with an increase in R&D even after controlling for patent propensity.27

The single equation estimates demonstrate the value of the estimating the system of equations and

using cross-equation restrictions to identify key parameters such as σ and µi. They also show that

the key results in this paper are not driven by the non-linearities that are inevitable in our structural

model. Specifically, we find that patent effectiveness tends to increase patent propensity and R&D

by a magnitude similar to that obtained from our system estimates.


6.2. Estimates of the structural parameters of the model

Table 4 shows the results of estimation of the nonlinear system (12) of three simultaneous equations

with cross-equation restrictions imposed. The table shows two sets of results, where the first

specification treats patent effectiveness as exogenous and the second specification instruments for

patent effectiveness. We will refer to these as the exogenous and endogenous premium

specifications, respectively. Unless otherwise noted, we focus on estimates from the specification

with endogenous premium, though the results from the exogenous premium specification are similar

in magnitude. In general, the specification with endogenous premium yields smaller estimated

responses of patenting and R&D to changes in the patent premium.




26
   This result is more clearly seen in a regression when all the five patent effectiveness class dummies are included
and the intercept term is dropped, unlike the specification reported in table 3 where we drop the first patent
effectiveness dummy and retain an intercept term.
27
   We tried several specifications with both patent propensity and patent effectiveness treated as exogenous and
endogenous variables with very similar results, although with exogenous patent effectiveness the impact on R&D is
stronger, consistent with the results of the system estimation.

                                                                                                                    26
The elasticity of product innovations w.r.t. R&D (β)

The elasticity of the number of innovations with respect to R&D (β) plays an important role in

conditioning the impact of changes in the patent premium on R&D in our subsequent simulation. The

smaller the elasticity, the more sharply the marginal productivity of R&D declines, and hence, the

less responsive R&D is to factors that affect the payoff from R&D, such as the patent premium. It is

reassuring therefore that this parameter is estimated with a high degree of precision and the point

estimate is robust across a wide variety of specifications. Our point estimate of 0.54 is consistent

with other studies that have looked at the relationship between patents and R&D (see for example

Adams [2000]). The 95% confidence intervals around the parameter estimates indicate limits of 0.43

and 0.64, with upper and lower bounds very similar for the two specifications.


The determinants of the value of an innovation, the cost of applying for patent protection, and R&D

productivity

Table 4 shows that both business unit size and firm size have a positive and significant effect on the

value of an innovation, but the effect of business unit size is more than twice as large, which is

qualitatively consistent with Cohen and Klepper [1996]. Being public and being global are also

associated with higher expected value per innovation. The hypothesized effects of the technological

opportunity variables on R&D productivity, notably information flows from universities and from other

firms, are largely confirmed, except in the endogenous specification where the coefficient estimate

for information flows from other firms is not significant.28 More technological rivals, holding the total

number of economic rivals constant, significantly decreases the value of an innovation, whereas an

increase in the number of total rivals, holding the number of technological rivals constant has a

negative effect, albeit insignificant.29




28
   In a prior version of this paper, where we explicitly introduce an equation explaining spillovers from other firms in
the system, the coefficient λ3 is significant at the 5% confidence level.
29
   These results are consistent with Ceccagnoli [2001], who analyzes the relationship between market structure and
R&D incentives, when only some firms are capable of R&D.

                                                                                                                       27
The impact of increasing rival patent effectiveness on vi is mixed and taken together, insignificant.30

As discussed in section 4.3, theory has conflicting predictions of the direction of the effect.

Measurement error is another concern. The other industry participants, whose patent effectiveness

scores are included in the computation of rival patent effectiveness, may not in fact be rivals.

Another possibility is that we are not able to clearly identify the separate effect of several industry

level factors, partly captured by the industry dummies and other variables, such as the number of

technological rivals, related to the focus industry.


The structural estimates imply that the average predicted value of an innovation without patent

protection, vi, is around $1 million, and the average predicted value of an innovation, hi, is about $1.5

million, whereas the estimated cost of patent application, c is $380,000. 31 As we have already noted,

the estimates of the levels of vi and c, but not their ratio, are sensitive to the values of constants that

we cannot pin down precisely.32 This is not surprising since we do not directly observe either the

value of an innovation or the cost of patenting.


We estimate the average number of patent applications per innovation, ki, introduced in equation

(10), to be 5.6, varying from a minimum of 2 in biotech and pharmaceuticals to about 8-9 in

semiconductors and transportation equipment. The only other empirical study we are aware of that

measures the number of patent applications per innovation is by Reitzig [2002], which is based on

data collected by the European Patent Office in 1994 from a survey of patentees (drawn from a

stratified random sample of European patents).33 Reitzig finds that the average number of patents


30
   The overall impact of the rival patent effectiveness variables on v, as measured by the function of the parameters
computed at the average of the sample (α8V8+α9V9+α10V10+α11V11, withV8-V11 representing the sample average of
the related variables), is not significantly different from zero.
31
   Adjusting for the average number of patent applications per innovation, the cost of per patent, is about $67,000
which, although still high, is more reasonable, because this includes both direct costs (patent filing fees, legal costs of
drafting and prosecuting patent applications) and some share of the indirect costs (information disclosure) of patent
application (cf. AIPLA [2001]). The grid search reveals that higher values of ω yield lower estimates of c, vi, and hi.
For ω =1.34 the cost of applying for patent protection is about $157,000, obtained in a previous version of this model.
32
   Specifically, the ratio of the expected value of an innovation to the cost of applying for patent protection is about 4
and the ratio of the expected value of an innovation without patent protection (vi) to the cost applying for patent
protection is about 2.9. The robustness of these ratios implies that key results involving the impact of patent
effectiveness on R&D investments and patent propensity are robust too.
33
   The patentees were asked if the individual patent referred to in the questionnaire was part of a group of related
patents used to protect a coherent invention, and if so, the size (number of patents) of the group. Patentees were
also asked to indicate the annual value of the individual patent on a cardinal scale.

                                                                                                                        28
per innovation is 5.35 (with a standard deviation of 21).34 Although both our and Reitzig’s findings on

the average number of patents per innovation are subject to a variety of qualifications, the

consistency in the point estimates is reassuring given that we estimate ki assuming the scale

parameter in the innovation production function is unity.


The distribution of the patent premium

As expected, respondents with higher patent effectiveness scores are characterized by higher patent

premium levels, as shown by the increasing value of the τ coefficients, with the exception of τ5 in the

endogenous premium case.35 One possibly anomalous result in the endogenous effectiveness

specification is that the premium for the lowest patent effectiveness class is negative (cf. 14).

Although it is conceivable that patenting can yield - through disclosure of valuable information - a

negative payoff (gross of the cost of patenting), this is unlikely.36 Instead, we suspect that this is due

to the higher point estimate of σ in the endogenous specification (1.28 versus 0.68), and points to

the need for more precise estimates of σ. This is discussed further below.

For each industry, one can compute the mean of the patent premium distribution, which we call the

unconditional expected patent premium, as well as the mean of the patent premium distribution for

patented innovations, called here the conditional expected patent premium. These means vary

across industries because the distribution of firms in the various patent effectiveness classes differs

across industries. Table 5 shows that the unconditional expected patent premium for the sample as

a whole is about 0.9 in the exogenous premium case and 0.5 in the endogenous one. Thus, the

expected value of the typical innovation if patented is between 10% and 50% lower than without

patent protection.




34
   His industry level findings are roughly consistent with ours except for the pharmaceutical industry, for which he
finds a substantially higher number of patent applications per innovation (between 5 and 6) than ours (about 2)..
35
   The formal test of the equality of the coefficients, not shown, is rejected for the first three coefficients (τ1, τ2, andτ3)
at the 5% confidence level. We cannot reject the null hypotheses that τ3 =τ4 or τ4 =τ5 , implying that firms that rated
patent protection as effective for more than 60% of their product innovations have similar patent premia.
36
   A negative unconditional premium simply implies that the innovation specific premium must be high for the
innovation to be patented.

                                                                                                                              29
The expected unconditional patent premium is greater than one across both specifications in the

health care related industries (biotech, drugs, medical instruments), whereas it is also greater or

equal to one in machinery and computers in the exogenous premium specification. Food and drink

even has a small negative unconditional expected patent premium because over 70% of the

respondents in that industry were in the lowest patent effectiveness class. To interpret these

numbers, note that the estimates of the unconditional and conditional premia do not net out the cost

of applying for patent protection. The estimated unconditional premium net of patenting costs is 0.17

and the net expected conditional premium 1.91, with industry differences entirely similar to the

pattern for the premium gross of costs.37

An average patent premium far less than unity confirms that the opportunity cost of patenting, such

as the cost of information disclosure and being “invented around” are substantial.38 This result both

confirms earlier findings but also marks an advance. Earlier studies (e.g., Levin et al. [1987], Cohen

et al. [2000]) had found that patents were not very effective except in selected industries. Our

estimates of the unconditional patent premium confirm that in most industries, patenting the typical

innovation is not profitable. However, even in these industries, some innovations are profitable to

patent, thus explaining why firms may rate patents as ineffective relative to alternative appropriability

mechanisms and yet file for patents themselves.

Although the typical innovation may not be profitable to patent, conditional on patenting an

innovation, the premium from patenting is substantial: As the last two columns of table 5 show,

conditional on having patented an innovation, firms expect to earn, gross of the cost of patent

application, between 75% to 125% more than if they had not patented those innovations. The

conditional premium is highest in industries such as biotechnology, medical instruments, and drugs

and medicines and the lowest in food and electronics. The variation across industries is, however,



37
   For the alternate specification where the value of innovations is allowed to differ within and across firms (discussed
in Section 5.4 above), our estimates of the unconditional premium and the expected conditional premium are a bit
lower, namely zero and 1.85, respectively.
38
   As a corollary result we find that respondents who indicated the amount of information disclosed in a patent
application or the ease of legally inventing around a patent as reasons not to patent have an estimated patent
premium 60% and 34% lower than those who did not report them, respectively.

                                                                                                                      30
low. There is much more variation across industries in the unconditional patent premium. This is

partly because the standard deviation of the patent premium distribution, σ, is assumed to be

common across industries. Also, if firms face similar costs of patenting, the expected premium

conditional on patenting ought to vary less than the unconditional premium.

Relaxing the assumption of uniform σ

Given the sensitivity of the patent premium estimates to σ, we explored specifications where σ was

allowed to vary by industry. The results implied that we could not reject the null hypothesis that σ

was the same in all sectors, except in the combined biotechnology- pharmaceutical sector.39 Thus,

we also estimated an additional specification, where σ was allowed to differ for bio-pharmaceuticals

sector, while all other sectors continue to have a common σ. This yields a point estimate of σ equal

to 1.19 in the manufacturing sector except the combined biotech-pharmaceutical industry sector,

whose value jumps instead to 5.96. For manufacturing as a whole, the unconditional patent

premium, µ, increases from 0.42 to 0.6 and the conditional premium increases from 2.25 to 2.44.

The increase in σ in drugs and biotechnology implies that for these industries, the patent premium

increases more sharply. The unconditional premium increases to 1.09 and 2.44, and the conditional

premium to 6.48 and 7.13 in drugs and biotechnology respectively. The impact of the premium on

patent propensity is sensitive to these differences in the variance of the patent premium distribution.

The impact of the premium on R&D is, in contrast, robust to changes in the estimate of σ.


6.3. The impact of patent protection on R&D and patent propensity

A key objective in estimating the structural model is to assess not only the value of patent protection

but also the extent to which it provides incentives for firms to invest in R&D. To our knowledge, ours


39
  We initially let σ vary across the 19 industry groups. However, the loss of degrees of freedom and identification
problems due to inclusion of industry dummies in multiple variables in the R&D equation greatly reduced the fit of the
estimates. We moved to a more aggregate, 2 digit SIC industry grouping, with the additional criterion of requiring at
least 50 observations per group, resulting in a system with 7 industry groups. We found that only the bio-
pharmaceutical industry group had a significantly different σ from the rest (the results of these estimates and tests are
available from the authors upon request). Finally, we estimated a specification setting σ equal to a constant and a
bio-pharmaceutical industry dummy variable, i.e., σ=σ0+σbio-pha dbio-pha, with dbio-pha =1 for biotech or pharmaceuticals.
We find (standard errors in parenthesis) σ0=1.19 (0.51) and σbio-pha=4.77 (2.34). The null of σ0= σbio-pha is only rejected



                                                                                                                        31
is the first study to assess the impact of patenting on R&D incentives while recognizing that

patenting and R&D affect one another and are both driven by many of the same variables.

Schankerman [1998] comes the closest to analyzing the impact on R&D of the patent premium when

he constructs what he calls the equivalent subsidy rate (ESR) to company-funded R&D due to patent

protection. The ESR is calculated by dividing the total value of patent rights by R&D and roughly

corresponds to the subsidy that would have to be provided to firms to maintain R&D at current levels

in the absence of patents. We calculate ESRs by first computing the difference between the

expected value of an innovation with and without patent protection, (hi - vin), where vin is computed by

assigning each respondent to the lowest patent effectiveness class.40 This is then multiplied by the

number of innovations and divided by R&D expenditures. Using our benchmark specification

(common σ across industries) we find that ESRs range from 2% for food and drink to 39% for

communication equipment. The average ESR is 17%, compared with an average 24% reported by

Schankerman. Given the differences in data sources and method, it is reassuring that our results are

broadly consistent with those obtained by Schankerman.41 Note, however, that the ESR is simply a

ratio of the incremental value from patent protection to R&D and thus, as Schankerman [1988]

himself notes, is not the best way to understand the R&D incentives provided by patent protection.

To understand these incentive effects, one needs to link—as we have done—firms’ R&D

investments to their patenting decisions and the perceived patent premium.42

One way of assessing the impact of patent protection on R&D is to ask how much R&D would fall if

patent protection were removed (both for a firm and its rivals). This can be computed from the

difference between the predicted value of the log of R&D with and without patent protection, equal to

(1/(1-β)(hi - vin), with vin defined above. We find that, on average, R&D would fall by about 35%. This



at the 11% confidence level. The implied average standard deviation of the patent premium in the full sample is 1.49,
slightly higher than the value of 1.28 estimated in the benchmark case.
40
   It is equivalent to setting the coefficients related to the rivals’ patent premium in vi to zero (α8-α11).
41
   Note, however, that our estimates of the ESR critically depend on the estimated values of c, vi, and hi, as well as
on the number of patents per innovation and thus may not be robust.
42
   The ESR reflects the average return to R&D conditional on patent protection. However, if R&D investments depend
on the marginal return, not the average return to R&D, then even relatively small ESRs can be consistent with a
sizable incentive from patent protection as long as the marginal product of R&D does not fall very rapidly (as would
be the case with a low value of β) and conversely large ESRs can imply small marginal incentive impacts.

                                                                                                                   32
estimate is clearly sensitive to the estimate of β. If β were equal to 0.4, (the lower bound of the 95%

confidence interval around our point estimate) R&D would fall by about 25%, still a substantial effect.

A more conventional way to assess the impact of patenting on R&D is to use our results to compute

the elasticities reported in the first column of table 6. Using (12), the % change in R&D for a given %

change in the own patent premium is e ≡ ∂ log r i µ =           1 Φ (Z i )
                                     r             i                       v i µi .
                                                    ∂µ i       1− β h


Overall, the impact of a change in the patent premium on innovation is substantial. As shown in the

first column of Table 6, the results indicate that a 10% increase in the patent premium would

stimulate the patent holder R&D by about 6% in the benchmark, endogenous premium case. The

results also suggest that the impact significantly varies across industries, with the elasticity varying

from about 10% in the health care related industries, to 4-5% in electronics and semiconductors. The

results are qualitatively consistent with Hall and Ziedonis [2001] who note that the strengthening of

patent protection in the U.S. did not have significant impact on R&D in the semiconductors industry

during the 80s, but largely stimulated patenting itself, with the consequence that the patent per

million R&D dollars increased significantly.43 It is important to highlight, however, that our results

imply that even where the returns to patenting innovations are lower and firms rely more heavily on

other means such as first mover advantages to protect their innovations (cf. Cohen et al. [2000]), as

in semiconductors, an increase in the patent premium still clearly stimulates R&D.44

We also simulated the impact of increasing the patent premium on patent applications and patent

applications per R&D dollar, computed as ea = eπ + β er and ear = eπ + (1-β) er, with ea and ear denoting

the elasticities of patent applications and patent applications per R&D dollar w.r.t. the patent



43
   Our analysis of the elasticity of R&D, and, below, of patent applications and patent propensity with respect to the
patent premium only considers the direct impact of increasing patent premium. However, since the indirect effects are
small (and in the case of the impact on v, close to zero and insignificant), the net impact, which also accounts for the
impact of the rivals’ premium is very similar to the direct impact.
44
   The higher responsiveness of R&D to patent premium in biotech or pharmaceuticals relative to other industries
may appear odd given the already high patent premia in the former. Indeed, given diminishing returns to R&D, a
given absolute increase in the patent premium will have a smaller impact the higher the patent premium. However,
the standard elasticity is premised on a given percentage increase in the premium, implying that a firm with a higher
patent premium (e.g., a biotech firm) would face a larger absolute increase in the premium than a firm with a lower
premium (e.g, a rubber products firm).

                                                                                                                     33
premium, er the R&D elasticity defined above, and e ≡ ∂ log π i µ = φ (Z i ) 1 µ the elasticity of patent of
                                                                               Φ (Z i ) σ
                                                   π
                                                                    ∂µ i
                                                                 i              i




patent propensity w.r.t. the premium. The second and third columns of Table 3 show that on average

a 10% increase in the patent premium increases patent applications by 12.3% and patent

applications per R&D dollar by 6.3%. We find substantial differences across industries. Indeed, a 10

percentage point increase in the patent premium would increase the number of patents per R&D

dollar by 3.6% in drugs and medicines, and by 7.1% in semiconductors, about twice as much. These

findings are qualitatively consistent with Hicks et al.’s [2001] finding that patents per million dollars of

R&D grew much more sharply in information technology industries relative to health-related

technology industries over the period 1989 to 1996—a period during which the patent premium

arguably increased with stronger enforcement and greater plaintiff success rates in infringement

suits. 45


7. Conclusion

Understanding the determinants of R&D is of first order importance given the central role of R&D in

productivity growth. Patents are believed to provide an important stimulus to R&D. However, to our

knowledge, this study is the first to systematically analyze the impact of patenting on R&D

investment while explicitly recognizing that R&D and patenting affect one another, and are both

driven by many of the same variables. We provide the first systematic estimates of the average

patent premium for the U.S. manufacturing sector. By modeling how the patent premium conditions

the decision to invest in R&D and to apply for a patent, we use our estimates to analyze the impact

of increasing the patent premium on R&D and patenting.46

We use a unique dataset based on the 1994 Carnegie Mellon Survey of R&D performing units in US

manufacturing in the United States, which measures R&D, patent propensity, patent effectiveness,


45
   The specification with unobserved heterogeneity in cost and value yields mostly similar results: The elasticity of
R&D is 0.5, (instead of 0.6) but that of patent applications is 1.72, compared to 1.23.




                                                                                                                        34
and information flows from other firms and universities, among other variables, at the R&D lab level.

As noted above, having a measure for the percentage of innovations that are patented—along with

our measures of R&D and patenting—allows us to treat the patenting and R&D as distinct

constructs, which in turn allows us to empirically distinguish between the impact of the patent

premium on R&D and on patenting.

We find that on average patents provide a positive (greater than unity) expected premium gross of

patent application costs in only a few industries, namely drugs, biotech and medical instruments,

with machinery, computers, and industrial chemicals close behind. We also show that an increase in

the mean of the patent premium distribution for a typical firm in our sample (US manufacturing)

would significantly stimulate its own R&D. This is certainly true in industries where the patent

premium tends to be high, such as drugs, biotech and medical instruments. But, even in industries

where the patent premium is lower, such as electronics and semiconductors, the elasticity is still

positive, though smaller. Thus, even in such industries where patent premiums are lower and firms

rely more heavily on means other than patents to protect their innovations, patents stimulate R&D.

We highlight two intriguing aspects of our results that might merit further exploration. First, we do not

find any apparent effect of patent disclosures on information flows originating from other firms.

Second, we do not find a clear effect of rival patent effectiveness on the value of the firm’s own

innovations. While the absence of both of these effects may be real, they may, however, reflect the

need for more accurate measures, especially of the impact of patent disclosures on information

flows.47 Moreover, we have already noted the conflicting theoretical predictions of the relationship

between the effectiveness of rivals’ patents and own R&D investments. Thus, our results also point




46
   Mansfield [1986] surveyed 100 respondents and found that, in the period 1981-1983, even in the absence of patent
protection, outside of the pharmaceutical and chemical sectors, relatively few inventions would have not been
developed asked. Our results, particularly in Table 4, suggest a more pervasive positive impact of patenting on R&D
spending across the manufacturing sector. We too use survey responses. However, can interpret the implications of
responses to a survey question (regarding patent effectiveness) by considering those responses in the light of other
responses (on the same survey) reflecting firms’ observable R&D spending and patenting behavior.
47
   Our finding that patent disclosures do not play a key role in conditioning R&D spillovers in the U.S. is, however,
consistent with Cohen et al.’s [2002] comparison between Japan and the U.S. of the impact of patent disclosures on
R&D-related information flows across rivals.

                                                                                                                  35
to the need for a more fully elaborated model incorporating competitive interactions that can help

disentangle the various effects.

Our study points to a number of other research questions. One is what factors drive the patent

premium, and especially the degree to which policy can affect it across technologies and industries.

Although we have considered the impact on R&D and patenting of raising the premium, this was a

way of discerning the impact of patenting rather than providing a guide for policy. It is conceivable

that the key determinant of the patent premium is the nature of the patented technology and the

degree to which it lends itself to “inventing around,” and the courts and Congress may consequently

be limited in their ability to shift the premium.48 A second, and related, question is how the ways that

patents are used condition their effectiveness in appropriating rents from innovation. Clearly, the

uses of patents are themselves functions of the underlying technology and the policy environment,

but also of market structure and the strategies of the major industry players. As noted earlier, we

have ignored the impact of patent effectiveness on entry, and on vertical industry structure, both

important determinants of the rate and direction of technical change.

In conclusion, we are well aware of the limits of our analysis—limits associated with our structural

model and others due to our underlying data and measures. We suggest, however, that our

modeling approach and use of survey-based data provide a strong basis for attacking what is clearly

an important problem, though a complex one from the perspective of modeling, measurement and

estimation.




48
  In their comparison of changes in patent effectiveness between 1983 when the Levin et al. [1987] survey was
administered and 1994 when the Carnegie Mellon Survey was administered, Cohen et al. [2000] find that large firms’
evaluations of patent effectiveness increased only modestly despite a strong pro-patent movement in the policy
environment during that period.

                                                                                                                36
References

Adams, J.D., (2000), “Endogenous R&D spillovers and industrial research productivity,” NBER Working
    Paper n. 7484.
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, (1997), Judicial Business of the United States Courts,
    Washington, D.C.
American Intellectual Property Law Association (AIPLA), (2001), “Report of the Economic Survey,” AIPLA,
    Washington, D.C.
Arora, A., Fosfuri A., and A. Gambardella, (2001), Markets for Technology: Economics of Innovation and
    Corporate Strategy, MIT Press: Cambridge.
Arora, A., and Gambardella, A., (1994), “The Changing Technology of Technical Change,” Research
    Policy, 23: 523-532.
Arundel, A., and Kabla, I., (1998), "What percentage of innovations are patented? Empirical estimates for
    European firms," Research Policy, 27:127-141.
Boone, J., (2000), “Competitive pressure: the effects on investments in product and process innovations,”
    The Rand Journal of Economics, 31:549-569.
Bowker Co., R.R., (1995), Directory of American Research and Technology, 30th Ed., R.R. Bowker: New
   Providence.
Ceccagnoli, M., (2001), “Essays on the economics of R&D and intellectual property strategies,” Ph.D.
    dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University.
Cohen, W.M., (1995), “Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity,” in Paul Stoneman (ed.), Handbook of the
    Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Basil Blackwell: Oxford.
Cohen, W.M., Nelson, R.R., and Walsh, J.P., (2000), “Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability
      conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent or not,” NBER Working Paper n. 7552.
Cohen, W.M., Goto, A., Nagata, A., Nelson, R., and Walsh, J. (2002), “R&D Spillovers, Patents and the
      Incentives to Innovate in Japan and the United States,” Research Policy, 31: 1349-1367.
Cohen, W.M., and Klepper, S., (1996), “A reprise of size and R&D,” Economic Journal 106:925-51.
Cockburn, I.M., and Henderson, R.M., (2001), “Scale and scope in drug development: unpacking the
      advantages of size in pharmaceutical research,” Journal Of Health Economics, 20 (6): 1033-1057
Duguet, E. and Kabla, I., (1998), "Appropriation strategy and the motivations to use the patent system: an
      econometric analysis at the firm level in French manufacturing,” Annales d'Economie et de
      Statistique, No. 49/50:289-327.
Gallini, N. (2002), “The economics of patents: Lessons from recent U.S. patent reform,” Journal of
      Economic Perspectives, 16:131-154.
Gallant, R.A., (1987), Nonlinear Statistical Models, John Wiley & Sons: New York.
Grindley, P., and Teece, D., (1997), “Managing intellectual capital: licensing and cross licensing in
      semiconductors and electronics,” California Management Review, 39: 8-41.
Hall, B., and Ziedonis, R.M., (2001), “The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting in the
      U.S. semiconductor industry, 1979-1995,” RAND Journal of Economics, 32:101-128.
Heller, M. and Eisenberg, R., (1998), “Can patents deter innovation? The anticommons in biomedical
      research,” Science, 28:698-701.
Hicks, D., Breitzman, T., Olivastro, D. and Hamilton, K. (2001) “The changing composition of innovative
activity in the US—a portrait based on patent analysis,” Research Policy, 30 (4): 681-704.
Horstmann, I., J.M. MacDonald and A. Slivinski (1985) “Patents as information transfer mechanisms: To
      patent or (maybe) not to patent,” Journal of Political Economy, 93: pp. 837-58.
Jaffe, A., (1986), “Technological opportunity and spillovers of R&D: Evidence from firms’ patents, profits,
      and market value,” The American Economic Review, 76:984-1001.
Jaffe, A. (2000), “The U.S. patent system in transition: Policy innovation and the innovation process,”
      Research Policy, 29: 531-558.

                                                                                                         37
Lerner, J., (1995), “Patenting in the shadow of competitors,” Journal of Law and Economics, 38:463-495.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson. R.R. and Winter, S.G., (1987), “Appropriating the returns from
     industrial R&D,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 783-820.
Mansfield, E., (1986), “Patents and innovation: An empirical study,” Management Science, 32:173-81.
Merges, R.P. and Nelson, R.R., (1990), “On the complex economics of patent scope,” Columbia Law
     Review, 90: 839-916.
Needham, D., (1975), "Market structure and firms' R&D behavior,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 33:
     241-255.
Pakes, A., (1986), “Patents as options: Some estimates of the value of holding European patent stocks,”
     Econometrica, 54: 755-784.
Quillen, C.D. and O.H. Webster (2001), Continuing Patent Applications and Performance of the U.S.
     Patent Office, Federal Circuit Bar Journal, August issue.
Reinganum, J.F., (1989), “The theory of innovation: Research, development and diffusion,” in R.
     Schmalensee and R.D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Amsterdam, North
     Holland.
Reitzig, Markus Georg, (2002), "The Private Values of 'Thicket' Patenting: An Empirical Study Across
     Industries and Patent Types," paper presented at the 2002 Academy of Management conference,
     Denver, Colorado.
Rivette, K.G. and Kline, D. (2000), Rembrandts in the Attic, Harvard Business School Press: Boston.
Schankerman, M., (1998), “How valuable is patent protection? Estimates by technology field” RAND
     Journal of Economics, 29:77-107.
Schankerman, M. and A. Pakes, (1986), “Estimates of the value of patent rights in European countries
     during the post-1950 period,” The Economic Journal, 96: 1052-1076.
Scherer, F.M., et al., (1959), Patents and the corporation, 2nd Ed., Boston, privately published.
Scherer, F.M. and D. Harhoff, (2000), “Technology policy for a world of skew distributed Outcomes”,
     Research Policy, 29: 559-566.
Scotchmer, S, (1991), “Standing on the shoulders of giants: cumulative research and the patent law,”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5:29-41.
Shapiro, C. (2000), “Navigating the patent thicket: Cross licenses, patent pools, and standard setting,” in
     A. Jaffe, J. Lerner and S. Stern, eds., Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1, National Bureau of
     Economic Research and MIT Press, Cambridge.
Taylor, C.T. and Silberston, Z.A., (1973), The Economic impact of the patent system: a study of the British
     experience. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.




                                                                                                        38
Figure 1. R&D and patenting: the payoff structure.


                                 R&D INVESTMENTS



                                         INNOVATION




        APPLY FOR PATENT                                     NOT APPLY FOR
           PROTECTION                                      PATENT PROTECTION



                     xij vi - c                                                vi


 x ij = ε ij + µ i : Patent premium;
      ε ij = innovation-specific random component of the premium observed by the firm at the time of
           patenting, but not the econometrician ~ N(0, σ 2 );
     µ i = firm-specific component of the premium, observed by the firm at the time of the R&D
           investment, and treated as a parameter in the analysis;
 v i : Private value of an innovation without patents; function of firm and industry characteristics;
 c: Cost of applying for patent protection; treated as a parameter in the analysis.




                                                                                                        [39]
Fig 2. The patent premium probability distribution

a) Probability density function of the patent premium for firm i and innovation j (x ij )




                                                            µi
b) Probability density function of the patent premium conditional on having applied for patent protection ( x * ij )




                                                                       c    µ i*
                                                                  1+
                                                                       vi




                                                                                                                       [40]
Figure 3. Relationship between endogenous and exogenous variables


                PROBABILITY OF APPLYING FOR PATENT PROTECTION,
                            GIVEN AN INNOVATION (πi)


         PATENT                                                          VALUE OF INNOVATION
        PREMIUM*                                                          (vi), COST OF PATENT
                                                                              PROTECTION (c)
           ( x ij )

                                         R&D EFFORT (r)

INFORMATION FROM                                                          ORGANIZATIONAL
 OTHER FIRMS AND                                                           FACTORS (Si1)
   UNIVERSITIES
       (Si2,Si3)


                              NUMBER OF INNOVATIONS (mi)




*: The exogenous variables are denoted by labels in italics, whereas the endogenous by bold
characters labels. We estimate two model specifications: one with exogenous and one with
endogenous patent premium. Note that although the premium varies across innovations and firms,
only the firm specific component, µ i , treated as a firm specific parameter, needs to be taken into
account to estimate the model with firm-level data. Endogeneity of the premium comes from
endogeneity of the related survey based patent effectiveness measures, as explained in the
estimation section.




                                                                                                       [41]
Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Variable                                Mean     St. Dev.   Median    Min.      Max.
% prod. innov. applied for patent         0.32        0.3      0.25      0         1
Product R&D (Mil. $)                      8.18      31.04      1.35   0.02     420.75
No. of Product Patent Applications        6.43      18.64       1.4      0     283.33
Spill-in-other-firms (factor measure)     0.06       0.68     -0.02   -1.44      2.14
Spill-in-university (factor measure)      0.03       0.69     -0.24   -0.63      1.91
Patent premium dummy, class 1             0.34       0.47        0       0         1
Patent premium dummy, class 2             0.23       0.42        0       0         1
Patent premium dummy, class 3             0.16       0.37        0       0         1
Patent premium dummy, class 4             0.15       0.35        0       0         1
Patent premium dummy, class 5             0.12       0.32        0       0         1
Business Unit Employees                  6 406     27 451      550      10    448 000
Firm Employees                          21 841     57 426     3 000     10    710 800
No. of U.S. Technological Rivals          3.96        4.9        4       0        30
No. of Total U.S. Rivals                 10.34       9.32        8       0        30
Firm is Global                            0.77       0.42        1       0         1
Firm is Public                            0.65       0.48        1       0         1
Firm is Foreign                            0.1        0.3        0       0         1
I.T. Used in Organization                 0.54        0.5        1       0         1

N. of obs.=737




                                                                                        [42]
Table 2: Within and across industries variation in key variables
                                                                                                % variance
                                                                                               explained by
                                                                                                   inter-ind.
                                                                Mean                TSS        differences*
R&D (Mil. $)                                                     8.18         709 249                   8.0%
Pat. Applications                                                6.43         255 852                   3.6%
Patent Propensity (%)                                            0.32                 67              13.1%
Patent Effectiveness (%)                                         0.38                 75              12.6%


TSS: Total Sum of Squared Deviations.
*Proportion of the variable's variance explained by cross industry variation (explained sum of squared deviations
from the mean as a fraction of the total sum of squared deviations from an OLS regression of the variable on a
constant and the industry dummies used in the analysis, with identical sample - N=737 and industry definitions -
cf. Appendix).
Note: Patent effectiveness measured using mid-points of the related patent effectiveness classes for descriptive
purposes (cf. main text).




                                                                                                                    [43]
        Table 3a. Single equations estimates
                                                                            Log of patent                                                                                     Log of patent
                                            Patent propensity
                                                                            applications                                                     Patent propensity equation       applications
                                                equation
                                                                              equation                                                                                          equation

                                          NONLINEAR                                                                                           NONLINEAR
                                                          NONLINEAR IV     OLS         IV                                                                      NONLINEAR IV   OLS           IV
                                             OLS                                                                                                 OLS


    Intercept                                -2.21 **         -2.69 **     1.77 **   1.71 **
                                              0.26             0.79        0.16      0.18
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 2       0.65 **          0.87                                % rivals with patent premium dummy=2           0.55               0.98
                                              0.10             0.74                                                                                0.45              0.80
                                                     **
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 3       1.08             1.21                                % rivals with patent premium dummy=3           0.38               0.37
                                              0.10             0.92                                                                                0.50              0.86
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 4       1.32 **          1.50 *                              % rivals with patent premium dummy=4           0.90               0.64
                                              0.10             0.72                                                                                0.56              0.95
                                                     **               **                                                                                  **
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 5       1.34             2.27                                % rivals with patent premium dummy=5           2.17               3.77 *
                                              0.11             0.75                                                                                0.69              1.52
    Log of business unit employees            0.06 **          0.06 *                              I.T. used in organization                                                  -0.11       -0.26 *
                                              0.02             0.03                                                                                                            0.09        0.11
    N. of U.S. technological rivals          -0.01 a          -0.02 a                              Spill-in from firms-FACTOR                                                 0.07        0.53 *
                                              0.01             0.01                                                                                                            0.07        0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                      *
    Firm is global                            0.05             0.08                                Spill-in from universities-FACTOR                                          0.16        0.08
                                              0.07             0.11                                                                                                            0.07        0.25
    Firm is public                            0.17 *           0.19 a                              Elasticity of innovation w.r.t. R&D (β)                                    0.49 **     0.57 **
                                              0.08             0.11                                                                                                            0.03        0.06
    Tot. N. of U.S. rivals                    0.00             0.00
                                              0.00             0.00                                Adj. R-square                                  0.46               0.38     0.43        0.37
                                                                                               π   ~




    Firm is foreign                           0.02             0.05                                N                                               737                737      529         529
                                              0.11             0.15
    Log of parent firm employees              0.01             0.01
                                              0.02             0.02
π   ~




    Footnotes at bottom table 3b




                                                                                                                                                                                                    [44]
        Table 3b. Single equations estimates (cont.)
    Log of R&D equation
                                                              OLS          IV specif. I        IV specif. II    IV specif. III                                                 OLS         IV specif. I       IV specif. II   IV specif. III
                                                                      **                  **               **               **
    Intercept                                                -4.66           -4.52                -4.60           -4.95              % rivals with patent premium dummy=2      -0.80          0.09                0.18             0.48
                                                               0.37            0.77                 0.86            1.20                                                        0.66           1.01                1.09             1.33
                                                                      *                                                                                                                                   a
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 2                       0.30            0.54                 0.63             0.88             % rivals with patent premium dummy=3      0.30           1.98                2.00             1.96
                                                               0.12            0.95                 1.03            1.23                                                        0.75           1.17                1.17             1.25
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 3                       0.52 **         2.16 a               2.31             2.66             % rivals with patent premium dummy=4      2.11 *         2.53                2.58             2.89
                                                               0.14            1.28                 1.42            1.70                                                        0.90           1.57                1.60             1.83
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 4                       0.56 **         0.97                 1.17             2.03             % rivals with patent premium dummy=5      -2.40 *       -1.73               -1.50             0.17
                                                               0.15            1.01                 1.38            2.40                                                        1.06           1.90                2.14             4.36
    Patent effectiveness dummy, class 5                       0.57 **         0.81                 1.05             2.31             I.T. used in organization                 0.49 **        0.18                0.18             0.24
                                                               0.16            0.98                 1.46            3.21                                                        0.10           0.16                0.16             0.22
                                                                      **                  **               **               *                                                          *
    Log of business unit employees                            0.33            0.22                 0.22             0.26             Spill-in from firms-FACTOR                0.15           0.93                0.89             0.78
                                                               0.03            0.07                 0.07            0.12                                                        0.07           0.79                0.81             0.89
    N. of U.S. technological rivals                          -0.01           -0.03                -0.03           -0.03              Spill-in from universities-FACTOR         0.15 *         0.90 *              0.92 *           0.94 *
                                                               0.01            0.02                 0.02            0.03                                                        0.07           0.44                0.44             0.47
    Firm is global                                            0.44 **         0.38 *               0.38 *           0.43 * Patent Propensity                                                                     -0.28            -2.45
                                                               0.11            0.16                 0.16            0.21                                                                                           1.05             4.97
    Firm is public                                            0.25 *          0.09                 0.10             0.21             Elasticity of inventions w.r.t. R&D (b)
                                                               0.12            0.17                 0.16            0.30
    Tot. N. of U.S. rivals                                    0.01            0.00                 0.00             0.00             Adj. R-square                             0.53           0.22                0.21             0.11
                                                               0.01            0.01                 0.01            0.01             N                                          737            737                 737              737
    Firm is foreign                                           0.19            0.08                 0.07             0.10
                                                               0.18            0.26                 0.26            0.28
                                                                                                                                 π




                                                                      **                  **               **
                                                                                                                    0.13 **
                                                                                                                                     ~




    Log of parent firm employees                              0.11            0.12                 0.12
                                                               0.03            0.04                 0.04            0.04
π   ~




    Standard Errors in italics.
    **, *, a: Significantly different than 0 at the .01, .05, and .10 confidence levels.
    Note 1: Industry fixed effects estimates are suppressed.
    Note 2: All the IV specifications treat the patent effectiveness dummies and the spillover measures as endogenous when appropriate, using the same instruments as for the case of the system estimation (cf. the main
    the text). Furthermore, products and cross products of the inlcuded continuous exogenous variables, in addition to the exogenous and instrumental variables, are included as instruments in the nonlinear IV estimation
    of the patent propensity equation.
    Note 3: The actual dependent variable of the patent applications equation is the log of product patent applications minus the log of product patent propensity, as explained in the main text. Furthermore, as instruments
    for R&D and spillovers for the IV estimation of such equation we use the same instruments used for patent effectiveness and spillovers in the other equations, in a linear fashion.
    Note 4: The IV estimates of the R&D equation differ in that specification I does not include patent propensity on the RHS, whereas II and III do, and only specification III treats patent propensity as endogenous, for
    which the set of instruments used for patent effectiveness is sufficient for identification.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [45]
    Table 4. System estimates of the structural parameters

                     Exogenous            Endogenous                                                                                            Exogenous              Endogenous
                       premium               premium                                                                                              premium                 premium

    β                      0.55
                                   **
                                                 0.53
                                                        **
                                                                Elast. of innovation w.r.t. R&D                                           VALUE:
                                                                                                                                                                          -0.56 *
                                                                                                                                                            *
                            0.05                 0.05                                                                               α0              -0.57                               Intercept, value of innovation
              PATENT PREMIUM:                                                                                                                        0.23                  0.22

    σ                      0.68
                                   **
                                                 1.28
                                                        *
                                                                St. dev. of patent prem. distrib.                                   α1               0.12
                                                                                                                                                            **
                                                                                                                                                                           0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                  **
                                                                                                                                                                                        Log of business unit empl.
                            0.22                 0.52                                                                                                0.03                  0.03
                                   **                   **                                                                                                  *                     *
    τ1                    -0.86                 -1.42           Pat. premium dummy, class 1                                         α2              -0.01                 -0.01         N. of U.S. technological rivals
                            0.12                 0.33                                                                                                0.00                 0.005
                          -0.18 a               -0.57 **
                                                                                                                                                            **                    **
    τ2                                                          Pat. premium dummy, class 2                                         α3               0.15                  0.14         Firm is global
                            0.10                 0.16                                                                                                0.05                  0.05
                                   **                   **
    τ3                     0.32                  0.58           Pat. premium dummy, class 3                                         α4               0.08                  0.06         Firm is public
                            0.10                 0.19                                                                                                0.05                  0.05
                                   **                   **
    τ4                     0.52                  0.59           Pat. premium dummy, class 4                                         α5               0.00                  0.00         Tot. N. of U.S. rivals
                            0.10                 0.15                                                                                                0.00                 0.003
                                   **                   **
    τ5                     0.54                  0.53           Pat. premium dummy, class 5                                         α6               0.04                  0.02         Firm is foreign
                            0.10                 0.16                                                                                                0.09                  0.09
              COST:                                                                                                                                         **                    **
                                                                                                                                    α7               0.05                  0.05         Log of parent firm empl.
    δ                      0.30    **
                                                 0.38   *
                                                                Cost of appl. for pat. protection                                                    0.02                  0.02
                            0.12                 0.19                                                                               α8              -0.21                 -0.25         % rivals with pat. effectiv.=2
    κ0                     4.87
                                   **
                                                 4.91
                                                        **
                                                                Interc., n. of pat. appl. per innov.                                                 0.27                  0.29
                            0.89                 0.91                                                                               α9               0.48                  0.49         % rivals with pat. effectiv.=3
              R&D PRODUCTIVITY:                                                                                                                      0.32                  0.33
                                                                                                                                                            *                     a
    λ1                     0.07                  0.06           I.T. used in organization                                          α 10              0.92                  0.70         % rivals with pat. effectiv.=4
                            0.05                 0.05                                                                                                0.41                  0.40
                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                          -1.06 *
                                                                                                                                                            a
    λ2                     0.26                  0.18           Spill-in from firms-FACTOR                                         α 11             -0.86                               % rivals with pat. effectiv.=5
                            0.11                 0.11                                                                                                0.46                  0.48
                                   **                   **
    λ3                     0.40                  0.41           Spill-in from univer.-FACTOR
                            0.10                 0.10
π   ~




        Standard Errors in italics.
        **, *, a: Significantly different than 0 at the .01, .05, and .10 confidence levels.
        Note 1: Industry fixed effects estimates are suppressed. A full set of 18 industry dummies is indeed included to control for the number of patent applications per patented innovation, k i, and the value of the innovation
        without patent protection, vi (in both cases we dropped the 19th dummy, “Other manufacturing industries”).
        Note 2: In both specifications we estimate 60 parameters with 737 observations and 3 equations. There are 5 endogenous (R&D, patent propensity, patent applications, spillovers from firms and universities) and 35
        exogenous variables in the exogenous premium case, and 10 endogenous (those indicated above with the addition of the 5 patent effectiveness dummies) and 30 exogenous variables in the endogenous premium
        specification.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [46]
Table 5. Patent premium estimates
                                               Expected Patent Premium         Conditional Patent Premium
                                                   Exogenous     Endogenous       Exogenous       Endogenous
                                                     Premium        Premium         Premium          Premium

Biotech                                                 1.20            1.34           1.79            2.45
Medical instruments                                     1.14            1.22           1.77            2.41
Drugs and medicines                                     1.11            1.05           1.73            2.29
Machinery, excl. computers                              1.02            0.88           1.79            2.38
Computers and other office equipment                    1.00            0.83           1.72            2.27
Industrial chemicals                                    0.95            0.66           1.72            2.24
Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                         0.91            0.52           1.80            2.32
Other chemicals                                         0.92            0.51           1.72            2.19
Aircraft and missiles                                   0.91            0.51           1.79            2.26
Communication equipment                                 0.89            0.49           1.66            2.11
Metals                                                  0.85            0.39           1.73            2.22
Semiconductors                                          0.87            0.39           1.79            2.25
Other electrical equipment                              0.84            0.37           1.73            2.24
Instruments, excl. Medical                              0.83            0.31           1.71            2.17
Petroleum refining and extraction                       0.83            0.30           1.69            2.15
Other manufacturing industries                          0.80            0.26           1.79            2.28
Rubber products                                         0.80            0.22           1.86            2.37
Electronic components, excl. Semicond.                  0.72            0.01           1.70            2.11
Food, kindred, and tobacco products                     0.60           -0.34           1.66            1.99

Total                                                   0.90            0.52           1.75            2.25
Note: Sorted by the expected patent premium estimated with the endogenous premium specification




                                                                                                               [47]
Table 6. % change in R&D, Patent Applications, and patent applications
per R&D $ w.r.t. a 10% change in the patent premium
                                                                                                               Patent
                                                                                       Patent        applications per
Industry                                                           R&D           Applications                  R&D $

Biotech                                                          10.6%                  14.3%                  3.6%
Medical instruments                                                  9.7                  13.4                   3.7
Drugs and medicines                                                  8.9                  12.5                   3.6
Machinery, excl. computers                                           7.6                  12.4                   4.8
Computers and other office equipment                                 7.3                  11.6                   4.3
Industrial chemicals                                                 6.9                  12.2                   5.4
Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                                      6.1                  13.1                   7.0
Other chemicals                                                      5.8                  11.4                   5.6
Other electrical equipment                                           5.8                  13.6                   7.8
Petroleum refining and extraction                                    5.7                  13.3                   7.6
Metals                                                               5.5                  12.6                   7.1
Communication equipment                                              5.4                  10.3                   4.9
Aircraft and missiles                                                5.2                  10.7                   5.4
Other manufacturing industries                                       4.8                  12.8                   8.0
Semiconductors                                                       4.8                  11.9                   7.1
Instruments, excl. Medical                                           4.6                  11.2                   6.6
Electronic components, excl. Semicond.                               4.1                  13.0                   8.9
Rubber products                                                      4.0                  11.3                   7.3
Food, kindred, and tobacco products                                  2.2                  12.2                  10.0

                                                                     6%                 12.3%                  6.3%

Note: Estimates refer to the endogenous premium specification and are sorted by the R&D elasticity




                                                                                                                        [48]
APPENDIX
     A) Computing product patent applications
     To get the number of product patent applications from total applications, an adjustment factor has been derived as
follows. Let a=a1+a2=(m1π1+m2π2)k be the total number of patent applications, with a1 and a2 the number of product and
process applications, m1 and m2 the number of product and process innovations, π1 and π2 the % of product and process
innovations for which patent applications are made, and k≥1 the number of patent applications per patented innovation,
assumed to be equal across product and process innovations. We assume that product and process R&D are also equally
efficient, so that m1/m2=r1/r2, ρ1=m1/(m1+m2)=r1/(r1+r2), and ρ2=m2/(m1+m2)=r2/(r1+r2), with r1 and r2 the level of product and
process R&D effort, and ρ1 and ρ2 the % share of R&D effort devoted to product and process innovation respectively. Then,
a/k=m1π1+m1(ρ2/ρ1)π2 and the number of product innovations can be written as m1=a/k(π1+(ρ2/ρ1)π2). The endogenous
variable used to estimate the second equation of (12) is then computed as log m1=log a-log(π1+(ρ2/ρ1)π2)- log k, with log k
being a parameter to be estimated using industry fixed effects.
       B) Industry groupings used to create industry dummies
                                Description                                                       SIC      N
                                Food, kindred, and tobacco products                              20,21     54
                                Industrial chemicals                                       281–82,286      51
                                Drugs and medicines                                                 283    26
                                Biotech49                                                       various    21
                                Other chemicals                                        284–85,287–89       57
                                Petroleum refining and extraction                                13,29     10
                                Rubber products                                                      30    23
                                Metals                                                           33-34     39
                                Computers and other office equipment                                357    21
                                Machinery, excl. computers                                 35, exc.357     86
                                Communication equipment                                             366    25
                                Electronic components, excl. Semic.                      367 exc. 3674     15
                                Semiconductors                                                    3674     17
                                Other electrical equipment                                 361–65,369      43
                                Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                        37 exc. 372,376     36
                                Aircraft and missiles                                          372,376     31
                                Instruments, excl. Medical                                 38 excl. 384    61
                                Medical instruments                                                 384    49
                                Other manufacturing industries                          22-27,31-32,39     72
                                All                                                                       737
     C) Factor-based measures
       To measure the amount of information flows from other firms and public research benefiting the R&D lab we are faced
with the problem that we cannot measure these variables directly. We do have however several survey measures, available
in the CMS, which represent different dimensions of the variables of interest. In order to both develop measures of the
underlying unobserved variables and to reduce the number of variables we have to deal with in our analysis, we used factor
analysis to create new composite measures.
     C1. Information flows from other firms
     We have data related to the following dimensions of the information flows from other firms:
     1) Whether the R&D unit obtained information from RIVALS which either suggested new R&D projects or
     contributed to completion of existing R&D Projects;
     2) Whether the R&D unit obtained information from INDEPENDENT SUPPLIERS which either suggested new R&D
     projects or contributed to completion of existing R&D Projects;
     3) Whether the R&D unit obtained information from CUSTOMERS which either suggested new R&D projects or
     contributed to completion of existing R&D Projects (yes/no response);
     4) Frequency with which the R&D unit obtains useful technical information about NORTH AMERICAN
     COMPETITORS activities (response measured in ordinal scale, from 1 reflecting “rarely or never,” to 5, reflecting
     “daily”);
     5) Frequency with which the R&D unit obtains useful technical information from NORTH AMERICAN SUPPLIERS
     activities, measured in ordinal scale (response measured in ordinal scale, from 1 reflecting “rarely or never,” to 5,
     reflecting “daily”).
          The correlation matrix for the five items confirmed the substantial correlations among groups of items. We then
conducted an exploratory factor analysis of the respondent level data on the five measures to uncover the factor structure


49   Identified from questionnaire product description and Compustat classification.


                                                                                                                              i
generating the correlations among the variables50. This factor analysis generated one underlying variable corresponding to
the first extracted factor, the only one which accounted for meaningful amounts of variance. We then assigned each
respondent the estimated factor score, which is a linear composite of the optimally weighted variables under analysis.
       The factor analysis results presented in Table C1 show the factor loadings (that is the correlations between the
measures and the factor) and the eigenvalue (representing the amount of variance that is accounted for by the factor). The
only two variables with factor loadings greater than 0.3 are the two frequency related measures. In other words, our factor
based measure of information flows from other firms mostly reflects the frequency with which respondents obtain useful
technical information about the activities of North American suppliers and competitors.
Table C1. Factor analysis of variables related to information flows from other firms
                                                                                                           Factor Loading
Variable                                                                                                      First Factor
Frequency of Interaction with North American Suppliers                                                               0.39
Frequency of Interaction with North American Competitors                                                             0.30
Independent Suppliers – Suggested or contributed to completion of R&D Projects                                       0.20
Competitors – Suggested or contributed to completion of R&D Projects                                                 0.13
Customers – Suggested or contributed to completion of R&D Projects                                                   0.06
Eigenvalue                                                                                                             0.77
C2. Information flows from public research
      CMS contains data on the following dimensions of the information flows from public research:
      1) Whether the R&D unit obtained information from UNIVERSITIES or GOVERNMENT RESEARCH INSTITUTES
      and LABS which either suggested new R&D projects or contributed to completion of existing R&D Projects (yes/no
      response);
      2) Frequency with which the R&D unit obtains useful technical information from UNIVERSITIES or GOVERNMENT
      RESEARCH INSTITUTES and LABS (response measured in ordinal scale, from 1 reflecting “rarely or never,” to 5,
      reflecting “daily”).
      As in the previous case, the factor analysis generated only one underlying variable corresponding to the first extracted
factor accounting for meaningful amount of variance. The results suggest that the two survey-based measures reflecting
both the frequency of interaction and the importance of contribution of external public research are highly correlated with the
underlying factor – information flows from public research, as shown in table C2.
Table C2. Factor analysis of variables related to information flows from public research
                                                                                                                   Factor Loading
Variable                                                                                                         First Factor
Frequency of interaction with North American universities/government research institutes and labs                              0.40
Universities/ government research institutes and labs – suggested or contributed to R&D projects                               0.40
Eigenvalue                                                                                                                     0.70
      As before, we assigned each respondent the estimated factor score, which is a an estimate of a respondent’s standing
on the underlying factor and computed as a linear composite of the optimally weighted variables under analysis.




50 A limitation of the implemented factor analysis is that we are treating all our raw measures as though they are continuous, although they

are not; the response scales are categorical. The state of the art in factor analysis itself has only recently begun to address this issue.


                                                                                                                                          ii
                                                                                                                                                      Appendix D

                                           Additional Tables, Baseline Model (No unobserved heterogeneity in v i )

Table D1. Variation within and across industries
                                                                         R&D              Pat. Applications        Patent Propensity     Patent Effectiveness
                                                        N        Mean          St. Dev.    Mean        St. Dev.      Mean     St. Dev.     Mean       St. Dev.
Food, kindred, and tobacco products                    54         6.56          17.52       2.26          7.32        0.11       0.21      0.15          0.20
Industrial chemicals                                   51        11.55          36.86       8.15        13.36         0.34       0.30      0.41          0.32
Drugs and medicines                                    26        43.19          94.75     11.53         28.88         0.42       0.41      0.59          0.35
Biotech                                                21        20.33          43.47     11.19         24.39         0.56       0.30      0.65          0.30
Other chemicals                                        57         9.94          23.44       7.63        16.38         0.32       0.28      0.41          0.35
Petroleum refining and extraction                      10         9.36          13.97     19.98         35.90         0.41       0.39      0.37          0.39
Rubber products                                        23         2.34            3.08      4.12          7.67        0.28       0.30      0.26          0.22
Metals                                                 39         1.96            2.28      3.23          6.86        0.28       0.25      0.32          0.29
Computers and other office equipment                   21        25.80          92.11     16.22         61.28         0.39       0.29      0.42          0.29
Machinery, excl. computers                             86         3.60            7.48      5.65        16.91         0.37       0.25      0.45          0.29
Communication equipment                                25        13.88          21.50       9.01        21.74         0.28       0.32      0.33          0.26
Electronic components, excl. Semicond.                 15         2.28            3.31      1.92          3.62        0.19       0.31      0.25          0.29
Semiconductors                                         17         4.10            5.94      9.19        21.04         0.21       0.21      0.36          0.34
Other electrical equipment                             43         3.29            5.01      8.69        27.05         0.33       0.32      0.36          0.36
Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                        36         4.93            7.94      9.35        17.84         0.27       0.28      0.40          0.34
Aircraft and missiles                                  31        17.08          50.74       4.40          6.34        0.26       0.26      0.35          0.27
Instruments, excl. Medical                             61         4.07            7.18      4.35          9.92        0.27       0.26      0.31          0.28
Medical instruments                                    49         3.78            6.44      5.54          8.17        0.58       0.29      0.57          0.30
Other manufacturing industries                         72         2.24            4.63      2.68          5.43        0.26       0.31      0.30          0.29

Total                                                737          8.18          31.04       6.43        18.64         0.32       0.30      0.38          0.32
Note: Patent effectiveness measured using mid-points of the related patent effectiveness classes for descriptive purposes




                                                                                                                                                                 iii
                                                                                 Additional Tables, Baseline Model (No unobserved heterogeneity in v i )                                                                                   Appendix D


    Table D2. System estimates of the structural parameters, within industry groups
                     Chemical-            Computer-                                                                                       Chemical-            Computer-
                Pharmaceuticals           Electronics                                                                                Pharmaceuticals           Electronics
                       (N=155)               (N=161)                                                                                        (N=155)             (N=161)
                                     **               **
    β                         0.47            0.65         Elast. of innovation w.r.t. R&D                                       VALUE:
                              0.05             0.06                                                                        α0                     0.75              0.26        Intercept, value of innovation
            PATENT PREMIUM:                                                                                                                        0.63             0.24
                                     *                                                                                                                    **               **
    σ                         3.39            0.29         St. dev. of patent prem. distrib.                               α1                     0.20              0.07        Log of business unit empl.
                              1.45             0.30                                                                                                0.07             0.03
                                                                                                                                                          *
    τ1                       -0.21           -1.11 ** Pat. premium dummy, class 1                                          α2                    -0.01             -0.01        N. of U.S. technological rivals
                              0.49             0.30                                                                                                0.01            0.005
                                                                                                                                                                           *
    τ2                        0.03           -0.41 *       Pat. premium dummy, class 2                                     α3                     0.07              0.18        Firm is global
                              0.43             0.19                                                                                                0.08             0.07
                                     *                                                                                                                                     *
    τ3                        1.01            0.26         Pat. premium dummy, class 3                                     α4                    -0.05              0.16        Firm is public
                              0.40             0.20                                                                                                0.10             0.08
                                     **                                                                                                                   **
    τ4                        1.03            0.30         Pat. premium dummy, class 4                                     α5                     0.02              0.00        Tot. N. of U.S. rivals
                              0.35             0.23                                                                                                0.01            0.004
                                     **
    τ5                        1.53            0.23         Pat. premium dummy, class 5                                     α6                     0.07             -0.12        Firm is foreign
                              0.40             0.23                                                                                                0.13             0.09
                                                                                                                                                                           *
            COST:                                                                                                          α7                     0.02              0.05        Log of parent firm empl.
                                     a                                                                                                             0.02             0.02
    δ                         4.29            0.07         Cost of appl. for pat. protection
                              2.20             0.08                                                                        α8                    -2.28             -0.41        % rivals with pat. effectiv.=2
                                     **               **
    κ0                        6.00            5.09         Interc., n. of pat. appl. per innov.                                                    1.52             0.72
                              0.94             0.80                                                                        α9                    -1.22             -0.58        % rivals with pat. effectiv.=3
            R&D PRODUCTIVITY:                                                                                                                      1.10             0.57
                                     *                *
    λ1                        0.26            0.19         I.T. used in organization                                      α 10                   -1.27             -0.14        % rivals with pat. effectiv.=4
                              0.11             0.08                                                                                                0.89             0.74

    λ2                       -0.07            0.02         Spill-in from firms-FACTOR                                     α 11                   -0.99             -0.68        % rivals with pat. effectiv.=5
                              0.12             0.07                                                                                                1.05             0.66
                                                      *
    λ3                        0.09            0.16         Spill-in from univer.-FACTOR
                              0.10             0.07
π   ~




    Standard Errors in italics.
    **, *, a: Significantly different than 0 at the .01, .05, and .10 confidence levels.
    Note 1: The Chemical-Pharmaceutical group includes firms belonging to SIC 28, whereas the Computer-Electronics group includes firms belonging to SIC 36, SIC 357, and selected SIC 38 industries ollowing the revised classification of
    the NAICS (i.e. electronic instruments - SIC 3812, 3822-3826; we excluded SIC 3845, electronic medical instruments, contrary to the NAICS classification).
    Note 2: Industry fixed effects estimates are suppressed. Industry dummies are included to control for the number of patent applications per innovation, k i, and the value of an innovation without patent protection, v i. In particular, we
    included dummies for communication equipment, electronics components (exc. semicond.), semiconductors, and other electrical equipment for the computer-electronics group, and industrial chemicals, pharmaceuticals and biotech for the
    chemical-pharmaceuticals group.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    iv
                                                                          Appendix D

Additional Tables, Baseline Model (No unobserved heterogeneity in v i )



 Table D3. Estimated number of patent applications per
 innovation by industry
 Industry                                                        k
 Rubber products
                                                               8.8
 Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                               7.8
 Semiconductors                                                7.2
 Petroleum refining and extraction                             6.9
 Other electrical equipment                                    6.7
 Machinery, excl. computers                                    6.7
 Industrial chemicals                                          6.6
 Instruments, excl. Medical                                    6.3
 Metals                                                        6.1
 Other chemicals                                               5.8
 Electronic components, excl. Semicond.                        5.7
 Computers and other office equipment                          5.1
 Other manufacturing industries                                4.9
 Medical instruments                                           4.7
 Food, kindred, and tobacco products                           4.6
 Aircraft and missiles                                         4.3
 Communication equipment                                       2.9
 Biotech                                                       2.2
 Drugs and medicines                                           2.0
 Total
                                                               5.6




                                                                                   v
                                                                          Appendix D

Additional Tables, Baseline Model (No unobserved heterogeneity in v i )


     Table D4. The equivalent subsidy rate
                                                             ESR
     Communication equipment                                 39%
     Other electrical equipment                              34%
     Petroleum refining and extraction                       28%
     Metals                                                  23%
     Semiconductors                                          23%
     Biotech                                                 22%
     Drugs and medicines                                     22%
     Medical instruments                                     21%
     Machinery, excl. computers                              20%
     Rubber products                                         19%
     Other manufacturing industries                          18%
     Transportation, excl. Aircrafts                         17%
     Instruments, excl. Medical                              16%
     Other chemicals                                         14%
     Electronic components, excl. Semicond.                  13%
     Industrial chemicals                                    11%
     Computers and other office equipment                     8%
     Aircraft and missiles                                    4%
     Food, kindred, and tobacco products                      2%

     Total                                                   17%




                                                                                  vi
                                                 Appendix E: Model with unobserved heterogeneity and results



Appendix E: “A simple model with unobserved heterogeneity across innovations and
             across firms in both vi and the patent premium.”

Recall that if a firm applies for patent protection it earns xijvi – cij and vi otherwise, where the
subscript i indexes firms (i=1,…,n), and j indexes innovations (j=1,…,m). Let cij=ρijvij, so that
an innovation is patented if xij vij - ρij vij > vij, which is equivalent to (xij -ρij -1) > 0. Define xij -ρij
to be the net patent premium and denote it as wij. We introduce within firm (innovation
specific) and across firm heterogeneity in value as follows:



                                             Model payoffs structure


                                              R&D INVESTMENTS


                                                INNOVATION



                           APPLY FOR PATENT                   NOT APPLY FOR
                              PROTECTION                         PATENT


                                   wij vij                             vij




wij = υij+νi :    Patent premium net of patenting costs, ~N(νi ,συ2);
     υij =        innovation-specific random component of the net premium observed by the
                  firm at the time of the patent decision, but not the econometrician and
                  distributed i.i.d. ~ N(0,συ2);
     νi =         firm-specific component of the net premium, observed by the firm at the time
                  of the R&D investment, and treated as a parameter in the analysis.

vij = ψij + vi χi : Private value of an innovation if not patented;
     ψij =        innovation-specific random component of the value of an innovation
                  observed by the firm at the time of the patenting decision, but not the
                  econometrician i.i.d (0, σψ2);
     χi =         firm-specific component of the value of an innovation, observed by the firm at
                  the time of the R&D investment, but not the econometrician with log χi ~ (0,
                  σχ2);
     vi =         firm-specific component of the value of the innovation, function of observed
                  firm and industry characteristics.

Assumption:       The unobserved errors are independently distributed so that for all i,
                  E(ψij |vi, χi, νi, υij)=0; E(υij | vi, χi, νi, ψij)=0, E(log(χi)| vi) = 0.




                                                                                                             vii
                                                             Appendix E: Model with unobserved heterogeneity and results




The expected value of an innovation is

hi = E (w ij v ij | w ij > 1) Pr(w ij > 1) + E (v ij ) Pr(w ij < 1) = Φ(Zi )(ν i*v i ) + (1 − Φ(Zi ))v i ,

where
                                                     φ (− Z i )
ν i* = ν i + E(υ ij | υ ij > 1 − ν i ) = ν i + σ υ             ;
                                                      Φ(Z i ) 
        ν i −1
Zi =          .
         συ

Thus, following along the lines of the text, the system of equations to be estimated is:
            
            π = Φ (Z i ) + η
             i               ip
            
             log ai − log π i = (log k i + log d ) + si + β log ri + ηia
            

                      1− β
                               (
             log r = 1 γ + log h + s +η
                                     i     i
                                                 ) ir

with:
v i = α 0 + α 1Vi 1 + ... + α kv Vikv ;

si = λ1Si 1 + λ2Si 2 + λ3Si 3 ;
γ = log β + log d + ω ;
ηip = sampling error; η ia = η im + ηˆim + ξ ia ; η ir = 1 η im + log χ i + ξ ir .
                                                        1− β
Where ξ ia , ξ ir represent measurement error in product patent application and product R&D
respectively.


As for the benchmark model, we also set :

νi −1
      = τ1Ti1+ τ2Ti2 + τ3Ti3 + τ4Ti4 + τ5Ti5 and estimate five levels of the net premium:
 συ

ν 1 = τ 1σ υ + 1; ν 2 = τ 2σ υ + 1;ν 3 = τ 3σ υ + 1;ν 4 = τ 4σ υ + 1;ν 5 = τ 5σ υ + 1.




                                                                                                                     viii
                                                                                                                             Appendix E: Model with unobserved heterogeneity and results



 Table E1. System estimates of the structural parameters
                                                                                                                        VALUE:
 β               0.56 **   Elast. of innovation w.r.t. R&D                                                        α0              -0.45     *       Intercept, value of innovation
                 0.05                                                                                                              0.20
         NET PATENT PREMIUM:                                                                                      α1               0.11     **      Log of business unit empl.
 συ              1.31 *    St. dev. of net patent prem. distrib.                                                                   0.02
                 0.51                                                                                             α2              -0.01     a       N. of U.S. technological rivals
 τ1             -2.12 **   Net Pat. premium dummy, class 1                                                                        0.005
                 0.61                                                                                             α3               0.13     **      Firm is global
 τ2             -0.80 **   Net Pat. premium dummy, class 2                                                                         0.05
                 0.14                                                                                             α4               0.04             Firm is public
 τ3              0.24 a    Net Pat. premium dummy, class 3                                                                         0.05
                 0.14                                                                                             α5               0.00             Tot. N. of U.S. rivals
 τ4              0.38 **   Net Pat. premium dummy, class 4                                                                        0.003
                 0.13                                                                                             α6               0.03             Firm is foreign
 τ5              0.26 *    Net Pat. premium dummy, class 5                                                                         0.08
                 0.13                                                                                             α7               0.05     **      Log of parent firm empl.
         R&D PRODUCTIVITY:                                                                                                         0.01
 λ1              0.07      I.T. used in organization                                                              α8              -0.32             % rivals with pat. effectiv.=2
                 0.05                                                                                                              0.29
 λ2              0.12      Spill-in from firms-FACTOR                                                             α9               0.41             % rivals with pat. effectiv.=3
                 0.11                                                                                                              0.31
 λ3              0.40 **   Spill-in from univer.-FACTOR                                                          α10               0.58             % rivals with pat. effectiv.=4
                 0.10                                                                                                              0.38
                                                                                                                 α11              -1.35     **      % rivals with pat. effectiv.=5
                                                                                                                                   0.47
Standard Errors in italics.
**, *, a: Significantly different than 0 at the .01, .05, and .10 confidence levels.
Note 1: Industry fixed effects estimates are suppressed. A full set of 18 industry dummies is indeed included to control for the number of patent applications per patented innovation, ki, and the
value of the innovation without patent protection, vi (in both cases we dropped the 19th dummy, “Other manufacturing industries”). Estimates related to of ki are suppressed.
Note 2: Estimates of the model with endogenous premium. We estimate 59 parameters with 737 observations and 3 equations. There are 10 endogenous (R&D, patent propensity, patent
applications, spillovers from firms and universities and the 5 patent effectiveness dummies) and 35 exogenous variables.




                                                                                                                                                                                                      ix
                                            Appendix E: Model with unobserved heterogeneity and results



Table E2. Net patent premium and elasticities

                                                                    Elasticities, wrt the net premium, of:
                                         Expected   Conditional     R&D          Patent            Patent
                                              Net   Net Patent               Application     applications
                                           Patent     Premium                          s      per R&D $
                                         Premium
Food, kindred, and tobacco products         -1.11         1.60       0.17           2.55             2.38
Industrial chemicals                         0.14         1.89       0.56           1.64             1.07
Drugs and medicines                          0.63         2.01       0.75           1.37             0.62
Biotech                                      0.95         2.09       0.90           1.36             0.45
Other chemicals                             -0.01         1.85       0.48           1.61             1.13
Petroleum refining and extraction           -0.35         1.79       0.47           2.21             1.74
Rubber products                             -0.36         1.76       0.32           1.68             1.37
Metals                                      -0.20         1.81       0.46           1.90             1.44
Computers and other office equipment         0.36         1.93       0.59           1.33             0.74
Machinery, excl. computers                   0.43         1.95       0.63           1.36             0.72
Communication equipment                     -0.02         1.83       0.42           1.43             1.01
Electronic components, excl. Semicond.      -0.69         1.71       0.35           2.40             2.04
Semiconductors                              -0.17         1.81       0.41           1.66             1.25
Other electrical equipment                  -0.27         1.80       0.48           2.11             1.63
Transportation, excl. Aircrafts             -0.03         1.85       0.53           1.81             1.28
Aircraft and missiles                        0.02         1.84       0.43           1.36             0.93
Instruments, excl. Medical                  -0.26         1.78       0.37           1.70             1.32
Medical instruments                          0.81         2.04       0.80           1.28             0.48
Other manufacturing industries              -0.37         1.77       0.40           2.00             1.59

Total                                       -0.03          1.85      0.50           1.72             1.22




                                                                                                         x
