                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HOW IS MACRO NEWS TRANSMITTED
                                  TO EXCHANGE RATES?

                                          Martin D. D. Evans
                                          Richard K. Lyons

                                         Working Paper 9433
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9433


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




This paper was circulated under the previous title “Why Order Flow Explains Exchange Rates.” We thank
the following for helpful comments: Brian Boyer, Anusha Chari, Frank Diebold, Jon Faust, Simon Gervais,
Aditya Kaul, Antonio Mello, John Rogers, Andrew Rose, and seminar participants at the Empirical Exchange
Rate Models conference (Sept. 2001), the American Finance Association meetings (Jan. 2002), the Yale
Market Microstructure conference (June 2002), U.C. Berkeley, Alberta, Michigan, London Business School,
the New York Fed, Aix-Marseille, and Virginia. Both authors thank the National Science Foundation for
financial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2003 by Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including, ©
notice, is given to the source.
How is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?
Martin D. D. Evans and Richard K. Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 9433
January 2003
JEL No. F31

                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper tests whether macroeconomic news is transmitted to exchange rates via the
transactions process and if so, what share occurs via transactions versus the traditional direct
channel. We identify the link between order flow and macro news using a heteroskedasticity-based

approach, a la Rigobon and Sack (2002). In both daily and intra-daily data, order flow varies
considerably with macro news flow. At least half of the effect of macro news on exchange rates is

transmitted via order flow.

Martin D. D. Evans                                  Richard K. Lyons
Department of Economics                             Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley
Georgetown University                               Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
Washington DC 20057                                 and NBER
and NBER                                            lyons@haas.berkeley.edu
evansm1@georgetown.edu
            How Is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?


        In macroeconomic models of exchange rates, news maps directly into prices. The
effect of news on currency demands in these models is common knowledge and transac-
tions—though perhaps engendered by the change in exchange rates—play no role in
causing the change. In microeconomic models of asset prices, in contrast, transactions do
play a causal role in price determination (e.g., Glosten and Milgrom 1985, Kyle 1985).
The causal role arises because transactions convey information that is not common
knowledge. In this paper we test whether any part of the effect of news on exchange rates
is transmitted via transactions and, if so, what share is transmitted that way versus the
traditional direct channel.
        That transactions might play a role is motivated by recent empirical work demon-
strating a link between signed transaction volume (order flow) and nominal exchange rate
changes.1 In the models employed by these papers, order flow affects exchange rates as a
proximate determinant. The underlying determinant, which theory labels information, is
not specified, nor is it directly tested. This leaves open the nagging question of what
really drives the order flow. This paper is an attempt to address that question by examin-
ing whether macroeconomic news might be a determinant of order flow. This question is
distinct from whether volume is determined by news, a well-established property of many
speculative markets (see, e.g., Fleming and Remolona 1999).2


        1
            See, e.g., Payne (1999), Rime (2000), Evans (2002), and Evans and Lyons (2002a).
Order flow—a concept from microstructure finance—is the cumulation over time of               signed
trades. Trades are signed according to whether the initiator is buying or selling. (The market-
maker posting the quote is the non-initiating side.) For example, a sale of 1 unit by a trader acting
on a marketmaker’s quote is order flow of –1. In rational-expectations models, order flow is
undefined because all transactions in that setting are symmetric. A large empirical literature
within finance shows that signing trades this way provides considerable explanatory power (see
the review in Lyons 2001).
         2
           A volume effect is consistent with idiosyncratic portfolio rebalancing in response to
news. Under rational expectations, given the immediate unbiased adjustment in price that it
implies, one would not expect good news for the dollar to produce positive (or negative) order
flow in the aggregate; i.e., one would not expect a relative increase in executed transactions
initiated by dollar buyers. We return to this issue below when discussing potential simultaneity
bias.
                                                     1
        We estimate a trading model that distinguishes three sources of exchange-rate
variation. The first source mirrors traditional models—macro news that is impounded in
price immediately and directly (i.e., with no role for order flow). The second source is the
indirect effect of news via induced order flow.3 The third source is order flow unrelated
to public news (such as that due to banks’ changing risk tolerances, firms’ changing
hedging demands, or individuals’ changing liquidity demands; see, e.g., Evans and Lyons
2002a). We find that for the DM/$ market, all three sources of exchange rate variation are
significant. The flow of transacted orders between marketmakers (our measure of order
flow) varies considerably with macro news flow, such that at least half of the effect of
macro news on exchange rates is transmitted via order flow, the remainder being the
direct effect of news. We also find that when news arrives, there is an increase in the
relative importance of order flow in exchange rate determination, despite intuition from
macro models to the contrary. Together, the two news channels account for about 30
percent of long-horizon price variance (from intraday estimates).
       Though the literature linking exchange rates and news is well-developed, we are
the first to our knowledge to use order flow to sort out the relationship. The existing
literature has two branches: the first addresses the direction of exchange-rate changes
(first moments) and the second, later branch addresses exchange-rate volatility (second
moments). A common finding of the first branch is that directional effects from scheduled
macro announcements are difficult to detect at the daily frequency because they are
swamped by other factors affecting price. Intraday event studies find statistically signifi-
cant effects, particularly for employment and money-supply announcements, but R2
statistics are generally low.4 The second, later branch of this literature—which focuses on


       3
           That this channel might be operative is another reminder that order flow and demand
are not one to one. To clarify, consider a simple counter-example. In the common-knowledge
tradition of exchange rate economics, when positive public news arrives, demand increases,
causing price to increase—without any flow of transacted orders occurring or needing to occur.
This is incompatible with demand and order flow being one to one: the demand shift occurs
without the occurrence of order flow.
         4
           See, for example, Cornell (1982), Engel and Frankel (1984), Hakkio and Pearce (1985),
Ito and Roley (1987), Hardouvelis (1988), Ederington and Lee (1995), and Andersen et al.
(2002). The latter paper is more successful at finding systematic first-moment effects from
scheduled announcements. Note that explaining first moments within event windows for
                                                   2
news effects on volatility—is partly a response to the lack of strong news effects on first
moments.5 This work finds that the largest changes in exchange rates are linked to the
arrival of scheduled announcements. On the other hand, though major announcements
dominate the volatility picture at release, their ability to account for overall volatility
changes is less than that of systematic features such as ARCH and time-of-day effects
(Andersen and Bollerslev 1998).6
        Our paper departs from earlier work on macro news in two main ways. First, we
consider a broader set of macro news events. Scheduled announcements account for about
10 percent of the macro news arrivals we obtain from the Reuters Money Market
Headline News screen. (The median number of macro news arrivals per day in our
sample is 11.) This allows us to test whether this wider set of news types affects the
processes for transactions and returns in ways not examined previously. At the same time,
including a broad set of news types requires a change in estimation strategy because it is
not possible to measure ex-ante expectations for most of them (e.g., a report on the
Headline News screen of an official stating that the trade deficit is unsustainable). This
leads to the second of our main departures from earlier work on macro news: like
Rigobon and Sack (2002), we depart from the event-study approach to measuring impact
on asset prices and adopt instead an approach based on the state dependent heteroskedas-
ticity.7 Specifically, we identify (via GMM) the relative importance of direct and indirect



scheduled announcements does not translate into high explanatory power over first moments
generally: event windows for this type of macro news comprise a small fraction of the full time
series. In this paper, the sample of macro news events is much broader than the set of scheduled
announcements (addressed below).
         5
           See, for example, Goodhart et al. (1993), DeGennaro and Shrieves (1997), and Ander-
sen and Bollerslev (1998). See also the work on bond prices and announcements, e.g., Fleming
and Remolona (1999), Balduzzi et al. (2001), Fleming (2002), and Green (2002). The latter two
papers are especially relevant in that they use direct measures of order flow in fixed income
markets. Green (2002), for example, finds evidence that asymmetric information increases
following public macro announcements.
         6
            Accounting for volatility changes and accounting volatility levels of are not the same.
For example, abnormal volatility in response to heightened news arrivals may dissipate rapidly,
but that does not imply that trading induced by past news arrival cannot continue to contribute to
normal volatility (a point we return to below).
         7
           See the discussion in Rigobon and Sack (2002) comparing the merits of the event-study
and heteroskedasticity approaches. Omitted variable bias in event-study analysis is simply a
                                                    3
effects from news by allowing the variances of shocks to order flow and price to depend
separately on the rate of news arrival. These second moment conditions identify our
model and answer the central question before us, namely, whether order flow plays a role
in transmitting news to exchange rates. This approach, as in Rigobon and Sack (2002),
does not require measurement of news’ unanticipated component; it requires the weaker
assumption that one can distinguish periods in which the variance of macro news flow is
relatively high. We use news arrivals for this purpose.
       Why is news affecting exchange rates via order flow? Our preferred interpretation
is that participants in this market are drawing different inferences from common macro-
economic data. Whether it is rational to do so is beyond the scope of this paper. But the
phenomenon is certainly not limited to the FX market: think, for example, of differences
in analyst forecasts of future stock market indices, despite access to common information
about aggregate equity values (Harris and Raviv 1993).
       The remainder of the paper is in four sections. Section 1 describes our data and
presents some descriptive statistics. Section 2 presents daily analysis of the three sources
of price adjustment. Section 3 presents intra-daily analysis of the three sources. Section 4
concludes.


1. Data and Descriptive Statistics
       Our empirical strategy is two pronged, encompassing two data frequencies and
two complementary approaches to how macro news is transmitted to exchange rates. The
first approach applies at the daily frequency, the second at intraday frequencies (in our
case, five-minute observations). Daily analysis of exchange rate variation is interesting
because daily changes in nominal exchange rate are, to a first approximation, a martin-
gale. Any empirical model that explains daily price increments is therefore relevant for
explaining exchange rate levels at long horizons. This martingale property at the daily
frequency does not apply to intraday prices, which exhibit mean reversion, as we shall
show. The upshot is that disentangling different sources of daily exchange rate variation


manifestation of a point made above, namely, that specific effects are often swamped by other
factors affecting price.
                                                 4
provides a solid indication of decompositions at frequencies more familiar to ma-
croeconomists (e.g., monthly). But daily analysis does not convey the rich intraday
structure of news effects. Nor is it suited to addressing whether news makes order flow
more or less important in exchange rate determination. For these we turn to intraday
analysis.
        Our order flow and price data are drawn from time-stamped, tick-by-tick transac-
tions in the largest spot market—DM/$—over a four-month period, May 1 to August 31,
1996 (full 24-hour trading day). The data source is the same as that in Evans (2002) and
we refer readers there for additional detail. The transactions are from the Reuters Dealing
2000-1 system. At the time of our sample, Dealing 2000-1 was the most widely used
electronic dealing system: according to Reuters, over 90 percent of the world's bilateral
transactions between DM/$ marketmakers took place through the system.8 For every trade
executed on D2000-1, our data set includes a time-stamped record of the transaction price
and a bought/sold indicator. The bought/sold indicator allows us to sign trades for
measuring order flow.
        For our daily analysis, ∆pt is the change in the DM transaction price for purchases
of dollars from 5 pm BST (British Summer Time) on day t-1 to 5 pm BST on day t.9
When a purchase transaction does not occur precisely at 5 pm, we use the immediately
preceding purchase price. Daily order flow xt is the difference between the number of

trades initiated by dollar buyers and the number initiated by dollar sellers over the same
time interval (in hundred thousands, negative sign denotes net dollar sales).10 For our


        8
            At the time of our sample, transactions between marketmakers accounted for about 75
percent of total trading in major spot markets. This 75 percent breaks into two transaction
types—direct (bilateral) and brokered. Direct trading accounted for about 60 percent of trades
between marketmakers and brokered trading accounted for about 40 percent. For more detail on
the Reuters Dealing 2000-1 System see Lyons (2001) and Evans (2002).
         9
            Using prices from purchase transactions (i.e., transactions at the ask) eliminates return
reversals that would arise in prices that bounce randomly from bid to ask.
         10
            In direct trading between marketmakers, orders sizes are standardized, so variation in
size is much smaller than variation in the size of individual customer-marketmaker trades. Note
too that using measures of order flow based on numbers of transactions rather than size is
common in work on equity markets, even when both measures are available (see, e.g., Hasbrouck
1991). Our data set does include total dollar volume over our sample, which allows us to
calculate an average trade size; we use this below to interpret the estimated coefficients.
                                                     5
five-minute returns, which we denote ∆pi, we also use the immediately preceding
transaction when no transaction occurs precisely at the five minute mark. (With roughly 1
million transactions per day, the preceding transaction is generally only seconds earlier.)
Five-minute order flow xi is defined similarly to xt but over the five-minute interval

matching ∆pi.
       Our data on news arrivals come from the Reuter’s Money Market Headline News
screen (source: Olsen Associates). These screens are standard equipment on FX trading
desks and are used for high frequency monitoring by non-marketmaker participants as
well. Our daily frequency variable At is the number of news arrivals relating to U.S. or

German macroeconomics between 5:01 pm BST on day t-1 and 5 pm BST on day t. The
five-minute analogue of At is denoted Ai . The dummy variable Ai takes the value of one

if there was a news arrival (U.S. or German) during the previous five minutes. (We use a
dummy variable approach in the five-minute data because there are very few instances of
more than one news arrival during a single five-minute observation window.) In our four-
month sample, there are 315 five-minute windows in which at least one news arrival
occurs. Arrivals in the raw news data recorded after 20:00 hrs and before 6:30 (BST) are
quite rare and typically refer to previous news events within the heart of the trading day.
For this reason we do not include the few news arrivals that occur in this time interval in
our sample.
       As noted, our methodology allows us to consider a much wider set of macro news
types. This is important because our four-month sample sharply constrains our ability to
work with news arrivals on a fully disaggregated basis (i.e., by individual news types,
such as Unemployment Claims). Though there is no ready measure ex-ante expectations
for more than 80 percent of this full news set, there is a subset for which a commonly
used measure of expectations exists, namely the subset of scheduled macro announce-
ments (that measure being survey responses provided by Money Market Services and
used extensively in foreign exchange event studies). We secured these survey data from
Money Market Services so that we could measure innovations for this subset more
accurately and compare our results from this subset to results from the full set of macro

                                                6
news events. This provides an indication of the statistical power gained by extending the
news definition beyond the narrow definition for which the best expectation proxies exist.
Another (partial) disaggregation for which our sample provides some statistical power is
U.S. versus German news. Results for these two disaggregations are presented in the next
section.
        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the variables used in our daily analysis
(upper panel) and intraday analysis (lower panel). For the daily analysis these variables
include news flow At, price changes ∆pt, and order flow between marketmakers xt. The
median number of daily news arrivals is 11, 8 of which pertain to Germany. As noted,
these news events extend well beyond the scheduled announcements that are the focus of
most past work. (The most important scheduled announcements for explaining changes in
exchange rate volatility are employment, GDP, the trade balance, and durable goods; see
Andersen and Bollerslev 1998.) Our intraday analysis includes a variable not included in
the daily analysis, namely ni, the total number of trades over each five-minute interval.
This variable accounts for dependence on trading intensity in the intraday model, as we
shall see. Note that intraday price changes display (negative) autocorrelation, but only at
lag one. Thus, future price changes cannot be predicted from past changes beyond a five
minute horizon—a result confirmed by the ARMA model estimates in Evans 2002 (i.e.,
price changes follow an MA(1)). Order flow is much more persistent. For perspective,
we note that on the day with the most news arrivals (28), the realization of ∆pt was at

the 73rd percentile of its distribution, the realization of ∆xt was at its 92nd percentile, and

the realization of trading intensity ni was at its 86th percentile.
        Figures 1 and 2 provide more perspective on the announcement data. Figure 1
shows the sample distribution for all news arrivals (both U.S. and German) by 30-minute
interval. Figure 2 provides a list of the first twenty arrivals in the sample. These news
events clearly extend well beyond scheduled announcements. (Including only the latter
would leave many trading days in our sample without a single news event.) Note too that
none of the news arrivals (in Figure 2 or in the whole sample) correspond to events like
“such and such official says the dollar-DM market was quite volatile this morning.” This

                                                    7
kind of endogeneity in the flow of news would be problematic for our empirical strategy,
given its reliance on news-induced heteroskedasticity in returns. Note too the first of the
listed news items: that the German bond market will close for public holiday. It is
tempting to assert that this could not possibly affect order flow since it is perfectly
anticipatable. But even in this case, as extreme as it is, it is not clear that there cannot be
information content. Imagine a fixed-income portfolio manager in the U.S. that has been
thinking about shifting into or out of bonds in Germany, but who might not have had this
particular German holiday on his mind. The public news may induce him to trade right
away, in advance of the closure, and the innovation in his demand (and others like him)
can affect price. In short, this bit of information may not have been in the information sets
of all the relevant participants. We prefer to let the data speak: if these macro news items
are just noise then the rate of their arrival should not be correlated with trading activity or
exchange rate volatility.
       Whether news arrival is correlated with trading activity and volatility is addressed
in Figure 3. It presents a scatter plot of the number of news arrivals per day (At) against
the daily variance of returns and order flow. To measure the two realized variances more
precisely, we use a measure of integrated variance based on a five-minute sampling
frequency.11 From the figure there is clearly a relationship: the variances of both returns
and order flow are higher when the flow of macro news is higher. The positive link
between the variance of returns and news flow is well documented in the existing
literature. The positive link between the variance of order flow and news flow is new. Our
daily model gives this positive link more structure, to which we turn in the next section.
       As a final point regarding data, the major spot markets have recently undergone
some institutional changes. Since the time of our sample in 1996, trading between
marketmakers has migrated significantly from bilateral trading (the source of our data) to
brokered trading over the EBS and Reuters Dealing 2000-2 systems (see BIS 2002). Does
this render our analysis based on order flow obsolete? No, for two reasons. First, bilateral
trading between marketmakers accounts for the lion’s share of total trading through



       11
            See the Appendix for details on these integrated variance measures.
                                                     8
virtually all of the post Bretton Woods era. That the FX market is now more oriented
toward brokered trading does not render the type of data we use here obsolete for
understanding post Bretton Woods floating rates. Second, though it is true that the
specific order flow data we use is now a smaller share of the total, this does not imply that
order flow analysis is less useful going forward. Strategies for order flow measurement
and capture will need to change (e.g., extracting it from electronic broker systems). But
the role of order flow in conveying information, in theory and in practice, transcends
market structure. The types of information that order flow conveys—particularly types
with persistent price effects—are unlikely to change radically as the FX market changes
over time. Put another way, the underlying information structure of this market has more
to do with the properties of the asset being traded than it does with market structure per
se. Order flow should continue to convey dispersed information that needs to be aggre-
gated and subsequently impounded in price. The methodology we introduce here is more
robust than a cursory look at market structure might suggest.


2. Daily Analysis: Direct vs Indirect Effects from News
       Our daily analysis relies heavily on the portfolio shifts model of trading developed
in Evans and Lyons (2002a). Accordingly, rather than review that model’s details, our
presentation focuses on ways this paper extends that earlier framework. We base our daily
analysis on the portfolio shifts model because it serves three important purposes. First,
the model clarifies how and why causation runs strictly from order flow to price. Within
microstructure theory more broadly, this direction of causality is the norm (e.g., Glosten
and Milgrom 1985 and Kyle 1985). Second, the model clarifies why price determination
should depend most directly on a particular type of order flow, namely, the flow of orders
between marketmakers. (This measure of flow is the most transparent to the marketmak-
ers and therefore plays the most important role in updating their beliefs.) This feature of
the model corresponds well to reality and produces estimable equations because this type
of flow data is available (largely because this type of trading occurs electronically, unlike
data on trades between marketmakers and the public). Third, the model provides underly-
ing economics for why price effects from order flow should persist. The basic reason is

                                                 9
that flow innovations provide signals about stochastic portfolio shifts (such as those due
to changing hedging demands by a subset of agents). These portfolio shifts must be
reabsorbed in equilibrium by the rest of the market, thereby inducing persistent portfolio
balance effects on price.
        This paper’s extension of the portfolio shifts model introduces a macro news arri-
val whose implications for the exchange rate are not common knowledge.12 Specifically,
the information in news has two components. The first component is a common-
knowledge (or “mean”) part: all agents agree what the first part’s impact on the exchange
rate should be. (This will be the source of the direct effects on the exchange rate.) The
second component is the part whose implication for the exchange rate is not common
knowledge. Suppose, for example, that all agents do not have access to the same technol-
ogy for transforming the macro news into an exchange rate forecast. The information in
this second part is thus dispersed throughout the economy and for price-setting market-
makers to aggregate it, they need to learn from the public trades that are induced by it.13
         The model produces three basic channels through which information affects prices. The
first is the traditional direct channel for public information: the common-knowledge part of
macro news is reflected instantaneously in price, a process that does not rely in any way on the
flow of transacted orders. The second is the channel for the non-common-knowledge part of
macro news: information in the induced order flow is impounded in price as it is realized. The
third is the channel for information in other types of order flow, i.e., order flow unrelated to
macro news flow (such as trades motivated by shocks to individuals’ hedging demands or shocks
to banks’ effective risk aversions due to capital constraints, etc.).
        The model leads to the following empirical specification for daily price changes
and order flow:


        12
            An earlier version of this paper provides formal treatment of this change in informa-
tion structure. Though the change is fundamental, it does not involve a fundamental change in the
analytics, so we omit it here to conserve space. A copy of that earlier version is available at
haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons/macronewsold.pdf.
         13
            How do marketmakers respond to scheduled announcements in practice? For the major
announcements (which represent a small subset of our data), bank economists typically produce a
forecast of the announcement’s value (e.g., the employment report) that is distributed to that
bank’s marketmakers that morning. The sheet with the forecast will often include a prediction for
the exchange rate impact, but marketmakers are left to their own judgment regarding how to
respond. Our best reading from observing the process is that some price adjustment does indeed
occur rapidly across the market, with little apparent role for flow. But announcements often
induce follow-on trading, some of which comes later the same day from customers whose trading


                                                   10
                                      ∆pt = α xt + ξt + κ t                                (1)

                                        xt = et + ηt                                       (2)


       where ∆pt is the change in the exchange rate (DM/$) from the end day t-1 to end
day t and xt is order flow between marketmakers realized over the same period. The
parameter α captures the price impact of order flow, i.e., it reflects the information
content of order flow. Prices and order flow are subject to four shocks representing
different sources of information hitting the market. These shocks are mean zero, mutually
uncorrelated, and serially uncorrelated. The ξ t and κ t shocks represent information that is

impounded in price directly. ξ t is the common knowledge effect of macro news arrivals

on the exchange rate. κ t represents other information directly impounded in prices, i.e.,

information that is unrelated to both order flow or macro news events. Order flow is
driven by the et and η t shocks. The et shocks represent order flow effects from macro

news arrivals—the non-common-knowledge effect of the news. Shocks to order flow that
are unrelated to macro news (i.e., portfolio shifts arising from other sources such as
changing risk tolerances or hedging) are represented by the η t shocks.

       The estimation strategy in our daily analysis relies on identification through condi-
tional heteroskedasticity. The key conditioning variable is the number of macro news
arrivals between the end of day t-1 and the end of day t, At . We allow the variance of the

ξ t and et shocks to increase with the number of news arrivals:


                         Var (et ) = σ ( At )   and     Var (ξt ) = ω ( At )               (3)


       where σ (0) = ω (0) = 0 , with σ '(.) ≥ and ω '(.) ≥ 0 . This specification implies

that neither the ξ t nor the et shocks affect prices on days when there are no news




response is not instantaneous. It is these (unforecastable) customer trading responses that the
model is designed to capture.
                                                       11
arrivals. The shocks κ t and η t are independent of news, so their variances are unrelated

to At . We assume these variances are constant:


                              Var (κ t ) = sκ   and Var (η t ) = sη .                           (4)


       To estimate the model described in equations (1) – (4) we specify linear forms for
the variance functions σ (.) and ω (.) , which we later subject to diagnostic testing. The

parameters of these functions along with sκ and sη are estimated by the Generalized

Method of Moments (GMM), with conditions on second moments playing the central role
in identification. (Estimation details are described in the Appendix.) The answer to the
central question of this paper—does order flow help to transmit macro news to exchange
rates—amounts to a test of whether the parameter                 σ is positive and significant. The
relative importance of the direct and indirect news channels can be determined from the
relative sizes of the estimated parameters ω and σ. (The importance of the indirect effect
on price from the latter also depends on the magnitude of the estimated price impact
coefficient α.)
                  To the above specification we add one last feature: room for contempora-
neous returns to enter the order flow equation (2). An effect of returns on order flow is
not optimal within the motivating theory, but as an empirical matter, estimating an overly
restrictive model is not necessary. Specifically, we enrich the model in equations (1) and
(2) to the following:


                                        ∆pt = α xt∗ + ξt + κ t                                  (5)

                                          xt = xt∗ + xt+                                        (6)

                                          xt∗ = et + ηt                                         (7)

                                          xt+ = φ∆pt                                            (8)




                                                       12
        This specification includes an additional component of order flow, xt+ , which is

driven by contemporaneous returns. The parameter φ is easily estimated within our GMM
framework.
        To illustrate how identification through heteroskedasticity is achieved in the
model, consider how the two key parameters α and φ relate to the covariance between
price changes and order flow. Equations (5)-(8) imply the following expression for that
covariance:
                           Cov(∆p,x) = α(1+αφ)Var(e+η) + φVar(ξ+κ).


        Identification is achieved by considering how the moments in the data change
across states. In particular, the arrival of macro news affects both terms on the right-hand
side: from equation (3), both Var(e) and Var(ξ) increase, where the former is the indirect
order-flow effect on price and the latter is the direct effect on price. The resulting change
in Cov(∆p,x) depends on the values of α and φ. While this link alone is insufficient to
identify α and φ, these parameters also determine how macro news affects the variance of
price changes and order flow (see appendix). Taken together, data on changes in
Cov(∆p,x), Var(∆p), and Var(x) that are induced by daily variation in news arrival At
(through At‘s impact on Var(e) and Var( ξ)) are sufficient to identify all the parameters of
the model.14
        There are at least two reasons why contemporaneous returns might enter the daily
order flow equation.15 The first is aggregation bias. As we show in the Appendix, when
the intraday relationship between order flow and returns has an extended intertemporal
structure, then the simple sums that daily data represent cannot capture the relationship


        14
           The covariance equation above also clarifies why positive values of α or φ could in
principle account for the positive unconditional covariance between price changes and order
flow found in the data. The model estimates allow us to determine whether this covariance arises
because order flow has a positive price impact or because price changes feedback positively into
order flow. We also estimated a version of the model where total order flow x is included in
equation (5), as opposed to the non-feedback-driven flow x*. Estimates from this alternative
specification are not substantially different from those we report in Table 2.
        15
           At the daily frequency, order flow and lagged returns in our data are uncorrelated, so
we do not lose generality by including only contemporaneous returns in the order flow equation.
                                                   13
fully. In this case, time-aggregated order flow xt is not quite the right measure to include
as a regressor in equation (1). As a result, joint estimation of equations (5) through (8)
will produce a non-zero φ. The second reason why contemporaneous returns might enter
the daily order flow equation is intraday feedback trading.16 (In daily data, intraday
feedback trading would appear contemporaneous.) If intraday returns do not follow a
martingale then individuals might rationally choose a feedback strategy. For example, if
intraday returns exhibit reversals then negative feedback trading would be a natural
response.
        Though our specification in equations (5)-(8) address reverse causality (from re-
turns to order flow), there is another causality issue we have not yet addressed: Can
positive macro news cause an increase in both order flow and price (with no causality
from order flow to price)? This hypothesis seems plausible at first blush. It is, however,
inconsistent with rational expectations. The reason is because—under rational expecta-
tions—public information is impounded in price instantaneously. At the new price, which
fully impounds the public information, there is no longer motivation for dollar buying
relative to dollar selling.17 The change in price level may induce trading at the new price
(i.e., unsigned volume). But on average good news for the dollar will not produce positive
order flow in the aggregate at the new price (a relative increase in transactions initiated by
dollar buyers). In our model, this restriction imposed by rational expectations implies that
the news-driven return shock ξ t and the order flow shocks et and η t are orthogonal.


        16
            That feedback trading is even feasible on average, given that marketmakers are on both
sides of every transaction in our data, is not obvious. Why wouldn’t marketmakers anticipate
these inter-marketmaker feedback trades and attempt to undo the anticipatable effects on their
positions from the incoming orders? They would. But in equilibrium they would be unable to do
so by trading with other marketmakers: somebody has to take the other side of these trades. For
inter-marketmaker trading to be positive feedback on average, the trades of non-marketmakers
would have to be negative feedback on average. This is possible, but not very satisfying
intellectually. Osler (2002) reports evidence on the types of orders non-marketmakers actually
submit. For evidence on the currency transaction flows of institutional investors, a specific class
of non-marketmaker, see Froot and Ramadorai (2002).
         17
            One way to produce this non-causal correlation between order flow and price changes
is if marketmakers are able to execute dollar purchases against other marketmakers before price
adjusts to the public information. But this would require irrationality on the part of the quoting


                                                    14
        The theory on which we base our empirical models is subtler. Part of the public
news maps directly into price, as in the traditional story (the shock ξ t ). But if to some

degree market participants are drawing different inferences from common macro data,
then price-setting marketmakers need to clear the market by determining the inferences of
others (which they cannot know a priori). How do they learn them? The answer from
microstructure theory is that they learn from the sequence of submitted orders over time.
In this case, price instantaneously adjusts to the marketmaker’s rational expectation of the
market’s interpretation, and then goes through a period of gradual adjustment caused by
the sequence of transacted orders.


Daily Results
        We turn to the empirical model in equations (5) through (8) for sorting out the di-
rect versus indirect (via order flow) effects of news. The full empirical model embeds six
parameters, α , ω , σ , φ , sκ , and sη . The parameter α captures the price impact of order

flow. For the central question of this paper—how is macro news transmitted to exchange
rates—the key parameters are     ω and σ. ω governs the direct effect of news on price: the
greater the number of news arrivals At the higher the variance of this component of daily
returns. σ governs the direct effect of news on order flow: the greater the number of news
arrivals At the higher the variance of this component of daily order flow.18 The variance
sκ reflects the component of daily returns not explained by order flow or news. The

variance sη reflects the component of daily order flow not explained by news.




marketmaker: by not instantaneously impounding the public information in price he is permitting
trades at “stale” prices, clearly a losing proposition.
         18
            Though the derivation for model equation (1) does not call for order flow lags, whether
they are relevant empirically is a legitimate robustness concern. The daily analysis in Evans and
Lyons (2002a) shows, however, that order flow lags are insignificant when included in this
specification. Indeed, our order flow measure shows no persistence in daily data, nor do daily
returns, so we are not omitting any variables that a non-structural VAR approach would identify
as significant.
                                                    15
        Table 2 reports GMM parameter estimates together with standard errors calcu-
lated from the asymptotic covariance matrix (allowing for heteroskedasticity).19 The table
reports estimates for specifications using the flow of all news arrivals lumped together
(labeled All News) and also with the U.S. and German news introduced separately. In
both specifications the estimate of the price-impact parameter α is positive, as the theory
predicts, and statistically significant. (Its size corresponds to a price impact of roughly 50
basis points per $1 billion in order flow.) The parameter φ, which captures the contempo-
raneous effect of returns on order flow, is negative and significant. Recall that we offered
two reasons why a negative relationship might exist here: temporal aggregation bias and
negative feedback trading (on average) by marketmakers. We address these hypotheses in
more detail in our intraday analysis. (At this stage, let us simply add that it is comforting
that these results regarding news effects are robust to including a role for φ. The overall
news results are essentially unchanged when we restrict φ equal to zero.) With all news
arrivals lumped together, both of the key parameters ω and σ are significant and correctly
signed (positive), implying that both direct and indirect effects of news on price are
present. When U.S. and German news events are introduced separately (last column),
both of the ω estimates are significant and correctly signed (positive). Also, the effect of
German news on order flow volatility ( σ g ) is positive and significant. The effect of U.S.

news is of similar size but is not significant at the five percent level. (Recall that the
median number of daily German news arrivals is nearly three times that for U.S. news
arrivals.) In both specifications, the two (unconstrained) variance parameters sκ and sη

are quite significant. The next rows of the table report Wald statistics for various
parameter restrictions. The first two of these rows show that in the unrestricted model
(i.e., with U.S. and German news separated), the null that the direct and indirect news
channels are insignificant are strongly rejected. From the third row, the restriction that


        19
          Though not reported, we estimated the model allowing the price-impact parameter α to
vary linearly with the number of announcements: the coefficient on the incremental announce-
ment effect was positive but not significant. We also tested whether announcement effects on the
                                                                                 γ
variance of order flow might be non-linear (by modeling the variance of et as σ A ), but found no
                                                                                t


evidence of this either.
                                                   16
both of the ω and σ coefficient pairs are equal cannot be rejected, which provides support
for the restricted specification in the All News column.
        Important summary statistics are provided in the final rows of Table 2. The three
rows labeled with R∆2p present the fraction of total variance in price attributable on

average to the direct and indirect effects of news. The indirect channel (through order
flow) is roughly twice the size of the direct effect: 19 percent versus 10 percent, respec-
tively.20 The final row presents the P-value for the test that the direct effect is larger than
the indirect effect. In the restricted (All News) model, the hypothesis that the direct effect
is larger is rejected. (Recall that the restrictions on that model are not rejected.)
        To summarize, we do indeed find that order flow helps transmit macro news to
exchange rates. Roughly 20 percent of the daily movements in spot rates can be linked to
macroeconomic news through the indirect order-flow channel. Through the direct
(traditional) channel, macro news accounts for about 10 percent of daily price move-
ments.21 Given rejection of the test for whether R∆2p (direct ) > R∆2p (indirect ) , we conclude

that at least half of the effect of macro news on the exchange rate is transmitted via order
flow. Finally, let us provide a big-picture accounting from these point estimates. The
analysis in Evans and Lyons (2002a) shows that about 60 percent of daily DM/$ price
variation is due to order flow and about 40 percent is due to other factors. The results in
Table 2 shed light on both of these pieces. They suggest that the 60 percent from order
flow breaks into 20 percent that is induced by macro news and 40 percent that is not news


        20
            Given that much of the past work on news and exchange rates implicitly assumes that
the indirect channel is not present, we also estimate our daily model with the (rejected) restric-
tion that σ equals zero. We find that the R from the direct channel rises above 10 percent, but
                                              2

                                             ∆p


only to 13.6 percent, i.e., it does not rise to anywhere near the 29 percent we find for both
channels. This may help explain why the explanatory power of news in our model is relatively
high (see too the analysis below of the subset of scheduled announcements).
         21
            Noise in our measurement of news arrivals may bias down our estimates of the total
percentage of price variance from news flow, but it is not obvious why this should bias our
estimates of the relative importance of the direct and indirect channels. For this reason, we place
most significance on our results regarding relative importance. With respect to the possible
biasing down of the total percentage, note that our results are positive in this respect (i.e., we find
a large percentage relative to existing literature); eliminating the bias, if it exists, would only
make our result more striking.
                                                      17
induced. The 40 percent due to other factors in that earlier work breaks into 10 percent
from the direct effect of macro news and 30 percent that remains unaccounted for.


Robustness
       In this subsection we consider several potential robustness issues. First,
might our broad definition of macro news account for the relatively large share of
volatility due to public news arrival (29 percent)? To address this we turn to the
subset of our news data that represents scheduled macroeconomic announcements,
the subset for which we have ex-ante survey expectations for measuring announce-
ment innovations. We focus on four U.S. announcements in particular, all of which
are consistently among the most important in past event studies: Non Farm Payroll,
Durable Goods, Trade Balance, and Unemployment Claims.22 We create a set of
standardized forecast errors using the sample standard deviations of the measured
innovations. Then, for each day in the sample we construct an index At equal to the
sum of the absolute standardized forecast errors. Then we re-estimate our model in
Table 2 using this alternative measure of macro news flow. The results from this
version of the model are in Appendix Table 1.
       The results are similar in some ways to those in Table 2, but quite dissimilar
in other ways. They are similar in that the feedback trading parameter φ is still
negative and still significant. The key parameters ω and σ are also still positive and
significant (at the 4 and 6 percent levels, respectively). The big difference is in the
bottom line: the variance ratios are 0.014 for the direct channel and 0.028 for the
indirect channel (aggregated news case), implying that these scheduled announce-
ments account for only about 4 percent of total exchange rate variance. Thus, using
this more limited measure of news accounts for far less of the daily price variance
than the full set of Reuter’s Money Market Headline News. This is consistent with


       22
           We select these announcements to give the “scheduled announcement” model a greater
chance of success. In fact, results from including all the scheduled U.S. announcements for
which survey expectations are available are even poorer than the results we report, presumably
because most of these other announcements are insignificant for exchange rates (as shown in
earlier work). For German announcements, there is little empirical basis for selecting the more
significant announcement types so we include all those announcements for which we have survey
expectations.
                                                  18
past work, which shows that scheduled announcements account for less that 10
percent of daily price variance. Thus, it does appear that our broad definition of
macro news can account for our finding that a large share of volatility is due to
public news arrival.
       Appendix Table 1 also speaks to a related robustness check: might our definition
of macro news account for the indirect channel (via order flow) being twice as important
for exchange rate variance as the direct channel (i.e., 19 of 29 percent)? Note that the
ratio of indirect to direct effects in Appendix Table 1 remains about the same as those in
Table 2, namely 2 to1, suggesting that the relative importance of the indirect channel is
not due to our definition of news.
       As a third type of robustness check we turn to regression analysis to examine the
sources and form of heteroskedasticity. We consider (i) the extent to which news flow can
account for the conditional variance of returns and order flow and (ii) whether the linear
specifications of the variance functions σ ( At ) and ω ( At ) in our baseline model are
warranted. As described in the Appendix, we test for news-related heteroskedasticity by
regressing the daily conditional variance of returns on a constant and the daily news flow
At. We perform the same regression for the daily conditional variance of order flow. We
find a significant direct effect of news on the conditional variance of prices (see Appen-
dix Table 2). We also find a significant direct effect of news on the conditional variance
of order flow. The first of these two results is consistent with existing literature. The
second is new, though, and quite important to the economics underlying our model. (Both
results are consistent with the visual evidence in the scatter plots in Figure 3.) Regarding
potential non-linearity in the news flow effects, we find no evidence that squared news-
flow terms should be included in the regression.
       To summarize the robustness results above, we find that our inclusive definition
of macro news is important for explaining a large fraction of exchange rate variation. Our
news definition is also important for understanding why the model explains so much
exchange rate variation relative to existing literature. In contrast, our news definition does
not appear to be important for the result that the indirect macro news channel is at least as
important as the direct channel. Our regression analysis finds a strong effect of news flow

                                                 19
on order flow volatility: the order flow process is not orthogonal to public news, as
simple rational expectations models would predict. Finally, our regression results support
the linear specifications we adopt in our GMM model and corroborate that both direct and
indirect price effects from news are present.




3. Intraday Analysis: Direct vs Indirect Effects from News
       Our second approach complements the daily analysis above by examining intraday
data, specifically five-minute data. At this ultra-high frequency, we have sufficient power
to estimate both returns and order flow as state-dependent processes. These processes
allow the arrival of news to affect price dynamics quite generally. Also, our intraday
analysis allows us to estimate the percentage of price variation at different horizons that
comes from order flow shocks, and how that percentage changes with news arrival. This
is important for answering whether order flow plays a larger or smaller role in exchange
rate determination when news arrives. Finally, unlike our daily analysis, which permitted
only unconditional inferences, our intraday analysis allows us to draw conclusions about
news, order flow, and price conditional on trading intensity and price-impact horizon.
       Our intraday model, designed for use in five-minute data, extends the empirical
model in Evans (2002). This model takes the form:


                                     ∆pi = B ( L)vi + ε i                                 (9)
                                          ~
                                     xi = C ( L)vi                                       (10)


where now we use the subscript i to denote the five-minute frequency. Here, vi repre-
sents dispersed information shocks, i.e., bits of information that are first manifested in
order flow and then subsequently impounded in price. The dynamic responses of prices
and order flow to these dispersed information shocks are determined by the lag polyno-
                  ~
mials B( L) and C ( L) . The other term in the price equation corresponds to common-



                                                   20
knowledge news ε i . The vi and ε i shocks are mutually independent and serially
uncorrelated.
        There are two key identifying assumptions in this model: rational expectations and
imperfect substitutability across different-currency assets. To understand the first, note
that we require orthogonality between the common-knowledge news shock ε i and the
dispersed information shock vi . This orthogonality derives from the rational expectations
restriction that common-knowledge news shocks are impounded fully and instantaneously
in price (see the discussion of causality within the daily model). The second identifying
assumption maintains that all order flow xi represents dispersed information. Imperfect
substitutability together with rational expectations is sufficient to ensure this: with
imperfect substitutability (i.e., demand for foreign exchange that is imperfectly elastic),
all order flow conveys price-relevant information since all order flow requires price
adjustment to achieve market clearing.23 (The rational expectations assumption ensures
this information is dispersed rather than public.) Based on this specification in equation
(10) we shall address whether our intraday estimates are consistent with an aggregation-
bias explanation for the negative estimates of φ (reported in Table 2).
        In ultra-high frequency data, such as the five-minute data we examine in this sec-
tion, it is important to account for subtleties in the timing of dispersed information shocks
relative to the timing of order flow. In particular, the first event in the foreign exchange
trading process is a desire to transact on the part of the non-marketmaker customer. This
is not the order flow we measure, however. The trades between marketmakers measured
by xi are temporally downstream from the initial customer order. If, for example, some
information conveyed by customer orders is impounded in price when customer orders
are executed, then price is adjusting before trades between marketmakers are induced,
despite the fact that order flow—the customer order—is driving the price change (see
Evans 2001, pages 48-49). It is important to account for these initial stages of price


        23
           With perfect substitutability, in contrast, order flow can have price irrelevant compo-
nents. It is perhaps best to think of the dispersed information shock νi in equation (10) as a
composite shock that includes any information relating to narrowly defined fundamentals as well
as information relating to portfolio balance effects on price.
                                                   21
adjustment. Figure 4 provides additional perspective. The bottom line is that even when
causality is running wholly from order flow to price, the temporal link between our order
flow measure xi and price changes will involve both leads and lags.
        To develop an estimable model, we proceed in two steps. First, we assume that
                                               ~
                                                                                    bg
the lag polynomial in the order flow equation, C ( L) , can be written as Lm C L where

C ( L) −1 exists and follows an autoregressive process. m denotes the number of (five-
minute) periods between the first effects on price from a typical customer order and its
subsequent effect on order flow between marketmarkers, xi. With these assumptions we
can rewrite equation (9) as


                                      ∆pi = D( L) xi + ε i ,                               (11)


where D( L) = B( L) L− mC ( L) −1 . The polynomial D( L ) may take many forms depending
on the dynamic responses of price and order flow to dispersed information shocks. Notice
though that if m > 0, as illustrated in Figure 4, D( L ) should contain both leads and lags

(because the polynomials B( L) and C ( L) −1 contain only non-negative powers of L). We

follow Evans (2002) in using a six-term polynomial: D( L) = d1 L−4 + d 2 L−3 +....+ d 6 L as our
basic specification. Similarly, we find that the dynamics of order flow are well character-
ized if C ( L) −1 is an AR(10). In both cases, coefficient estimates on further leads/lags for
price changes, and lags for order flow, are not statistically significant when more general
specifications are estimated (see Evans 2002 for further diagnostics supporting these
specifications). The specification for D( L) implies that a customer order can begin to
have an impact on price approximately 20 minutes before it affects order flow between
marketmakers (i.e., m = 4).
       The second step is to test whether the lag polynomials and the error variances are
dependent on macro news having arrived. Evans (2002) reports strong evidence of
dependence on trading intensity, ni , measured as the number of transactions in observa-
tion window i. (Including trading intensity as a state variable is important for accommo-

                                                   22
dating the pronounced time dependence in volatility documented by Andersen and
Bollerslev 1998.) Here we extend the analysis by including macro news arrival as an
additional state variable. Specifically, we construct dummy variables Ai* and Ai that take
the value of one if there was a news arrival (either U.S. or German) during the previous
15 or 5 minutes respectively.24 The results in Appendix Table 3 shows that there is strong
evidence for state-dependence in the return equation polynomial D( L ) , with respect to

both Ai* and ni , but not the order flow polynomial C ( L) −1 . There is also strong evidence
of heteroskedasticity related to Ai and ni in the error variances.
        These results point to the need to incorporate state-dependence into our intraday
model. To this end, we consider an extension of (9) where D( L ) is replaced by

D( L, ni , Ai* ) , a state-dependent 6'th order polynomial:



                       D( L, n, A* ) = d1 (n, A* ) L−4 + d 2 (n, A* ) L−3 +....+d 6 (n, A* ) L ,



with state-dependent coefficients d j ( n, A* ) . Thus, d 6 ( n, A* = 1) is the coefficient on

lagged order flow when news arrived in the past 15 minutes, and trade intensity equals n.
We also allow for heteroskedasticity in the error variances, Var (ε i ) = Σ ε (ni , Ai ) and
Var (vi ) = Σ v (ni , Ai ) . State-dependence in the coefficients and variances is modeled as:


                      d j (n, A* ) = d j (0, A* ) exp( − n / γ ) + d j ( ∞, A* )(1 − exp( −n / γ ))

                       Σ j (n, A) = Σ j (0, A) exp( − n / γ ) + Σ j ( ∞, A)(1 − exp( − n / γ ))



where d j (0,0) , d j ( ∞,0) , Σ j (0,0) , and Σ j ( ∞,0) are the parameters to be estimated for

observations without a news arrival, and d j (0,1) , d j ( ∞,1) , Σ j (0,1) , and Σ j ( ∞,1) when


        24
           As noted, we a dummy variable approach here because there are very few instances
where there is more than one news arrival during a single 5-minute observation window. Note
too that for our intraday analysis there is no scope for using the MMS-measured expected values


                                                          23
there is a news arrival. Although these functional forms are somewhat specialized with
respect to variations in trading intensity, they do not restrict how the flow of news affects
price and order flow dynamics. Nor do they appear unduly restrictive when we subject
our model to specification tests below.


Intraday Results
        Table 3 presents GMM estimates of the intraday model. One measure of the im-
portance of state-dependence in the price change dynamics is the sum of the order flow
coefficients D(1, n, A* ) . This measures the long run impact of order flow on the price

level. The estimated D(1, n, A* ) varies considerably with both trading intensity and macro
news flow. This is consistent with the findings of our state-dependence tests. It also
accords with the non-parametric evidence on state-dependence in hourly price change
data reported in Evans and Lyons (2002b). The variation in the estimates of D(1, n, A* )
also underlines how the analysis of intraday data brings greater resolution of the study of
return and order flow dynamics.
        Before studying the implications of our estimates, we examine a number of diag-
nostic tests (see Appendix Table 4). First, we examine the null hypothesis of no state-
dependence in D(1, n, A* ) . Consistent with our earlier results, this hypothesis is strongly
rejected with respect to trade intensity and macro news flow. Second, we consider LM-
type tests for mis-specification in the estimated d j (n, A* ) and Σ j (n, A) functions. None of

these tests are statistically significant suggesting that the estimated model has captured
well the state-dependence related to trading intensity and news flow. Third, we examine
whether the model captures all the heteroskedasticity in the data. Here we find evidence
of some residual ARCH effects. So, while the model does appear to capture the state-
dependent dynamics of prices and order flow with respect to trading intensity and news
flow, it does not account for all the sources of heteroskedasticity. As a final diagnostic,
we examine whether the estimated intraday model can account for the negative estimates


for scheduled announcements (to measure announcement innovations) because even for monthly
announcements there are only four forecast errors in our sample for each announcement type.
                                                  24
of φ found in the daily model. Under the null of our intraday model, time-aggregated
(i.e., daily) order flow xt is only approximately equal to the correct measure of order flow
that should be present in equation (1). Moreover, as the appendix shows, estimates of the
intraday model imply that the approximation error is negatively correlated with daily
price changes. In other words, the negative estimates of φ can arise through time-
aggregation of the price and order flow dynamics that are described by our intraday
model.25
        We now turn of the point of this section: How is the information in macro news
transmitted to prices? To answer this question we use the GMM estimates to compute the
fraction of price variance attributable to dispersed information across different market
states. Specifically, our estimates allow us to write price changes as:


                                         ∆pi = B ( L, ni , Ai* )vi + ε i



where. B( L, n, A* ) = D( L, n, A* ) L4 C ( L) . Using this equation, we can compute the
fraction of the variance in a k-period price change due to vi shocks for a given level of
trade intensity and news flow. Table 4 shows that this fraction increases with trade
intensity and horizon (as in Evans 2002). More importantly, however, there is a marked
difference in the contribution according to whether or not news arrives. For all trade
intensities and horizons, dispersed information contributes more to the variance of price
changes when news has arrived. Indeed, comparison of the first and second panels shows
that order flow accounts for two to three times as much price variance when news has
arrived. Thus, order flow is more important in exchange rate determination when news
arrives, not less. The p-values for the hypothesis that there is no increase in the ratio,



        25
           It is noteworthy that the process followed by exchange rates essentially rules out posi-
tive feedback trading that is also rational. To understand why, recall from Table 1 that there is no
autocorrelation in returns beyond the first five-minute lag (negative in that case, and arising
primarily due to dispersion across marketmakers’ quotes at a given time, not as a median-price
phenomenon). Given that transactions are costly, and given that there is no positive autocorrela-
tion in returns, a positive feedback trading strategy would clearly be a negative-profit strategy.
                                                      25
shown in the lower panel, are all small, particularly at the 5-minute horizon and in the
limit as the horizon approaches infinity.




4. Conclusions
       This paper extends the literature on exchange rates and public news in three main
ways. First, our analysis is the first to address the presence and importance of an indirect
channel through which public news affects exchange rates. Second, methodologically we
depart from existing literature on exchange rates and public news by using heteroskedas-
ticity-based identification, a la Rigobon and Sack (2002), rather than the event-study
approach. Third, our methodology accommodates a much wider set of news events than
the scheduled macro announcements that are the focus of event studies.
       To address the indirect channel, we test whether macroeconomic news is transmit-
ted to exchange rates via transactions and if so, what share occurs via transactions versus
the traditional direct channel. Our model distinguishes three sources of exchange-rate
variation. The first source mirrors traditional models—public news that is impounded in
price immediately and directly (i.e., with no role for order flow). The second source is an
indirect effect of public news that operates via induced order flow. The third source of
exchange rate variation is order flow unrelated to public news arrival. No previous work
has disentangled these three sources empirically.
       Using DM/$ data from 1996, we find that all three sources of price variation are
significant. Our point estimates at the daily frequency imply that about two thirds of the
price effect from macro news is transmitted via order flow, with the remaining one third
being the direct impounding of news in price. Unconditionally, the total effect accounts
for about 30 percent of long-horizon exchange rate variance. We reject the null that the
direct channel is the more important, implying that the indirect channel accounts for at
least half of the effect of macro news on the DM/$ rate.26 These daily results are consis-
tent with those at the five-minute frequency. In particular, our five-minute results in Table




                                                 26
4 show that when news arrives there is a 100-200 percent increase in the importance of
order flow in price determination. This is inconsistent with the natural prior that order
flow should be less important when public news arrives. These intraday results apply
consistently when conditioning on both trading intensity and price-impact horizon.
        Why, one might ask, does this paper find that roughly 30 percent of total volatility
comes from news effects whereas past work finds that news effects account for less than
10 percent? We offer three possible reasons. First, we consider a much wider set of macro
news arrivals. When we used the more common, and more limited set of scheduled
announcements (for which survey expectations are readily available) we found they could
account for only about 5 percent of total volatility. Second, we adopt a heteroskedasticity
approach that does not rely on measuring ex-ante expectations for each of these news
arrivals (c.f., the event-study approach). Third, we use a less restrictive model in the sense
that we allow for an indirect channel and we allow flow responses to dispersed informa-
tion to persist over extended periods. Event studies impose window lengths that constrain
response times, typically less than one hour in intraday analysis. (In practice, response
times for some participants surely extend beyond an hour.) This constraint might appear
rather loose: past work finds that volatility changes from announcements dissipate
quickly (e.g., half-lives less than an hour). But volatility does not go to zero when shocks
to volatility dissipate; it settles back to a (statistical) mean. Volatility being at its mean
does not imply that last hour’s news is irrelevant for current trading. Rather, participants’
macro views evolve continuously and trades induced by those evolving views can hit the
market over extended periods.27
        It would be heroic indeed for us to assert that causality between order flow and
exchange rates is strictly one directional. It is, almost surely, two directional, at least


        26
            Whether this result generalizes to less actively traded currencies is beyond the scope of
our analysis.
         27
            Carlson (2002), for example, finds that in response to a public macro announcement,
liquidity in an electronic interbank trading system (Reuters 2000-2) remained significantly below
normal (and below its ex ante state) for about 2 hours. Even if average effects from news are
reflected in prices quickly, as in Andersen and Bollerslev (1998) and Cheung and Chinn (2001),
this does not imply that total effects are reflected quickly. Average effects may correspond to the


                                                     27
under some circumstances.28 That said, as a theoretical matter the portfolio shifts model
underlying our analysis provides a clear formalization of one-directional causality, even
in the face of public information. As an empirical matter, we allowed for the potential
presence of reverse causality but found no evidence supporting the most commonly
offered form, namely positive-feedback trading. Moreover, existing micro evidence of
causality running from order flow to prices in stock, bond, and FX markets is so strong
that there is no compelling basis for believing that causality runs wholly or even largely in
reverse (for micro evidence in stocks and bonds see the survey by Madhavan 2000). In
our judgment an indirect channel through which news affects exchange rates has indeed
been identified.




direct, or rational expectations channel, which one would expect to be reflected more quickly
than indirect, order-flow mediated effects.
         28
            One possible channel of reverse causality is when exchange rate changes are large
enough to induce distress at some institutions, causing them to sell into falling markets (and vice
versa) for risk management purposes.
                                                    28
                                           References


Andersen, T., and T. Bollerslev (1998), Deutsche mark-dollar volatility: Intraday activity
       patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies, Journal
       of Finance, 53: 219-265.
Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, C. Vega (2002), Micro effects of macro an-
       nouncements: Real-time price discovery in foreign exchange, NBER Working Pa-
       per 8959, May.
Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, and P. Labys (2001), The distribution of realized
       exchange rate volatility, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96: 42-
       55.
Balduzzi, P., E. Elton, and C. Green (2001), Economic news and bond prices, Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Bank for International Settlements—BIS (2002), Central bank survey of foreign exchange
       market activity in April 2001. Publication of the Monetary and Economics De-
       partment, BIS (at www.bis.org).
Carlson, J., (2002), One minute in the life of the DM/$: Public information in an
       electronic market, typescript, Purdue University, August.
Cheung, Y., and M. Chinn, (2001), Currency traders and exchange rate dynamics: A
       survey of the U.S. market, Journal of International Money and Finance, 20: 439-
       471.
Chinn, M. (1991), Some linear and non-linear thoughts on exchange rates, Journal of
       International Money and Finance, 10: 214-230.
Cornell, B. (1982), Money supply announcements, interest rates, and foreign exchange,
       Journal of International Money and Finance, 1: 201-208.
DeGennaro, R., and R. Shrieves (1997), Public information releases, private information
       arrival, and volatility in the foreign exchange market, Journal of Empirical Fi-
       nance, 4: 295-315.
Ederington, L., and J. Lee (1995), The short-run dynamics of price adjustment to new
       information, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 30: 117-134.

                                               29
Engel, C., and J. Frankel (1984), Why interest rates react to money announcements: An
       answer from the foreign exchange market, Journal of Monetary Economics, 13:
       31-39.
Evans, M. (2001), FX trading and exchange rate dynamics, NBER Working Paper 8116,
       February.
Evans, M. (2002), FX trading and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Finance, 57: 2405-
       2448.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons (2002a), Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
       Political Economy, 110: 170-180.
Evans, M., and R. Lyons (2002b), Time-varying liquidity in foreign exchange, Journal of
       Monetary Economics, 49: 1025-1051.
Fleming, M., (2002), Price discovery in the U.S. treasury market: The impact of order
       flow and liquidity on the yield curve, typescript, New York Federal Reserve Bank,
       September.
Fleming, M., and E. Remolona (1999), Price formation and liquidity in the U.S. treasury
       market, Journal of Finance, 54: 1901-1915.
Flood, R., and A. Rose (1995), Fixing exchange rates: A virtual quest for fundamentals,
       Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 3-37.
Frankel, J., and K. Froot (1990), Chartists, fundamentalists, and trading in the foreign
       exchange market, American Economic Review, 80: 181-185.
Frankel, J., and A. Rose (1995), Empirical research on nominal exchange rates, in G.
       Grossman and K. Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier
       Science: Amsterdam, 1689-1729.
Froot, K., and T. Ramadorai (2002), Currency returns, institutional investor flows, and
       exchange rate fundamentals, NBER Working Paper 9101, August.
Glesjer, H. (1969), A new test for heteroskedasticity, Journal of the American Statistical
       Association, 64: 316-323.
Glosten, L., and P. Milgrom (1985), Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market
       with heterogeneously informed agents, Journal of Financial Economics, 14: 71-
       100.

                                                30
Goodhart, C., S. Hall, S. Henry, and B. Pesaran (1993), News effects in a high-frequency
       model of the sterling-dollar exchange rate, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8: 1-
       13.
Green, C., (2002), Economic news and the impact of trading on bond prices, typescript,
       Emory University, May, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Greene, William H. (1997), Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.
Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally efficient
       markets, American Economic Review, 70: 393-408.
Hakkio C., and D. Pearce (1985), The reaction of exchange rates to economic news,
       Economic Inquiry, 23: 621-635.
Hardouvelis, G. (1988), Economic news, exchange rates, and interest rates, Journal of
       International Money and Finance, 7: 23-25.
Harris, M., and A. Raviv (1993), Differences of opinion make a horse race, Review of
       Financial Studies, 6: 473-506.
Hasbrouck, J. (1991), Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of
       Finance, 46: 179-207.
Hasbrouck, J., and D. Seppi (2001), Common factors in prices, order flows, and liquidity,
       Journal of Financial Economics, 59: 383-411.
Isard, P. (1995), Exchange Rate Economics, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
       UK.
Ito, T., and V. Roley (1987), News from the U.S. and Japan: Which moves the yen/dollar
       exchange rate? Journal of Monetary Economics, 19: 255-277.
Jones, C., G. Kaul, and M. Lipson (1994), Transactions, volume, and volatility, Review
       of Financial Studies, 7: 631-651.
Jones, C., and M. Lipson (1999), Execution costs of institutional equity orders, Journal of
       Financial Intermediation, 8: 123-140.
Kandel, E., and N. Pearson (1995), Differential interpretation of public signals and trade
       in speculative markets, Journal of Political Economy, 103: 831-872.
Killeen, W., R. Lyons, and M. Moore (2001), Fixed versus flexible: Lessons from EMS
       order flow, NBER Working Paper 8491, September.

                                                31
Kyle, A. (1985), Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica, 53:1315-35.
Lyons, R. (2001), The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press, published
       December (chapters at www.haas.berkeley.edu/~lyons).
Madhavan, A. (2000), Market microstructure:A survey, Journal of Financial Markets,
       3:205-258.
Mark, N. (1995), Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon predict-
       ability, American Economic Review, 85: 201-218.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff (1983a), Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies,
       Journal of International Economics, 14: 3-24.
Meese, R., and K. Rogoff (1983b), The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange rate
       models, in J. Frenkel (ed.), Exchange Rate and International Macroeconomics,
       University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Newey, W., and K. West (1987), A simple positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
       autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica, 55: 703-708.
Osler, C. (2002), Currency orders and exchange-rate dynamics: An explanation for the
       predictive success of technical analysis, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Payne, R. (1999), Informed trade in spot foreign exchange markets: An empirical
       investigation, typescript, London School of Economics, January.
Rigobon, R., and B. Sack, (2002), The impact of monetary policy on asset prices, NBER
       Working Paper 8794, February.
Rime, D. (2000), Private or public information in foreign exchange markets? An
       empirical analysis, typescript, University of Oslo, March.




                                               32
                                   Table 1: Sample Statistics

 A: Daily Data                                                                      News Arrivals
                     ∆pt          ∆x t      | ∆pt |    | ∆xt |         US:   Atus     German: Atg         Total: At
        5%         -11.9         -308        0.1         5               0                    3               5
       25%          -3.8          -61        1.4        28               1                    6               9
       50%           0.3            8        3.7        83               2                    8              11
       75%           3.4           91        5.9       140               5                   12              16
       95%           6.9          186       11.9       319               7                   19              22
       Max          12.4          339       20.7       449               9                   23              28
       Min         -20.7         -449        0.0         0               0                    0               0
     Sdt. Dev.       5.9         136.4       3.8       97.9             2.5                  5.2             6.3
     Skewness       -0.8          -0.6       1.5        1.5             0.7                  0.6             0.2
     Kurtosis        3.8          4.5        6.1       4.9              2.4                  3.0             2.7

 B: 5-Minute Data
                         ∆pi                ∆xi              | ∆pi |                   | ∆xi |              ni
        5%               -1.4                -9               0.0                        0                   2
       25%               -0.3                -2               0.1                        1                   6
       50%                0.0                 0               0.3                        3                  12
       75%                0.3                 3               0.7                        5                  21
       95%                1.3                 9               1.7                       12                  44
       Max                5.0                69               7.9                       72                 212
       Min               -7.9               -72               0.0                        0                   2
     Sdt. Dev.            0.8                5.6              0.6                      4.2                 15.5
     Skewness            -0.2                0.1              2.2                       3.2                 3.4
     Kurtosis             7.4               12.6             10.8                      22.9                23.2

                                      Autocorrelations (p-values)
         Lag=1       2            3         4        5         6                      12           18            24
∆pi     -0.305    -0.010        -0.004    -0.003      -0.004         0.013           0.004        0.018      0.004
        (0.00)    (0.35)        (0.76)    (0.79)      (0.68)        (0.23)          (0.69)       (0.06)     (0.64)

xi       0.231     0.105         0.093     0.077       0.060         0.058           0.027        0.023      0.004
        (0.00)    (0.00)        (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.01)     (0.65)

Notes: ∆pt is 1000 times the change in the last DM purchase price for dollars between 4:00 pm on
day t and day t-1. ∆x t is the total interdealer order flow over the same time interval. ∆pi and xi are
the corresponding price changes and order flows during 5-minute interval i, and ni is the total number
             us       g
of trades, At and At are respectively the number of macro news arrivals observed on the Reuters
Money Market Headline News screen relating to the US and Germany between 4:00 pm on day t and
day t-1. Autocorrelations are computed from five-minute data by GMM, and the p-values are
calculated from Wald tests of the null hypothesis of a zero correlation (allowing for conditional
heteroskedasticity).
                              Table 2: Daily Model Estimates


  ∆pt = α xt* + ξt + vt      with     VAR (ξ t ) = ω At , VAR (κ t ) = sκ

   xt = xt* + xt+            with     xt* = et + ηt , VAR (et ) = σ At , VAR(η t ) = sη , xt+ = φ∆pt

                                           All News                         US vs German News
      Parameters               Estimate           Std. Err.             Estimate         Std. Err.
            α                     0.031            (0.002)                   0.031        (0.002)
            φ                    -2.051            (0.172)                  -2.041        (0.172)
            sκ                   83.831           (10.446)                  81.415        (9.553)
             sη                   4.056            (0.539)                   4.047        (0.532)
            ω                     2.444            (0.629)
            σ                     0.138            (0.035)
                    ωus                                                      3.940        (1.866)
                    ωg                                                       2.097        (0.916)
                    σ us                                                     0.112        (0.089)
                    σg                                                       0.145        (0.041)

      Wald Tests:                                                       Statistic         P-value
      ω us = ω g = 0                                                        62.703        (0.000)
      σ us = σ g = 0                                                        16.111        (0.000)
 ω us = ω g & σ us = σ g                                                     2.072        (0.355)

    Variance Ratios              Ratio             Std. Err.                Ratio        Std. Err.
     R∆2p ( direct )                0.09            (0.035)                  0.11         (0.035)
     R∆2p (indirect )               0.20            (0.061)                  0.18         (0.054)
     R∆2p (total )                  0.29            (0.072)                  0.29         (0.071)

P-value: direct>indirect                            (0.023)                               (0.121)

Notes: The table reports GMM parameter estimates and asymptotic standard errors (corrected for
heteroskedasticity) in parentheses. The Wald statistics are for the null hypothesis listed; p-values are
reported in parentheses. The standard errors reported for the variance ratios are computed from a
                                                    2                   2
Monte Carlo experiment with 5000 replications. R∆p ( direct ) and R∆p (indirect ) are the fraction of the
daily variance in prices attributed to news arrival via the direct and indirect channels. The p-value in
                                                 2              2
the last line is for the null hypothesis that R∆p ( direct ) > R∆p (indirect ) and is calculated from the
Monte Carlo experiment.
                               Table 3: Intraday Model Estimates (GMM)

  ∆pi = D( L, ni , Ai* ) xi + ε i + ωi − ωi −1                     with Var (ε i ) = Σ ε (ni , Ai ) , Var (ωi ) = Σ ω (ni , Ai )
            −1
   C ( L) xi = vi                                                  with Var (vi ) = Σ v (ni , Ai )

Price Eq.: No News Arrival                            xi +4            xi +3           xi +2            xi +1             xi              xi −1
Coefficients in       D( L, 0,    Ai∗   = 0)        0.030            0.039            0.033           -0.060            -0.106          -0.048
                                                   (0.024)          (0.052)          (0.199)          (0.042)          (0.022)          (0.027)
Coefficients in       D( L, ∞, Ai∗ = 0)             0.113            0.219            0.491            0.705            -0.239          -0.025
                                                   (0.104)          (0.189)          (0.603)          (0.148)          (0.062)          (0.082)

                                                  Σε (0, 0)        Σε (∞, 0)        Σω (0, 0)       Σω (∞, 0) D(1,0,0)               D(1, ∞,0)
                                                    0.000            0.010            0.002            0.000            -0.112           1.265
                                                    (N/A)          (<0.001)         (<0.001)           (N/A)           (0.031)          (0.105)

Price Eq.: News Arrival                               xi +4            xi +3           xi +2            xi +1             xi              xi −1
Coefficients in       D( L, 0,    Ai∗   = 1)       -0.091            0.012            0.041           -0.199            0.073            0.020
                                                   (0.062)          (0.057)          (0.043)          (0.076)          (0.067)          (0.058)
Coefficients in       D( L, ∞, Ai∗ = 1)             0.502            0.061            0.327            0.784            -0.607           0.086
                                                   (0.175)          (0.178)          (0.105)          (0.218)          (0.160)          (0.148)

                                                   Σε (0,1)        Σε (∞,1)         Σω (0,1)        Σω (∞,1)         D(1,0,1)        D(1, ∞,1)
                                                    0.000            0.006            0.002            0.000            -0.146           1.153
                                                    (N/A)           (0.002)         (<0.001)           (N/A)           (0.080)          (0.221)

Order Flow Eq.                                        xi −1            xi −2            xi −3           xi −4            xi −5            xi −6
                       −1
Coefficients in C ( L)                              0.210            0.036            0.048            0.033            0.019            0.025
                                                   (0.014)          (0.013)          (0.012)          (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.011)
                                                      xi −7            xi −8           xi −9            xi −10
                                                    0.015            0.017           -0.016            0.020
                                                   (0.010)          (0.012)          (0.010)          (0.010)

                                                  Σ v (0, 0)       Σ v (∞, 0)       Σ v (0, 0)       Σ v (∞,1)
                                                    0.000            0.032            0.000            0.030
                                                    (N/A)           (0.002)           (N/A)           (0.002)

Notes: GMM estimates with asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis corrected for conditional
heteroskedasticity and an MA(1) error term. (Coefficients and standard errors in the first two panels
                                                                                                                                               ∗
are multiplied by 100.) The state-dependent polynomial in the price equation is D ( L , ni , Ai ) =
             ∗   −4             ∗    −3                     ∗                 ∗
 d1 ( ni , Ai ) L + d 2 ( ni , Ai ) L + .... + d 6 ( ni , Ai ) L where Ai is a dummy variable equal to one if there was
a macro news arrival during the previous 15-minutes (i.e. 3 observation windows). State-dependency
                                                                                                                 ∗              ∗
in the coefficients and variances is modeled as                                                     d j ( ni , Ai ) = d j (0, Ai ) exp( − ni / γ ) +
            ∗
 d j (∞ , Ai )(1 − exp( − ni / γ )) , and           Σ j ( ni , λ ) = Σ j (0, Ai ) exp( − ni / γ ) + Σ j ( ∞ , Ai )(1 − exp( − ni / γ ))     where
γ = 100 , and Ai is a dummy variable equal to one if there was a news arrival during the previous 5-
mintues.
      Table 4: Percentage Price Variance From Order Flow Shocks

 News Arrival
                                        Horizon (minutes)
                                5             30               60             120             •
  Trade intensity n
          10                   5.03          10.49            11.73          12.99          13.35
                              (1.47)         (5.44)           (6.89)         (8.54)         (9.06)
          20                   9.87          17.97            19.26          20.50          20.84
                              (2.59)         (8.27)           (9.88)        (11.48)        (11.94)
          30                 15.83            25.51           26.62          27.63          27.91
                             (4.12)          (10.87)         (12.52)        (14.09)        (14.52)


 No News Arrival
                                        Horizon (minutes)
                                5             30               60             120             •
  Trade intensity n
          10                   1.45            2.63           2.53            2.41           2.37
                              (1.17)          (2.72)         (3.43)          (4.34)         (0.52)
          20                   3.63            7.23           7.70            8.18           8.32
                              (1.27)          (2.71)         (3.14)          (3.59)         (0.77)
          30                   6.54          13.36          14.46            15.48          15.76
                              (1.58)         (3.32)         (3.64)           (3.94)         (1.30)


 P-values: No increase in variance ratio
                                        Horizon (minutes)
                                5              30              60             120             •
  Trade intensity n
          10                   0.02           0.04            0.06            0.08          0.01
          20                   0.00           0.02            0.03            0.05          0.01
          30                   0.00           0.03            0.05            0.08          0.02


Notes: Estimated from five-minute data (model in Table 3). The upper two panels report the
percentage of price variance over various horizons due to order flow shocks, given trade intensity n,
with and without concurrent news arrival. (From Table 1, the median number of trades n per five-
minute interval is 12 and the 75th percentile is 21.) The standard errors reported in parenthesis in
the upper panels, and p-values shown in the lower panel are calculated from 5000 Monte Carlo
draws from the estimated asymptotic distribution of the GMM estimates.
                    Figure 1: Sample Distribution of News Arrivals




120



100



 80



 60



 40



 20



  0
      6.30
             7.00
             7.30
             8.00
                    8.30
                    9.00
                            9.30
                           10.00
                                   10.30
                                   11.00
                                   11.30
                                           12.00
                                           12.30
                                           13.00
                                           13.30
                                                   14.00
                                                   14.30
                                                   15.00
                                                           15.30
                                                           16.00
                                                           16.30
                                                           17.00
                                                                   17.30
                                                                   18.00
                                                                   18.30
                                                                           19.00
                                                                           19.30
                                                                           20.00
                                                                           20.30
Notes: Distribution of all news arrivals by 30 minute interval starting at the interval
centered at 6:30 BST and ending at the interval centered at 20:00 BST. Sample: May 1 to
August 31, 1996. Data on news arrivals are from the Reuters Money Market Headline
News screen.
                            Figure 2: Macro News Sample


 Date       Time                                 News

05/01/96   6:00:20     GERMAN BOND MARKET CLOSES FOR PUBLIC HOLIDAY
05/01/96   13:05:22    MARCH U.S. LEADING INDICATORS SHOW ECONOMY EASING
05/01/96   14:00:50    U.S. MARCH CONSTRUCTION SPENDING ROSE 3.1 PCT
05/01/96   14:10:14    MARCH U.S. CONSTRUCTION SPENDING REBOUNDS STRONGLY
05/02/96   6:05:18     GERMAN MARCH IMPORT PRICES CLIMB 0.3 PCT M/M
05/02/96   8:33:10     BUNDESBANK DOES NOT PLAN NEWS CONFERENCE TODAY
05/02/96   9:48:20     GERMAN CALL MONEY FALLS BACK TO 3.30/40 PCT
05/02/96   10:50:08    BUNDESBANK LEAVES INTEREST RATES UNCHANGED
05/02/96   10:51:56    GERMAN MARCH INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT DATA DUE 1130 GMT
05/02/96   12:30:40    U.S. JOBLESS CLAIMS FELL IN LATEST WEEK
05/02/96   12:31:00    U.S. Q1 1996 REAL GDP ROSE 2.8 PCT
05/02/96   14:00:30    U.S. MARCH FACTORY ORDERS ROSE 1.5 PCT
05/02/96   14:34:06    BUNDESBANK STEERING MARK EVEN LOWER—ANALYSTS
05/02/96   15:01:54    U.S. Q1 GDP SURGE SEEN JUST A BLIP IN MODEST TREND
05/02/96   15:10:32    GERMAN EMPLOYER TO OPPOSE ANTI-WAGE DUMPING LAW
05/03/96   9:56:32     GERMAN CALL MONEY EASES SLIGHTLY AHEAD OF WEEKEND
05/03/96   12:30:38    U.S. APRIL NON-FARM PAYROLLS ROSE 2,000
05/03/96   12:31:00    U.S. MARCH PERSONAL INCOME ROSE 0.5 PCT
05/03/96   12:38:44    U.S. JOBLESS RATE LOWER BUT LABOR MARKET LOOKS WEAK
05/03/96   13:42:16    MARCH US INCOME DATA SHOW MODEST GROWTH, INFLATION


Notes: The figure shows the first 20 macro news arrivals in our sample (May 1 to August 31,
1996).
                Figure 3: Daily Price and Order Flow Volatility




VAR                                          VAR
 ∆pt                                          xt




           # News Arrivals At                               # News Arrivals At




Notes: Daily data from May 1 to August 31, 1996. Data on news arrivals At are from the
Reuters Money Market Headline News screen. Daily realized variances for ∆pt and xt are
integrated variance measures based on a five-minute sampling frequency (Andersen et al.
2001).
     Figure 4: Time-line of Information Flow at Ultra-High Frequencies



            Phase 1                                Phase 2                        Phase 3




      Public          Public          Inter-                       Inter-          Public
      Quote           Trade           dealer      . . .            dealer          info
      Requests                        trade #1                     trade #n        arrival



        ∆ P1            ∆ P2           ∆ P3       . . .            ∆Pn+2            ∆Pn+3


                                        x1        . . .              x




Notes: The response of price to order flow in ultra-high frequency data takes place as a
series of increments that can be split into three phases. In the first, price is responding to
public order flow (∆P1 and ∆P2), but before any trade between marketmakers (dealers) is
realized. In the second phase, inter dealer order flows xi induced by the public order
become the causal driver of additional price adjustment. The third phase includes any
price changes due to subsequent public news that is correlated with the initial public trade
(i.e., for which the initial public trade provides a signal). Jones and Lipson (1999) provide
a nice discussion of the first of these price changes ∆P1: When customers call various
banks for quotes, often these banks know something about whether the trade will be a buy
or sell. So even those banks who do not receive the ultimate order have learned some-
thing about the trade before it is executed. Some of this information becomes impounded
in price before the trade is realized. Evans (2002) provides analysis of the second of these
price changes ∆P2 (see especially pages 48-49): price adjusts to public order flow upon its
execution, which occurs before the induced interdealer order flows. For detail on the
phase-2 causal link between rounds of (hot potato) interdealer order flow and prices ∆P3
through ∆Pn+2, see Lyons (1997).
    Appendix

   Daily Data

The reduced form of the model presented in (5) - (8) is:


                                   ∆pt = α (et + η t ) + ξ t + κt ,

                                    xt = (1 + φα) (et + ηt ) + φ (ξ t + vt ) ,


where V ar (ξ t ) = ωAt , V ar (κt ) = sκ , V ar (et ) = σAt , and V ar (ηt ) = sη . For the model
where At identiÞes all the news items in day t, ω and σ are parameters. In the model where
                                                   g
we separate US and German news items, A0t = [Aus
                                              t , At ] , ω = [ω us , ω g ] and σ = [σ us , σ g ] .

To Þnd the GMM estimates, we Þrst Þnd the variances and covariance for price changes and
order ßow implied by the equations above:


                           V ar (xt ) = (1 + φα)2 (σAt + sη ) + φ (ωAt + sκ ) ,

                         V ar (∆pt ) = α2 (σAt + sη ) + (ωAt + sκ ) ,

                   Cov (xt , ∆pt ) = (1 + φα) α (σAt + sη ) + φ (ωAt + sκ ) .


Next, we construct empirical counterparts to these theoretical moments in the form of the
integrated variances and covariance from the Þve-minute data:

                   X
                   288                              X
                                                    288                                   X
                                                                                          288
      V (∆pt ) =         ∆p2it ,        V (xt ) =         x2it ,   and CV (xt , ∆pt ) =         (∆pit xit ) ,
                   i=1                              i=1                                   i=1


where the subscript “it” denotes the i0 th. 5-minute observation on day t. The variables
V (∆pt ) , V (xt ) and CV (xt , ∆pt ) measure the realized volatility in price changes and order
ßow that, under suitable conditions, provide us with unbiased and highly eﬃcient estimates
of actual volatility (see, Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Labys 2001). [V (∆pt ) and V (xt )
are plotted in Figure 3.]



                                                           A1
   Table 2 reports GMM estimates based on the following set of moment conditions:


                       0 = E [{V (∆pt ) − V ar (∆pt )} ⊗ Zt ] ,

                       0 = E [{V (xt ) − V ar (xt )} ⊗ Zt ] ,

                       0 = E [{CV (xt , ∆pt ) − Cov (xt , ∆pt )} ⊗ Zt ] ,
                             h³                ´               i
                                         α
                       0 = E ∆pt − 1+αφ      xt (xt − φ∆pt ) ,


where Zt is a vector of instruments. The Þrst three conditions imply that the diﬀerence
between realized volatility any the (co)variance implied by the model is uncorrelated with
each instrument. The fourth condition follows from the fact that shocks to the price equation,
ξ t +κt , are uncorrelated with x∗t = et +ηt . In the case of the All News model, we use a constant
and At as instruments, and when US and German news are separated we use a constant,
          g
Aus
 t , and At .

   The ratios reported in the lower panel of Table 2 are computed as

                          2              V arT (ξ t + κt ) 2
                         R∆p (direct) =                   R,
                                           V arT (∆pt ) ξ
                                         α̂2 V arT (x∗t ) 2
                       R2∆p (indirect) =                 R,
                                          V arT (∆pt ) e
                             2             2
                          R∆p  (total) = R∆p  (direct) + R2∆p (indirect),


where V arT (.) denotes the sample variance of daily observations, and a “ ^” denotes the
GMM parameter estimate. R2e and Rξ2 identify the average contribution of news-related
shocks to the integrated variance of the residuals in the order ßow and price change equations
                                   ¡          ¢                   ¡         ¢
and are computed as Re2 = σ̂At / σ̂At + ŝη and Rξ2 = ω̂At / ω̂At + ŝκ , where At is the
sample average of At . The standard errors associated with all the ratios are computed from
a Monte Carlo simulation with 5000 replications based on the asymptotic distribution of the
GMM estimates.
   Appendix Table 2 provides supplemental evidence on the daily relation between the
volatility and the ßow of news items. The upper (lower) panel reports results from regressions

                                               A2
of the integrated volatility of price changes (order ßow) on the daily ßow of all news items,
                                      g
At , US items, Aus
                t , and German items At . Consistent with the results in Table 2 and the

visual evidence in Figure 3, all three regressors are statistically signiÞcant. We also report
several diagnostics associated with these regressions. Under the column headed “Non-linear”,
are p-values for chi-squared LM tests excluding squared news terms. None of the tests are
signiÞcant, providing support for the linear variance functions of our daily model. There
is little evidence of residual serial correlation or heteroskedasticity in the price volatility
regressions. In the case of order ßow, the presence of residual serial correlation indicates that
daily changes in the volatility of order ßow are not completely accounted for by variations in
the ßow of news. To see whether this feature of the data materially aﬀected our results, we
re-estimated the daily model using the Newey-West weighting matrix allowing for an MA(1)
error structure. The parameter estimates (and standard errors) are very similar to those
shown in Table 2.


   Intraday Data

Our analysis of the intraday data draws on Evans (2002). The data set constitutes a sequence
of irregularly spaced observations on a continuous trading process. At some points in the
sample, the gaps between successive trades span many minutes, while at others several trades
appear with the same second-by-second time stamp. We do not attempt to directly model
these irregular timing patterns. Instead, we use prices, order ßow, trading intensity, and
news ßow measured relative to a Þxed Þve-minute observation interval. One consequence of
adopting a Þxed observation interval is that there are periods of the day when no transactions
take place during an interval. We designate observations from these periods as “missing”.
Evans (2002) describes how GMM estimation can be modiÞed to deal with these observations
and we refer interested readers to that paper for further estimation and testing details.
   To estimate the intraday model, we need to be precise about the relation between the
prices we observe in the data set and the equilibrium market price. Prices in the data set
come in two forms. If a dealer initiating a transactions buys dollars, the transaction price

                                              A3
equals the ask quote in DMs per dollar oﬀered by the other dealer. We refer to this as the
DM purchase price for dollars, pask . If the dealer initiating a transaction sells dollars, the
transaction price will equal the bid quote given by the other dealer. We refer to this as the
DM sale price for dollars, pbid . Evans (2002) argues that the lack of transparency in direct
dealer trading (and diﬀerences between the mechanisms for direct and brokered interdealer
trading) allows for the existence of an equilibrium price distribution without introducing
arbitrage opportunities.
   To formalize this idea, our intraday model assumes that equilibrium in the market at
a point in time is described by a distribution of purchase prices and a distribution of sales
prices. Let pask
             i   and pbid
                      i   denote observed prices drawn randomly from the respective dis-
tributions of purchase and sales prices at time i. These observed prices are related to the
average transaction price, pi , by
                                          poi = pi + ω oi ,                               (A1)

for o = {ask, bid}. ω ask
                      i   and ω bid
                                i   are idiosyncratic shocks that identify the degree to which
observed prices diﬀer from the market-wide average. Their size depends on the identity
of the dealers whose prices we observe. The model assumes that observed prices are drawn
randomly and independently from the cross-sectional distributions of purchase and sale prices
every period so that ω ask
                       i   and ω bid
                                 i   are serially uncorrelated and independently distributed.
   Combining (A1) with (9) and (11) in the text, gives us the estimable form of the model


                           ∆pask
                             i   = D(L, ni , A∗i )xi + εi + ω ask
                                                              i   − ω ask
                                                                      i−1 ,               (A2)

                           ∆pbid
                             i   = D(L, ni , A∗i )xi + εi + ω bid   bid
                                                              i − ω i−1 ,                 (A3)

                      C(L)−1 xi = vi .                                                    (A4)


This speciÞcation extends the model in Evans (2002) with addition of both another state
variable (news arrival) and the equation for order ßow, and can be estimated with the same
technique. We therefore refer readers to that paper for further details on how the GMM
estimates reported in Table 3 are obtained. As in Evans (2002), we set γ equal to 100 for

                                                A4
estimation. We also Þnd that the unrestricted estimates of Σε (0, A), Σv (0, A) and Σω (∞, A)
are very close to zero, so Table 3 reports estimates where these parameters are restricted to
zero. None of these restrictions materially aﬀect the variance decompositions in Table 4.
   Appendix Table 3 provides empirical motivation for the presence of state-dependence in
the intraday model. The upper panel reports Wald tests for non-linearity in models of the
form:
                           zi = θ(L)xi + θn (L)xi ni + θA (L)xi Ai + ς i .

All models are estimated by GMM allowing for heteroskedasticity and an MA(1) error struc-
ture in the case of zi = ∆pask
                           i   and zi = ∆pbid
                                          i . These estimates are then used to construct

the Wald test. For the price change models, θj (L) = θ j1 L−4 + θ j2 L−3 + ...θj6 L, and for order
ßow θj (L) = θj1 L + θj2 L2 + ...θj10 L10 ; these speciÞcations capture all the serial correlation in
the data (see, Evans 2002 for further details). As the table shows, there is strong evidence to
reject the null hypothesis of no state-dependence with respect to trading intensity and the
ßow of news in both the price equations, but not in the order ßow equation. The lower panel
reports Glesjer (1969) tests for heteroskedasticity in the shocks to the model in (A2) - (A4)
estimated without state-dependence in D(L, ni , A∗i ). There is strong evidence against the
null of homoskedasticity in all cases with respect to trading intensity. There is also strong
evidence of heteroskedasticity related to the ßow of news in the case of the εi and vi shocks.
  Appendix Table 4 reports diagnostics for the GMM estimates of the intraday model. The
                                                                     ³     ´−1
Wald test for the null of D(L, 0, 0) = D(L, ∞, 0) is computed as ∇dˆ0 Ω̂∇d     ∇dˆ where

                           h                                                        i
                      ∇dˆ = dˆ1 (0, 0) − dˆ1 (∞, 0), .. .., dˆ6 (0, 0) − dˆ6 (∞, 0)


and Ω̂∇d is the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix of ∇d. The other Wald tests use
the coeﬃcients in D(L, n, A∗ ) analogously. To test for misspeciÞcation in the dj (n, A∗ ) and
Σj (n, A) functions, we use the GMM version of the LM test developed by Newey and West
(1987). In the case of the dj (n, A∗ ) functions, we consider alternative speciÞcations of the
form d˜j (n, A∗ ) = dj (n, A∗ ) + ϕj n for type (i) tests, and d˜j (n, A∗ ) = dj (n, A∗ ) + ϕj A∗ for


                                                   A5
type (ii). To test the null hypothesis that ϕj = 0 for all j, we use the two-step procedure
suggested by Greene (1997). First, we compute the derivative for the GMM criterion function
with d˜j (n, A∗ ) replacing dj (n, A∗ ) at the GMM estimates with ϕj = 0. We then calculate
the Wald statistic for the null hypothesis that this vector of derivatives equals zero. In
the case of the variance functions Σω (n) and Σε (n), the alternative speciÞcations take the
form of Σ̃9 (n, A) = Σ9 (n, A) + ϕn for type (i) and Σ̃9 (n, A) = Σ9 (n, A) + ϕA for type
(ii) where Σ(n, A) = {Σε (n, A), Σω (n, A), Σv (n, A)}. None of these statistics are statistically
signiÞcant. This suggests that the model did manage to incorporate most of the state-
dependence in return and order ßow dynamics. The lower panel reports autocorrelations for
the estimated shocks. The shocks are calculated from the GMM estimates and standardized
as Ĩ 2i = I 2i [Σ̂9 (ni , Ai )]−1 where Ii denotes the shock in question. These statistics show
there is some residual heteroskedasticity not accounted for by the state variables.
   The variance decompositions reported in Table 4 are computed as follows. First we write
the price change dynamics implied by the GMM estimates as


                                       ∆pi = B(L, ni , A∗i )vi + εi ,


where B(L, n, A∗ ) = D(L, n, A∗ )L4 C(L). Next, we consider the k-period price change,
∆k pi ≡ Σk−1
         j=0 ∆pi+j , implied by this equation:


                                         Xk−1
                               ∆k pi =             εi−j + B(L, k, ni , A∗i )vi ,
                                             j=0

                             Pk−1
where B(L, k, ni , A∗i ) =    j=0   B(L, Lj ni , Lj A∗i )Lj . Since the vi and εi shocks are independent
and serially uncorrelated, the variance of price changes is

                                      Xk−1
                    V ar(∆k pi ) =              Σε (ni−j ) + V ar (B(L, k, ni , A∗i )vi ) .
                                          j=0



The upper panel of Table 4 reports the contribution of the second term to the variance of price
changes for diﬀerent horizons k, and trading intensities ni with A∗i = Ai = 1. The calculations


                                                      A6
use the GMM estimates of D(L, n, A∗ ), C(L), Σε (n, A) and Σv (n, A) reported in Table 3.
Standard errors (shown in parenthesis) are computed from 5000 Monte Carlo simulations
based on the asymptotic distribution of the GMM estimates. (For the k = ∞ case, we note
that prices can be written as pi = p̄i + I(0) terms, where ∆p̄i = εi + B(1, n, A∗ )vi . The
contribution of order ßow can therefore be calculated as B(1, n, A∗ )2 Σv (n, A)/V ar(∆p̄i ).)
The middle panel reports the analogous contributions for the case where A∗i = Ai = 0. The
lower panel reports the Monte Carlo p-value for the null hypothesis that there is no increase
in the contribution of order ßow shocks when news arrives.
   Finally, we consider whether time-aggregation of our intraday model can account for the
                                                                         1
                                                                             P288
negative estimates of φ in the daily model. For this we calculate x∗i ≡ D(1)  j=1 D(L)xi−j

where D(L) is the polynomial on order ßow from the model in (A2) - (A4) estimated with-
out state-dependence. Notice that the 5:00 BST observation on x∗i each day (i.e., x∗t,216 )
should closely approximate x∗t in the daily model. To examine whether our intraday model
can account for the negative estimates of φ found in the daily data, we then estimate the
regression
                                 xt = a0 x∗t,216 + a1 ∆pt + ζ t .

This regression corresponds to the combination of equations (6) and (8) of the daily model.
The OLS estimate of a0 is 0.948 while the estimate of a1 is -1.963, close to the estimate of
-2.051 found for φ in Table 2.




                                               A7
                                         Appendix Table 1

              Daily Model Estimates with Scheduled Announcements


  ∆pt = α xt* + ξt + vt     with    VAR (ξ t ) = ω At , VAR (κ t ) = sκ

   xt = xt* + xt+            with   xt* = et + ηt , VAR (et ) = σ At , VAR(η t ) = sη , xt+ = φ∆pt

                                         All News                         US vs German News
      Parameters               Estimate         Std. Err.             Estimate         Std. Err.
            α                    0.031           (0.002)                0.031           (0.002)
            φ                   -2.036           (0.175)               -2.028           (0.174)
            sκ                 108.725           (5.596)              108.582           (5.639)
            sη                   5.506           (0.381)                5.477           (0.379)
            ω                    8.523           (5.019)
            σ                    0.415           (0.267)
                    ωus                                                   13.979       (11.636)
                    ωg                                                     7.815        (4.871)
                    σ us                                                   0.648        (0.664)
                    σg                                                     0.379        (0.265)

    Variance Ratios              Ratio           Std. Err.                Ratio        Std. Err.
     R∆2p ( direct )             0.014            (0.009)                  0.018        (0.011)
     R∆2p (indirect )            0.028            (0.020)                  0.025        (0.018)
     R∆2p (total )               0.042            (0.026)                  0.044        (0.026)


Notes: The table reports GMM parameter estimates and asymptotic standard errors (corrected for
heteroskedasticity) in parentheses. The index At is constructed as the sum of the absolute
standardized forecast errors associated with scheduled macro announcements on each day. We include
U.S. announcements on: Non Farm Payroll, Durable Goods, Trade Balance, and Unemployment
Claims, and German announcements on: the Current A/C, Employment, GDP, Import Prices,
Industrial Production, M3, Manufacturing Orders, Manufacturing Output, Producer Prices, Retail
Sales, the Trade Balance, Whole Sale Prices, and the Cost of Living Index. The standard errors
reported for the variance ratios are computed from a Monte Carlo experiment with 5000 replications.
  2                  2
 R∆p ( direct ) and R∆p (indirect ) are the fraction of the daily variance in prices attributed to news
arrival via the direct and indirect channels.
                                       Appendix Table 2
                            Variance Regressions (Daily Data)


 Equation                    Regressors                                  Diagnostics


                  Const.       At       Atus      Atg     R2     SEE      Non-linear Serial Hetero


 Price change     72.966      3.513                      0.15    48.83       0.50        0.18     0.64
                 (12.393) (0.762)                                                        0.76     0.98


                  72.279               5.135    3.042    0.16    48.94       0.74        0.19     0.68
                 (11.952)              (2.344) (1.057)                                   0.80     0.99



  Order flow       3.124      0.184                      0.11    3.06        0.41        0.00     0.00
                  (0.756)    (0.050)                                                     0.07     0.04


                   3.114               0.207     0.18    0.11    3.08        0.77        0.00     0.00
                  (0.733)              (0.136) (0.070)                                   0.06     0.04


Notes: The table reports OLS regression coefficients with standard errors in parenthesis. The
dependent variable is the integrated variance of price changes (upper panel) and the integrated
variance of order flow (lower panel). (In both cases the integrated variance is calculated using a 5-
                                                                                        us
minute sampling frequency.) Regressors include; the number of US news arrivals At , German news
            g
arrivals, At , and total news arrivals At , all on day t. The Non-linear column presents the p-value of a
chi-squared LM test for exclusion of the squared news term (or terms, in the case where country news
arrivals are separated). The Serial column presents the p-value of a chi-squared LM test for first-order
(top row) and fifth-order (bottom row) serial correlation in the residuals. The Hetero column presents
the p-value of a chi-squared LM test for first-order (top row) and fifth–order (bottom row) ARCH in the
residuals.
                                            Appendix Table 3

                   Tests for State-Dependency (Intraday Data)


                                                 Non–linearity
Equation                   Θ( L) xi ni                (p-value)                Θ( L) xi Ai*    (p-value)

 ∆p ask                    113.211                        (0.00)                   14.247        (0.03)
 ∆p bid                    103.115                        (0.00)                   21.331        (0.00)
 x                           8.411                        (0.21)                    4.218        (0.65)


                                            Heteroskedasticity
                               ni                     (p-value)                     Ai         (p-value)

 εt                        797.274                        (0.00)                    4.774        (0.03)
 ω task                      5.514                        (0.02)                    1.846        (0.17)
 ωtbid                       3.197                        (0.08)                    0.398        (0.53)
 vt                       6787.326                        (0.00)                   10.575        (0.00)


Notes: The upper panel reports Wald statistics and p-values for the null hypothesis of zero
coefficients on the terms listed at the head of each column in models of the form:

                             zi = Θ( L ) xi + Θ( L ) xi ni + Θ( L ) xi Ai + wi .
                                                                          *



All models were estimated by GMM allowing for heteroskedasticity and an MA(1) error structure in
the case of zi = ∆pi and zi = ∆pi . These estimates are then used to construct the Wald test. For
                         ask                  bid

                                                                −4      −3
the      price        change          models,     Θ( L ) = θ 1 L + θ 2 L + .... + θ 6 L     and for order flow,
 Θ( L ) = θ 1 L + θ 2 L + .....θ 10 L . Ai and Ai are a dummy variables equal to one if there was a macro
                       2             10   *


news arrival during the previous 15-mintues (i.e. 3 observation windows) or previous 5-mintues
respectively. The lower panel reports the results of Glesjer (1969) tests for heteroskedasticity in the
variance of each shock using the variables listed at the head of each column. The shock vi is the
innovation to the AR(10) model for order flow, while ε i , ω i , and ω i are the shocks from
                                                                           ask          bid



                                 ∆p i      = Θ( L ) xi + ε i + ω i − ω i −1
                                     ask                         ask     ask



                                 ∆p i      = Θ( L ) xi + ε i + ω i − ω i −1
                                     bid                         bid     bid



estimated jointly by GMM.
                                                   Appendix Table 4

                                      Diagnostics for The Intraday Model


                                                                               Statistic            P-value
  Wald Test for             D( L, 0, 0) = D( L, ∞, 0)                           250.731             (<0.001)
  Wald Test for             D( L, 0,1) = D( L, ∞,1)                              19.130              (0.004)
  Wald Test for             D( L, 0,1) = D( L, 0,1)                              24.039              (0.001)
  Wald Test for             D( L, ∞,1) = D ( L, ∞, 0)                            17.882              (0.007)

                                                        ∗
  Test (i) for misspecification in D ( L, ni , Ai )                              0.324               (0.999)
                                                   ∗
  Test (ii) for misspecification in D ( L, ni , Ai )                             6.097               (0.412)
  Test (i) for misspecification in Σε ( ni , Ai )                                0.866               (0.352)
  Test (ii) for misspecification in Σε ( ni , Ai )                               0.173               (0.677)
  Test (i) for misspecification in Σω ( ni , Ai )                                0.398               (0.528)
  Test (ii) for misspecification in Σω ( ni , Ai )                               0.721               (0.396)
  Test (i) for misspecification in Σ v ( ni , Ai )                               2.518               (0.113)
  Test (ii) for misspecification in Σ v ( ni , Ai )                              0.092               (0.762)


                                 Squared Residual Autocorrelations (Std. Errs.)
                                 Lag = 1       2            3        4            5             6              12

        Residual
   ε i Σ ε ( ni , Ai )
        2
                                   0.091     0.038       0.048     0.162        0.028         0.058         0.019
                                  (0.028)   (0.019)     (0.028)   (0.135)      (0.015)       (0.021)       (0.008)
 (ω )
            2
                Σω ( ni , Ai )
    ask
    i
                                   0.068     0.015       0.015    -0.015        0.002         0.019         0.014
                                  (0.025)   (0.016)     (0.020)   (0.011)      (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.011)
 (ω )
            2
                Σω ( ni , Ai )
    bid
    i
                                   0.058     0.022       0.009     0.005       -0.003         0.010         0.023
                                  (0.024)   (0.010)     (0.012)   (0.012)      (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.014)
        2
   vi Σ v ( ni , Ai )              0.068     0.032       0.039     0.033        0.000         0.022        -0.009
                                  (0.026)   (0.017)     (0.017)   (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.018)       (0.007)


Notes: The table reports diagnostic tests for the estimated intraday model shown in Table 3. The upper
                                                                      ∗
panel reports Wald tests for state-dependency in D ( L, ni , Ai ) . The second panel reports LM-type tests
                                                   ∗
for misspecification in the estimated d j ( ni , Ai ) and Σ j ( ni , Ai ) functions. Type (i) and (ii) tests consider
misspecification with respect to trade intensity ni and news arrival dummy Ai, respectively.
    *
( Ai and Ai are a dummy variables equal to one if there was a news arrival during the previous 15-
mintues—i.e. 3 observation windows—or previous 5-mintues respectively.) The lower panel reports
autocorrelations in the standardized squared shocks.
