                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE PRICE IMPACT AND SURVIVAL
                                 OF IRRATIONAL TRADERS

                                           Leonid Kogan
                                           Stephen Ross
                                            Jiang Wang
                                          Mark Westerfield

                                         Working Paper 9434
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9434


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2003




The authors thank Ming Huang and participants of the 2002 NBER Asset Pricing Summer Conference and
seminars at LBS, University of Minnesota, NYU, and MIT for valuable comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2003 by Leonid Kogan, Stephen Ross, Jiang Wang, and Mark Westerfield. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit including, © notice, is given to the source.
The Price Impact and Survival of Irrational Traders
Leonid Kogan, Stephen Ross, Jiang Wang, and Mark Westerfield
NBER Working Paper No. 9434
January 2003
JEL No. G1, G0

                                            ABSTRACT

       Milton Friedman argued that irrational traders will consistently lose money, won’t survive

and, therefore, cannot influence long run equilibrium asset prices. Since his work, survival and price
influence have been assumed to be the same. Often partial equilibrium analysis has been relied upon
to examine the survival of irrational traders and to make inferences on their influence on prices. In
this paper, we demonstrate that survival and influence on prices are two independent concepts. The
price impact of irrational traders does not rely on their long-run survival and they can have a
significant impact on asset prices even when their wealth becomes negligible. In addition, in contrast

to a partial equilibrium analysis, general equilibrium considerations matter since the ability of
irrational traders to impact prices even when their wealth is diminishing can significantly affect their

chances for long-run survival. In sum, in a long-run equilibrium, we explicitly show that price
impact can occur whether or not the irrational traders survive. In related work, we show that even
if the irrational traders survive they may have no price impact.

Leonid Kogan                           Stephen Ross
Sloan School of Management             Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-434                           MIT, E52-443
50 Memorial Drive                      50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                    Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                               and NBER
lkogan@mit.edu                         sross@mit.edu

Jiang Wang                             Mark Westerfield
Sloan School of Management             Department of Economics
MIT, E52-456                           MIT, E52
50 Memorial Drive                      50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                    Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                               mmwester@mit.edu
jwang@mit.edu
Contents

1 Introduction                                                                                 1


2 The Model                                                                                    3


3 The Equilibrium                                                                              6


4 A Special Case: Logarithmic Preferences                                                      8


5 The Survival of Irrational Traders                                                          14

  5.1   Heuristic Partial Equilibrium Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15

  5.2   General Equilibrium Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16

  5.3   Absolute Extinction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20


6 The Price Impact of Irrational Traders                                                      20


7 Portfolio Policies                                                                          23


8 Conclusion                                                                                  28


A Wealth Distribution and Welfare                                                             30


B Proofs                                                                                      33
1         Introduction

Most neoclassical asset pricing models rely on the assumption that market participants
(traders) are rational in the sense that they behave in ways that are consistent with the
objective probabilities of the states of the economy (e.g., Radner (1971) and Lucas (1978)).
More particularly, they maximize expected utilities using the true probabilities of uncertain
economic states. This approach is ﬁrmly rooted in the tradition of going from the normative
to the positive in economics, yet there is mounting evidence that it is not descriptive of the
observed behavior of the average market participant (see, e.g., Alpert and Raiﬀa (1959),
Benartzi and Thaler (2001), Black (1986), Kahneman and Tversky (1979), Odean 1998)).
How the presence of traders with incorrect beliefs may aﬀect the behavior of ﬁnancial markets
remains an open question.

        It has long been argued (see, e.g., Friedman (1953)) that irrational traders who use wrong
beliefs cannot survive in a competitive market. Trading under the wrong beliefs makes them
lose money to the rational traders and eventually lose their wealth. It is the rational traders
who in the long-run control most of the wealth and determine asset prices. Using a partial
equilibrium model, De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1991) suggest that traders
with wrong beliefs may survive in the long run because they may hold portfolios with higher
growth rates and therefore can eventually outgrow the rational traders.6 In contrast, in a
general equilibrium setting, Sandroni (2000) and Blume and Easley (2001) show that with
intermediate consumption, irrational traders do not survive in the long-run.

        The eﬃciency of ﬁnancial markets is the principal motivation behind the interest in the
survival of irrational traders. If irrational traders impact asset prices, then markets will not
be eﬃcient, either informationally or allocationally. Implicitly, the discussion on survival is
based on the assumption that survival is a necessary condition for long-run price impact.
It is thought that irrational traders have to control a signiﬁcant amount of wealth in order
to aﬀect – or ‘infect’ – prices with their irrational beliefs. In this paper, we show that this
assumption is false and that irrational traders can maintain a large price impact even as
their relative wealth diminishes towards zero over time.

        Our analysis is conducted with a parsimonious general equilibrium model inhabited by
    6
     See also Figlewski (1978) for a discussion on the notion of long-run survival. Many papers in existing
literature analyze survival of irrational traders and their eﬀect on prices in ﬁnancial markets with various
constraints and imperfections, e.g., De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990), Shleifer and Vishny
(1997), Hirshleifer, Subrahmanyam, Titman (2002). In contrast, the setting of this paper assumes perfect,
complete ﬁnancial markets.


                                                     1
both rational traders and irrational traders. Traders only care about their terminal con-
sumption. We are able to derive an explicit solution to the model, and we obtain conditions
under which the irrational traders can survive in the long run in the sense that their share of
the total wealth does not go to zero over time. However, we show that even when irrational
traders do not survive, with a negligible amount of wealth they can still exert signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the asset price over a long period of time.

   Underlying this initially counterintuitive result is a solid economic intuition. Under
incorrect beliefs, irrational traders express their views by taking positions (bets) on extremely
unlikely states of the economy. As a result, the state prices of these extreme states can be
signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the beliefs of the irrational traders with negligible wealth. In turn,
these states, even though highly unlikely, can have a large contribution to current asset
prices. This is especially true for states associated with extremely low levels of aggregate
consumption in which the traders’ marginal utilities are very high and so too are the state
prices. The beliefs of the irrational traders on these low probability but high marginal
utility states can inﬂuence current asset prices and their dynamics. Furthermore, irrational
traders need not take extreme positions in order to inﬂuence prices. The formal analysis
clearly veriﬁes this conceptual distinction between the long-run price impact and the long-
run survival of irrational traders.

   The possibility that irrational traders may have a signiﬁcant price impact with a neg-
ligible share of wealth also has important implications for their survival. In the partial
equilibrium analysis of De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1991) (DSSW, there-
after), for example, it was assumed that when the irrational traders control only a negligible
fraction of the total wealth, they have no impact on asset prices, i.e., asset prices behave as if
the irrational traders are absent. Given the rationally determined prices, DSSW then show
that the wealth of irrational traders can grow at a faster rate than the wealth of the rational
traders. Thus the irrational traders can recover from their losses and survive in the long-
run. Although such an argument is illuminating, the limitations of partial equilibrium do
not allow it to adequately resolve the question of price impact. As we have argued, irrational
traders may still inﬂuence prices with diminishing wealth. Moreover, such a possibility can
signiﬁcantly aﬀect the irrational traders’ portfolio policies in ways that make their recovery
diﬃcult.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops a canonical, pure exchange economy
similar to that of Black and Scholes (1973), but in presence of irrational traders who have
persistently wrong beliefs about the economy, and Section 3 describes the general equilibrium

                                                2
of this economy. Section 4 treats the special case of logarithmic preferences and demonstrates
that although irrational traders never survive they nevertheless can still inﬂuence long-run
asset prices. Section 5 analyzes the survival of irrational traders for the general case. We
ﬁrst consider the partial equilibrium arguments of DSSW using our setting to analyze the
conditions under which the irrational traders may survive in the long run. We then present
the general equilibrium results on the survival of irrational traders and contrast them with
the partial equilibrium analysis. In Section 6, we examine the price impact of the irrational
traders and how it aﬀects their survival. Section 7 discusses the equilibrium portfolio policies
and demonstrates ow the eﬀects on price we describe extend beyond the ﬁrst two moments
and aﬀect traders’ portfolio policies and long-run survival. Section 8 concludes the paper
with a short summary and some suggestions for future research. Appendix A provides
additional results on the dynamics of wealth distribution and the welfare implications of
irrational beliefs. All proofs are given in Appendix B.


2     The Model

The economic mechanisms that determine the survival of irrational traders and their impact
on prices can be studied in a simple, parsimonious model, which is deﬁned as follows.

Information structure

The economy has a ﬁnite horizon and evolves in continuous time. Uncertainty is described
by a one-dimensional, standard Brownian motion Bt for 0 ≤ t ≤ T , deﬁned on a complete
probability space (Ω, F, P ), where F is the augmented ﬁltration generated by Bt .

Financial markets

There is a single share of a risky asset in the economy, the stock, which is a claim on a
terminal dividend payment DT at time T . DT is the value of a geometric Brownian motion
Dt at time T , where D0 = 1 and

      dDt = Dt (µdt + σdBt ) ,    σ > 0.                                                    (1)

There is also a zero coupon bond available in zero net supply. Each unit of the bond makes
a certain payment of one at time T . We use the risk-free bond as the numeraire and denote
the price of the stock at time t by St .



                                               3
Endowments

There are two competitive traders in the economy, each endowed with a half share of the
stock (and none of the bond) at time zero.

Trading strategies

Financial markets are frictionless, and there are no constraints on lending and borrowing.
Traders’ trading strategies satisfy the standard integrability condition used to avoid patholo-
gies
           T
                θt2 dSt < ∞                                                              (2)
        0

where θt is the number of shares of the stock held in the portfolio at time t and St is the
quadratic variation process of St .

Preferences and beliefs

Both traders have constant relative risk aversion utility, deﬁned over their consumption at
time T :
         1
           C 1−γ ,       γ ≥ 1.
        1−γ T

For ease of exposition, we only consider the cases when γ ≥ 1. The cases when 0 < γ < 1
can be analyzed similarly and the results are similar in spirit.

   Standard aggregation results imply that each trader in our model can actually represent
a collection of traders with the same preferences. This provides a justiﬁcation for our com-
petitive assumption for each of the traders. The ﬁrst trader, the rational trader, knows the
true probability measure P and maximizes expected utility
                      
       P     1     1−γ
      E0         C                                                                         (3)
           1 − γ r,T

where the subscript r denotes quantities associated with the rational trader. The second
trader, the irrational trader, believes incorrectly that the probability measure is Q, under
which

       dBt = (ση)dt + dBtQ                                                                 (4)



                                              4
and hence
                                        
      dDt = Dt        µ + σ 2 η dt + σdBtQ                                                  (5)

where BtQ is the standard Brownian motion under the measure Q and η is a constant,
parameterizing the degree of irrationality of the irrational trader. When η is positive, the
irrational trader is optimistic about the prospects of the economy and overestimates the rate
of growth of the aggregate endowment. Conversely, a negative η corresponds to a pessimistic
irrational trader. The irrational trader maximizes expected utility using belief Q:
                       
        Q     1     1−γ
       E0         C                                                                         (6)
            1 − γ n,T

where the subscript n denotes quantities associated with the irrational trader.

   Because η is assumed to be constant, the probability measure of the irrational trader Q
is absolutely continuous with respect to the objective measure P , i.e., both traders agree
on zero-probability events. Letting ξt ≡ (dQ/dP )t denote the density (Radon-Nikodym
derivative) of the probability measure Q with respect to P ,
              1 2 2
      ξt = e− 2 ησ t+ησBt
                                                                                            (7)

the irrational trader maximizes
                                          
        Q     1     1−γ      P      1    1−γ
      E0          C       = E0 ξT      C       .                                            (8)
            1 − γ n,T             1 − γ n,T

This permits us to interpret the objective of the irrational trader as the expected value of a
                                      1   1−γ
state-dependent utility function, ξT 1−γ Cn,T , under the true probability measure P .

   The equivalence between incorrect beliefs and state dependent preferences raises the
conceptual question about the precise deﬁnition of irrationality. It is beyond the scope of
this paper to address this question, and our analysis of this form of irrationality is primarily
motivated by the fact that it is widely adopted in the recent literature on behavioral models
of asset prices.




                                               5
3       The Equilibrium

The competitive equilibrium of the economy deﬁned above can be solved analytically. Since
there is only one source of uncertainty in the economy, the ﬁnancial market is dynamically
complete as long as the volatility of stock returns remains non-zero almost surely. Conse-
quently, the equilibrium allocation is eﬃcient and can be characterized as the solution to a
central planner’s problem:
                                             
                   1    1−γ          1    1−γ
        max           C     + b ξT      C                                                (9a)
                1 − γ r,T          1 − γ n,T
          s.t.   Cr,T + Cn,T = DT                                                        (9b)

where b is the ratio of utility weights. The equilibrium allocation is characterized in the
following proposition.


Proposition 1 For the economy deﬁned in Section 2, the equilibrium allocation between the
two traders is
                            1
        Cr,T =                       DT                                                 (10a)
                   1 + (b ξT )1/γ

                        (b ξT )1/γ
        Cn,T =                       DT                                                 (10b)
                   1 + (b ξT )1/γ
where
                    2
        b = e(γ−1)ησ T .                                                                 (11)

The price of a ﬁnancial security with the terminal payoﬀ ZT is given by
                            γ        
           Et 1 + (b ξT )1/γ DT−γ ZT
     Pt =                     γ     .                                                 (12)
             Et 1 + (b ξT )1/γ DT−γ

For the stock, ZT = DT and its return volatility is bounded between σ and σ(1 + |η|).


    Since the instantaneous volatility of stock returns is bounded below by σ, the stock
and the bond dynamically complete the ﬁnancial market. In the limiting cases when only
the rational or the irrational trader is present, the stock prices, denoted by Sr,t and Sn,t ,



                                              6
respectively, are given by
                      2 −γ)σ 2 T + 1 (2γ−1)σ 2 t+σB
       Sr,t = e(µ/σ                2               t
                                                                                          (13a)
                      2 −γ+η)σ 2 T + 1 [(2γ−1)−2η]σ 2 t+σB                 2 (T −t)
       Sn,t = e(µ/σ                  2                    t
                                                              = Sr,t eησ              .   (13b)

     We will use this equilibrium model to analyze the survival and extinction of the traders.
We employ two deﬁnitions of extinction, and, conversely, of survival.


Definition 1 The irrational trader is said to experience relative extinction in the long-run
if

            Cn,T
       lim       = 0 a.s.                                                                  (14)
       T →∞ Cr,T


The relative extinction of the rational trader can be deﬁned symmetrically. A trader is said
to survive relatively in the long-run if relative extinction does not occur.


Definition 2 The irrational trader is said to experience long-run extinction in the absolute
sense if

       lim Cn,T = 0 a.s.                                                                   (15)
       T →∞


The absolute extinction of the rational trader can be deﬁned symmetrically. A trader is said
to survive absolutely in the long-run if absolute extinction does not occur.


In the above deﬁnitions and throughout the paper all limits are understood to be almost
sure (under the true probability measure P ) unless speciﬁcally stated otherwise.

     Clearly, relative survival is suﬃcient for absolute survival but as our analysis demon-
strates, absolute survival is not suﬃcient for relative survival. Similarly, absolute extinction
implies relative extinction, but the converse is not true. Throughout this paper, we use the
notion of relative extinction or survival unless it is speciﬁed otherwise.

     In our model, the ﬁnal wealth of each trader equals the terminal consumption. Thus, the
deﬁnitions of survival and extinction are equivalent to a similar deﬁnition using wealth.




                                                         7
4     A Special Case: Logarithmic Preferences

We begin analyzing the equilibrium by considering a special case of the economy where all
traders have logarithmic preferences. When both the rational and irrational traders have
logarithmic preferences, we have the following result:


Proposition 2 Suppose η = 0. For γ = 1, the irrational trader never survives.


    This result is immediate. For γ = 1, the rational trader holds the portfolio with maximum
expected growth. Any deviation in beliefs from the true probability causes the irrational
trader to move away from the maximum growth portfolio, which leads to his long-run relative
extinction.

    Our interest, however, is not merely on the survival of the irrational trader, but also on
the impact of irrationality on the long-run stock price. Under logarithmic preferences, b = 1
and from Proposition 2 the stock price is

                    1 + ξt            1 + ξt                        1
      St =                       =    −ησ 2 (T −t)
                                                       (−µ+ 1 2
                                                              σ )T + 1 2
                                                                       σ (T −t)−σBt
                                                                                    .    (16)
              Et [(1 + ξT )/DT ]   1+e             ξt e     2        2



Moreover, the moments of stock returns can be derived explicitly. Let αt denote the relative
wealth of the rational trader,

                 Wr,t
      αt ≡
              Wr,t + Wn,t

the conditional volatility of stock returns is given by
                                                                  
                                                    1
      σS,t = σ + η σ(1−αt ) − ησ 1 −
                                        1 + e−ησ2 (T −t) (αt−1 −1)

while the conditional mean is

              2
      µS,t = σS,t − η σ(1−αt )σS,t .

The presence of the irrationality parameter η in the expressions for the stock price and its
ﬁrst two moments provides our ﬁrst demonstration that the irrational trader can maintain
inﬂuence on the stock price for long periods of time even though he does not survive in the
long run.


                                                      8
   This can be seen explicitly from a numerical illustration with parameters corresponding to
an economy with a relatively long horizon. The irrational trader is assumed to be pessimistic
(η = −4). The horizon of the economy is set at T = 400. We let the current time t be
suﬃciently large, so with high probability most of wealth in the economy is controlled by
the rational trader. For convenience, we deﬁne the following normalized state variable:

             Bt − Bs
      gs,t ≡ √       .                                                                     (17)
               t−s

It is easy to show that gs,t is the unanticipated dividend growth normalized by its standard
deviation, which has a standard normal distribution. Figure 1 plots the stock price volatility
and the wealth distribution at t = 100 against the normalized state variable g0,t . The
probability density for g0,t is illustrated by the shaded area (with the vertical axis on the
right). The bottom panel of Figure 1 shows that with almost probability one, the wealth of
the economy is all controlled by the rational trader at this time. Yet as the top panel of the
ﬁgure shows, the conditional volatility of stock returns is very diﬀerent from σ, the volatility
of the state variable Dt , which would be its value in the economy populated by only one
type of traders. In particular, over a large range of values of the dividends, the conditional
volatility of returns is approximately equal to σ(1 − η) = σ.

   To examine the long-run stock price more generally we employ asymptotic analysis. We
call two stochastic processes asymptotically equivalent if for large values of T , their ratio
converges to one. That is,

Definition 3 (Asymptotic Equivalence) Two stochastic processes, Xt and Yt are said to be
asymptotically equivalent if

           XT
      lim     = 1 a.s.
      T →∞ YT


which are denoted by XT ∼ YT .

   As the horizon of the economy, T , increases, we need to have some sense of what it means
for a particular property of the economy to persist for a signiﬁcant period of time. Suppose,
for example, we say that the impact of the irrational trader on a variable is signiﬁcant as
long as the variable exceeds a ﬁxed level e within a time interval. If as T grows, this time
interval also grows with T but at a slower rate, this would mislead us into arguing that the
impact of the irrational trader was signiﬁcant, even though it was not persistent. Persistence
requires that the proportion of time over which the impact is signiﬁcant does not go to zero

                                               9
                                                   Conditional volatility
                            1                                                                0.4

                           0.8

                           0.6




                    σS,t
                                                                                             0.2
                           0.4

                           0.2

                            0                                                                 0
                            −5   −4   −3   −2       −1        0       1          2   3   4   5

                                                   Wealth distribution
                            1                                                                0.4

                           0.8

                           0.6
                      t




                                                                                             0.2
                     α




                           0.4

                           0.2

                            0                                                                 0
                            −5   −4   −3   −2       −1        0       1          2   3   4   5
                                                                      −1/2
                                                Normalized state, t          B
                                                                             t


   Figure 1: The conditional volatility of stock returns, σS,t and the wealth distribution
                                                                                        √           αt =
   Wr,t /(Wr,t + Wn,t ) are plotted against the normalized state variable, g0,t ≡ Bt / t. The shaded
   area is the probability density function of the normalized state variable (vertical axis on the right).
   The model parameters are set at µ = 0.12, σ = 0.18, η = −4, T = 400 and γ = 1. The current time
   is t = 100.



as T grows. Conversely, if the proportional amount of time over which there is negligible
impact is going to one, then we conclude that the irrational trader has no persistent impact.

   To make this more formal, we will consider a sequence of economies with increasing
horizon T , where the current time of observation is chosen to be t = λT , 0 < λ ≤ 1. As
the horizon of the economy approaches inﬁnity, the “current” time t increases as well, but it
remains at a constant fraction of the horizon of the economy. Moreover, the time remaining
until the ﬁnal date of the economy is also increasing proportionally to T . Since the properties
of the equilibrium prices and quantities depend on how much time is remaining until the
ﬁnal date, they depend on λ.

   We have the following result on the persistence of the price impact of irrationality when
traders have logarithmic preferences:


Proposition 3 Suppose γ = 1 and η < 0. Let λS = 2/(2 − η). At t = λT , the stock price




                                                         10
behaves as follows when T → ∞:
               
                Sr,t eη[σ2 T +( 12 η−1)σ2 t−σBt ] , 0 < λ < λS
     St ∼                                                                                            (18)
                S ,                                 λS < λ ≤ 1
                   r,t


where Sr,t , deﬁned in Equation (13) with γ = 1, is the stock price when only the rational
trader is present. The limiting values of the instantaneous moments of stock returns are
equal to the moments of the corresponding asymptotic expression (18).

   It follows from Proposition 3 that for any t < λS T , the price inﬂuence of the irrational
trader remains signiﬁcant, that is, St = Sr,t , despite the fact that as T approaches inﬁnity, t
can be arbitrarily large and the wealth share of the irrational trader becomes negligible.
                                                Conditional volatility
                                1

                               0.8

                               0.6
                    σS,t




                               0.4

                               0.2

                                0
                                 0   50   100   150        200     250   300   350   400

                                                 Wealth distribution
                                1

                               0.8

                               0.6
                      1 − αt




                               0.4

                               0.2

                                0
                                 0   50   100   150        200     250   300   350   400
                                                       Time, t

    Figure 2: The maximum likelihood path of the irrational trader’s wealth share, 1 − αt , and the
    stock price volatility, σS,t . The model parameters are set at µ = 0.12, σ = 0.18, η = −4, T = 400
    and γ = 1.



   What Propositions 3 describes is the situation where the wealth share of the irrational
trader and his price impact converge to zero over time at drastically diﬀerent rates. Figure 2
illustrates the most likely path over time (the path with highest probability) for the irrational
trader’s wealth share and the stock price volatility. In fact, his wealth share diminishes to
zero exponentially while his price impact diminishes at a much slower rate. The stock
price volatility stays away from its asymptotic level for an extended period of time before
eventually converging to its limiting value.

                                                      11
   In order to better understand how the irrational trader can exert inﬂuence on the stock
price despite having negligible wealth, we examine how his portfolio policy aﬀects the state
price density (SPD). With the horizon of the economy set at T = 30, the left panels of
Figure 3 plot the relative consumption shares of the rational and the irrational traders at
two diﬀerent times, t = 0, 20, as a function of the normalized state variable, gt,T (i.e., the
normalized unanticipated dividend growth from t to T deﬁned in (17)). At each date, the
state of the economy is conditioned on Bt = 0, the most likely state. For t = 0, the irrational
trader owns half of the economy. But at η = −4, he is very pessimistic and bets on states of
low dividends (states toward the left end of the horizontal axis). This is shown in the top
left panel of Figure 3. The dashed line plots his terminal consumption for diﬀerent states of
the economy. Over time, these ‘bad’ states become even less likely and the irrational trader’s
bets become less valuable. Thus, his wealth decreases. At t = 20 and Bt = 0, these bad
states become extremely unlikely and the irrational trader has lost most of his wealth. His
wealth relative to the wealth of the rational trader has reduced from 1 at t = 0 to 0.0056.
As shown in the bottom left panel of Figure 3, going forward, he consumes a non-trivial
fraction of the total wealth only in the extreme states toward the left end of the horizontal
axis. The probability of these states, as shown by the shaded area, becomes very small. So
is the irrational trader’s wealth.

   In the two panels on the right of Figure 3, we plot the state price density against the
normalized state variable dT at the two times, t = 0, 20, conditioned again on Bt = 0. With
logarithmic preferences, the equilibrium state price density at time t is given by

               (1 + ξT )DT−1
      φt ≡                    
             Et (1 + ξT )DT−1

which is represented by the dashed line in each of the two panels. The solid line plots the
state price density when the economy is populated only by the rational traders, which can
be obtained by setting ξT = 0 in the above expression for φt . The top panel gives the state
price density at t = 0. It is obvious that at this point, the irrational trader owns half of
the total wealth and his portfolio policy has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the state price density
over the whole range. In particular, being pessimistic, he is eﬀectively betting on the bad
states, which causes the state price density to increase for the bad states and decrease for
the good states. This is shown by the diﬀerence between the dashed line, the state price
density in the presence of the irrational trader, and the solid line, the state price density
without the irrational trader. As time passes, his wealth dwindles and his inﬂuence on the
state price density diminishes quickly for most of the states, as the bottom panel for t = 20

                                              12
                                              t=0                                                        t=0
                            1                                       0.4              20                                       0.4

                           0.8

             Consumption
                                                                                     10
                           0.6




                                                                              SPD
                                                                    0.2                                                       0.2
                           0.4
                                                                                      0
                           0.2

                            0                                       0               −10                                       0
                            −5                  0                  5                  −5                  0                  5


                                              t = 20                                                    t = 20
                            1                                       0.4              20                                       0.4

                           0.8
             Consumption




                                                                                     10
                           0.6



                                                                              SPD
                                                                    0.2                                                       0.2
                           0.4
                                                                                      0
                           0.2

                            0                                        0              −10                                        0
                            −5                 0                    5                 −5                 0                    5
                                                       − 1/2                                                     − 1/2
                             Normalized state, (T − t)       (BT − Bt)                 Normalized state, (T − t)       (BT − Bt)

   Figure 3: The terminal consumption of the rational and irrational traders as a fraction of the
   total consumption and the state price density (SPD) in diﬀerent terminal states of the economy at
   diﬀerent times. The model parameters are set to be µ = 0.12, σ = 0.18, η = −4, γ = √      1 and T = 30.
   The horizontal axis in all panels is the normalized state variable gt,T ≡ (BT − Bt )/ T − t, which
   has a standard normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance, which is shown by the shaded
   area (vertical axis on the right). In the two panels on the left, the terminal consumption for the
   rational trader (the solid line) and the irrational trader (the dotted line) are plotted against the
   normalized state variable at times t = 0, 20, respectively, when Bt = 0. In the two panels on the
   right, the dashed
                     line plotsthe logarithm of the state price density at times t = 0, 20, respectively,
   which is ln [(1 + ξT )/DT ] Et [(1 + ξT )/DT ] . The solid line plots the logarithm of the state price
                                                                                                
   density in the economy populated only by the rational traders, which is ln DT−1 Et DT−1 .



shows. However, for the extremely bad states, his inﬂuence remains signiﬁcant because he
is still betting heavily on these states.

   In order to further examine how the irrational trader can aﬀect the state-price density
for the bad states, let us consider the following thought experiment. We start with the
economy inhabited only by the rational trader. The state price density, denoted by φ,
is proportional to the rational trader’s marginal utility u(C): φ = au (C), where a is a
constant. Suppose now the irrational trader is introduced into the economy and he purchases
δ units of state-contingent claims that pay oﬀ only when the aggregate consumption is C.
The total cost is w ≡ φδ ≈ au (C)δ when δ is small. The state-price density now will change


                                                                         13
by ∆φ ≈ −au (C)δ. Divided by the wealth spent by the irrational trader, we obtain the
marginal change in the state-price density:

        ∆φ  u (C)   1
           =       =
        w   u (C)     C

which is independent of δ. Clearly, for the bad states when C is low (close to zero), the
irrational trader can have a large impact on the state-price density with little wealth if he
decides to bet on these states. Moreover, through his impact on the state-price density in
bad states, the irrational trader can inﬂuence asset prices, such as the prices of the stock
and the bond. Given that the bond is used as a numeraire and its price is always one, this
inﬂuence is captured in the stock price. In particular, we have

        St = Et [φt Dt ]

which is computed in Equation (16). As t increases, Equation (18) gives the stock price
asymptotically. The above analysis shows that despite the low probability and low dividends
of the extreme bad states, the irrational trader can maintain his inﬂuence on the stock price
through his impact on the state price density of these states, even as his wealth diminishes
over time.

    The simple case of logarithmic preferences clearly shows that survival and price impact
are in general not equivalent. In particular, survival is not a necessary condition for the
irrational traders to inﬂuence long-run prices, and depending on their beliefs, irrational
traders can maintain a signiﬁcant price impact even as their wealth becomes negligible over
time.


5       The Survival of Irrational Traders

In the case of logarithmic preferences, the irrational trader does not survive in the long-run
simply because his portfolio grows more slowly than the maximum growth rate which is
achieved by the rational trader. For relative risk aversion diﬀerent from one, though, the
rational trader no longer holds the optimal growth portfolio and under an incorrect belief,
the irrational trader may end up holding a portfolio that is closer to the optimal growth
portfolio, and so his wealth may grow more rapidly. This was the argument put forward by
DSSW using a partial equilibrium setting similar to ours. In this section, we examine the
long-run survival of the irrational trader in a general equilibrium setting.

                                              14
5.1    Heuristic Partial Equilibrium Analysis

We ﬁrst follow the partial equilibrium argument of DSSW and derive conditions under which
the irrational trader may survive in the long-run despite having incorrect beliefs. The essence
of the partial equilibrium argument is to examine a limiting case in which one of the two
traders controls most of the aggregate wealth in the economy while the other trader is
inﬁnitesimal. The argument then assumes that the inﬁnitesimal agent has no impact on
market prices and computes the implied growth rate of both traders’ wealth. If the wealth
of the inﬁnitesimally small trader has a higher growth rate, and therefore the share of wealth
of such a trader is growing over time, then DSSW conclude that such a trader would be able
to successfully “invade” the economy and hence must survive in the long-run, “in the sense
that their wealth share does not drop toward zero in the long run with probability one.”

   Assume ﬁrst that the rational trader dominates the economy and the prices of ﬁnancial
assets are as if there were no irrational traders. Let µS and σS denote the drift and volatility
of the stock price process:

      dSt = St (µS dt + σS dBt ) .

It is easy to show that

      µS = γσ 2 ,   σS = σ.

The rational trader invests only in the stock. The rate of growth of the rational trader’s
portfolio, deﬁned as the drift of the logarithm of the trader’s wealth, is given by

          1     1
      µS − σS2 = (2γ − 1)σ 2 .
          2     2
Under the beliefs of the irrational trader (under the measure Q), the drift of the stock price
process is

      S = µS + σ 2 η
      µ

                                                                            S / (γσ 2 ) = 1+η/γ
and the volatility remains σ. The irrational trader invests a fraction wn = µ
of his wealth in the stock. Thus, the growth rate of the irrational trader’s portfolio is

          1      1 σ2
      µS − σ 2 +      η (γη  − η)
          2      2 γ2


                                              15
where we deﬁne

      η  ≡ 2(γ − 1).                                                                     (19)

The growth rate of wealth of the “invading” irrational trader is higher than that of the
dominant rational trader if and only if 0 < η < γη  .

   Next, assume that the irrational trader dominates the economy. Repeating the steps of
the previous analysis, the volatility of the stock price remains at σ and the drift becomes

      µS = γσ 2 − ησ 2 .

For the irrational trader, the growth rate of the portfolio is

          1
      µS − σ 2
          2
while for the rational trader it is
                                               
            1 2 1 σ2                    γ     
      µS − σ +          (2γ − 1)η η −        η .
            2      2 γ2               2γ − 1

The rational trader’s portfolio grows faster than the irrational trader’s portfolio if and only
                    γ
if η < 0 or η >   2γ−1
                       η.

   The partial equilibrium analysis thus appears to provide suﬃcient conditions for long-run
survival of both types of traders. In particular, for γ > 1
                    γ
       0<η<       2γ−1
                       η    ⇒ Irrational trader survives
         γ
       2γ−1
            η   < η < γη  ⇒ Both traders survive                                        (20)

       η < 0 or η > γη      ⇒ Rational trader survives

For γ = 1, only the rational trader survives regardless of the value of η. These results are
summarized in the phase diagram shown in Figure 4. Since γ/(2γ − 1) ≤ 1 for γ ≥ 1, η 
belongs to the second region deﬁned in (20).


5.2    General Equilibrium Analysis

The partial equilibrium analysis seems straightforward and intuitive. However, it is based
on the assumption that the stock price is unaﬀected by the trader whose wealth approaches


                                               16
                                                                  Partial Equilibrium, Survival
                                                          2


                                                              R
                                                                                      N,R




                          Irrational traders′ belief, η
                                                          1


                                                                                      N

                                                          0




                                                     −1                               R




                                                     −2
                                                       1                       1.5                      2
                                                                        Risk aversion, γ

   Figure 4: The survival of rational and irrational traders for diﬀerent values of η and γ in partial
   equilibrium. For each region in the parameter space, we document which of the agents survives in
   the long run. “R” means that survival of the rational trader is guaranteed inside the region, “N”
   corresponds to the irrational trader, “N,R” means that both traders survive.



zero in the long run. The fact that this assumption does not hold in the case of logarithmic
preferences suggests that the partial equilibrium analysis cannot, in general, be trusted
to correctly analyze survival and extinction. From the competitive equilibrium derived in
Section 3, we have the following result:


Proposition 4 Suppose η = 0. For γ = 1, the irrational trader never survives. For γ > 1,
only one of the traders survives in the long run. In particular,

   Pessimistic irrational trader: η < 0                                                     ⇒ Rational trader survives

   Moderately optimistic irrational trader: 0 < η < η  ⇒ Irrational trader survives (21)

   Strongly optimistic irrational trader: η > η                                            ⇒ Rational trader survives

where η  = 2(γ − 1). For η = η  , both rational and irrational traders survive.


   For γ > 1, Proposition 4 identiﬁes three distinct regions in the parameter space as shown
in Figure 5. For η < 0, the irrational trader is pessimistic and does not survive in the
long-run. For 0 < η < η  , the irrational trader is moderately optimistic and survives in the
long-run while the rational trader does not. For η > η  , the irrational trader is strongly
optimistic and does not survive.


                                                                          17
                                                                  General Equilibrium, Survival
                                                          2


                                                              R




                          Irrational traders′ belief, η
                                                          1


                                                                                      N

                                                          0




                                                     −1                               R




                                                     −2
                                                       1                       1.5                2
                                                                        Risk aversion, γ

   Figure 5: The survival of rational and irrational traders for diﬀerent values of η and γ in general
   equilibrium. For each region in the parameter space, we document which of the agents survives in
   the long run. “R” means that survival of the rational trader is guaranteed inside the region, “N”
   corresponds to the irrational trader.



   By contrast with the partial equilibrium displayed in Figure 4 where there is a region in
which both traders survive, other than the knife-edge case (η = η  ), only one of the traders
can survive in general equilibrium. Furthermore, the surviving trader eventually dominates
the economy and owns most of the wealth. In general, however, survival and dominance
may not be equivalent. In addition, comparing Figures 4 and 5 we see that for some regions
of parameter values, the partial equilibrium argument leads to incorrect predictions about
the survival of traders. In particular, the general equilibrium divides the mixed partial
equilibrium where both traders seem to survive into two sections; a lower one below η 
where only the irrational trader survives and an upper one in which only the rational trader
survives.

   In order to gain more insight into what determines the survival of the irrational trader,
we examine the terminal wealth (consumption) proﬁles of the rational and irrational traders.
The two panels on the left in Figure 6 show the two traders’ terminal wealth proﬁles for two
values of T (10 and 30) when the irrational trader is pessimistic. The solid line shows the
terminal wealth share of the rational trader and the dashed line shows that for the irrational
trader. As expected, the rational trader ends up with more wealth in good states of the
economy (when the dividend is high) while the irrational trader, being pessimistic, ends up
with more wealth in the bad states of the economy. As the horizon increases, the irrational


                                                                          18
                                     η = −0.3 η*                            η = 0.5 η*                             η = 2 η*
                              1                              0.4    1                              0.4    1                              0.4

        Consumption, T= 10   0.8                                   0.8                                   0.8

                             0.6                                   0.6                                   0.6
                                                             0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2
                             0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4

                             0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2

                              0                           0         0                           0         0                           0
                              −5          0              5          −5          0              5          −5          0              5



                              1                              0.4    1                              0.4    1                              0.4
        Consumption, T= 30




                             0.8                                   0.8                                   0.8

                             0.6                                   0.6                                   0.6
                                                             0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2
                             0.4                                   0.4                                   0.4

                             0.2                                   0.2                                   0.2

                              0                           0         0                           0         0                           0
                              −5          0              5          −5          0              5          −5          0              5
                                                     − 1/2                                 − 1/2                                 − 1/2
                               Normalized state, T           BT      Normalized state, T           BT      Normalized state, T           BT


   Figure 6: The terminal consumption of rational and irrational traders for diﬀerent horizon T .
   We consider two values of T , 10 and 30, respectively. The model parameters are set at µ = 0.12,
   σ = 0.18, and γ = 5. We consider three distinctive cases for the irrational trader’s belief: (1)
   pessimistic, η = −0.3η  , (2) moderately optimistic, η = 0.5η  , and (3) strongly optimistic,
                                                                                         √         η = 2η  .
   The horizontal axis in all panels is the normalized state variable g0,T ≡ (BT )/ T , which has a
   standard normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance, which is shown by the shaded area
   (vertical axis on the right). The two panels on the left show the terminal consumption, as a fraction
   of the total consumption, of the rational trader (solid line) and the irrational trader (dashed line)
   with a pessimistic belief, i.e., Cr,T /DT and Cn,T /DT , for the two values of the horizon, T = 10, 30,
   respectively. The two panels in the middle and on the right show the terminal consumption, as a
   fraction of the total consumption, of the rational trader and the irrational trader with a moderately
   and strongly optimistic beliefs for the two values of T , respectively.



trader ends up with non-trivial wealth in more extreme and less likely, low dividend states.
When the irrational trader is mildly optimistic, the situation is diﬀerent. His impact on the
prices make the bad states (i.e., the low dividend states) cheaper than the good states. This
induces the rational trader to accumulate more wealth in the bad states by giving up wealth
in the good states, including those with high probabilities. As a result, the irrational trader
is more likely to end up with more wealth. When strongly optimistic, the irrational trader
ends up accumulating wealth in very unlikely, good states by giving up wealth in most other
states, which leads to his extinction in the long-run.




                                                                              19
5.3     Absolute Extinction

In the above discussion, we used the notion of extinction in the relative sense that the relative
wealth of a trader goes to zero in the long-run. Our equilibrium analysis gives the following
result about absolute survival:


Proposition 5 Assume that the aggregate endowment is growing, i.e., µ > 12 σ 2 .

(i) The irrational trader experiences long-run absolute extinction if
                        
       η < (γ − 1) −        (γ − 1)2 + γ (2µ/σ 2 − 1)

or
                        
       η > (γ − 1) +        (γ − 1)2 + γ (2µ/σ 2 − 1).


(ii) The rational trader experience long-run absolute extinction if (γ −1)2 −γ (2µ/σ 2 − 1) > 0
and
                                                                  
       (γ − 1) −       (γ − 1)2 − γ (2µ/σ 2 − 1) < η < (γ − 1) +    (γ − 1)2 − γ (2µ/σ 2 − 1).


     Figure 7 shows the ranges of η, given γ, for the relative and absolute extinction of the
two traders. This veriﬁes that there are regions where the two concepts do not coincide. It
                                              
is worth pointing out that for η < (γ −1) − (γ −1)2 + γ(2µ/σ 2 −1), the irrational trader
experiences absolute extinction and yet he can still have non-trivial price impact in the
long-run (when η < 0) as our discussion in the logarithmic case shows.




6      The Price Impact of Irrational Traders

The diﬀerence in the results between the partial equilibrium argument and the general equi-
librium analysis on the irrational trader’s survival comes from the fact that the price impact
of irrational traders is taken into account in general equilibrium and ignored in partial equi-
librium. The partial equilibrium “invasion” analysis of an inﬁnitesimal trader, i.e., a trader
who controls only a negligible fraction of the total wealth, relies on the following two as-
sumptions: (i) such a trader has no impact on prices, (ii) the portfolio policies of both

                                                   20
                    Cn,T                                   Cn,T                                Cn,T
            lim          =0                          lim        =∞                      lim         =0
            T →∞    Cr,T                            T →∞   Cr,T                         T →∞   Cr,T

                                                                                                


                           )                  (                        )            
                                                                                               (               -
                                 0                                              η                              η
                                                                                                         

     lim Cn,T = 0                                    lim Cr,T = 0                               lim Cn,T = 0
     T →∞                                           T →∞                                       T →∞



                 Figure 7: Comparison between relative extinction and absolute extinction.


traders are the same as if the prices are exclusively set by the dominant trader. Under these
assumptions, the inﬁnitesimal trader’s wealth is growing as a fraction of the total and one
can conclude that such an trader must survive in the long run.

     Having derived the exact solution to the general equilibrium economy, we now investigate
the validity of these two assumptions and characterize the precise combinations of the model
parameters under which they fail to hold. We have already seen that in the case of logarithmic
preferences, assumption (i) does not always hold. In this section we examine the validity of
the ﬁrst assumption in the general case for γ > 1 and in Section 7 we examine the second
assumption.

     Our focus is on relative survival and, as in Section 4 when considering a sequence of
economies with increasing horizon, we choose the time of observation to be t = λT , 0 <
λ ≤ 1. We deﬁne three values of λ to help us characterize points of change in the limiting
behavior:
                     2                        η                              η
       λS ≡              ,     λr ≡                    ,    λn ≡                        .                          (22)
                  2γ − η               (γ − 1)(2γ − η)             η(γ + 1) − 2γ(γ − 1)

It is easy to verify that for η < η  , 0 < λS ≤ 1; for 0 < η ≤ η  , 0 < λr ≤ 1; and for η < 0 or
η > η  , 0 < λn ≤ 1.

     The limiting behavior of the stock price process can be characterized as follows.


Proposition 6 (Stock Price) At t = λT , the stock price behaves as follows when T → ∞.




                                                           21
Case 1. Pessimistic Irrational Trader (η < 0):
                
                 Sr,t eη[σ2 T + 12 (η−2γ)σ2 t−σBt ] , 0 < λ < λS
     St ∼
                 S ,                              λS < λ ≤ 1
                   r,t



Case 2. Moderately Optimistic Irrational Trader (0 < η < η  ):
            
             Sn,t e−η[σ2 T + 12 (η−2γ+2)σ2 t−σBt ] , 0 < λ < λS
     St ∼
            
               Sn,t ,                                 λS < λ ≤ 1


Case 3. Strongly Optimistic Irrational Trader (η  < η):

     St ∼ Sr,t .

The limiting values of the stock price, Sr,t and Sn,t , are given in Equation (13). The lim-
iting values of the instantaneous moments of stock returns are equal to the moments of the
corresponding asymptotic expressions above.

   Observe that in the ﬁrst two cases, when the irrational trader is pessimistic or moderately
optimistic, the stock price process does not converge quickly to its value in the economy
populated exclusively by the trader who survives in the long-run. Instead, over long periods
of time, i.e., for t between 0 and λS T , the stock price process is aﬀected by the presence of
both traders.

   We illustrate this property of the stock price in Figure 8 by showing which of the traders
has a ﬁnite asymptotic impact on the stock price for diﬀerent combinations of model pa-
                          2
rameters. We set λ =      3
                              to illustrate that both traders can potentially aﬀect the stock price
even if one of them becomes inﬁnitesimally small asymptotically. Eventually, when t reaches
λS T , convergence of the stock price to its value in a single-trader economy does occur. As
we show in the next proposition, in each of the cases considered in Proposition 6, for any
non-zero value of lambda, the proportion of aggregate wealth controlled by the trader who
does not survive in the long run becomes arbitrarily small by time t = λT .

   This veriﬁes that the ﬁrst assumption of the partial equilibrium “invasion” argument is
incorrect. As the horizon of the economy expands, a trader can control an asymptotically
inﬁnitesimal fraction of the total wealth and yet exert a non-negligible eﬀect on the stock
price. In other words, convergence in wealth does not readily imply convergence in prices.

                                                     22
                                                                  General Equilibrium, Stock Price Impact (λ = 2/3)
                                                              2


                                                                                    R




                               Irrational agents′ belief, η
                                                              1


                                                                                    N,R
                                                                                                           N
                                                              0
                                                                   N,R


                                                         −1                                R




                                                         −2
                                                           1                              1.5                         2
                                                                                  Risk aversion, γ

        Figure 8: The price impact of rational and irrational traders for diﬀerent values of η and γ in
        general equilibrium. The time is ﬁxed at t = 23 T . For each region in the parameter space, we
        document which of the traders has an impact on the stock price in the long run. “R” means that
        the rational trader has an impact inside the region, “N” means that the irrational trader has an
        impact, and “N,R” means that both traders have an impact.



7         Portfolio Policies

Proposition 6 in the previous section established the possibility that a trader whose wealth
diminishes over time can have a persistent impact on asset prices. In this section, we study in
more detail the diﬀerences in the survival results between the partial equilibrium and general
equilibrium analysis.7 In particular, we examine the traders’ portfolio policies and show that
convergence in the price process does not lead to immediate convergence in policies.

        Expressions for portfolio policies are not available in closed form. However, using the
same arguments as in the proof of the bounds on the volatility of stock returns in Proposition
1, it can be shown that individual portfolio holdings are bounded in absolute value, |w| ≤
1 + |η|(γ + 1)/γ. The bound on the traders’ portfolio holdings is important for our results.
It explicitly shows that price impact of the irrational trader with negligible wealth does not
rely on excessive leverage. It also implies that our long-run survival results do not rely on the
traders’ use of high leverage. Our solution for the equilibrium remains valid even if traders
are constrained in their portfolio choices, as long as the constraint is suﬃciently loose to
allow for w = ±[1 + |η|(γ + 1)/γ].
    7
    In a recent paper, Loewenstein and Willard (2002) emphasize the importance of imposing market clearing
in all markets for many existing models of mispricing with irrational traders.

                                                                                    23
    The diﬀerence in the survival results between the partial equilibrium and general equi-
                                      γ
librium analysis occur when         2γ−1
                                         η   < η < γη  (see Equations (20) and (21) and Figures 4
and 5). Partial equilibrium argument predicts survival of both traders for these parameter
values while general equilibrium analysis shows the extinction of the irrational trader when
η > η  . As mentioned earlier, the partial equilibrium argument relies on assumptions, (i) and
(ii), namely, when the irrational trader becomes small in relative wealth, (i) the stock price
behaves as if he is absent and (ii) he adopts the portfolio policy that is optimal under that
price process. We know that assumption (i) is false in general. But this does not directly
explain the discrepancy in survival results. For instance, η  < η < γη  corresponds to Case
3 of Proposition 6, in which the stock price is asymptotically the same as in the economy
without the irrational trader. In other words, the irrational trader has no signiﬁcant impact
on the current stock price as his wealth becomes negligible. The moments of stock returns
converge to the values implied by the partial equilibrium analysis. However, as we show
below, the irrational trader’s portfolio policy can diﬀer signiﬁcantly from what the partial
equilibrium price process predicts, in contrast to assumption (ii). This explains the diﬀerent
conclusions about traders’ survival in the long-run.

    To analyze the traders’ portfolio policies in more detail, we decompose a trader’s stock
demand into two components, the myopic component and the hedging component. The sum
of the two gives the trader’s total stock demand. We have the following proposition.


Proposition 7 (Portfolio Policies) At t = λT , the individual stock holdings behave as follows
when T → ∞.

Case 1. Pessimistic Irrational Trader (η < 0):8
                  
                  
                   (myopic)            (hedging)           (total)
                  
                         γ−η               (γ−1)η
       wr,t ∼                       −                 =       1,        0 < λ < λS
                  
                  
                        γ(1−η)             γ(1−η)
                  
                           1        +         0       =       1,        λS < λ ≤ 1
                  
                  
                   (myopic)            (hedging)           (total)
                  
                           1                                  1
       wn,t ∼             1−η
                                    +         0       =      1−η
                                                                 ,      0 < λ < min(λn , λS )
                  
                  
                               η
                        1+      γ
                                    +         0       = 1 + γη ,        max(λn , λS ) < λ ≤ 1

    8
      The limit of the portfolio policy for values of λ ∈ [min(λn , λS ), max(λn , λS )] can be characterized ex-
plicitly as well, but the results depend on the ordering between λn and λS , which in turn is determined by
the values of model parameters. We omit these results to simplify the exposition.


                                                       24
Case 2. Moderately Optimistic Irrational Trader (0 < η < η  ):
                
                
                 (myopic)   (hedging)                 (total)
                
                
                
                
                
                
                     1
                    1+η
                           +     0     =                 1
                                                        1+η
                                                            ,             0 < λ < λr
      wr,t ∼           1              η(γ−1)                   η
                
                               +               = 1−               ,      λ r < λ < λS
                
                
                      1+η             γ(1+η)                γ(1+η)
                
                
                
                           η
                    1−      γ
                                +       0       =      1 − γη ,           λS < λ ≤ 1
                
                
                
                  (myopic)          (hedging)        (total)
                
                      γ+η             η(γ−1)
      wn,t ∼                    +               =      1,              0 < λ < λS
                
                
                     γ(1+η)           γ(1+η)
                
                       1        +       0       =      1,              λS < λ ≤ 1


Case 3. Strongly Optimistic Irrational Trader, (η  < η):

      wr,t ∼     1 + 0 = 1,            0<λ≤1

               
                (myopic)   (hedging)   (total)
               
               
                              η(γ−1)
      wn,t   ∼    1 + γη  +           = 1 + η,                         0 < λ < λn
               
               
                                 γ
               
                  1 + γη  +      0    = 1 + γη ,                       λn < λ ≤ 1


   Since the moments of stock returns are asymptotically state-independent, it is intuitive
to assume, as in assumption (ii), that the implied portfolio policies are myopic. Proposition
7 shows, however, that this is not true. In other words, the asymptotic portfolio policy
can diﬀer signiﬁcantly from what the asymptotic moments of stock returns suggest. The
deviation comes from the hedging demand in the traders’ portfolio holdings. By deﬁnition,
the myopic component of portfolio holdings depends only on the instantaneous moments of
stock returns. Hence, it converges to its partial equilibrium value as long as the instantaneous
moments of stock returns converge. Given that the instantaneous moments of stock returns
are asymptotically state-independent, it may seem surprising that the hedging component
of portfolio holdings may not converge to zero, as Case 3 of Proposition 7 illustrates for the
irrational trader. The reason behind this result is that limiting moments of stock returns
do not fully characterize the investment opportunities traders face. In particular, for ﬁnite
values of T , moments of stock returns do not always stay constant. As we have seen in Figure
1, for example, return volatility can change signiﬁcantly as the relative wealth distribution
changes. As T becomes large, the probability for the reversal of wealth distribution between

                                                25
the rational and irrational traders and changes in the equilibrium return moments becomes
smaller. Nonetheless, the possibility of such a change remains important, which gives rise to
the signiﬁcant hedging demand in the traders’ portfolio holdings.

   Figure 9 illustrates the behavior of the economy when the irrational trader is strongly
optimistic (η > η  ). In this case (Case 3 in Propositions 4, 6 and 7), the irrational trader
does not survive and has no price impact in the long-run. For the chosen set of parameter
values, λn = 0.29. The time of observation t is set to be 0.15 T . Thus t < λn T . As the
bottom panel of Figure 9 shows, with almost probability one, the rational trader controls
most of the wealth in the economy by this point in time. As Proposition 6 states, at this point
the stock price converge closely to the price in the economy populated by only the rational
trader. If we consider the Sharpe ratio of the stock, deﬁned by µS /σS , which characterizes
the instantaneous investment opportunity traders face, it also converges to its value in the
limiting economy with the rational trader only, which is γσ. The top panel plots the value
of the Sharpe ratio for diﬀerent states of the economy at time t. It is obvious that with
almost probability one, the value of the Sharpe ratio equals the limit γσ (the probability
distribution of the state of economy is shown by the shaded area). However, for very large
values of Dt (or Bt ), the economy will be dominated by the irrational trader (as we see from
the bottom panel) and the instantaneous Sharpe ratio of the stock converges to its value in
an economy populated by the irrational trader only, which is (γ − η)σ. Such a possibility,
even though with very low probability under the true probability measure, can be important
to the irrational trade because under his belief, its likelihood can be non-trivial. As a result,
it can have a signiﬁcant impact on the irrational trader’s portfolio choice.

   The importance of these low probability but large changes in the Sharpe ratio is reﬂected
in the traders’ indirect utility function. Since traders in our model have constant relative
risk aversion, the indirect utility function of the irrational trader can be expressed in the
form
                                                                         
                               WT1−γ      1 h(t,Dt ) 1−γ           1    1−γ
       V (t, Wt , Dt ) ≡ Et ξT         =     e      Wt   ≡ Et ξT      C       .             (23)
                               1−γ       1−γ                     1 − γ n,T

State dependence of the indirect utility function, i.e., the eﬀect of possible changes in the
Sharpe ratio, is captured by the function h(t, Dt ). The second panel of Figure 9 shows that
for the irrational trader h is non-constant over a wide range of values of Dt . It exhibits
signiﬁcant state-dependence even when the contemporaneous Sharpe ratio is approximately
constant. It is this state-dependence in the indirect utility function that induces hedging


                                               26
                                                      t = 0.15 × T
                                                                                            0.4
           µS / σS




                                0
                                                                                            0.2

                              −2                                                            0
                                    −6   −4   −2            0           2    4        6
                              200                                                           0.4
                                0
         h(t,D )
              t




                                                                                            0.2
                             −200
                             −400                                                           0
                                    −6   −4   −2            0           2    4        6
                               20                                                           0.4
         whedge




                                                                                            0.2
          n




                                0
                                                                                            0
                                    −6   −4   −2            0           2    4        6
                                1                                                           0.4
              W / (W + W )
                      n




                              0.8
                              0.6
                                                                                            0.2
                      r




                              0.4
                              0.2
                      r




                                0                                                           0
                                    −6   −4   −2          0              2   4        6
                                                                   −1/2
                                               Normalized state, t      Bt

Figure 9: The behavior of the economy for the following parameter values: µ = 0.12, σ = 0.18,
γ = 5, T = 30. Also, η = 2η  = 16, i.e., the irrational trader is strongly optimistic. The time of
observation√ is set at t = 0.15 × T . The horizontal axis in all panels is the normalized state variable,
g0,T = BT / T , which has a standard normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance, shown
by the shaded area (vertical axis on the right). The four panels from top to bottom show (i)
the instantaneous Sharpe ratio of returns, µS /σS ; (ii) the state dependence of the indirect value
function of the rational trader, as captured by the function h(t, Dt ) in (23); (iii) the portion of
the portfolio strategy of the irrational trader attributable to hedging demand, deﬁned as wnhedge =
wn − µS + ησS2 /(γσS2 ); (iv) the fraction of the aggregate wealth controlled by the rational agent,
Wr /(Wr + Wn ).




                                                       27
demand. The third panel of Figure 9 shows hedging demand of the irrational trader. Over
a wide range of values of Dt , his hedging demand is non-zero. In particular, it is close to its
asymptotic value η(γ − 1)/γ (see Proposition 7), which equals 12.8 for the chosen values of
parameters.

    What we conclude from this is that convergence of the stock price to a limiting process
does not necessarily imply convergence of the traders’ portfolio policies to their policies
under the limiting price process. Price paths of small probability under the true probability
measure can have a signiﬁcant impact on the traders’ portfolio policies. Thus, assumption
(ii) of the partial equilibrium analysis that convergence in price gives convergence in portfolio
policies does not hold in general. In the case we are interested in, the irrational trader is
strongly optimistic and does not survive in the long-run. As his wealth diminishes, the stock
price becomes very close to the price set by the rational trader who dominates the economy
and the instantaneous moments of stock returns stay constant with almost probability one.
Yet, the irrational trader’s portfolio policy remains far from myopic. The presence of the
hedging component in his holdings can lower the growth of his portfolio and reduce his chance
of recovery from past losses. Such a mechanism is overlooked in the partial equilibrium,
which creates the diﬀerence in the survival results between partial equilibrium and general
equilibrium analysis.

    In the appendix, we also examine the dynamics of the wealth distribution of the economy
as well as the welfare implications of the irrational beliefs.


8     Conclusion

The analysis above has examined the long-run survival of irrational traders who use persis-
tently wrong beliefs to make their portfolio choices. Using a parsimonious model with no
intermediate consumption, we have shown that the partial equilibrium arguments to sup-
port the long-run survival of irrational traders are ﬂawed and that the impact irrational
traders have on equilibrium prices is important in determining their long-run fortunes. In
particular, we have found that an irrational trader with a very small wealth may still have a
large impact on the stock price, and, furthermore, that irrational traders with beliefs mildly
diﬀerent from the true probabilities can survive in the long run.

    For tractability, we conﬁned our analysis to preferences with constant relative risk aver-
sion. Extensions of our analysis to more general preferences are possible and may yield


                                               28
unexpected results. We have also assumed that the rational and irrational traders diﬀer
only in their beliefs but not in their preferences. This allows us to focus on the impact of
irrational beliefs on survival and prices. Of course, diﬀerences in time and risk preferences
can have their own implications for long-run survival.

   Perhaps more important is the extension of these results to models with intermediate
consumption and to alternative preferences. We have deferred this to a second paper but,
while there is much more to be done on this topic, it is fair to say that a general message
is emerging and is unlikely to be overturned. Namely, survival and price impact are related
but independent concepts and the arguments of partial equilibrium are not to be trusted.
In our model irrational traders could survive and could even dominate rational traders, but,
contrary to the partial equilibrium analysis, even if they did not survive, they could still
have a persistent impact on prices.




                                             29
A      Wealth Distribution and Welfare

Wealth Distribution

Section 5 discussed the limiting distribution of wealth between the rational and irrational
traders at the ﬁnal date T , as T approached inﬁnity. We now characterize the dynamics of
the wealth distribution in the economy.


Proposition 8 (Individual Wealth) At t = λT , the individual wealth processes behave as
follows when T → ∞.

Case 1. Pessimistic Irrational Trader (η < 0):
                 1               2

      Wr,t       e 2 [η−2(γ−1)]ησ t−ησBt ,                                              0 < λ < λn
           ∼
      Wn,t          1       2 /γ 2 )(γ−1)σ 2 T + 1
                                                      [(η2 /γ 2 )−2η(γ−1)/γ ] σ2 t−(η/γ)σBt , λ < λ ≤ 1
                   e 2 (η                         2
                                                                                               n


       Wr,t ∼ St


Case 2. Moderately Optimistic Irrational Trader (0 < η < η  ):
                 1               2

      Wr,t       e 2 [η−2(γ−1)]ησ t−ησBt ,                                                      0 < λ < λr
           ∼
      Wn,t              1     2 /γ 2 )(γ−1)σ 2 T + 1
                                                        [(η2 /γ 2 )(2γ−1)−2η(γ−1)/γ ] σ2 t−(η/γ)σBt , λ < λ ≤ 1
                   e− 2 (η                          2
                                                                                                       r


      Wn,t ∼ St


Case 3. Strongly Optimistic Irrational Trader (η  < η):
                 1               2

      Wr,t       e 2 [η−2(γ−1)]ησ t−ησBt ,                                              0 < λ < λn
           ∼
      Wn,t          1       2 /γ 2 )(γ−1)σ 2 T + 1
                                                      [(η2 /γ 2 )−2η(γ−1)/γ ] σ2 t−(η/γ)σBt , λ < λ ≤ 1
                   e 2 (η                         2
                                                                                               n


       Wr,t ∼ St


    The results for Case 3 conﬁrms our analysis of the diﬀerence in the irrational trader’s
survival between general and partial equilibrium analysis. Despite the convergence of the
stock price to its limiting process, the irrational trader does not follow a myopic portfolio
policy as the limiting price process implies. The hedging demand in his portfolio policy

                                                               30
changes the growth rate of his wealth from that of the myopic policy and the chance of his
survival.

   Lastly, we show that even when the stock price, the traders’ portfolio policies and their
wealth eventually do converge to their limiting values, the irrational trader suﬀered from
wealth losses may not recover, in contrast to the partial equilibrium argument. Consider
a combination of model parameters satisfying η  < η < γη  . In this case, for suﬃciently
large values of t, the stock price, the traders’ portfolio policies, and the growth rate of their
wealth do eventually converge to their partial equilibrium values as Propositions 6 and 7
show. Yet, from Proposition 8, the irrational trader still becomes extinct in the long-run.
The reason for this can be seen from Proposition 8 and is further illustrated in Figure 10
(the second curve from the top). Even though for t = λT , λ > λn , the relative wealth of the
irrational trader is growing, it does so only following a period of decline, i.e., 0 < λ < λn .
This happens because assumption (ii) of the partial equilibrium analysis does not hold for
0 < λ < λn and the irrational trader suﬀers signiﬁcant decline in relative wealth growth this
period. If this decline is below certain threshold, he will be unable to recover despite relative
growth afterwards and cannot escape from relative extinction.

                                     1    Wr,λT
                               lim     ln
                            6T →∞    T    Wn,λT

                                     γη  < η or η < 0        
                                                         
                                                    
                                                "
                                         R ""
                                         @
                                         @
                                           "
                                          "    !!XXXX
                                        "
                                      " !!!                  XX
                                    " !                 6
                                   " !
                                 "!!              η  < η < γη 
                               " !
                              "!
                            "!
                            !
                          0 X
                            aXaX                γ
                               aXaX X
                                                      
                                              2γ−1 η < η < η
                                                               
                                      X
                                   aa XX
                                      aa XXXX ?
                                          aa         XX
                                           aa
                                                  aa
                                                        a``
                                  0 < η < γ η2γ−1
                                                             ``


                                                                       -
                                                         λn   λr   1   λ

                             Figure 10: Asymptotic Wealth Behavior.




                                                  31
Utility Loss of Irrational Beliefs

As we have established, the irrational trader can have a signiﬁcant impact on the behavior of
stock returns. In this subsection we show that the impact on prices is associated with utility
loss by irrational traders. By revealed preference, the rational trader always beneﬁts from the
presence of irrational traders, since the autarchic solution remains feasible in our equilibrium
economy. We quantify this beneﬁt and show that it is asymptotically independent of the
exact belief of the irrational traders, and, surprisingly, therefore independent of the long run
survival of the rational trader.

   For γ > 1 and η = 0, the certainty equivalent of the terminal consumption of the rational
trader in the equilibrium economy we are analyzing is given by
                        1−γ  1−γ
                                 1         1 2
      C.E. (Cr,T ) ≡ E0 Cr,T        ∼ e(µ− 2 σ γ )T .

The above expression is the same as the certainty equivalent of consuming the entire aggre-
gate dividend at time T. Thus, we ﬁnd that, in the limit of economy horizon approaching
inﬁnity, the rational trader realizes the largest possible beneﬁt of risk sharing, and this con-
clusion is independent of the exact belief bias η exhibited by the irrational trader. This
remains the case even if the rational trader does not survive in the long run.

   Next, we compute the certainty equivalent of the consumption of the irrational trader.
We are using the objective probability distribution in our calculation, i.e., we are ﬁnding the
certainty equivalent the the rational trader would assign to the terminal consumption proﬁle
of the irrational trader. As before, we assume γ > 1 and η = 0. We ﬁnd
                        1−γ
                              1−γ
                                 1         1 2    1 2 2         2
      C.E. (Cn,T ) ≡ E0 Cn,T        ∼ e(µ− 2 σ γ− 2 η σ (2γ−1)/γ )T .                      (24)

We know from our previous analysis that the irrational traders can have long-run impact
on the asset prices in equilibrium. To quantify this impact, we consider that certainty
equivalent of the consumption chosen by the irrational trader facing the prices free of their
impact on prices, i.e.., the prices in the economy populated exclusively by rational traders.
Assuming that the endowment of the irrational trader is one half of the aggregate dividend,
a straightforward calculation yields the certainty equivalent of

      1 (µ− 12 σ2 γ− 12 η2 σ2 γ1 )T
        e                           .
      2
Since γ > 1, the above expression has higher growth rate in T than (24), i.e., asymptotically


                                                32
the irrational traders are hurt by their own price impact. As a quantitative measure of
the resulting utility loss one can use the fraction of the aggregate dividend with which the
irrational agent must be endowed in an economy without price impact to achieve the same
certainty equivalent consumption as in our general equilibrium economy. We ﬁnd that this
fraction converges to zero asymptotically.


B      Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

The optimality conditions of the maximization problem in (9a) require that

      Cr,T = Cn,T (b ξT )1/γ .

Combined with the market clearing condition (9b), this implies (10a) and (10b).

    The state price density must be proportional to the traders’ marginal utilities. Since we
set the interest rate equal to zero, the state price density conditional on the information
available at time t is given by
                         γ
           1 + (b ξT )1/γ DT−γ
                          γ   .
      Et 1 + (b ξT )1/γ DT−γ

The price of any payoﬀ ZT is therefore given by (12).

    The individual budget constraint in a dynamically complete market is equivalent to the
static constraint that the initial wealth of an trader is equal to the present value of the
trader’s consumption (e.g., Cox and Huang (1989). Since the two traders in our model have
identical endowments at time t = 0, their budget constraints imply
                                                                                 
                                    1  γ−1                  1            1      γ−1
                   1−γ              γ
                                                    1−γ
            E0 DT       1 + (b ξT )            E0 DT (b ξT ) 1 + (b ξT ) γ
                                                            γ


    Wr,0 =                         1  γ   =                       1 γ               = Wn,0 . (25)
              E0 DT−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ                E0 DT−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ

                                  2 (γ−1)T
We now verify that b = eησ                   satisﬁes (25). Note that
                           σ2
                                )+ 12 (1−γ)2 σ2 ]T − 12 (1−γ)2 σ2 T +(1−γ)σBT
      DT1−γ = e[(1−γ)(µ−    2                   e


                                                           33
where the second term is an exponential martingale. Deﬁne a new measure Q, such that
      
       dQ         1      2 2
             = e− 2 (1−γ) σ t+(1−γ)σBt
       dP t

where P is the original probability measure. By Girsanov’s theorem, the process

         BtQ = Bt − (1 − γ)σt

is a Brownian motion under Q. Thus, Girsanov’s theorem implies that the equality
                                                                  
                    1           1 γ−1                            1 γ−1
           1−γ      γ           γ
                                               1−γ               γ
      E0 DT (b ξT ) 1 + (b ξT )         = E0 DT      1 + (b ξT )

is equivalent to
                                                                                   
                1            1               γ−1                              1   γ−1
      E0 (ξTQ ) γ 1 + (ξTQ ) γ
        Q
                                                       =    EQ
                                                             0     1 + (ξTQ ) γ


where ξtQ = exp(− 12 σ 2 η 2 t + σηBtQ ). Since the process BtQ is equivalent in distribution to Bt ,
we can restate the last equality equivalently as
                    γ−1                γ−1 
           1        1                      1
     E0 ξTγ 1 + ξTγ          = E0    1 + ξTγ        .


   To verify that the above equality holds, consider a function F (z) deﬁned as
                                                      1
                                                            γ 
                                 1          1
                                   zT    − 2γ zT        γ
         F (z) = E0         e   2γ      +e             ξT          .                                         (26)

Changing the order of diﬀerentiation and expectation operators, (see Billingsley 1995, Th.
16.8),
                                           γ−1 
                                   1         1
                           1
         F  (z)|z=0   =E    1 − ξTγ   1 + ξTγ        .
                           2

Thus it suﬃces to prove that F  (z)|z=0 = 0.

   Since
                        γ       1                                                                  
         1         1    1                      1 2 2                 1       1 2 2             γ    1
           zT   − 2γ zT γ
 E0 e   2γ    +e       ξT      = E0 e 2γ (zT − 2 η σ T +ησBT ) + e− 2γ (zT − 2 η σ T +ησBT )       ξT2       (27)



                                                                       34
if we deﬁne a new measure Q so that
       
        dQ         1 2 2    1
              = e− 8 η σ t+ 2 ησBt
        dP t

and use Girsanov’s theorem in a manner similar to its earlier application in this proof, we
ﬁnd that (27) equals
                  1                    1             γ      1 2 2
      E0        e 2γ (zT +ησBT ) + e− 2γ (zT +ησBT )        e− 8 ησ T
                                                                        .

The symmetry of the distribution of the normal random variable BT implies that F (z) =
                                                                            2 (γ−1)T
F (−z), therefore F  (z)|z=0 = 0. This veriﬁes that b = eησ                           .

   The stock price is given by
                                 γ
          Et DT1−γ 1 + (bξT )1/γ
     St =                        γ
                −γ             1/γ
          Et DT 1 + (bξT )

Deﬁne
                           
                    −ησ 2
                     γ
                                (T −t)
      A=e

                    σ γ T +σ2 η(γ−1) γ1 t+ ησ
                 1 2 21
      g = e− 2 η                            γ
                                              BT


then, as we have shown above, the stock price can be equivalently expressed as

                2         1 2                Et [(1 + g)γ ]
      St = e(µ−σ γ )T +(− 2 σ (1−2γ))t eσBt
                                            Et [(1 + gA)γ ]

and therefore, by Ito’s lemma, its volatility σSt is given by
                                                                    
            ∂ ln St            Et [(1 + gA)γ−1 ] Et [(1 + g)γ−1]
     σSt =          = σ + ησ                     −                     .                   (28)
             ∂Bt                Et [(1 + gA)γ ]       Et [(1 + g)γ ]

To establish the bounds on volatility, we prove that

      Et [(1 + gA)γ−1 ] Et [(1 + g)γ−1]
                       −                ≥0                                                 (29)
       Et [(1 + gA)γ ]   Et [(1 + g)γ ]

for A ≤ 1 with the opposite inequality for A ≥ 1. Note that for any twice-diﬀerentiable




                                                             35
function F (A, γ),

∂ ∂                        ∂                     ∂                      ∂ F (A, γ − 1)
      ln (F (A, γ)) ≥ 0 ⇒    ln (F (A, γ − 1))−    ln (F (A, γ)) ≤ 0 ⇒                 ≤0
∂γ ∂A                     ∂A                    ∂A                     ∂A F (A, γ)

Thus, to prove (29), it suﬃces to show that ∂ 2 ln (Et [(1 + gA)γ ]) / ∂A∂γ ≥ 0. The function
(1 + gA)γ is log-supermodular in A, g, and γ, since it is positive and it’s cross-partial
derivatives in all arguments are positive. Thus, according to the additivity property of log-
supermodular functions (see Athey (2002)), Et [(1 + gA)γ ] is log-supermodular in A and γ,
i.e., ∂ 2 ln (Et [(1 + gA)γ ]) / ∂A∂γ ≥ 0.

   Because A > 1 if and only if η < 0 , we have shown that
                                           
         Et [(1 + gA)γ−1 ] Et [(1 + g)γ−1 ]
     η                    −                   ≥0
          Et [(1 + gA)γ ]   Et [(1 + g)γ ]

and hence σSt ≥ σ.
                                                      
              Et [(1+gA)γ−1 ]         Et [(1+g)γ−1 ]
   Because     Et [(1+gA)γ ]
                              −        Et [(1+g)γ ]
                                                           is bounded between −1 and 0 for η < 0 and be-
tween 0 and 1 for η > 0, we obtain the stated upper bound from (28): σSt ≤ σ(1 + |η|).



Proof of Proposition 4

According to (10a) and (10b),
                                                      
      Cn,T          1/γ     1  1 2 2    2           1
           = (b ξT ) = exp    − σ η + ησ (γ − 1) T + ησBT .
      Cr,T                  γ  2                    γ

Using the strong Law of Large Numbers for Brownian motion (see Karatzas and Shreve
(1991, Sec. 2.9.A)), for any value of σ,
                             
                                 0,    a<0
             a T +σ BT
       lim e             =                                                                          (30)
      T →∞
                                 ∞, a > 0

where convergence takes place almost surely. The statement of the proposition then follows.




                                                             36
Proof of Proposition 5

Equations (10a) and (10b) state that
                                 1
          Cr,T =                          DT
                           1 + (b ξT )1/γ

                             (b ξT )1/γ
          Cn,T =                          DT
                           1 + (b ξT )1/γ
                1 2
If µ >          2
                  σ ,     then the irrational trader’s consumption converges to zero if and only if
          1/γ
(b ξT )         DT converges to zero:
                                                                   
                    1/γ              21        1 2 21    1 2      1
          (b ξT )         DT = exp ησ (γ − 1) − η σ + µ − σ T + ση + σ BT . (31)
                                      γ        2    γ    2        γ
                                                                                       DT
Similarly, the rational trader’s consumption converges to zero if and only if      (b ξT )1/γ
                                                                                                converges
to zero:
                                                                  
                DT                 21        1 2 21    1 2       1
                          = exp −ησ (γ − 1) + η σ + µ − σ T + −ση + σ BT . (32)
          (b ξT )1/γ                γ        2    γ    2         γ


    According to (30), (31) and (32) imply that
                        µ
      Cn,T → 0 ⇔ γ 2 2 − 1 < −2η(γ − 1) + η 2                                                       (33a)
                          σ
                       µ
          Cr,T → 0 ⇔ γ 2 2 − 1 < 2η(γ − 1) − η 2                                                   (33b)
                        σ
                                                                                                     
The right hand side of (33a) is convex in η, thus Cn,T       → 0 for η < (γ−1)− (γ − 1)2 + γ 2 σµ2 − 1
                                           
and η > (γ − 1) + (γ − 1)2 + γ 2 σµ2 − 1 .
                                                                  
   Similarly, Cn,T → 0 for η > (γ − 1) − (γ − 1)2 − 2 σµ2 − 1 and η < (γ − 1) +
                                                                                 
  (γ − 1)2 − γ 2 σµ2 − 1 . Such a value of η exists as long as (γ − 1)2 − γ 2 σµ2 − 1 > 0.



Proof of Propositions 6, 8

Our analysis will make use of the following technical result.

Lemma 1 Consider a stochastic process Xt = ec t+v Bt and a constant a ≥ 0. Assume that
ac + 12 v 2 a2 (1 − λ) = 0, 0 ≤ λ < 1. Then the limit limT →∞ Et [XTa ] is equal to either zero or
inﬁnity almost surely, where we set t = λT . The following convergence results hold:

                                                      37
(i) (Point-wise convergence)

          Et [(1 + XT )a ]
         lim               = 1.                                                                   (34)
      T →∞ 1 + Et [X a ]
                     T


(ii) (Convergence of moments)

           meant Et [(1 + XT )a ]
         lim                      =1                                                              (35)
      T →∞ meant (1 + Et [XTa ])


           volt Et [(1 + XT )a ]
         lim                     =1                                                               (36)
      T →∞ volt (1 + Et [X a ])
                           T
where meant ft and volt ft denote the instantaneous mean and standard deviation of the process
ln ft respectively.


Proof of Lemma 1

(i) Consider the conditional expectation
                                                  
                              1 2 2
      Et [XTa ]   = exp ac T + v a (1 − λ) T + avBt .                                             (37)
                              2

The limit of Et [XTa ] is equal to zero if ac+ 12 v 2 a2 (1−λ) < 0 and equal to inﬁnity if the opposite
inequality holds (according to the strong Law of Large Numbers for Brownian motion, see
Karatzas and Shreve, 1991, Sec. 2.9.A).

   Because the function ac T + 12 v 2 a2 (1 − λ) T is convex in a and equal to zero when a = 0,
we ﬁnd that for a ≥ 1

                           Et [XTz ]
      Et [XTa ] → ∞ ⇒                → 0,    ∀z ∈ (0, a)                                          (38)
                           Et [XTa ]

      Et [XTa ] → 0 ⇒ Et [XTz ] → 0,        ∀z ∈ (0, a).                                          (39)

   We prove the result of the lemma separately for six regions that cover the entire parameter
space.

Case 1: 0 ≤ a ≤ 1, Et [XTa ] → ∞.

   If XT ≤ 1, (XT + 1)a ≤ 2a , while if XT ≥ 1 ⇒ (XT + 1)a − XTa ≤ aXTa−1 ≤ a since
(XT + 1)a is concave and a − 1 ≤ 0. Therefore, XTa ≤ (1 + XT )a ≤ XTa + 2a + a, and hence
limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ]/Et [XTa ] = 1, which implies limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ]/(1 + Et [XTa ]) = 1.

                                                   38
Case 2: 1 ≤ a ≤ 2, Et [XTa ] → ∞.

   By the mean value theorem, (1 + XT )a = XTa + a (w + XT )a−1 for some w ∈ [0, 1]. Using
the analysis of case 1, (w + XT )a−1 ≤ (1 + XT )a−1 ≤ XTa−1 + 2a−1 + a − 1, which, combined
with (38), implies that limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ]/Et [XTa ] = 1 and the main result follows.

Case 3: 2 ≤ a, Et [XTa ] → ∞.

   By the mean value theorem, (1 + XT )a = XTa + a (w + XT )a−1 for some w ∈ [0, 1]. By
Jensen’s inequality, ((1 + XT )/2)a−1 ≤ (1 + XTa−1 )/2. Thus,

      0 ≤ (w + XT )a−1 ≤ (1 + XT )a−1 ≤ 2a−2 + 2a−2 XTa−1

which, combined with (38) implies that limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ]/Et [XTa ] = 1 and the main
result follows.

Case 4: 0 ≤ a ≤ 1, Et [XTa ] → 0:

   If XT ≤ 1, (1 + XT )a ≤ 1 + XT ≤ 1 + XTa , while if XT ≥ 1, (1 + XT )a ≤ XTa +
a ≤ 1 + XTa since (1 + XT )a is concave. Thus, 1 ≤ (1 + XT )a ≤ 1 + XTa and therefore
limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ] = 1, which implies the main result.

Case 5: 1 ≤ a ≤ 2, Et [XTa ] → 0.

   By the mean value theorem, (1 + XT )a = 1 + aXT (1 + wXT )a−1 for some w ∈ [0, 1].
                                                                    
Further, XT (1 + wXT )a−1 ≤ XT (1 + XT )a−1 ≤ XT XTa−1 + 2a−1 + a − 1 , using the same
argument as in case 1. Since limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = 0, according to (39), limT →∞ Et [XT ] = 0
and hence limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ] = 1.

Case 6: 2 ≤ a, Et [XTa ] → 0.

   By the mean value theorem, (1 + XT )a = 1 + aXT (1 + wXT )a−1 for some w ∈ [0, 1].
Further, XT (1 + wXT )a−1 ≤ XT (1 + XT )a−1 ≤ 2a−2 XT + 2a−2 XTa by Jensen’s inequal-
ity. Since limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = 0, according to (39), and limT →∞ Et [XT ] = 0 and hence
limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a ] = 1.

   (ii) Since the conditional expectations Et [(1 + XT )a ] and Et [1 + XTa ] are martingales,
they have zero drift for all values of T and t. By Ito’s lemma, convergence of the ﬁrst
moments of the natural logarithms of the same processes follows from convergence of the
second moments.

   We now establish convergence of volatility of the process Et [(1 + XT )a ]. According to


                                              39
Ito’s lemma, one must show that

            ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ] /∂Bt
        lim                            = 1,      ∀a ≥ 0.
       T →∞ ∂ ln(1 + Et [XTa ])/∂Bt


Given (37), it suﬃces to prove that limT →∞ ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ] /∂Bt = 0 if limT →∞ Et [XTa ] =
0 and limT →∞ ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ] /∂Bt = av if limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = ∞.

     First, changing the order of diﬀerentiation and expectation operators (see Billingsley
1995, Th. 16.8),
                                                                                   
       ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ]      Et [XT (1 + XT )a−1 ]          Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ]
                             = av                       = av 1 −                      .
                ∂Bt                  Et [(1 + XT )a ]             Et [(1 + XT )a ]

Furthermore, according to part (i),

       Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ]   Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ]
                          ∼                    .                                                         (40)
        Et [(1 + XT )a ]       1 + Et [XTa ]

Assume a ≥ 1. As we have shown in case 1 of the proof of part (i), XTa−1 ≤ (1 + XT )a−1 ≤
                                                                   
XTa−1 + 2a−1 + a − 1. If Et [XTa ] → ∞, according to (38), Et XTa−1 /Et [XTa ] → 0, which yields

            ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ]
        lim                       = av.
       T →∞          ∂Bt
                                                                      
Similarly, if Et [XTa ] → 0, then, according to (39), limT →∞ Et XTa−1 = 0, which, according
to part (i), implies that limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ] = 1 and

            ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ]
        lim                       = 0.
       T →∞          ∂Bt

     Next, consider the case of 0 < a < 1. If Et [XTa ] → ∞, because Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ] ≤ 1, (40)
implies limT →∞ ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT )a ]/∂Bt = a v.

     Suppose that limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = 0. By Markov’s inequality, Pt [XT > ] ≤ Et [XTa ]/                 a
                                                                                                             →
                                                            a−1              a−1
0, for any > 0. Similarly, Pt [XT < ] ≤ Et [(1 + XT )             ]/(1 + )         . Thus, 1 ≥ Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ] ≥
Pt [XT < ] (1 + )a−1 , and therefore lim inf T →∞ Et [(1 + XT )a−1 ] ≥ (1 + )a−1 for any                 > 0.
                                          a−1                                                        a
This implies that limT →∞ Et [(1 + XT )         ] = 1, and therefore limT →∞ ∂ ln Et [(1 + XT ) ]/∂Bt =
0.

     We establish the long-run behavior of the quantities St and Wr,t /Wn,t for the case when
γ > 1 and 0 < η < η  = 2(γ − 1). The results for all other regions in the parameter space


                                                    40
can be obtained similarly.

   The equilibrium stock price and the ratio of the individual wealth processes are given by
                             1 γ
          Et DT1−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ
     St =                   1  γ .
                 −γ
          Et DT 1 + (b ξT )   γ



                                                                        
                                                     1              γ−1
                       Et       DT1−γ    1 + (b ξT ) γ
      Wr,t
           =                                                                  .
      Wn,t                           1             1                      γ−1
                    Et DT1−γ (b ξT ) γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ

We therefore need to characterize the long-run behavior of the following four quantities:
                         1                γ
      Et DT1−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ
                        1   γ
      Et DT−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ
                                 
                            1  γ−1
           1−γ
      Et DT     1 + (b ξT ) γ
                                                              
                             1                       1    γ−1
      Et       DT1−γ (b ξT ) γ       1 + (b ξT )     γ              .

We will establish the asymptotic behavior of the stock price process in detail, the corre-
sponding results for the wealth ratio process in Proposition 8 are obtained in a very similar
fashion.

   Consider the ﬁrst expression,
                                                                                 1−γ               1       γ
                                      1   γ                                DT                     ξT γ
      Et DT1−γ 1 + (b ξT )              γ        = Dt1−γ Et                                 1 + b ξt                  .
                                                                              Dt                     ξt

Given the aggregate dividend process,
               1−γ
          DT                                     1       2 (1−γ)γ
                                                                    ) e− 12 (1−γ)2 σ2 (T −t)+(1−γ)σ(BT −Bt ) .
                         = e(T −t)(µ(1−γ)− 2 σ
          Dt

As in the proof of Proposition 1, we introduce a new measure Q with the Radon-Nikodym
derivative
       
        dQ        1      2 2
             = e− 2 (1−γ) σ (T −t)+(1−γ)σ(BT −Bt ) .
        dP t


                                                                          41
By Girsanov’s theorem, BT − Bt = BTQ − BtQ − (1 − γ)σ(T − t), where BtQ is a Brownian
                                                                                                                                       2
motion under the measure Q. Using the expression for b from Proposition 1, b = eT (γ−1)σ η ,
we ﬁnd
                       1                 γ                          1
     Et DT1−γ 1 + (bξT ) γ                           = eT (µ(1−γ)− 2 σ
                                                                           2 (1−γ)γ
                                                                                      )+t(− 12 σ2 (1−γ)2 )+Bt (σ(1−γ))

                                                                         1 2 21        1       2    ησ Q                   γ
                                                          × EQ
                                                             t     1 + e(− 2 η σ γ )T +( γ (γ−1)σ η)t+ γ BT                       .   (41)


We will omit the superscript Q in (41), since the distribution of BtQ under the measure Q is
the same as the distribution of Bt under the original measure P .

Using the assumption that t = λT , deﬁne
              1 2 21         1       2     ησ
     XT = e(− 2 η σ γ +(1−λ) γ (γ−1)σ η)T + γ BT .

We now apply the result of lemma 1, with

          1       1         1
     c = − η 2 σ 2 + (1 − λ) (γ − 1)σ 2 η
          2       γ         γ
                 ησ
     v =            ,
                  γ
     a = γ.

Since we are assuming γ > 1 and 0 < η < 2 (γ − 1), limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = ∞.

According to lemma 1,
                        1                γ                   1 2               1 2        2
     Et DT1−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ                         ∼ e(µ(1−γ)− 2 σ (1−γ)γ )T +(− 2 σ (η+1−γ) )t+σ(η+1−γ)Bt .


   We next examine
                                     1   γ
     Et       DT−γ       1 + (b ξT )   γ        .

Using a similar change of measure, we ﬁnd
                       1                 γ                1 2               1 2 2
     Et DT−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ                          = e(−µγ+ 2 σ (1+γ)γ )T +(− 2 σ γ )t+(−σγ)Bt
                                                                           2 1    1 2 21       2   ησ            γ
                                                         × Et        1 + e(−σ η γ − 2 η σ γ )T +σ ηt+ γ BT               .

                                                                      42
We apply lemma 1, setting XT = ec T +v BT and

                             1 1 2 21
      c = −σ 2 η              − η σ + (1 − λ)σ 2 η
                             γ 2    γ
                  ησ
      v =
                   γ
      a = γ.

The value of limT →∞ Et [XTa ] depends on the exact combination of the model parameters. In
particular,
                                
                                    ∞,           −2η + λ(2γη − η 2 ) > 0,
      lim       Et [XTa ]   =
      T →∞
                                    0,           −2η + λ(2γη − η 2 ) < 0,

(see the proof of lemma 1, part (i)). Deﬁne

                    2
      λS =              .
                 2γ − η

Note that, because γ > 1 and 0 < η < 2 (γ − 1), 0 < λS < 1. Then, limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = ∞
if λ > λS and 2γη − η 2 > 0 or if λ < λS and 2γη − η 2 < 0, and the limit is equal to zero
otherwise.

By lemma 1, if limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = ∞,
                                       1   γ                1
      Et       DT−γ       1 + (b ξT )    γ        ∼ eT (−µγ+ 2 σ
                                                                   2 (1+γ)γ−σ 2 η
                                                                                    )T +(− 12 σ2 (η−γ)2 )t+σ(η−γ)Bt


while if limT →∞ Et [XTa ] = 0, then
                        1                  γ            1 2               1 2 2
      Et DT−γ 1 + (b ξT ) γ                       ∼ e(−µγ+ 2 σ (1+γ)γ )T +(− 2 σ γ )t+(−σγ)Bt .

Using our deﬁnition of λS , we re-state these results as
                                                  
                                                      −µγ+ 12 σ2 (1+γ)γ )T +(− 12 σ2 γ 2 )t−σγBt
                1                 γ             e(                                            ,                   0 ≤ λ < λS
    −γ
Et DT 1 + (b ξT ) γ                          ∼
                                                  
                                                   (−µγ+ 12 σ2 (1+γ)γ−σ2 η)T +(− 12 σ2 (η−γ)2 )t+σ(η−γ)Bt
                                                    e                                                      , λS < λ ≤ 1


   Having established the behavior of both the numerator and the denominator of the ex-
pression for the stock price, we have proven the limiting result for the stock price itself.


                                                                     43
According to part (ii) of lemma 1, not only the stock price, but also the mean and volatility
of returns behave according to the asymptotic expressions of Proposition 6 in the limit of
the economy horizon T approaching inﬁnity. The same is true for the ratio of individual
wealth and the volatility of that ratio in Proposition 8.

Proof of Proposition 7

When the ﬁnancial markets are dynamically complete and there is a single source of un-
certainty (driven by a Brownian motion), the fraction of the agent’s wealth invested in
stock can be computed as a ratio of the instantaneous volatility of the agent’s wealth to
the instantaneous volatility of the cumulative stock return process. Propositions 6 and 8
provide expression for the long-run behavior of the volatility of stock returns and individual
wealth processes, from which the expression for portfolio holdings follow immediately. To
decompose the portfolio holdings of the rational trader into as a sum of the myopic and
hedging demands, we compute the hedging demand as µS /(γσS2 ), where µS and σS are the
drift and the diﬀusion coeﬃcients of the stock return process. The diﬀerence between the
total portfolio holdings and the myopic component deﬁne the agent’s hedging demand. For
the irrational trader, the calculations are analogous, except the myopic demand is given by
µ̂S /(γσS2 ) = (µS + ησσS )/(γσS2 ), where µ̂S is the expected stock return as perceived by the
irrational trader.




                                              44
References

 [1] Alpert, M; Raiﬀa, H. 1959, A progress report on the training of probability assessors.
    Reprinted in D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky (eds.) Judgement under Uncer-
    tainty: Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

 [2] Athey, Susan. 2002, Monotone Comparative Statics Under Uncertainty, Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, 117 (1), 187–223.

 [3] Barberis, Nicholas; Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. 1998, A Model of Investor Senti-
    ment, Journal of Financial Economics, 49 (3), 307–43.

 [4] Benartzi, Shlomo; Thaler, Richard H. 2001, Naive Diversiﬁcation Strategies in Deﬁned
    Contribution Saving Plans, American Economic Review, 91(1), 79–98.

 [5] Billingsley, Patrick. 1995, Probability and Measure, Wiley-Interscience, Third Edition.

 [6] Black, Fischer. 1986, Noise, Journal of Finance, 41 (3), 529–43.

 [7] Black, Fischer; Scholes, Myron S. 1973, The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabili-
    ties, Journal of Political Economy, 81 (3), 637–54.

 [8] Blume, Lawrence; Easley, David. 2001, If You’re So Smart, Why Aren’t You Rich?
    Belief Selection in Complete and Incomplete Markets, Cowles Foundation Discussion
    Papers, 1319.

 [9] Cecchetti, Stephen G.; Lam, Pok-Sang; Mark, Nelson C. 2000, Asset Pricing with
    Distorted Beliefs: Are Equity Returns Too Good to Be True?, American Economic
    Review, 90 (4), 787–805.

[10] Cox, John; Huang, Chi-fu. 1989, Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when
    Asset Prices Follow a Diﬀusion Process, Journal of Economic Theory, 49, 33–83.

[11] De Long, J. Bradford; Shleifer, Andrei; Summers, Lawrence H.; Waldman, Robert J.
    1990, Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets, The Journal of Political Economy, 98
    (4), 703–38.

[12] De Long, J. Bradford; Shleifer, Andrei; Summers, Lawrence H.; Waldman, Robert J.
    1991, The Survival of Noise Traders in Financial Markets, Journal of Business, 64 (1),
    1–19.


                                            45
[13] Duﬃe, Darrell. 1996, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory, Princeton University Press, Sec-
    ond Edition.

[14] Duﬃe, Darrell. 1986, Stochastic Equilibria: Existence, Spanning Number, and the ‘No
    Expected Financial Gain from Trade’ Hypothesis, Econometrica, 54 (5), 1116–84.

[15] Duﬃe, Darrell; Huang, Chi-fu. 1986, Implementing Arrow-Debreu Equilibria by Con-
    tinuous Trading of Few Long-Lived Securities, Econometrica, 53 (6), 1337–56.

[16] Figlewski, Stephen. 1978, Market “Eﬃciency” in a Market with Heterogeneous Infor-
    mation, Journal of Political Economy, 86 (4), 581–97

[17] Friedman, Milton. 1953, The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates, Essays in Positive
    Economics, University of Chicago Press.

[18] Hakansson, Nils H. 1971, Capital Growth and the Mean-Variance Approach to Portfolio
    Selection, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 6 (1), 517–557.

[19] Halmos, Paul R. 1950, Measure Theory, D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc., Tenth Print-
    ing.

[20] Harrison, J. Michael; Kreps, David M. 1979, Martingales and Arbitrage in Multiperiod
    Securities Markets, Journal of Economic Theory, 2 (3), 381–408.

[21] Hirshleifer, David; Subrahmanyam, Avanidhar; Titman, Sheridan. 2002, Feedback and
    the Success of Irrational Investors, Working Paper.

[22] Kahneman, Daniel; Tversky, Amos. 1979, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
    under Risk, Econometrica, 47(2), 263–91.

[23] Karatzas, Ioannis; Shreve, Steven E. 1991, Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus,
    Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Second Edition.

[24] Loewenstein, Mark; Willard, Gregory A. 2002, Asset Pricing Puzzles and Market Clear-
    ing, Working Paper.

[25] Lucas, Robert E., 1978, Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy, Econometrica, 46 (6),
    1429–45.

[26] Odean, Terrance. 1998, Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?, Journal of
    Finance, 53(5), 1775–98.

                                           46
[27] Radner, Roy. 1972, Existence of Equilibrium of Plans, Prices, and Price Expectations
    in a Sequence of Markets, Econometrica, 40 (2), 289–303.

[28] Sandroni, Alvaro. 2000, Do Markets Favor Agents Able to Make Accurate Predictions?,
    Econometrica, 68 (6), 1303–41.

[29] Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert W. 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance,
    52 (1), 35–55.

[30] Shleifer, Andrei; Summers, Lawrence H. 1990, The Noise Trader Approach to Finance,
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4 (2), 19–33.

[31] Wang, Jiang. 1996, The Term Structure of Interest Rates in a Pure Exchange Economy
    with Heterogeneous Investors, Journal of Financial Economics, 41 (1), 75–110.




                                            47
