NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MISMEASUREMENT OF THE CPI
Kenn Ariga
Kenji Matsui
Working Paper 9436
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9436
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

This paper was prepared for the volume on Structural Impediments to Growth that is being edited by Magnus
Blomstrom, Jennifer Corbett, Fumio Hayashi and Anil Kashyap for the NBER and will be published by the
University of Chicago Press. The authors benefited greatly from valuable comments and suggestions by
Albert Ando, Jenny Corbett, David Flath, Fumio Hayashi, Yasushi Iwamoto, Anil Kashyap, Robert Lipsey,
Shigenori Shiratsuka, and other participants in the NBER Japan Project. We also wish to thank Ignazio Visco
and Enrico Giovanni at OECD for helping locate data on statistical programs of OECD countries. Special
thanks are due to Mr Masato Aida and others at Japan's Statistics Bureau for their replies to our queries
regarding the price survey procedures used in the CPI and for data on the educational background of
statistical staff. Finally, Larry Meisner’s superb professional editing has made the presentation in the final
version far clearer. The authors are of course responsible for any errors in the paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Kenn Ariga and Kenji Matsui. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including . notice, is given
to the source.

Mismeasurement of the CPI
Kenn Ariga and Kenji Matsui
NBER Working Paper No. 9436
January 2003
JEL No. F4, F1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate several key problems in Japanese economic statistics. We use
CPI mismeasurements and biases as an example to explore the roots of the problems and also to
offer guidelines for improvements. We emphasize 3 major shortcomings shared by many official
statistics in Japan: (1) long delays in adjustments, (2) lack of proper coordination, and 3) insufficient
information disclosure.
In the analysis of CPI bias, we limit our focus to potential biases due to aggregation, survey
methodology and sample selection procedures. We estimate that, in recent years, the commodity CPI
inflation rate is biased upward by at least 0.5% per year, even if we assume away the potential bias
associated with the quality adjustment, delay in incorporating changes in consumption basket, and
other important unresolved problems.

Kenn Ariga
Kyoto Institute of Economic Research
Kyoto University
Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo-ku
Kyoto 606 Japan
ariga@kier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Kenji Matsui
Faculty of Business Administration
Yokohama National University
79-4 Tokiwa-dai Hodogaya-ku
Yokohama, Kanagawa 2408501
Japan
mkenzi@white.plala.or.jp

As the Japanese economy continues to experience negative or near-zero growth under weak
demand, many economists and policy makers are increasingly concerned over the accuracy of
many key economic statistics. In particular, the accuracy of the CPI (consumer price index) has
become a central issue.
The annual CPI registered declines in the three years through 2001. In early 2002, the
data indicate the possibility deflation might be somewhat accelerating. While the economy
seems to be floating at the edge of a deflationary spiral, many suspect and are worried that
prices are falling faster than CPI statistics suggest. Supporting these concerns are such things
as Seiyu, a large supermarket chain, publishing an index showing how its own prices had fallen
much faster than the official CPI.
If CPI data contain significant measurement errors, such that the downward trend is not
measured with accuracy, the cost of such bias can be substantial. Consider, for example,
potential ramifications on the heated debate over monetary policy, especially inflation
targeting. The very idea of inflation targeting hinges critically on timely and accurate
measurement of the inflation rate. Because retail price data collected by Sōmusho (Ministry of
Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications) for the CPI are also used
for the national income statistics, mis-measurements in the CPI can lead to serious errors in
GDP statistics as well.
In general, the potential cost of mis- or non-measurements in official statistics can be
substantial and are not limited to affecting policy making. Many economists in the financial
sector and consulting firms have voiced concern over the noise and inconsistency in the
quarterly GDP estimates. The discrepancy between preliminary and final GDP figures is
suspected to originate in the inconsistency in several dimensions in the methodologies
employed in the two estimates.1

1

For example, in the preliminary GDP figures, private fixed investment growth for year 2000 initially was
reported as 4.6%; this became 9.3% in the final figure. For a brief review of the quality-of-statistics issue, and a
response by the Economic and Social Research Institute of Cabinet Office, visit
[www5.cao.go.jp/2000/g/0602g-gdpcoments.html].

3

Given the critical role of key economic indicators such as GDP and CPI, it is not
surprising that large and frequent swings in official statistics can create visible commotions in
financial markets and other sectors of the economy. The potential costs due to problems in the
official statistics are widespread and far reaching. For example, a key part of the "structural
reform" advanced by the Koizumi government is job creation in services and information
technologies (IT). However, there are no official statistics to guide such policy, as none of the
published data report job creation by start-ups or job destruction from closing of
establishments.
To be fair, there are many good, even wonderful, things to say about economic
statistics in Japan. There is extensive and comprehensive coverage on a wide spectrum of
topics, especially those collected on an establishment basis. Some are quite exotic and
probably not available anywhere else in the world. Many are collected by non-government
institutions. Moreover, data are comprehensive, geographically and otherwise. Although the
country consists of many small islands, most government statistics cover virtually the entire
population.
There are problems, of course, some rather serious in nature and quantitatively
important. In this paper, we point out several underlying factors responsible for the problems
in official statistics in Japan. In doing this, however, the focus is on the consumer price index
(CPI). Most of the problems raised by the Boskin Commission for the US CPI are found in
Japan's CPI. In many areas, the potential ramifications seem even more important in Japan.
CPI is an important and popular statistic and is used for many different purposes. The
CPI inflation rate is one of the key indicators for cyclical fluctuations of the economy. CPI also
is used as the benchmark in many wage setting negotiations and public pensions are linked to
it. (Although for political reasons the pensions have not been adjusted downward to reflect the
sizable decline in the CPI.) Recent macroeconomic developments in Japan also add to the
significance of studying potential mismeasurements in CPI in that the stagnant economy has
been experiencing zero or negative inflation rates for prolonged periods, an experience that is
rather unique and which might shed new light on issues of measurement biases in CPI.

4

The choice of the CPI is partly because of the authors' background: in past research we
have used disaggregated price data as well as price indices such as CPI or WPI and we are,
therefore, concerned about their accuracy. More important is the depth of the analysis that can
be achieved. Thus, although GDP is by far the most popular and important statistic, it is a
secondary one based on a large variety of primary statistics. That means the potential sources
of biases and other problems are simply too great to be thoroughly analyzed in a single paper.2
Moreover, the CPI shares with other major official statistics the underlying causes
which lie beneath the problems in the Japanese official statistics system. We hope this
investigation of the CPI helps elucidate the nature of the problems commonly found in many
important official economic statistics of Japan.
The paper is organized as follows. First we offer a bird's eye view of official statistics
in Japan and point out several important deficiencies, after which we review key issues in the
CPI. With this background, we investigate potential problems in several major aspects of the
CPI. These include data collection procedures (including how discounted prices are handled),
services, quality change and new products, and aggregation issues (substitution across time,
brands, and stores). We then look at a discrepancy between CPI and WPI that probably relates
to differences in how quality adjustments are made and some hitherto neglected aspects of the
measurement problem, relating to shopping and storage behaviors. From this analysis we offer
a tentative assessment of the magnitude of the CPI inflation rate bias and draw some
suggestions for improving the statistics in general and the CPI in particular.
A cautionary note on the distinction between potential measurement errors in general
and bias in the inflation rate: measurement errors contaminate the CPI, but they do not imply
systematic bias in the measured inflation rate, or changes in COLI. For example, consider
medical and health-care services. Although we believe there are serious measurement errors
and under-representation problems, it is unclear if and in which direction they affect the

2

For the revised System of National Account (SNA) in Japan, see:
http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/sna/020612/outline.pdf. Ando(2002) explains in great details the problems he
encountered in SNA data as he investigates the cause of the long stagnation of the Japanese Economy. For those
not familiar with Japanese economic statistics, Matsuoka and Rose (1994) provides a gateway into major
economic statistics in Japan.

5

measured inflation rate. Indeed, several indices shown in Iwamoto (2000) indicate higher, and
others, lower, inflation in medical expenditure than does the CPI.

1

Overview of Official Statistics
Japanese official statistics fall into three broad groups based on how they are created. Primary
statistics collected for specific purposes (chōsa-tōkei), primary statistics collected as part of the
regular tasks of governmental offices (gyōmu-tōkei), and processed statistics derived from
primary data. Primary data on exports and imports (Custom Clearance Statistics) compiled by
the Ministry of Finance (MOF) is an important example of the second group. The National
Accounts are by far the most well known of the last group.
A more important distinction among chōsa-tōkei is based on legal status. The core of
official statistics are called "designated statistics" (shitei-tōkei). There also are "approved
statistics," so named because they are approved by the Minister of Sōmusho (Minister of
Public Management, Posts and Telecommunications).
Designated and approved statistics have special status in the law. Specifically, the law
stipulates clearly that government bodies collecting these statistics are endowed with authority
to request and enforce proper cooperation from the public chosen to be surveyed. At the same
time, the law sets rather rigid restrictions on the use and dissemination of information so
obtained. This allows the data collecting agency to conduct surveys and census in a way that
private bodies without such authorization cannot hope to accomplish. In short, compared to
other official statistics, these two types of statistics are given priority in data collection and a
more stringent set of rules governs their use and dissemination.
Table 1 lists the number of designated and approved statistics by the ministry
responsible for collecting them, with the ministry's staff and budget for statistics.

1.1

Staffing and Collecting

6

Officially, the Statistics Bureau of Sōmusho is responsible for coordinating the activities of the
statistics sections of all ministries. It is apparent, however, that the system is highly
decentralized and each ministry seems to act on its own in creating, collecting, abandoning,
and publishing data. Which ministry is responsible for a series often is a historical accident, but
ministries seem unwilling to reshuffle assignments. For example, Sōmusho conducts the
Survey of Research and Development, the National Tax Agency collects data on salaries in the
private sector, and the Bank of Japan (technically not even a part of the government) compiles
the wholesale price index (WPI) and corporate service price index (CSPI).
Table 2 displays data for the US federal government comparable to Table 1. Its budget
in 2002 was roughly 10 times that of Japan in absolute terms, and over 3 times in share terms.
Although total staff is similar, this is only because of the large number employed at Japan's
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery.
Composition of staff in Japan is problematic. As far as is known, only a very few
workers actually have advanced degrees in statistics, and virtually no one does in economics.
Based upon information from Sōmusho, Statistics Bureau, perhaps 10 (out of 384 full time
staff) have an MS in statistics, and no one had an MA or PhD in economics3. In contrast, the
US federal government employs more than 2,000 professional statisticians on a full time
permanent basis (It is not clear, however, how many of them have advanced degrees in
statistics or economics. In any case, we are certain that US government professional staff with
advanced degrees far outnumbers that in the Japanese counterpart).

2

General Data Problems
Japanese statistics have several broad problems in addition to the absence of statistical
professionals among the staff mentioned above. These include long lead times, coordination
among agencies, appropriateness of the data collected, and access to raw data and information
on how data are processed.
3

We are grateful to Mr Masato Aida at Sōmusho for this information.

7

2.1

Long Delays in Adjustments
Titles of the designated statistics indicate that their coverage is far from being well balanced.
Although each series differs in scope and size, Table 1 is at least suggestive of the imbalance
between the coverage of official statistics and the relative importance of subjects covered. This
reflects slowness in changing the data collected to reflect changes in the economy. The
imbalance is particularly noticeable in agriculture and fishery. In 1999, the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries spent 29% of the total budget and employed 68% of staff
devoted to statistics collection and compilation. But all primary industries combined provide
less than 2% of GDP.
Some other examples are: domestic production and usage of coal is a designated series
even though only 1.9% of total coal consumption is produced domestically and only 12% of
total energy consumptions is coal. There are three designated statistics on shipping and sailors,
although Japanese commercial ships long ago replaced Japanese crew with foreigners. Even
though the industry was all but extinct years earlier, production of silk and silk worms was a
designated statistic until the end of fiscal 2002.
On the other hand, surprisingly few resources are allocated for data on tertiary
industries, especially services. There is only one designated series that covers the service
industry on an annual basis, offering basic data on production, employment, firm size, etc.
Even this statistic rotates among subsectors on a three-year cycle so that the data for each
subsector is available only every third year. There is only one other designated series that
covers the service industry but this survey is conducted every five years and it covers only
those not covered in the first survey.
As we see more closely later, the weights attached to items in the CPI are based on the
FIES (Family Income and Expenditure Survey), and it is fixed for a five-year period, even
though the FIES is conducted monthly. Japan is not unique in this, other countries also have

8

similar delays in adjusting coverage and weights. In the US CPI, 1982-84 weights were used
until 1996, finally being replaced by 1993-95 weights.
Especially for GDP statistics, long lead times are a problem. Preliminary figures are not
announced until three months after the end of a quarter. These are revised three months later.
The final figure is made available in December of the next year. Moreover, the inconsistency
between quarterly estimates and the final figures reflects underlying differences in the
estimation procedure. The inconsistency and long lead times in GDP statistics have been
known for quite some time, but there seems little hope that any fundamental measures will be
taken to rectify the situation. In the United States preliminary quarterly GDP data are
announced in 8 weeks and the final figure is available in about 13 weeks. In other words, by the
time the preliminary Japanese figures are announced, the final US figure is announced. The
release of the latest CPI figures is far more timely. The most recent month’s figure is released
on the Friday of the last week of each month, whereas CPI in the second ten days of the current
month for metropolitan Tokyo area is released on the same day.
2.2

Lack of Proper Coordination
There is a lack of proper coordination among different bodies of government and coordination
with non-governmental institutions is uncommon. As a result, different bodies collect similar,
if not duplicate, sets of data. At the same time, in many important areas there is a lack of proper
official statistics, due, mainly, to the fact that the area falls under more than one ministry's
responsibility. This is especially true in the areas of information and communication: subsets
of these are covered rather independently by sections of Sōmusho and the Ministry of
Economy, Trade and Industry (formerly, MITI).
Inadequate coordination creates difficulties in combining sets of statistics. For example,
many statistics on private enterprises and establishments cover essentially the same universe
of firms, yet each series employs its own coding method, sample selection methodology, etc,
with the result that none of these statistics can be integrated to form a unified series. In other
cases, series employ unique geographical grids, strata, or categories, which means cross
referencing is often difficult and may lead to erroneous conclusions. The most well known
9

example is the apparent inconsistency in personal saving rates in the National Accounts and
the Household Saving and Expenditure Survey.
Lack of coordination places a heavy burden on sample respondents, especially large
firms that are included in most enterprise-based statistics. In 1993 more than 25% of polled
firms listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange said they had to reply to more than 100 different
central and local government surveys each year4.
Rectifying the situation is straightforward in some cases. For example, many
establishment based surveys cover 100% of firms (their establishments) with more than 1
billion yen paid capital. It would be easy to use the same id code for these firms to facilitate
cross referencing of a large variety of statistics.

2.3

Inadequate Disclosure
Inadequate disclosure of information is especially troublesome in two ways. First, many
published statistics are processed using one or more primary statistical series but details of the
procedure generally are not available. The disclosure problem is extremely severe for most of
the National Accounts data, as they incorporate so many different statistics. (See Ando (2002)
for the problems he faced in his exploration of the measurement errors in saving rate.)
In GDP statistics, the corporate sector includes not only private incorporated
enterprises, but also the portion of activities of central and regional governments conducted by
specific agencies (such as the postal system). There is no precise and reliable information on
how to identify which part of the government activities are included. The problem is not
limited to secondary statistics. The CPI is based on surveys of prices at sample retail stores, but
original results are not available. As a result, it is not known (for example) how, and by how
much, adjustment is made for quality change. The same problems exist for the WPI.

4

The results cited above are taken from the following survey : Tokeichōsa Hōkoku to no kinyū ni kansuru jittai
chōsa (Survey on the burden of respondents in official surveys and statistics), Sōmucho (to become Sōmusho in
2001).

10

For economists, an equally, if not more, important problem is government
unwillingness to make original micro data available to outside researchers. The law explicitly
and categorically prohibits use of official statistics for purposes other than the ones specified in
the law establishing each statistical series or the corresponding ministerial orders. Thus, to
obtain original data for designated statistics, one must file a petition for special exclusion. This
is a complicated, time-consuming, drawn-out process with no guarantee permission will be
granted. (See Matsuda et al (2000) for details.)
The difficulty in obtaining original data places severe constraints on outside observers,
making it difficult even to point out with any reasonable accuracy where problems may be.
Concern over the accuracy of CPI arose partly because many retail firms started publishing
their own price data to argue that the CPI contains sizable upward bias (for example, Sezon
Research Institute 2000). The resulting debate ultimately was unproductive in part because
Sōmusho would not disclose data comparable to those covered by the retailers.

3

CPI Statistics
The consumer price index (CPI) in Japan is collected and published by Sōmusho Tōkeikyoku
(Statistics Bureau and Center, Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and
Telecommunications). Japan's CPI is by and large typical of CPIs collected in most countries.
It is essentially a fixed-weight Laspeyres index, with weights taken from the Family Income
and Expenditure Survey (FIES), which also is conducted by Sōmusho. The weights are revised
every five years, incorporating the latest FIES.
Especially since the late 1990s when deflationary pressure became apparent, the CPI
index has been criticized for its apparent failure to register the impact of rapidly declining retail

11

prices as reported in the media and by some of the largest national general merchandise stores
(GMSs). 5
Compared to the CPI in the United States, there are several notable differences in data
collection procedures and lower-level aggregations. The Japanese CPI includes a larger
number of individual items (roughly 600 compared to about 200 in the US). For each item, to
survey prices, Japan uses a single brand and a single retail outlet within each designated area.
Both outlets and items are rotated in the US.
Surveys are prices on specific days of each month rather than averages over period or
brands, as in the US. Arithmetic means are used are used in every stage of aggregation, rather
than geometric means. (The US converted to geometric for lower-level aggregation in
January1999, as recommended by the 1996 Boskin Commission Report.)
3.1

Alternative Inflation Measures
If the CPI inflation rate is so problematic, why not use some other measures such as the GDP
deflator or WPI? In fact, all of these are used to measure inflation, and many view the GDP
deflator as a better indicator than the CPI. However, the same primary price survey data are
used to estimate GDP deflators as to estimate CPI and WPI. So, if CPI and WPI data contain
measurement errors, they will also appear in other processed statistics such as the GDP
deflator.
Moreover, the CPI is a more appropriate measure of overall changes in the cost of
living. In contrast, changes in the GDP deflator reflect overall changes in the prices of goods
and services produced in the country, not necessarily those consumed. The difference can be
large and important when events such as large increases in crude oil give rise to major swings
in the final price.

5

The most comprehensive study is Shiratsuka (1997). Shiratsuka (1999) offers in English a review of his 1997

monograph and other major studies. Sōmusho posts various documents prepared by the ministry on this issue at
[www.stat.go.jp/data/cpi/8.htm.]

12

Table 3 shows the CPI, WPI for final consumption demand, and the GDP deflator for
household final consumption. CPI and WPI are both Laspeyres indices with weights fixed for
five-year periods, whereas the GDP deflator is a Paasche index with weights given by
current-year expenditure shares. By construction, inflation in the GDP deflator has a
downward bias, as opposed to an upward bias in CPI and WPI.
3.2

CPI as COLI, CPI as COGI
From the viewpoint of standard microeconomic theory, the principal objective of a CPI is to
provide a benchmark for the cost of living index (COLI). However, as is the official view in
most other countries, the Statistics Bureau of Sōmusho clearly states that the CPI should be
viewed as the index of the specific basket of goods it contains – that is, the cost of goods index,
COGI. It does not subscribe to the view that the CPI should be the best estimate of the cost of
living index (COLI). (See Schultz (forthcoming) for a discussion of this incorporating the
Boskin report.) Box 1 discusses the CPI as a COLI.

Box 1

CPI as a Cost of Living Index
Under certain strict conditions, we can derive a group of price indices, called Superlative Price
Indices [see Diewart (1976) and Caves, Christensen, and Diewert (1982)] that approximate the
true cost of living index up to the second order. One index among the group is the Tornqvist
price index and it is given by
n
1 i
log P0TR
(ω 0 + ω ti )(log pti − log p0i )
t =∑
i =1 2

EQ. 1

where 0 denotes the reference period, i is the index for the goods and services, and ω is the
expenditure share. The Laspeyres index, on the other hand, is given by

13

L
0t

P

=

n

∑ω
i =1

i
0

p ti
p 0i

EQ. 2

The major advantage of a superlative price index, including the Tornqvist, is that the
index properly incorporates substitutions among goods and services in response to, among
other things, changes in relative prices. Neither Laspeyres (reference-period fixed weights) nor
Paasche indices (current-period fixed weights) incorporate substitutions. The most serious
problem with Laspeyres as an approximation of a COLI is that the index tends to
over-represents prices that have risen from the reference period, thus over-stating the impact
of price increases. By the same token, the index under-represents the impact of price declines.
The magnitude of the bias depends crucially on two factors: relative prices and the degree of
substitution across goods and services.
The practical difficulty in using Tornqvist or Fischer (geometric mean of Laspeyres
and Paasche) indices is that they require current data on expenditure shares. If expenditure
shares are continuously available, one can construct corresponding chained indices.
t −1 n
1 i
log P0TRC
=
(ω s + ω si +1 )(log psi +1 − log psi )
∏∑
t
2
s = 0 i =1

t −1

n

i
P0LC
t = ∏∑ ω s
s = 0 i =1

psi +1
psi

EQ. 3

EQ. 4

The important drawback of chained indices is path dependence. That is, the same magnitude
of total price changes results in different price index values, depending on the sequence in
which the changes take place. The problem is quantitatively important in high-frequency data.
See Feenstra and Shapiro (2001) on such bias.
Even though we concur with the majority view among economists that CPI should
serve as a measure of COLI, we also think that COGI, as it is constructed as an index
representing a fixed basket of consumption goods, has its own merits. Especially as a
14

macroeonomic indicator, the inflation rate measured in terms of changes in COGI is important,
given the crucial role played by the private and social costs of changing nominal prices. Unlike
COGI, a properly defined COLI can change without any accompanying change in nominal
prices, for example, due to changes in quality. This can be misleading especially when quality
unadjusted indices are not available.
In relation to other price indices such as WPI, CSPI, and various wage indices, COGI
is also important in monitoring the dynamics of vertical price formation. Thus, we agree that
the CPI should continue to serve as a COGI, providing an aggregate measure of nominal price
changes.
Even as a COGI, however, the CPI should perform better by incorporating lower-level
substitution more explicitly: there is strong evidence that consumers substitute brands, shop
around, and continue to shift toward mass retailers with lower prices. Moreover, unless one
subscribes to an extremely narrow and rigid definition of a fixed basket (fixed brand purchased
at fixed set of retailers), CPI should move in the direction of COLI at least in these dimensions.
We believe the CPI should serve both COLI and COGI purposes. Whenever important
difference arises between the purposes, separate COLI and COGI series can be compiled.
There is no practical or theoretical difficulty in this. As a matter of fact, the additional cost of
preparing a separate COLI for different groups of household is relatively small, and the current
CPI does include such series. We suspect, however, that the relevant COLIs for different
groups differ substantially, once proper attention is paid to shopping behavior. To incorporate
shopping behavior into the COLI, it is essential that information be collected at the household
level.
Whether the CPI is viewed as strictly a COGI or also serves as a COLI, it is crucial to
disclose details of the compilation processes, such as quality adjustments, as well as brand and
sample-store replacements. Without full and timely disclosure of these details and the original
survey results, the extent to which external monitoring can check potential problems is limited.

4

Major Sources of CPI Bias

15

There are several fairly well known, if not well-established, sources of problems in the
Japanese CPI. All are considered sources of upward bias. One set relates to aggregation
procedures and the second to lower-level data collection procedures (including how
discounted prices are handled).
Collection procedures, services, quality change, and new products are covered in this
section. Aggregation issues are taken up in later sections.
4.1

Lower-Level Data Collection Procedures
Under current procedures, prices for each item are collected first by specifying the most
representative brand for each item, then by selecting the most representative sample store
(usually the one with the largest sales volume of the item) within each precinct.
The brand selection procedure is problematic. Setting aside the problem of changes in
the leading brand over time, fixing a particular brand in itself creates upward bias because
many people are largely indifferent among brands and thus will substitute among brands,
especially when one is temporarily discounted. Fixing a particular brand gives unbiased COLI
data if and only if all consumers are completely brand loyal or retail prices of different brands
all move together. Sōmusho does not release data on how many or how often brand
replacements occur, but states that it checks the selection of specific brands every half year and
replaces brands whenever appropriate.
In the United States, CPI does not fix any particular brand and different brands rotate in
each price survey. The US procedure is superior in that the procedure avoids the inherent bias
associated with fixing particular brands. On the other hand, Shapiro and Wilcox (1996)
contend that brand turnover is closely related to CPI inflation in the US in that the bulk of the
inflation rate is attributable to the imputed price increase registered for newly surveyed brands
and entry-level (new) items when the sample is changed. That is, if brand A is substituted for
brand B in the sample, the price difference between the two will be recorded as a price change
affecting the CPI whether or not there is an actual change in the price of either brand between
sample periods.

16

Selection of a single store within each sample precinct also is problematic, because
consumers substitute among shopping outlets. Neglecting store substitution tends to introduce
upward bias.
Discount prices (specials) are another issue. Each month the survey collects prices on
the Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday of the week that includes the 12th. If the price is a
discount price, the sample is void unless the price has been quoted for at least eight days at the
time of the survey. It is not clear how regular and discount prices are defined. In most cases, the
highest selling price seems to be the one defined as the regular price. It is unclear if the regular
price ever changes at each store and, if so, how often. But, actual prices change quite
frequently.
The current procedure thus tends to ignore almost all discount prices (whatever that
means) of short duration. However, the bulk of sales of many products, especially ones easily
stored, are concentrated in short periods when prices are discounted.
The extent to which discount sales are used differs systematically across items, brands,
and types of retail outlets. Discounts are widespread and routinely used by national brands,
whereas most generic commodities without strong brand recognition are rarely discounted.
Discounts are far more common at large supermarkets and speciality stores, but very
infrequent at small general stores and almost non-existent in convenience store chains.
Although there is no a priori reason to believe these measurement errors inherently
generate systematic bias in the measured inflation rate, the recent macroeconomic setting and
secular changes in the retail industry do give reasons to suspect they create systematic upward
bias. The share of retail sales in Japan has been shifting away from traditional small stores
toward large supermarkets and discount stores in suburbs, and toward inner-city convenience
store chains. This may introduce systematic upward bias to the extent that current CPI
procedures subsume some of the pure price differences across different types of stores as
reflecting differences in service.
Biases created at lower levels can be quantitatively large precisely because they occur
as a result of substitutions over very close substitutes: over time of the same brand, among
different brands of the same good, and among neighborhood stores.

17

4.2

Services
After the revision in 2000, services comprise 48.4% of the CPI. There are no natural measures
for the quantity of most services purchased. This implies that expenditure data such as FIES
are ill-suited as the alternative data source for prices. Objective measurement of the quality of
services is even more difficult. For these reasons, we have little to offer on biases from
services.
Compared to commodity prices, there are reasons to believe raw price data are more
accurate for some services in the CPI. For example, most utility rates and public transportation
service prices are uniform and well documented. For these, there is little or none of the
discounting so common for food and clothing. This applies also for price data on medical
services. The bulk of payments are covered by public health insurance, and readily available
and highly comprehensive price lists exist for individual treatments, various fees, and
prescription drugs.
Setting aside quality issues, the biggest problem in service categories is
under-representation of medical and health care in the CPI, as the weight is based on consumer
out-of-pocket expenditure in the FIES, totally neglecting payments for medical insurance.
According to the Survey on Medical Expenditure, in 1999 30.9 trillion yen (8.1% of national
income) was spent on medical care. Out-of-pocket expenses covered by FIES were only 14.6%
of that. In the current CPI, the weight for medical care is 2.4% and for health care is 1.4%, a
total of 3.8%.
The medical- and health-related items in the CPI are limited to those not covered by
typical health insurance. Thus, non-prescription drugs, physical check-ups, and the basic
hospitalization fee for normal delivery of a baby are included, but most other medical services
are excluded. Not surprisingly, data indicate systematic differences in price indices, depending
on who directly pays the cost: the consumer, insurance, public institutions, etc. (See Iwamoto
(2000) for some representative medical price indices).
It also should be noted that the CPI contains several conceptual flaws in some other
service prices. Especially noteworthy is imputed rent for home owners. The actual rent data
collected are those for rented dwellings; it is known, however, that rented and owner-occupied
18

homes differ greatly in capacity and quality. To the extent that the recent improvements in the
quality of owner-occupied homes are not properly incorporated, measured rent is likely to
include sizable upward bias. It should be borne in mind, however, that given the sheer
magnitude of the diversity of dwellings across regions, types, and vintage, it is a formidable
task even to estimate the size of the bias, let alone correct it.
4.3

Quality Change and New Products
Although quality changes and new goods are potentially the most important source of bias in
the CPI, we do not investigate the problems in any depth here. Instead, two points. First, we
argue that, in principle, CPI would benefit enormously from careful and systematic
improvements in incorporation of the effects of quality change and introduction of new
products. Second, there is an important inconsistency between CPI and WPI regarding certain
groups of items. We suspect the inconsistency stems at least partially from differences in
quality adjustments in the two indices. This is dealt with in a later section.
Some argue that, ultimately, measurement of quality should be aimed at measurement
of contribution to the quality of life. For example, some say the measurement of medical
services should be reformulated to measure the cost of cure, rather than the cost of treatment
as is now the case. (See Schultze and Mackie forthcoming.) We do not engage in this debate
here, except to the extent it is an aspect of the issue of the role of the CPI as a COLI as we noted
earlier.
In the current CPI, essentially nothing is done to address the effect on living costs from
introduction of the new products. This is understandable, given that no established procedure
to do so exists. On the other hand, the long delay in incorporating changes in the consumption
basket by itself introduces large and rectifiable biases if price declines primarily come soon
after a product appears and before it is included in the CPI. That seems to be the regular pattern
for many consumer durables, but it is conceivable that for other types of products, prices rise
during the early stage.
It is only in the 2000 revision that the CPI included items such as personal computers
and service charges for mobile telephones. The CPI still does not include fax machines,
printers and other computer peripherals, or internet service-provider charges!
19

As for quality change, in the current procedure, whenever a sample item or brand is
considered different in quality from the previous item, an overlap method is used to take
account of quality changes. In 2000, the CPI for the first time started using hedonic methods to
estimate quality changes in personal computers, but, as of now, this is the only item utilizing
the method.
Few empirical studies in Japan measure quality changes and assess the impact of
changes on the CPI. Shiratuska (1997, 1999) are the only published results we are aware of that
estimate the impact of quality change on CPI bias. He estimates that under-estimates of quality
changes result in an annual upward bias of 0.3% to 0.9%, with 0.7% the point estimate.
However, he notes the estimate is based only on studies of a few consumer electronics and
passenger cars.6
Most of Shiratuska's work uses data from the first half of the 1990s, so it is not clear if
the same estimates apply to later periods. As shown below, in the late 1990s the consumer
electronics component of the CPI registers a lower (actually, larger negative values) inflation
rate than the comparable WPI rate.
For the United States CPI, Hausman (1999) estimates annual upward bias of 0.8% to
1.9% for telecom services as a result of not including cellular phone services in CPI until 1998.
The potential bias can be substantially larger in Japan in that the use of mobile phone
increased so fast and the price declined so dramatically. In 2001 the number of cellular users
surpassed the number of fixed telephone lines in Japan.
Sōmusho (2000) has conducted preliminary estimation of a hedonic price index for
personal computers. They estimate a price decline from the 1995 average, set at 100, to 12.8
by mid 1999. This is a 36.7% annual decline. Thus, if the personal computer had been included
in the CPI in 1995, that alone would have reduced the inflation rate by 0.2 percentage points
each year during 1995-99. (The personal computer weight in the current CPI is 0.54%). One
can expect similar dramatic price decline for other items that now command sizable
6

Shiratsuka (1997) and his associates estimated hedonic price indices for personal computers, camcorders,
automobiles, and apparel. They found quality-adjusted personal computer prices declined 25% a year from 1990
to 1994, while unadjusted prices fell 3%. For camcorders, the annual quality-adjusted decline was 11%, but only
6% unadjusted. For automobiles, adjusted prices declined 0.4% annually, but increased 4% unadjusted.

20

expenditure shares: fax machines (not included), printers (not included), mobile phones
(0.74%), internet service providers (not included), etc.
More often than not, the same goods and services appear on lists related to both proper
adjustments in quality and timely inclusion of new goods. This is because the most important
quality changes typically take place when items are relatively new. In this sense, timing is
crucial. If an item is included only after it has become a part of the standard consumption
basket, much of the impact of quality change and consumer surplus associated with
quality-adjusted price declines is missed.
5

Aggregation Biases
Aggregation procedures are a problem. The Japanese CPI is a fixed-weight Laspeyres index.
The biases created by using fixed weights and taking arithmetic means are well known.
Aggregation bias arises at every stage in the Japanese CPI.
At the bottom level, one representative brand of each item is chosen for data collection.
This assumes away inter-brand substitution and thus tends to create sizable upward bias.
Fixed-weighting problems also appear in the selection of sample stores. As discussed later, this
became serious in the 1990s as sales shifted away from small independent stores to larger
chain-store discount outlets (see Table 8).
The FIES has a significant sampling problem in that it does not include single-person
households. Given the large portion of the population living alone, and the substantial
deviation of consumption patterns of single-person households from others, the bias implicit in
this procedure is potentially important. Starting in late 2002, FIES is being expanded to cover
single-member households.
In an earlier step to improve data quality, in October 2001 Sōmusho started a new
consumption survey, covering 20,000 households, focusing on items the basic FIES is
ill-suited to cover such as high-priced products purchased infrequently and services. Included
are appliances, personal computers, other consumer electronics, mobile phones, and internet
service providers, as well as some services already covered in FIES. The survey is conducted
by a semi-private research organization. It includes single-member households.
21

Zero or negative inflation in recent years probably has lessened the size of aggregation
bias in comparison with economies with a mild but positive inflation rate.
5.1

Higher-Level Aggregation Bias
At higher-level aggregation, it is well known that the current fixed-weight Laspeyres index
using arithmetic means tends to produce some upward bias in the CPI. This is the case because
whenever relative price changes, people do tend to buy more of the goods and services whose
relative price declined, and buy less of those which have become more expensive, viz., in
response to changes in relative prices, they change the consumption shares. The assumption of
fix weights neglect this substitution and hence tends to overstate (understate) the impact of
price increase (decrease). This problem of using fixed weights is not unique to the Japanese
CPI. The procedure to measure the bias is simple and straightforward: annual expenditure
weights from FIES for the 85 lowest-level categories are used to compute chained Fischer and
Tornqvist indices, which are compared to the CPI, which uses the same price data but with
fixed 1995 weights. Table 4 summarizes Shiratsuka's calculations and extends them to
1995-2000.
The bias is not large for years since 1995, except for 1999. Relatively large bias in the
CPI inflation rate for 1999, i.e., the change in CPI from 1998 to 1999, probably reflects
relatively large changes in consumption weights after the increase in consumption tax from 3
to 5% in April 1998. Compared to chained Tornqvist or Fischer indices, the fixed-weight
Tornqvist generates roughly 0.054% upward bias per year in the five years through 2000.
There is larger bias in earlier periods – on the order of 0.1%.
Although the magnitude is not large, aggregation bias is serious because it always
exists and accumulates forever. Thus, it can have a quantitatively large impact when tracing
living standards for generations.
Aggregation bias arises due to the under-representation of the scope of substitution
whenever the relative prices of goods and services change over time. The results indicate that
the bias is smaller in the more recent years primarily because of smaller variations in relative
prices.
22

Notice that a low or negative inflation rate per se does not reduce aggregation bias.
What matters is changes in relative prices. These results only confirm that relative price
variability at higher-level aggregation is positively correlated with the inflation rate.
5.2

Discounts and Intertemporal Substitution
Biases created within each item, an aspect of lower-level aggregation, is now considered.
There are two issues: selection of a particular brand of an item, and how price observations are
collected. In a sense bias at this level is the easiest to deal with because, in principle, there is
not much room for disagreement. The extent to which different brands of an item are
substitutable is an empirical question that can be answered with reasonable accuracy if
sufficient data are collected. Substitution across brands within each item is addressed later.
Here the issue is substitution over time of the same brand – that is, the extent to which
consumers can exploit periodic discounts. This appears to be quantitatively important. How
much depends primarily on consumer knowledge and the ability to hold inventory at home.
(Feenstra and Shapiro 2000 is an early attempt to incorporate home storage and shopping
patterns into CPI measurements. Also see Ariga, Matsui and Watanabe 2000.)
In principle, the upward bias due to the survey procedure described earlier applies only
to the level, not necessarily to changes, in the index. The problem is essentially that the
procedure systematically truncates the low price observations. This truncation may or may not
generate upward bias in the inflation rate. Circumstantial evidence indicates, however, that it
does indeed produce sizable upward bias in the measured inflation rate, as retailers reduce
average sales price by further lowering the discounted price or increasing the frequency of
discounts.
The easiest way to demonstrate the inflation bias created by intertemporal, intra-brand
substitution is to compare the actual average purchase price to hypothetical price data, which
CPI would collect following the data collection procedure described earlier. For this exercise,
we use POS-DEI data. (See Appendix 1 for details regarding the data sets).
Table 5 covers six selected items sold at sample large-scale retail stores during the 24
months starting April 1995. The results are consistent across all of the items: namely, the
23

current CPI procedure consistently over-estimates the inflation rate because most special-sales
prices are dropped from the survey. Notice that the results indicate that the decline in the
average purchase price occurred primarily as a result of lowering the discount price or
increasing the frequency of the discounts. Moreover, as Shiratsuka (1997) pointed out, the
current procedure substantially increases noise, as it only sporadically picks up sales discounts.
Table 5 shows that standard deviations in the inflation rate under the current survey procedure
are substantially higher than those of average purchase prices for most items.
Unfortunately there is no unambiguous way to estimate the extent to which the bias due
to survey procedures applies to other items in the CPI. It is known that periodic price discounts
(specials, sales) are quite widespread in most medium- to large-scale retail stores. Discounts
typically apply to processed food, toiletries, cosmetics, household appliances, and some
clothing. In other words, for most items sold at large-scale retail stores, one expects periodic
discounts. Table 5 indicates that the current CPI creates systematic upward biases for these
items mostly in the order of 3% per year.
5.3

Substitution Across Brands
The CPI chooses a single brand to represent the price movement of each item. In general,
ignoring substitutions across brands results in an upward bias in the level of the cost of living,
but it is not certain if it results in any bias in the inflation rate. If the relative price of different
brands is stable over time, the bias may well be negligible in computing the CPI.
Figure 1 shows three price indices compiled from POS-SRI data for liquid condiment,
one of the 14 items included in the 1997 National Survey of Prices, Special Volume on Bargain
Prices. Along with the Tornqvist index for the item, the figure shows indices for the brands
that registered the lowest and the highest inflation rate from 1995 to 2000. Variations across
brands are very large indeed.
Table 6 shows the intra-item sample variances for the 14 items and the monthly
inflation rate for the corresponding item-level Tornqvist index. A simple panel regression of
monthly item-level price variances on inflation rate for 14 items yields

24

14

varti = ∑ const k − .0363ifrti (.023)

EQ. 5

k =1

R = .0874
2

The result (standard errors in the parenthesis) indicates that deflation （-ifr) coincides
with increase in price variations across brands. These findings thus indicate that, at least for
these 14 items, consumers have ample opportunities to substitute among brands.
In Ariga, Matsui, and Watanabe (2000), we used daily POS data for two rival brands
of curry paste sold at selected supermarket stores. Table 7 shows the impact of price discounts
on sales volume.
Average sales volume of Brand A at a discount price is 57.4 if the Brand B also is at a
discount price, which is 19% smaller than the average sales volume (70.7) at a discount price
if the Brand B is sold at regular price. The impact of Brand A's discount on sales of Brand B
at discount price is even larger, more than 30% (compare 29.2 against 42.4). On the other hand,
pricing has a much smaller impact on volume at regular price, around 6% to 8% (5.0 versus 5.4
for Brand A, and 2.9 versus 3.1 for Brand B).
Given the large impact of periodic price discount on sales, these figures suggest the
presence of heterogenous consumers, as well as sizable inter-brand substitutions in response to
changes in relative prices. Although these findings strongly indicate that price data of any
particular brand can be a highly misleading indicator for overall changes in prices of different
brands of each item, it is not possible to provide estimates of the magnitude of the inflation rate
bias created by brand substitutions per se. Given the analysis on inter-temporal substitution, it
is probably not very productive to try to estimate the effects alone, as substitution in this aspect
is closely related to inter-temporal substitution and periodic price discounts.
There also are difficulties from the extremely high rate of new brand introductions and
retirement of old brands, particularly among items in the food, household appliances, toiletry,
and clothing groups. Shifts in sales shares from one brand to another not only are highly
frequent but also unpredictable. This makes it practically impossible to obtain reliable
estimates of substitution elasticities for the wide range of goods in the CPI. Again, these
observations indicate the problem inherent in choosing a single specific brand to represent the
25

spectrum of brands of each item. It is far more satisfactory and actually easier to use price
averages across brands.
5.4

Substitution Across Stores
According to the current CPI procedure, the survey selects the most representative store within
each survey precinct for each item. Nation-wide, the survey has roughly 700 precincts. Usually
the store with the largest sales volume is chosen for the item.
Table 8 shows the changes in shopping points in the National Survey of Family Income
and Expenditure. As expected, regular stores lost shares across the board in the 15 years
1984-99. The decline is especially large in food.
Sōmusho (2000) explains the selection procedure for precincts and sample stores. It is
not entirely clear, however, to what extent the delay or failure in changing sample retail stores
contributes to selection bias in the CPI. According to Sōmusho, "The latest store selection is
fairly close to the 1999 distribution" shown in Table 8.
Shiratsuka points out that "the shift from department stores and general small stores to
discount outlets has largely subsided," so that price differentials have "settled down to a level
consistent with the difference in service quality" (1999, p 90). However, Table 8 suggests the
shift is still very much an ongoing process.
The current CPI revises sample store selections in two ways. Every five years the most
representative store is chosen for each commodity group in each precinct. This reflects
changes in market shares across different types of retail shops in each precinct and commodity
group. In principle, the CPI uses the overlap method to correct for underlying differences in
retail services between sample stores before and after the changes. Sample stores also are
replaced on an ad hoc basis. This is necessary when stores are closed or stop selling the sample
product. In such cases, price data are directly connected and no adjustments are made in prices.
In the case of services, the overlap method is used.
To sum up, the current procedure uses direct-comparison methods only for ad hoc
sample-store replacements for commodities. One expects that in the case of an ad hoc
replacement, the replacing store is selected in a way that retains the characteristics of the
26

previous sample store. It is not clear to what extent overall the overlap and direct-comparison
methods are used. As a result, it is not known how much of the price differentials across stores
are subsumed and assumed away using the overlap method. We suspect that whenever major
changes in the characteristics of sample stores occur, the overlap method is used so that the CPI
attributes the price differentials across old and new sample stores to differences in the quality
of retail services. In short, even if the CPI has been correctly adjusting the sample store
distribution to changing shopping patterns, most within-brand price differentials across
different types of stores are assumed away.
In principle, we agree that some price differentials reflect differences in service quality.
On the other hand, given the long history of restrictions on entry of large-scale retail stores, and
the fact consumers do shift purchases from general small-scale stores to supermarkets and
mass-marketing specialty stores whenever such stores are opened in the neighborhood, it
seems clear that some of the price differentials are indeed pure price differentials, reflecting the
local monopoly power element of retail pricing. Table 9 and Table 10 offer some evidence,
using cross-section data on retail prices of 14 items at a variety of retail stores at many
locations collected by the 1997 National Survey of Prices.
Table 9 shows the difference in actual retail prices of the items across different types
of stores. Ariga, Matsui and Watanabe (2000) found that for two brands of curry pastes sold at
sample supermarkets, 31% of daily observations were of discounted price, but 72% of volume
was sold at discount prices. More generally, for a sample 18 supermarkets we found 70% as the
share of sales at discount prices. General small stores and coops offer price discounts much
less frequently.
To indicate that some of these price differences reflect pure price differences, we used
the survey data to run simple cross-section regressions on average regular and sales prices over
a set of dummy variables, including one representing the presence of nearby rival stores. The
results in Table 10 show that both regular and discount prices are significantly lower among
stores with nearby rival stores.
Specifically, among regular small-scale stores, the regular price is 8.2% lower than
comparable stores without a nearby rival. The impact of a nearby rival on the discounted price
is 15.5%. In other words, the results suggest that a significant portion of price differences
27

between large-scale and small-scale stores reflects the effect of local competition on pricing,
rather than differences in service quality.
The same source shows that 26% of small-scale regular stores reported no nearby rival,
whereas for large-scale supermarkets, only 3.7% reported no nearby rival. Notice also that the
impact of a nearby rival on prices is far smaller in the case of supermarkets, mass-marketing
speciality stores, and coops. Setting aside the difference in geographical sizes of markets for
respective types of stores, the data indicates strongly the presence of monopolistic power of
many small-scale retailers.
We conclude from these results that sizable price differences exist between small-scale
general retailers and large stores, and that some of these differences reflect lack of local
competition for some small-scale retailers.
As indicated in Table 8, continuing shifts in sales share away from small-scale to
large-scale stores should have generated sizable price declines for average consumers. For the
sake of argument, suppose on average that a 10% pure price difference exists between the two
types of retailers. This implies a roughly 0.1% upward bias in the CPI from not accounting for
the pure price differences resulting from shifting shares. This is computed by multiplying the
6.5% decline in the share of small-scale stores by the 10% price differential over 5 years. In
any case, unless we know the extent to which the overlap method is used for each type of
sample store replacement, the effect on CPI bias cannot be estimated with any degree of
accuracy.
The current store selection method poses other problems. The price differences in
Table 9 are likely to generate sizable variations in average purchase prices across households,
depending on residence location, income, member composition, age, and other attributes.
Choice of a single representative store in each precinct for each item inevitably masks these
variations. Such considerations are important if the CPI is used as a COLI. More generally, the
current CPI system is ill-suited for incorporating cross-sectional and inter-temporal variations
in shopping behavior, and this has consequences on the COLI.

6

A Curious Discrepancy between CPI and WPI
28

This section compares CPI and WPI data for two groups of commodities to get some idea on
the likely magnitude of the bias created by quality change.
Until the mid 1990s, with the exception of consumer electronics, the CPI inflation rate
tended to be higher than the WPI rate for most items common to both indexes. Circumstantial
evidence suggests significant upward bias in CPI or downward bias in WPI (or both) due to
quality changes in the longer run, but at least since the mid 1990s this may not be the case. In
the last ten years, the annual impact of all quality change on the WPI is estimated to be around
0.3-0.4% by the Bank of Japan (2001a).
The groups being compared are processed food and consumer electronics. The likely
magnitude of quality improvement in processed food in the WPI is around 0.1% per year
(Bank of Japan 2001a). Given the magnitude of the estimation error, we take the effect as
essentially zero, and this is the primary reason the group is used in the analysis as the
benchmark. For consumer electronics, the potential impact of quality change on CPI bias is
one of the largest among items in the index.7
Using CPI weights, the average inflation rates of the two indices for the two groups
using only items commonly found in both is shown in Table 11.
The result for consumer electronics implies retail prices declined relative to wholesale
prices by as much as 25% during the 1990s. If the sample period is extended back to 1980, the
average annual difference is 1.9 percentage points, which translates into a decline in relative
retail price of as much as 66.4%. This is suspect because the distribution margin is at most
around 30% of the retail price and available statistics suggest at most a modest decline in the
retail margin during the period – perhaps a few percentages of the retail price. In other words,
either CPI or WPI, or both must contain sizable biases.
One possibility is that WPI severely under-represents the price declines. In the 1990s,
many consumer electronics firms relocated plants to Asian developing economies and the

7

Automobiles have the largest effect: -3.1% per year on its sub-index. However, the WPI has indices for
three different types of passenger cars, while the CPI has only one. Hence we decided to use consumer electronics
as an example.

29

import of these goods quickly replaced domestic production. In the 1995 revision of WPI, the
Bank of Japan started collecting import price indices of these products.
The bottom row of Table 11 shows the weighted inflation rate of consumer electronics
during 1995-2000, with WPI replaced by the corresponding import price index. The result is
essentially the same. Although the coverage of imported price indices is far from exhaustive,
it seems unlikely that the deviation can be due solely to the rapid price decline of imports.
Another possibility is that the large difference in price levels between domestic and imported
products is the root cause. The rapid decline of retail prices could reflect rapid replacement of
high-priced domestic items by cheaper imports even if the imported goods' prices did not
decline faster than the domestic ones.
It is conceivable that the Bank of Japan has severely underestimated the underlying
quality changes of these products, more so than Sōmusho did for the CPI. We consider this
highly unlikely, given the nature of the debate between Bank of Japan and Sōmusho on the
possible upward bias of CPI. Another possibility is that CPI over-estimates quality change and
so under-estimates the inflation rate for this group. There is reason to believe that hypothesis
has merit and it thus needs further investigation.
There are differences in quality adjustment methods between the two indices.
According to Bank of Japan (2001), the most popular method for dealing with quality change
in the WPI is cost comparison. It is used for about 30% of WPI items. In contrast, Sōmusho
(2000) states that the CPI uses either the overlap or the direct comparison method. Although
Sōmusho does not reveal how many items are quality adjusted by which methods, it says that
"whenever a sample brand is replaced, unless there are reasons to believe that the new and old
brands are essentially the same quality, the overlap method is used" (author's translation).
Hence, it is reasonable to say that virtually all substantive quality adjustment in CPI is done
using the overlap method. Bank of Japan also uses the overlap method, but only on about 10%
of WPI items.
Overlap methods can generate sizable over-estimate of quality change if the retail price
of the existing brand declines substantially in anticipation of a forthcoming future brand.
Suppose the CPI survey collects prices for brand b until period t and then replaces it with b' at
t+1. Replacement typically occurs because of a decline in the brand's market share or its
30

disappearance from the sample store. Overlap methods treat the price differential between the
current and replacement brand b' as reflecting an underlying quality difference, so the price
index for item i is computed as

rp tb
p =
rp 0b
i
t

p

i
t +1

= rp

b'
t +1

rp tb
rp tb '

EQ. 6

where rpｂis the survey price of a particular brand. Substantial over-estimate of the quality
change can occur if the relative price

rp tb
rp tb '

EQ. 7

does not properly represent the quality difference. In particular, a disappearing brand
might be heavily discounted around the time of replacement. In that case, quality improvement
is over-estimated and the method introduces downward bias in the inflation rate.
Sōmusho (2000), using color televisions as an example, reports that a chained index
using overlap methods generates a 46% decline in the index for the three-year period 1995-98,
which can be compared to a decline of 27% in the hedonic price index and 25% in the
published CPI index. On the other hand, estimates by Shiratsuka (1997), discussed earlier,
suggests significant upward bias in CPI due to under-estimation of quality change during the
first half of 1990s. Our results shown above cast some doubt on the alleged upward bias in CPI
for this reason.
All in all, for the late 1990s, we cannot make any definitive statement on even the
direction of bias created by quality change. But, in any case, it is certain that there are
important inconsistencies in quality adjustments between the CPI and WPI for at least some
product groups.
7

Impact of Shopping Patterns on COLI
31

The current CPI almost totally ignores the impact on COLI of diverse shopping patterns by
different types of consumers. This is also true of CPIs in most other countries. In Japan, there
are supplementary CPI indices incorporating differences in consumption patterns across
different types of households. They do not incorporate the impact of shopping patterns on
respective COLI, however.
In Appendix 2 we develop a simple model of cost minimization and demonstrate the
impact of shopping and storage costs on shopping and purchase decisions. Two points emerge.
First, pricing patterns of retail stores significantly influence consumer decisions on shopping
timing and purchase. Second, large variations in shopping and storage costs, as well as average
purchase price, result from variations in pricing policy across different types of stores.
Moreover, variations in consumer shopping and storage costs influence which store is the
optimal choice. These results suggest that the variation in COLI across regions and household
types can be much larger than what the current CPI indicates.

8

Estimation of Commodity CPI Biases
Inevitably, estimation of bias involves many subjective judgments and is likely to contain
sizable errors. The potential impact of each source of bias differs across categories, as does our
ability to estimate its direction and magnitude. For this reason, our analysis on bias will be
confined to the commodity CPI. Services are not considered.
Commodity CPI comprises 51% of overall CPI. We provide two results. The first
compares CPI with COLI using unit prices in FIES. The second is the COLI for 14 selected
items using POS-SRI. The two are consistent in suggesting sizable upward bias in commodity
CPI.
Table 12 compares four COLI indices for a variety of CPI categories. In the
comparison, unit price indices in FIES are used because CPI item selection is based on FIES,
which collects unit prices for about 200 items.
The large deviation between the two indices for clothing (2% per year) is consistent
with consumers rapidly shifting from domestic to imported, and from small-scale to
32

mass-marketing speciality stores. This shift started with the rapid expansion of several chain
stores specializing in men's suits and other formal clothing. The department stores,
traditionally the most popular choice for such items, lost share. Beginning in the late 1990s the
shift has been concentrated in more casual clothing and underwear. Among others, the
UNIQLO chain registered explosive growth in sales and profits.
Table 13, comparing POS-SRI Data with the CPI shows an upward bias in the CPI on
the order of 1.5% per year. For 6 of 14 items selected in the 1997 National Survey of Prices,
Special Volume on Bargain Prices, FIES also reports unit prices. The difference from the CPI
for these groups is again around 1.5% per year. These estimates are very close to the bias
estimated in Table 4. Although the two baskets differ, an index computed by aggregating all
FIES items yields a 1.35% lower inflation rate than the overall CPI.
The conclusion is that, for at least food and clothing groups, the CPI since the mid
1990s has sizable upward bias, most likely in the range of 1.5% to 2% per year. We believe a
bias of similar magnitude exists for other items commonly sold at mass retail stores (such as
appliances and toiletry goods), so that all-told roughly two-thirds of commodity CPI belongs to
groups we believe are biased upward by 1.5-2.0% per year.
To be conservative, assume the bias arises only for purchases of these commodities at
large retailers and that two-thirds of purchases are at mass retailers. Applying the low end of
the bias range, 1.5% per year, suggests a bias of 0.67% in the CPI. Using 2.0%, the impact on
CPI is roughly 0.9%. Even assuming the CPI bias is zero for other commodities and also for
samples taken at small-scale stores, the effect on overall commodity CPI must be 0.5% to 1.0%
per year. The difference between unit price inflation in FIES and the CPI inflation rate among
comparable items other than consumer electronics and services is about 0.6% per year (Table
12), which is within the range just estimated.
We believe that 0.5% to 0.6% per year is a conservative estimate of the upward bias in
the CPI as a measure of COLI because service prices, which comprises roughly 50% of the
overall CPI, have not been covered in the analysis. Upward biases in many important items in
this category is likely. On the other hand, the comparison of CPI with WPI indicates a potential
downward bias in the CPI.

33

9

Some Suggested Ways to Improve CPI
Japan's CPI contains upward biases and has other problems. Some of the problems can be
corrected or at least alleviated. Here are some suggestions for improving the CPI.

9.1

Upgrade Statistics Sections
The Statistics Bureau of Sōmusho, and most other statistics sections of Japan's central
government, are seriously under-manned and suffer from meager budget allocations. There are
fewer highly trained statisticians than is appropriate for the work, and there are no staff
members with advanced economics degrees. Not only must more people be hired, but the new
hires should be specifically skilled.
Staff and budget constraints severely limit the options available to improve CPI. For
example, use of POS data is highly expensive as Sōmusho has to purchase them from the
outside private sector. Needless to say, collecting POS data by themselves is even costlier and
practically impossible. Systematic attempts to estimate hedonic price indices require large
resources for data collection and estimation. In the United States, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (which prepares the US CPI) quickly incorporated recommendations in the Boskin
Commission report on problems with the US CPI (Schultz and Mackie forthcoming). Given
the budget and staff size limitations, it seems very difficult for Sōmusho to carry out similar
research with comparable speed.

9.2

Improve Data Collection
Data collection methods need to be changed in many aspects, most of them fundamentally.
First, the revision of item selection and weights must be done more frequently. In principle, to
the extent the CPI uses FIES, this is a matter of automatic adjustments. FIES is monthly, but
annual CPI revision is a more realistic goal. The need for continuity can easily be met by
tracking CPI component indices based on weights and item selections in the past. The
additional tasks created by annual revision may not be large.
34

Utilizing other official data sources in compiling the CPI offers significant benefits.
For example, the gain from coordinating data collection and compilation for CPI and WPI is
obvious. Coordinating with other agencies also should be done, especially regarding service
prices. In particular, there should be large gains in accuracy from utilizing other sources of data
on medical and health care, and housing expenses.
A more fundamental change is to seek alternative data sources. Current collection
relies exclusively on surveying sample retail firms. Given the time and resource constraint, the
margin of improving data quality in commodity CPI may be fairly narrow to the extent the
current method is retained. However, we propose two alternative (complementary) data
methods.
The first is to use POS data, which is available on a daily basis for essentially all the
brands sold in sample retail stores. Moreover, POS data contain quantity data totally missing in
the current survey. Such data are important for several reasons. Even if Sōmusho retains its
current position that the CPI should be based on representative brands, POS data provide more
accurate and timely information on which brand is the most popular. Being available on a daily
basis makes allowing for sales and temporary price mark-downs easy and straightforward.
Sōmusho uses POS for collecting price information on one item – personal computers, since
2000.
The second complementary data source is to improve and modify FIES to make it
usable as a source of CPI price information. The advantages of using consumer-side
information are numerous. The consistency between the CPI basket and the actual
consumption basket would be improved greatly. For the purpose of COLI, the actual mix of
brands within each item and expenditure shares of items are the ideal set of information. To the
extent FIES accurately represents these choices, there should be no disagreement on how to
best represent the consumption basket and relevant purchase prices. Improving the selection of
sample retail outlets will not be necessary, as consumers themselves make the choice, which
can be observed.
Adjustments to incorporate quality change are the most difficult and this paper has not
covered the issue in any detail. We are sure there are important inconsistencies between CPI

35

and other price data, especially WPI. The discrepancies are quantitatively large. Both CPI and
WPI will benefit from proper coordination and joint work by Sōmusho and Bank of Japan.
9.3

Create an Independent Research and Appraisal Body
Resources should be used to establish an independent body to conduct research and systematic
appraisal of major statistics. Such research is especially important for statistics compiled from
many primary statistics, such as the National Accounts. Given the current state of information
disclosure, and the inevitable information advantage of inside staff, such research must be
conducted within the government, rather than completely out-sourced, although the research
would benefit from using outside consultants.
The Statistics Council is a committee overseeing statistics collection and compilation
activities of the central government. Although the council in the past made important policy
recommendations to improve the official statistics, its abilities are limited. Like other
government councils, members are non-government officials and meet only a few times a year.
Without a body of research staff working on a regular basis to monitor official statistics, its
recommendations are necessarily abstract in nature and often too late. Given the autonomy of
individual ministries, it is unclear to what extent the council has influence on changes in
individual statistics produced in different ministries.

10

Conclusion
We have employed a variety of data and alternative aggregation and estimation methods to
estimate biases in Japan's CPI. The results strongly suggest the presence of sizable upward bias
in the commodity CPI. Our best estimate is at least 0.5% per year excluding biases in services
and from quality changes. The true bias is likely to be larger than this estimate, but far more
extensive research is needed to obtain a more reliable figure.
After a journey into a maze of price data, we come back yet again to one of our first
points: the Japanese government should allocate far more resources to collection, compilation,
and timely disclosure of statistics. Although private data collection services have grown
rapidly since the late 1980s, the need for official statistics is obvious and compelling. No
36

private sector entity can realistically replace the statistics collection activities of the central
government.
The potential benefit from improvement in indices such as CPI can be enormous, given
that so much decision-making is linked explicitly or implicitly to the CPI. Although many
suggestions for improvements can be implemented within the current budget and staff
allocations, the more fundamental necessary changes require sizable increases in budget and
staff.
We have pointed out several times the need for coordination within the government.
This is straightforward. Statistics based on the same population of samples should use
compatible data strata, the same method for coding, and the actual surveys should be merged
to the maximum extent possible in order to minimize costs to respondents. And, there needs to
be an independent body within the government conducting research and appraising the
statistics.
Although focused here on data collection and lower-level aggregation issues in CPI
mis-measurement, we concur with the majority that problems associated with quality
adjustments and introduction of new goods are by far the most important and challenging.
Moreover, shopping behavior and retail competition needs to be incorporated into CPI. These
and other issues are left for future research. The central message of this paper is the need for
fundamental changes in the way CPI is collected and compiled.

37

References

Ando, Albert (2002), “Missing Household Saving and Valuation of Corporations: Inquiry into
Japanese National Accounts,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 16 (2):
147-176
Ariga, Kenn, Kenji Matsui, and Makoto Watanabe (2000), “Hot and Spicy: ups and downs in
price floor and ceiling of Japanese Supermarkets,” mimeo.
Bank of Japan (2001a), “Oroshiuri Bukka shisū no Hinshitsu Chōsei wo megutte” (On Quality
Adjustments in Wholesale Price Index), a paper presented at a conference on Price Index.
Bank of Japan (2001b), “Oroshiuri Bukka Shisū ni okeru Hedonic Approach” (Hedonic
approaches in the wholesale price index), Bank of Japan Working Paper 01-24
Boskin, Michael.J., Ellen Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale W. Jorgenson
(1996), Final Report of the Advisory Commission to Study Consumer Price Index, U.S.
Government Printing Office
Caves, David, W., Lawrence R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewart (1982), “The Economic
Theory of Index Numbers and the Measurement of Input, Output, and Productivity,”
Econometrica 50(11): 1393-1414
Diewart, W. Erwin (1976), “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers,” Journal of Econometrics
4: 115-144
Feenstra, Richard C., and Matthew D. Shapiro (2001), “High Frequency Substitutions and the
Measurements of Price Indexes,” paper prepared for the CRIW Conference on "Scanner Data
and Price Indexes."
Gordon, Robert J. (1999), “The Boskin Commission Report and Its Aftermath,” Monetary and
Economic Studies (Bank of Japan), December 1999: 41-68
Hausman, Jerry A. (1999), “Cellular Telephone, New Products, and the CPI,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics 17(1): 188-194
Iwamoto, Yasushi (2000), “Jinkō-Kōreika to Iryōhi” (Aging Japanese Population and Medical
Expenditure) mimeo.
MacDonald, James M., and Paul E. Nelson, Jr.(1991), “Do the poor still pay more? Food Price
variations in large metropolitan areas,” Journal of Urban Economics 30(3): 344-349
Matsuda, Yoshiro, Keiro Hamasuna, and Hiromi Mori (eds.) (2000), Kōza Micro Tōkei
38

Bunseki (Microscopic Statistical Analysis) in 3 volumes, Tōkyō: Nihon Hyōronsha
Matsuoka, Mikihiro, and Brian Rose (1994), The DIR Guide to Japanese Economic Statistics,
Oxford University Press
Shapiro, Matthew, and David W. Wilcox (1996), “Mismeasurement in the Consumer Price
Index: An Evaluation,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1996: 93-154
Schultz, Charles, and Christopher Mackie (eds.), At What Price? Conceptualization and
Measuring Cost-of-Living and Price Indexes, National Academy of Sciences, forthcoming
Sezon Research Institute (2000), “Ōte Ryōhan-ten no POS data wo riyō shita bukka shisū ni
kakakwaru kenkyū,” (Price Index using POS data of a Large Scale Retailors)
Shiratsuka, Shigenori (1997), Bukka no Keizai Bunseki (Economic Analysis of Inflation
Measures), University of Tokyo Press (in Japanese)
Shiratsuka, Shigenori (1999), “Measurement Errors in the Japanese Consumer Price Index,”
Monetary and Economic Studies (Bank of Japan), December 1999: 69-102
Sōmusho (Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications)
(2000) Shōhisha Bukka Shisū Sankō Shiryō #17 (Reference documents for CPI #17)

39

Table 1
Major Official Statistical Series, 2000

Designated1 Approved2 Budget (1999)3 Staff

Ministry

8

119

13,032

a

5,979

Agriculture

4

50

256

102

Education

2

8

144

86

Finance

8

102

5,758

465

Health and Labor

7

68

4,169

124

Land and Transport

14

59

14,494

1,617

Public Management
(Sōmusho)

17

47

5,867

381

Trade and Industry

-

27

1,360

50

Others

62

480

45,080

b

Total

8,804

1 We include only those designated statistical series which are currently collected on a
periodic basis, thus excluding those for which new data collection has been stopped. In effect,
the latter series are no longer used, primarily because of the lack of interest (they retain the
special status only because the use of the original data is still tightly controlled by law).
2 The number of approved series collected in each year at each ministry varies widely, but
the total number has been stable between 400 and 500 since the mid 1990s. Unlike the
designated series, many of these statistics are collected once and only.
3 In million yen for fiscal 1999, which ended 31 Mar 2000. This is roughly 0.06% of the
central government budget. The budget has been in a 40-50 billion yen range since the early
1990s except when there is a population census (years ending in 0 and 5). Thus, the total fiscal
2000 budget was 98.6 billion yen, with 75.9 billion allocated to Sōmusho, which conducts the
census.
a
b

This is 68% of the total. Most of them are at regional offices of the ministry.
The total given is 2.2% of total central government administrative staff, 398,000.

Source: Tōkei Kijyun Nenpo (Statistics Standards Annual): Sōmusho, 1999, 2000.
40

Table 2
US Statistical Staff and Budget

Budget

1

Permanent Staff

(2002)1

Total

366.6

1,595

33

143.1

4,154

1,403

Commerce, except Census

563.4

3,708

1,398

Census Bureau

198.0

127

78

Education

1,260.6

606

212

Health, HS

57.4

67

42

Justice

655.4

2,792

179

Labor

122.3

162

54

Transportation

686.3

374

55

Other

4,110.5

9,877

2,056

Total

3,906.3

6,169

658

Statisticians
Agriculture

Total (ex Census)2

Estimate for Fiscal year ending 30 Sep 2003, in million dollars.

2 Excludes the 2000 census, entities spending less than $0.5 million, and statistics collection
in conjunction with other major activities.
Source: US Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, Statistical
Programs of the United States Government, 2002.

41

Table 3
Annual Inflation Rates, 1900-2000

(percent)

Period

CPI

WPI1

GDP2

1990-2000

1.64

-0.55

0.49

1995-2000

0.30

-0.76

-0.32

1

For final consumption goods

2

Deflator for household final consumption. This is a Paasche index using current weights

from FIES. Both factors tend to generate a lower inflation rate than the CPI.

42

Table 4
Aggregation Bias

(annual percentage rates except as noted)

Fixed Weights
Laspeyres
CPI

Chained

Tornqvist

Inflation

Inflation

Tornqvist
1

Difference

Inflation

Fischer
1

Difference

Inflation

Difference1

Index

1996

100.180

0.180

0.154

0.026

0.154

0.026

0.154

0.026

1997

101.869

1.689

1.651

0.038

1.657

0.032

1.649

0.032

1998

102.613

0.744

0.713

0.031

0.716

0.028

0.703

0.028

1999

102.242

-0.371

-0.498

0.127

-0.440

0.069

-0.429

0.058

2000

101.415

-0.827

-0.877

0.050

-0.864

0.037

-0.870

0.043

1995-2000 -

0.283

0.229

0.054

0.245

0.038

0.241

0.042

1970-95

-

4.438

-

-

4.313

0.125

4.216

0.222

1990-95

-

1.153

-

-

1.152

0.001

1.272

-0.119

1

Difference between the inflation rate in the CPI in column 2 and the inflation rate in

column to the left. As discussed in the text, this is an indicator of upward bias in the CPI
inflation rate.
Source: 1970-95 and 1990-95 are from Shiratsuka (1998).

43

Table 5
Bias Due to CPI Data Collection Procedure

Standard Deviation2

Mean Inflation１
Weighted

CPI

Upward

Weighted

CPI

Average

Procedure

Bias

Average

Procedure

-1.36

-0.38

0.98

.0148

.0208

Mayonnaise

-3.12

-0.41

2.71

.0195

.0305

Ketchup

-2.25

0.00

2.25

.0343

.0434

Soy sauce

-2.94

-0.30

2.64

.0238

.0429

Liquid soup
base

-2.73

-0.10

2.83

.0298

.0149

Laundry
Detergent

-5.44

-1.45

3.99

.0378

.0957

Instant Coffee

1 % per year
2 Annual log differences.

44

Table 6
Mean Inflation Rates and Within-Item Variances

Mean inflation

Variance1

rate(%)
0.4477

.016

Instant Coffee

0.1006

.0062

Facial tissue

-0.2258

.0041

Mayonnaise

-0.1324

.94*10-5

Yogurt

0.0781

.0080

Liquid condiments

0.2465

.092

Fruit juice

-1.4649

.019

Fresh milk

-11.8878

.038

Sugar

0.2117

.0061

Wheat flour

-0.1937

.0043

Soy sauce

0.2850

.0070

Cooking Oil

0.9755

.052

Sanitary napkins

-0.0627

.060

Laundry detergent

-0.0738

.0078

Kitchen detergent

1

Monthly average for indices of brand-specific inflation normalized to set the annual

average for 2000 equal to 1. The variance of mean inflation rate across different brands within
each item is shown in the second column.

45

Table 7
Substitution Across Brands: Curry Pastes

If A's price is:
Regular

Discounted
Brand A sales volume
when B's price is:

5.4

70.7

Regular

5.0

57.4

Discounted
Brand B sales volume
when B's price is:

3.1

2.9

42.4

29.2

Regular
Discounted

Unit: average number of sales unit per day

46

Table 8
Share of Expenditures on Selected Items, by Type of Retail Outlet, 1984-94

(percent)
Regular

Depart-

Conveni-

small-

Super-

ment

ence

Coopera-

Dis-

scale

markets

stores

stores

tives

count1

1984

50.8

28.9

10.0

-

4.6

-

1994

40.5

30.3

9.3

1.1

6.3

4.0

1999

34.0

35.3

9.1

1.7

5.9

5.4

1984

40.6

44.9

3.5

-

7.0

-

1994

25.2

49.2

4.1

1.9

10.4

2.3

1999

16.7

57.5

4.5

2.6

9.8

2.7

1984

46.3

24.1

15.1

-

4.3

-

1994

37.1

22.7

10.8

3.1

5.8

12.5

1999

32.3

26.6

9.4

3.0

5.3

16.7

1984

36.9

18.1

37.6

-

1.8

-

1994

33.7

17.7

34.0

1.3

2.1

11.2

1999

28.7

20.5

36.5

1.4

2.3

10.6

Total

Food

Appliances

Clothing

Row totals do not add to 100% because not all store types are included.
1

Mass marketing speciality discount stores.

Source: National Survey of Family Income and Expenditure
47

Table 9
Average Across-Store Price Differentials for 14 Items

Small-store regular price = 100.

Small

Super-

Mass

stores

markets

discount
95.0

Coops

100

95.4

94.4

Regular Price

78.7

64.9

(17.5%)

68.9

(12.5%)

68.7

89.4

74.0

(16.7%)

76.8

(14.1%)

81.6

(8.7%)

Case 11

95.7

74.0

(22.7%)

76.8

(19.8%)

89.3

(6.7%)

Case 22

(12.7%)Discount Price

Percentages in parentheses are the discount from the small store's price for each of the cases.
1

In determining the average price for each category, 50% of volume is assumed to be sold

at a discount.
2

In determining the average price for each category, 20% of volume is assumed to be sold

at a discount.
Data source: 1997 National Survey of Prices Special Volume on Bargain Prices.

48

Table 10
Impact of a Nearby Rival Store on Retail Prices

log (Regular Price)

log (Discount Price)

-.0401

(6.16)

-.0426

(4.50)

Large Store

-.0579

(2.84)

-.243

(8.18)

Supermarkets

-.170

(4.24)

-.315

(5.42)

Mass-discount

-.116

(2.63)

-.180

(2.79)

Coop

-.082

(4.48)

-.155

(5.82)

Rival Store (RS)

.0659

(3.14)

.122

(3.98)

RS*Supermarkets

.0898

(2.17)

.139

(2.31)

RS*Mass-discount

.120

(2.62)

.123

(1.86)

RS*coop

.995

.978

Adjusted R2

Results of OLS cross-section regressions.
Numbers in parentheses are t-statistics.
Data source: 1997 National Survey of Prices Special Volume on Bargain Prices.

49

Table 11
Comparison of CPI and WPI

(annual percentage rates)
1980-2000
CPI

WPI

1990-2000
CPI

WPI

0.83

0.68

0.25

-0.35

Food

-3.33

-1.49

-6.12

-3.32

Consumer Electronics

-5.76

-2.49

Import Price Index

-

-

CPI weights are used for both CPI and WPI

50

Table 12
COLI Average Annual Inflation in CPI and FIES

(percent)
1980-2000
CPI(C,C)1

(C,K)2

(K,C)3

(K,K)4

FIES5

0.83

0.70

0.44

0.56

0.27

Food

1.31

1.41

0.20

0.03

1.28

Clothing6

-8.62

-6.05

-4.80

-3.41

-5.21

0.11

0.45

-0.55

-0.69

0.80

6 items in Survey of Prices

0.57

0.67

0.32

0.45

0.12

CPI ex CE

0.63

0.75

0.32

0.59

0.14

CPI ex services & CE

1.54

-

-

0.64

0.90

Overall CPI vs overall FIES7

Consumer Electronics

1990-2000
CPI(C,C)1

(C,K)2

(K,C)3

(K,K)4

FIES5

0.25

0.20

-0.54

-0.35

0.60

Food

0.72

0.73

-1.19

-1.39

2.09

Clothing

-6.12

-5.92

-2.89

-3.32

-2.80

0.03

0.38

-0.81

-1.43

1.46

6 items in Survey of Prices

0.32

0.26

-0.46

-0.40

0.72

CPI ex CE

0.11

0.20

-0.81

-0.51

0.62

CPI ex services & CE

0.89

-

-

-0.46

1.35

Overall CPI vs overall FIES7

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Consumer Electronics

Original CPI fixed-weight Laspeyres index.
CPI price data and FIES monthly expenditure share used to compute a Tornqvist index.
CPI fixed weights and FIES unit prices used.
Tornqvist index using unit prices and expenditure shares from FIES.
Difference between CPI inflation rate and unit-price inflation rate in FIES.
1987-2000.
Baskets in two indices differ.
51

Table 13
Inflation Rates for 16 Selected Items

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000 1995-2000 average

-5.15

4.32

-7.66

0.72

-2.85

-6.47

-2.85

POS-Laspeyres

-5.05

3.17

-7.95

1.85

-2.80

-5.74

-2.75

POS-Tornqvist

-2.15

-2.07

-0.30

-1.00

-0.95

-2.28

-1.46

CPI

Notes The numbers shown are annual inflation rates (%). The first two use POS-SRI data (see
Appendix 1 for the data source). The first row uses CPI weights and computes Laspeyres index,
whereas the second is a chained Tornqvist using annual weights computed from the sales data
in POS-SRI. The last row is computed using item level indices and respective weights in CPI.

52

October-00

July-00

April-00

January-00

October-99

July-99

April-99

January-99

October-98

July-98

April-98

January-98

October-97

July-97

April-97

January-97

October-96

July-96

April-96

January-96

October-95

July-95

April-95

January-95

Figure 1
Brand Specific Price Indices for Liquid Condiments

1.2

1.15

1.1

1.05

1
Tornqvist

brand 1

brand 2

0.95

0.9

0.85

0.8

Appendix 1
Comments on the Data

Four sets of data are used in the analysis of potential mismeasurements of CPI.
1

Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES)

The CPI uses this survey for the selection and weights of items. Aside from the expenditure
records of the roughly 8,000 sample households, FIES also reports average unit purchase
prices for 200 items. We use these unit price data as the benchmark for cost of living index
estimates.
There are three major problem with using these unit prices as the COLI. First, the data
cover only subsets of consumption expenditure and do not cover services. Second, they are
averages of nominal purchase prices without incorporating any changes in quality. Third, there
are large monthly fluctuations in the data, partially reflecting measurement errors.
There are several advantages, however, over the current CPI as the benchmark of COLI.
The unit price data reflect the average of the actual choices by sample households of items,
brands, quality, and stores, thus incorporating substitutions by households across items, brands,
quality, and different types of stores. To the extent quality changes not reflected in prices are
not quantitatively important, the unit price and expenditure data provide the most natural
measure of COLI. Another notable advantage is that the survey can be used to estimate COLI
across different types of households: although the current CPI supplements include CPI series
for several different types of households, they incorporate only the differences in weights
across households (they use the common average prices taken from the Survey of Prices.)
2

1997 National Survey of Prices, Special Volume on Bargain Prices

This survey selected 16 items and collected cross-section data on regular and bargain
(discount) prices across regions, types of stores, and variety of other attributes such as location
53

characteristics and store sizes). We use data for 14 of these 16 items. We deleted 2 items, eggs
and beef, because of the potential large quality differences across samples.
3

POS-SRI

POS data compiled by the Sezon Research Institute (SRI) on 16 items for the 72 months
January 1995 through December 2000 for 20 stores in Metropolitan Tokyo belonging to a
national chain of supermarkets. The report provides monthly average prices and sales
separately for regular price and discount sales. We use the same 14 items selected above.
4

POS-DEI

POS data are compiled by the Distribution Economics Institute of Japan includes 6 items
among the 14 selected items above. The data are daily price and sales records for roughly 320
brand-store combinations for 24 months between April 1995 and March 1997.

54

Appendix 2
Shopping-Storage Model

Consider a household that consumes at constant rate c per day. Assume it visits a retailer each
1/s days. The price of the consumption good is randomly drawn from a known distribution
F(p). Normalize this price so the highest price is 1. Shopping costs are δ per visit, storage cost
is ε per day per unit, and costs associated with stock-out are ignored. For simplicity, assume the
same amount, q, is purchased on each visit if the price is below some threshold, level, p̂ . Since

the amount purchased per visit must on average equal consumption (c) so
sqF ( pˆ ) = c

EQ. 8

Thus the amount of purchase per visit is given by
q=

EQ. 9

c
sF ( pˆ )

The average time needed to consume the stored good is q/c. On average, the amount in storage
is half the amount purchased, so the average storage cost per unit of time is
1
cε
εq =
2
2sF ( pˆ )

EQ. 10

The household minimizes average (per unit of time) total cost by the choice of p̂ and s, taking
δ, ε, and F as given.

Min .[c ∫
{ pˆ , s }

pˆ

pdF ( p ) + sδ +

cε
]
2 sF ( pˆ )

EQ. 11

The POS-DEI data set can be used to obtain an empirical price distribution for the
simulation. The data include daily sales and price data for six items sold at 14 sample stores.
Each item includes 20 to 30 different brands. The top five brands by unit sales are chosen from
55

each store for the simulation. The data span the two-year period 7 April 1995 to 7 April 1997.
Daily price data are used to compute the kernel price density function for each brand, each item,
and each store.8
The range of parameters we used in simulation are:
c = .2 (one unit of purchase is equal to 5 days' consumption)
ε= .001 ~ .01
δ= .05 ~ .14
All are measured in rates per day. For example, ε= .001 is equivalent to depreciation at
0.1% per day if the good is purchased at the regular (high) price. Using the minimum wage in
Okinawa (the lowest) of around ¥600 per hour to set the low end, and assuming about 1-2
hours for shopping, shopping cost per visit ranges from ¥500 to ¥1400, which translates to 5%
to 14% of ¥10,000 of groceries. The upper limit correspond to roughly 2 hour minimum wage
in Tokyo Metropolitan area (=708 yen per hour).
Table A2.1 shows that across-store variations in total shopping cost and average
purchase price are large. For the top-five brands, total shopping cost varies by over 8%
between store 8, the lowest, and store 2, the highest. For average purchase prices, the range is
also more than 8% (between stores 8 and 2). If consumers (bargain hunters) choose to buy the
cheapest, variations are even larger: more than 12% in total costs (stores 9 and 1), and close to
13% in average purchase prices (stores 4 and 1). Variations in total shopping costs are smaller
than those for average purchase prices because volume shopping of discounted items increases
inventory holding costs.
Notice that the two coops tends to be more expensive, especially for bargain hunters.
This reflects the fact that periodic discounts are less common in those stores than in
supermarket chains.

8

The pricing patterns are not uniform and the optimal shopping behavior incorporating the periodic price
discounts are highly complex. For simplicity we assume a random drawing of prices from the empirical price
distribution. See Ariga, Matsui and Watanabe (2000) for the dynamics of pricing strategy and shopping behavior.

56

Across-store variations in pricing patterns alone can give rise to sizeable variations in
shopping frequency and storage. The other side of this fact is that consumers with different
shopping and storage costs choose different stores even if all the stores are identical except for
the pricing policy. This follows from the large variation in optimal shopping and storage costs
across stores even after controlling for unit shopping and storage costs. For example, when
δ=0.05 and ε=0.001, the shopping cost for the top-selling brand of item 1 varies between 0.045
and 0.113 and storage cost varies between 0.023 and 0.057.
To demonstrate this, Table A2.2 shows the cost-minimizing choice of store as unit
shopping and storage costs are varied for the top-selling brand of item 1. In this specific case,
store 5 minimizes the total shopping cost for those with lower shopping and storage costs. For
those with somewhat higher costs, store 2 becomes the best choice, reflecting the fact that the
optimal shopping and storage policy for store 5 involves sizable purchase at occasional but
deep discounts. At even higher shopping and storage costs, the optimal choice shifts to store 9.
This example is not exceptional. Among the 3000 simulation cases, each of the 14
stores is the cost-minimizing choice in at least one case, although store 10 has only one such
case. Store 3 is the overall winner, being the best choice in 509 cases.

57

Table A2.1 Variations in Total Cost and Average Purchase Price across 14 Stores

Total Cost

Average Purchase Price

Sample Store

Top 5 Brands Cheapest

Top5 Brands Cheapest

1 Coop #1

+3.42%

+8.75%

+2.46%

+10.33%

2 Coop #2

+3.51%

+8.17%

+2.65%

+7.83%

3 National Chain A #1

-2.731%

-0.33%

-6.15%

+1.51%

4 National Chain A #2

-0.58%

-3.03%

-2.83%

-2.56%

5 Unknown

-2.02%

+6.62%

-6.55%

+8.16%

6 Unknown

+0.26%

-1.10%

-2.33%

-0.85%

7 Unknown

-0.71%

+8.06%

-2.66%

+9.66%

8 Unknown

-4.74%

+0.92%

-6.63%

+1.36%

9 National Chain B #1

-2.53%

-3.38%

-3.49%

-1.11%

10 National Chain B #2

+.00%

+2.68%

-1.68%

+6.64%

11 Regional Chain C #1

-4.02%

+2.44%

-6.60%

+6.67%

12 Regional Chain C #2

+0.19%

+2.23%

-1.10%

+4.87%

13 National Chain D #1

+0.23%

+3.00%

-0.61%

+4.20%

Note 1 Numbers shown are percentage differences from Store #14 (not shown) which is used
as the benchmark.

58

Table A2.2 Optimal Store Choice for item #1, the top brand

δ
.001 .002 .003 .004 .005 .006 .007 .008 .009 .010
.05
.06
.07
.08
ε .09
.10
.11
.12
.13
.14

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
9

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
9

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
9
9

5
5
5
5
5
5
2
9
9
9

5
5
5
5
5
2
9
9
9
9

5
5
5
5
2
9
9
9
9
9

5
5
5
5
2
9
9
9
9
9

5
5
5
2
9
9
9
9
9
9

Note 1 The optimal choice of store under each configuration of ε and δ is shown in each cell.

59

