NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS JAPAN’S INNOVATIVE CAPACITY IN DECLINE?
Lee Branstetter
Yoshiaki Nakamura
Working Paper 9438
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9438
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

This paper was prepared for the volume on Structural Impediments to Growth that is being edited by Magnus
Blomstrom, Jennifer Corbett, Fumio Hayashi and Anil Kashyap for the NBER and will be published by the
University of Chicago Press. We thank the conference organizers, the conference participants, Masahiko
Aoki, Ashish Arora, Amar Bhide, Hiroyuki Odagiri, David Weinstein, and Akira Goto for extremely helpful
comments. We are also grateful to a number of Japanese corporate R&D managers and industry observers
based in Japan and overseas for their candid responses to our questions on Japanese firm R&D activity. By
prior agreement, their names must remain confidential. We are grateful to Takuji Saito (Hitotsubashi
University), Masami Imai (University of California, Davis), and Yoshiaki Ogura (Columbia University) for
excellent research assistance, and to the Research Institute of Economy, Trade, and Industry, the National
Science Foundation, and the Columbia Center on Japanese Economy and Business for financial support. All
errors remain our own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Lee Branstetter and Yoshiaki Nakamura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including . notice, is
given to the source.

Is Japan’s Innovative Capacity in Decline?
Lee Branstetter and Yoshiaki Nakamura
NBER Working Paper No. 9438
January 2003
JEL No. I24, O32, O33
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates changes in the output and productivity of research and development
activities in Japanese manufacturing firms over the 1980s and 1990s. Evidence from aggregate
patent and R&D statistics and a micro-level analysis of R&D productivity at the firm-level suggest
that there has been a slowdown in the growth of Japanese research productivity in the 1990s. The
paper goes on to suggest possible explanations for this slowdown and reviews some of the steps
Japanese firms are taking to increase the effectiveness of their R&D. The paper presents empirical
evidence concerning the impact of one of these steps – the creation of technology alliances with U.S.
firms – on Japanese innovative output.

Lee Branstetter
Associate Professor
Columbia Business School
Uris 815
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
lgb2001@columbia.edu

Yoshiaki Nakamura
Director for General Affairs Division
Kanto Bureau of Economy, Trade, and
Industry
METI
2-11, Kamiochiai, Saitama-shi
Saitama, Japan
nakamura-yoshiaki-yn@meti.go.jp

During the 1980s a significant source of Japanese growth – and a major source of concern for
Japan’s trading partners – was the widely admired innovative capacity of Japanese firms.
Over the course of the decade, Japanese firms entered and successfully competed in hightech industries that had formerly been the preserve of US and European multinationals.
Japanese firms’ expanding innovative capacity was clearly reflected in aggregate statistics on
R&D expenditures, patenting, and productivity, all of which showed a steady increase in
R&D input and output. A mid-decade study by the National Academy of Engineering (1987)
concluded that Japan was superior to the United States in 25 of 34 “critical” technologies.1
This situation changed quite dramatically over the course of the 1990s. R&D
spending by the private sector in Japan has stagnated during the Heisei recession. Measures
of R&D output growth in Japan have declined relative to the United States and relative to
Japanese historical trends. There is a widespread sense among Japanese R&D managers,
industry observers, and government officials that the Japanese approach to technological
innovation is no longer working effectively, and fundamental reform of the national
innovation system must take place.2
It is important to note that technological factors have not been the primary drivers of
the Heisei recession. Rather, the collapse of asset prices, the resulting crisis in the banking
system, and the inappropriate macroeconomic policy responses of the Japanese government
since the early 1990s have arguably been the primary cause.3 However, the implications of
the apparent decline in Japanese innovative capacity are potentially quite serious for Japan’s
long-run economic prospects. When normal growth resumes, the maximum sustainable rate
will depend in part on the ability of Japanese firms to develop and deploy new technology. If
Japan’s innovative capacity is growing at a slower rate than in past decades, this could limit
Japan’s future prospects.
This chapter examines Japan’s R&D performance from the early 1980s using several
complementary modes of analysis. First, we examine evidence from aggregate economic
statistics concerning changes in Japanese R&D. Second, we analyze comprehensive data on
1

See Okimoto and Saxonhouse (1987), Arison et al (1992), and Mansfield (1988). A book-length treatment is Goto (1993).

2

For a recent English article which quotes pessimistic Japanese experts at length on this subject, see Normile (2002)

3

For research supporting this view, see Posen (1998).
3

R&D inputs and outputs for a panel of nearly 200 Japanese firms. Microeconometric
analysis of this data set allows us to examine where any downturn in R&D activity is
concentrated, what Japanese firms are themselves doing to rectify the downturn in
performance, and what effects these steps have had to date. Third, we relate the results of 10
interviews of corporate R&D managers and informed industry observers concerning their
perceptions of changes in Japanese innovative capacity and the reasons for these changes.
The main empirical contribution of this chapter is to document, at the micro level and
the aggregate level, a slowdown in the growth rate of Japanese research productivity.
We find that after a decade of convergence with the United States in terms of R&D inputs
and outputs in the 1980s, Japanese and US innovation trends have diverged sharply in the
1990s. Measured in a common currency, real R&D outlays in Japan have grown much more
slowly than in the United States. The gap in patent output that was closing rapidly in the
1980s began expanding again in the 1990s.
Firm-level data show evidence of a slowdown in the growth of R&D productivity in
Japan in the 1990s, controlling for R&D spending and other firm attributes. This slowdown
does not affect all firms equally. By and large, the research productivity of the electronics
industry, broadly defined, has continued to grow in line with the trends of the 1980s and
early 1990s. On the other hand, firms outside the electronics industry have performed less
well.
Why has Japanese R&D productivity grown more slowly in the 1990s? A fullfledged investigation of this question is beyond the scope of this paper. However, drawing
on our interviews with Japanese R&D managers and evidence from other economic studies,
we are able to present some possible explanations. As they have reached the technology
frontier, Japanese firms have had to re-orient their R&D efforts from the application and
refinement of existing, relatively well-developed technology to the creation of more
fundamental breakthroughs.4
The shortage of PhD-level engineers and the relative weakness of Japanese academic
science may have inhibited the effectiveness of such technologically more ambitious R&D in
Japan. Furthermore, attempts to create large, centralized corporate labs focused on more
basic R&D have apparently run into the same problems that large-scale US corporate R&D
labs were criticized for in the 1980s, including a lack of focus on the needs of a rapidly

4

For an insightful perspective on this shift, see Goto (1997).
4

evolving marketplace.5 Finally, the absence of a venture capital industry and the types of
institutions that support start-ups in the United States seem to have made it difficult for
established Japanese firms to partner in product development with more entrepreneurial and
efficient smaller firms.
Having noted the problems, Japanese R&D managers are trying to respond to them.
Conversations with Japanese R&D managers reveal several steps firms are taking to
restructure R&D operations and improve research productivity. This chapter presents
evidence on the impact of one such step – the forging of technology alliances with US firms.
We find that this strategy leads to increased flows of technological information to Japanese
firms. We also present evidence that is consistent with the view that these increased
knowledge flows raise overall inventive productivity. This suggests that at least some of the
responses of the private sector are having the desired impact.
In terms of public policy implications, we note that the Japanese government has
undertaken a number of reforms to help Japanese firms make the leap from more applied to
more basic R&D, including strengthening the Japanese patent system, increasing public
expenditures on research, expanding graduate education in Japan, and removing some of the
legal and regulatory barriers to the formation of venture capital backed start-up firms.
However, in the context of a stagnating economy, many of Japan’s firms have been forced to
limit their R&D spending and shift R&D personnel into operational functions – and the
longer the recession lasts the more likely it is that these steps could have long-lasting
negative effects on research productivity. Perhaps the most important step the Japanese
government can take in the short-run to revive Japan’s innovative performance is to stimulate
macroeconomic growth.

1

Comparative Perspective
After nearly a decade of stagnation in Japan, it is sometimes difficult to recall the unease –
even fear – that Japan’s seemingly unstoppable economic advance during the 1980s once
generated among US industrialists and policy makers. To set the stage for the analysis here,
it is worth reviewing some of the evidence on Japan’s expanding technological capability.

5

See Rosenbloom and Spencer (1996).
5

As the Japanese economy expanded in the 1980s, R&D spending steadily increased.6
Moreover, the effectiveness with which Japanese firms applied this R&D expenditure to
successful generation of useful inventions also seemed to be increasing. Researchers noted
that Japanese firms produced more patent applications per R&D dollar than US firms, and
that this ratio was not declining, as it seemed to be in the rest of the industrialized world.7
Scholars familiar with the idiosyncratic features of the Japanese patent system prior
to its substantial reform in 1988 were quick to point out that many more patent applications
were required to protect the same amount of intellectual property in Japan, and that
straightforward comparisons of Japanese and US patent counts were likely to exaggerate
Japan’s technological prowess.
However, because of the importance of the US market, Japanese firms were also quite
aggressive about patenting in the United States. Over the course of the late 1970s and 1980s,
Japanese firms rapidly increased their level of US patenting in absolute numbers and relative
to US counterparts. Given that the two sets of firms were competing under the same patent
system with the same set of rules and examiners, this seemed to buttress the case that the
Japanese were closing the technological gap with their US rivals.
Careful micro studies of Japanese innovation, such as Mansfield (1988), also
suggested that Japan’s R&D capability was formidable, particularly its applied R&D
capability. Mansfield’s statistical results suggested that applied R&D expenditure in Japan
had a much stronger impact on firm-level total factor productivity (TFP) growth than it did in
the United States. On the other hand, basic R&D spending seemed to be far less effective.
Likewise, a comparative analysis of product development in the automobile industry in
Japan, Europe, and the United States by Clark and Fujimoto (1991) carefully documented
Japanese firms’ enormous lead over rivals in terms of the resource cost of product
development.
The picture of expanding relative Japanese technological capability changed
substantially in the 1990s, as Figure 1 shows. US private sector R&D spending grew quite
rapidly in real terms, reflecting robust macroeconomic growth and the especially rapid
growth of high-tech industries. In striking contrast, the increase in Japan was modest, and
spending actually declined in two years. The difference in trends in R&D inputs is reflected
6

Time-series on Japanese real R&D spending appears in Gijutsu Yoran (2000).

7

See Okimoto and Saxonhouse (1987) for a discussion of these issues.
6

in the aggregate statistics on R&D outputs. For instance, the counts of patents taken out by
Japanese firms in the United States grew much more slowly after 1990 than in the 1980s,
whereas the reverse was true for the United States. Figure 2 illustrates this divergence,
aggregating across all US patent classes.
Figure 3 illustrates a similar pattern of convergence followed by divergence within
the cluster of patent classes that are most closely connected to computers and information
technologies. Patenting levels converged up to 1988, but then, from 1993 US firms’
patenting in these fields exploded, greatly outstripping the growth in Japanese patents for the
rest of the 1990s.8 It is important to note that the relative decline in patents is seen not only
in the US patent system. Looking at world-wide patent applications, there have been striking
increases in the quantity of applications from inventors based in the United States and
Europe, but not in Japan. Figure 4 illustrates the trends.
This review of aggregate statistics suggests that there is something real behind the
steadily more insistent concerns being raised in Japan about the Japanese national innovation
system and its comparative performance.9 However, it also raises an important question. Is
the relative decline in Japanese innovative output simply a function of relative declines in
R&D spending, or has there been a slowdown in the growth of Japanese firms’ innovative
capacity, even after controlling for changes in R&D spending? This question is addressed in
the next section.

2

A Micro Analysis Of R&D Productivity
In this section, we utilize data collected on R&D inputs and outputs at the level of the firm to

8

Posen (2001) stresses that many of the top 10 patenting firms in the United States are Japanese multinationals. Unfortunately, the strong

performance of these firms is evidently not representative of the innovative performance of their industries.

9

For a forceful presentation of the view that Japan’s relative innovative performance has not changed since the 1980s, see Posen (2001).

While we strongly agree with Posen’s main point – that Japan’s poor macroeconomic performance in the 1990s has little direct connection
with the efficiency of its R&D activity – we believe that his rather optimistic view of the Japanese innovation system is not consistent with
some of the evidence presented in this paper.
7

estimate a simple “knowledge production function.”10 Let innovation for the ith firm be a
function of its R&D input, such that

N it = Ritβ Φ it

(1)

where

Φ

it

= e

∑

δ

c

D

c

ic

e

∑

γ

t

t

T

t

e

u

i

(2)

The δ s can be thought of as exogenous differences in the “technological opportunity” across
c different technological fields that are stable across time. The γ s can be thought of as
changes in the overall effectiveness of the R&D process, common to all fields, over time.
These latter coefficients will be crucial to our analysis. We want to observe whether,
conditional on R&D spending, the overall effectiveness of private sector innovative activity
is increasing, decreasing, or unchanging over time. Our inference concerning this will be
based on the pattern revealed by the γ coefficients.
Taking the logs of both sides of (2) yields the following log-linear equation
nit = βrit + ∑ γ tTt + ∑ δ c Dic + ε it
t

(3)

c

In (3), nit is innovation, rit is the firm's own R&D investment, Ds are dummy variables to
control for differences in the propensity to generate new knowledge across technological
fields (indicated by the subscript c), Ts are year dummies, and ε is an error term.

2.1
10

Measuring Innovation

The empirical methodology here borrows heavily from Branstetter and Sakakibara (1998) and Branstetter (2001a), which, in turn, are

strongly influenced by Jaffe (1986). The exposition follows those earlier papers quite closely.
8

There are no direct measures of innovation, but if some fraction of new knowledge is
patented, such that the number of new patents generated by the ith firm is an exponential
function of its new knowledge,

Pit = e

∑ α c Dic
c

(4)

e ξ i N it

then the production of new knowledge can be proxied by examining the generation of new
patents. Taking the logs of both sides of (4) and substituting into (3) yields

pit = βrit + ∑ γ tTt + ∑ δ c Dic + µ it
t

(5)

c

where pit is the log of the number of new patents and the other variables are as before, except
for the error term. We allow the new error term to contain firm fixed effects, such that there
can be time-invariant differences in the propensity to patent among firms within industries.
Because firms in our sample do not change their primary industry affiliation over time, the
industry effect would “fall out” with the firm fixed effect in a standard fixed effects
regression.
As written, equation (5) suggests that the log of patent counts should be our
dependent variable. Some firms in our sample are observed to take out zero patents in a
given year, which creates an obvious problem because one cannot take the log of zero. In the
earlier micro R&D-patents literature, it was customary to take the log of the count of patents
plus 1 to get around this. However, this somewhat arbitrary transformation of the dependent
variable could bias the results.
Instead, we have used count data statistical models to conduct our analysis. In
particular, we use the fixed effects negative binomial estimator developed by Hausman, Hall,
and Griliches (1984) to estimate a version of (5) in which a 0 realization of the dependent
variable does not pose any kind of mathematical problem.

9

2.2

Data Gathering

To implement this approach, we collected data on the patents granted to Japanese firms in the
United States (dated by year of patent application), patents applied for by Japanese firms in
Japan, R&D spending, and industry affiliation. Further information on data sources and
construction is provided in the Appendix.
Is our sample reasonably representative of Japanese industrial R&D activity, and does
this degree of “representativeness” change over time? In Japan, R&D spending and
patenting have historically been highly concentrated in the larger industrial firms. A panel of
large industrial firms in the United States would become steadily less representative of US
patenting over the 1990s because of the rising role of universities and high-tech start-up
firms in US inventive activity.11 In Japan, there is no evidence of a similar shift.12 Because
our sample includes most of the leading R&D-performing firms in Japan, we believe it is
representative of industrial R&D activity.
For our purposes, the use of US patents is actually the preferred metric of innovative
output. A major patent reform in Japan in 1988 allowed Japanese firms to change the
number of claims per patent, making it at least theoretically possible for Japanese firms to
protect the same amount of intellectual property with a smaller number of patents. It is thus
difficult to draw long-term inferences about changes in research productivity using Japanese
patent application counts because the relationship between innovations and patents has
shifted over time.13 There was no such change in the US patent system over our sample
period.
Furthermore, Japanese firms tended to submit patent applications to the US Patent
and Trademark Office for the ideas they perceive, at least ex ante, to have the most promise,
so that a US patent count series represents a “quality-adjusted” measure of innovative output.
Finally, thanks to the availability of US patent data in electronic form, it is possible to
conduct an additional “quality adjustment” by measuring the number of citations received by
a patent from subsequently granted patents over some fixed time period – in our case, four
years.

11

See Hicks et al (2001), who document the increased role of smaller firms and universities in US patenting.

12

Goto (1997) affirms this and comments on its implications for the future of industrial innovation in Japan.

13

For an empirical study of the effects of this patent reform on Japanese innovation, see Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001).
10

2.3

Drawing Inferences from the Data

The first column of Table 1 presents results of a fixed effects negative binomial regression of
US patent counts on firm R&D spending and our year dummy variables. Controlling for
R&D spending at the firm level, the coefficients on the time dummies trace out changes in
the level of R&D output that are common to all firms. In other words, it gives us a sense of
how innovative output is changing, on average, after we have controlled for inputs.
Figure 5 graphs the pattern traced out by the time dummies, along with the 95%
confidence bounds. The picture that emerges is fairly striking. From the mid-to-late 1980s,
one sees a sharp increase in average innovative output. This growth largely ceases in the
early 1990s, suggesting that R&D productivity reached a plateau around 1990 and grew little
thereafter.14
Is this cessation of R&D productivity growth real or an artifact of the data? The
substitution of observable patents for unobservable innovation creates some problems for our
statistical inference. The γ coefficients measure not just changes in the productivity of
R&D activity over time, but also changes in the propensity to patent in the United States over
time. It could be, for instance, that Japanese firms are generating larger numbers of
innovations over time but, in order to economize on the costs of protecting their intellectual
property rights, they are being more selective about which patents they take out in the United
States. In other words, a count-based output measure would show a flattening of innovative
productivity where there was none.15 To try to get around this possibility, we constructed a
measure of patent output in which we adjusted for the number of citations received by each
patent up to four years after it was granted. If the number of patents taken out in the United
States is going down because only the upper tail of the quality distribution of innovations is
actually being patented, then an outcomes measure that controls for innovation quality would
be less likely to generate a spurious result of flat productivity growth.
The second column of Table 1 presents results from such a regression. Figure 6
graphs the coefficients along with their 95% confidence bounds. The picture that emerges is
similar to that in Figure 5.
14

Including deflated sales as an additional regressor yields results qualitatively similar to those presented here.

15

We thank Hiroyuki Odagiri for stressing this point.
11

The next set of regression results segments our sample into industry groups to see
how research productivity trends differed among industries. Figure 7 indicates that the
research productivity of the electronics industry, broadly defined, has continued to grow
through the mid-1990s more or less in line with the trends of the 1980s. In contrast, there is
a decline in research productivity for manufacturing firms outside the electronics industry.
That is, controlling for innovative inputs, these firms are generating less innovative output,
on average, then they were in the late 1980s. Regression results based on citation-adjusted
patent output measures indicate a similar pattern.
Table 2 presents results based on Japanese patent applications. If one pools data
across all firms, these data suggest a continuing rise in innovative productivity through the
mid 1990s, but a slowdown in growth relative to the trends of the 1980s. Splitting the
sample along industry lines indicates electronics firms outperformed firms in other
industries. In both cases, a slowdown in productivity growth is evident, occurring sooner
among firms outside of electronics. While there were substantial increases in R&D
productivity in the early 1990s for electronics firms, the increase is much less impressive
outside that sector.
If the number of claims is rising fast enough to offset the slowdown in the growth of
patent applications, then one can argue that the data are consistent with increased innovation
in both categories. This possibility indicates the need for caution in interpreting results based
on Japanese patent data. For a study of Japanese innovation trends in the immediate
aftermath of the 1988 patent reform, see Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001).
A breakdown of R&D productivity trends by firm size suggests that, outside the
electronics sector, relatively smaller firms are more likely to show progress in research
productivity than larger firms. These findings are not reported here due to space constraints,
but they were confirmed using US patent output data as well.
What can we conclude from our preliminary exploration of the firm-level data? Our
results suggest that changes in Japan’s absolute and relative performance are not simply or
solely the result of a decline in firms’ R&D spending. Although we find some evidence of
an actual decline in research productivity in some sectors, the more robust result is that the
broad-based increase in Japanese research productivity that was so striking in the 1980s
largely faded in the 1990s. The exception to this general trend is the electronics sector,
which has continued to increase its innovative output, controlling for input. However,
continued progress in R&D productivity in this sector has not prevented Japanese firms from
12

falling well their US rivals in such key patent categories as information technology. This
may reflect Japanese firms’ inability to match their rivals’ expanding investments in R&D.

3

Factors Affecting R&D Productivity Growth

The stereotype of Japanese firms as effective imitators and implementers rather than
innovators may have been accurate in the late 1970s and even the early 1980s, but by the late
1980s many Japanese firms had reached the technological frontier and their continued
success increasingly has depended on their ability to advance that frontier. This is captured
in our interviews with Japanese R&D managers and industry observers, conducted in the
United States and Japan in 2000 and 2001.
3.1

The Focus and Structure of R&D Activity

Since at least the early 1980s, each interviewed company has made a substantial
commitment to R&D at the technological frontier within its industry. A large central R&D
operation was built up with the aim of creating important technical breakthroughs that could
be incorporated into future products. Although our interviewees tended to be corporations
recognized as technological leaders within their fields, this change in focus from applied to
more basic R&D also is broadly reflected in larger, more representative surveys.16 A change
in the focus of R&D was inevitable – at one time, Japanese firms were the global low-cost
suppliers of standardized products, but manufacturers in South Korea, Taiwan, and China are
increasingly able to undercut Japanese firms. This means that Japanese firms have to
compete on the basis of innovative products.17 The interviewed R&D managers are
universally dissatisfied with the results of their investment in frontier research. The view
within firms seems to be that the central R&D laboratories have become bureaucratic,

16

See Goto and Nagata (1997), Cohen et al (1997), and the 2000 Gijutsu Yoran for evidence that the distribution of R&D effort across the

categories of basic versus applied R&D (and process innovation versus product innovation) in the United States and Japan had essentially
converged by the mid-1990s.
17

Goto (1997) offers some useful observations regarding this point.
13

insular, and unresponsive to the needs of the firm. R&D management has been unable to
effectively translate the basic and frontier research into effective new products.18 The
critiques of central R&D operations echo those by US firms in the 1980s regarding their own
central R&D operations: these were often seen as being unable to translate research
advances effectively into new products.19 In other words, a managerial perception that
relative R&D performance has declined confirms the findings of our statistical analysis.
Our interviewees spoke admiringly of the way their US counterparts restructured
their R&D operations during the 1990s, and most of the interviewed firms were trying to
restructure along the lines of the “new” US model. The characteristics of the new structure
of R&D are still emerging, but conversations with Japanese corporate R&D managers
suggest that it includes five main features.
1
Greater reliance on R&D partnerships outside the traditional vertical keiretsu
networks within Japan.
2
Greater reliance on foreign (especially US) R&D partnerships and acquisitions of
high-tech firms.
3
Greater emphasis on cooperation with universities, domestic and foreign.
4
A de-emphasis on centralized in-house R&D and a gradual downsizing of resources
invested in central R&D facilities.
5
Increased interest and investment in “corporate venturing” programs.
Japanese firms, in conscious imitation of their US counterparts, are placing increased
emphasis on sourcing useful technologies from outside the firm. These can then be
combined with the firm’s own technical strengths to generate important new products. This
increased “R&D outsourcing” is probably the over-riding theme guiding departures from the
“traditional” model of research. As part of this, because Japan still has relatively few hightech start-ups, and because the quality and level of academic research in Japan typically lags
that of the United States, Japanese firms have moved aggressively to expand their efforts to
tap US technology networks.
3.2
18

Reasons for a Slowdown in R&D Productivity

An early evaluation of the effectiveness of the build-up in R&D spending, based on an econometric study of product introductions, is

Wakasugi and Koyata (1997).
19

See Rosenbloom and Spencer (1996).
14

A full-fledged investigation of the reasons why the innovation trends in the United States and
Japan have diverged so sharply is beyond the scope of this chapter, but our exchange with
R&D managers and a review of the related literature suggests some possible explanations.
The nature of Japanese industrial R&D has clearly changed in terms of its
technological focus and its organization. First, Japanese firms have moved from a focus on
largely applied R&D to an effort to generate more fundamental R&D breakthroughs,
bringing them more in line with the US allocation of industrial R&D effort. Second, in
pursuit of this change in focus, Japanese firms have concentrated engineering talent in
upgraded central R&D labs.
Prior research and comments from our interviewees suggest that the shift in R&D
focus may have placed Japanese firms at a relative disadvantage. As Saxonhouse has pointed
out for decades, the Japanese higher education system produces far fewer PhDs in the
sciences and engineering than does the US educational system.20 Japan has produced many
more engineering graduates at the bachelors degree level per capita, and this may have been
sufficient to propel Japan’s technical advance while it was still behind the technology
frontier. However, it is reasonable to think that, as Japanese firms have reached the frontier,
it has become more important to have technical personnel with highly specialized training.
In some fields, such as software engineering, the shortage of engineers with advanced
degrees is so acute that there have been references to a “soft crisis” since the late 1980s.21
Even in the United States, demand for software engineers dramatically outstripped supply in
the 1990s – but US immigration law allowed the import of hundreds of thousands of foreign
engineers to bridge the gap.22
Furthermore, evidence from US industrial patents suggests that, at least in some
fields, US firms are increasingly building on academic science in their R&D efforts.23 This
also places Japanese firms at a relative disadvantage. US high-tech firms are able to work
with, and build on, the research of the world’s most celebrated research universities and
institutions. Despite important advances over the postwar period, the quantity and quality of

20

See, for example, Okimoto and Saxonhouse (1987).

21

See Finan and Williams (1992).

22

We thank Amar Bhide and Ashish Aurora for discussions on the role of immigration in propelling the US high-tech boom of the 1990s.

23

See Narin et al (1997).
15

publicly funded research in Japanese universities and research institutes typically lags behind
that conducted in the United States. Although the results of this kind of public science are
generally published in easily accessible scientific journals, understanding and applying the
most recent developments may require a degree of familiarity with, and connection to, that
recent science that is harder to come by in Japan than in the United States.24
The centralization of R&D effort in Japan runs counter to the trends in the United
States. Over the course of the 1990s, US firms downsized their central R&D labs and
increased emphasis on collaboration with other firms in R&D and product development.25
Some of this collaboration is with high-tech start-up firms, often backed by venture
capital, and successful collaboration can lead to acquisition of the start-up by its established
partners. For a variety of reasons, there has not been the same kind of venture capital
activity in Japan. This means that the domestic set of potential partners is less diverse and,
possibly, less technologically dynamic than it is in the United States. The larger Japanese
corporate labs seem to have run into the same problems that beset their US counterparts –
bureaucracy, insularity, and a lack of connection with developments in the market. As we
saw in our review of the aggregate statistics, total private sector R&D spending in the U.S.
has continued to grow at a robust rate, but the allocation of that spending across
organizational boundaries has changed in a way that has no parallel in Japan – and that may
help explain the differences in R&D productivity.
To its credit, the Japanese government has instituted a number of significant reforms
over the course of the 1990s to address some of the perceived problems in the Japanese
innovation system and help Japanese firms make the leap from more applied to more basic
R&D. A series of patent reforms, begun in 1988 and culminating in the adoption by the
Japanese Supreme Court of the “doctrine of equivalents” in 1998, have dramatically
increased the intellectual property rights protections available to inventors under the
Japanese patent system.26 The government has removed a number of legal restrictions that
inhibited the operation of high-tech start-ups. Legal restrictions on the business activities of
24

There is a large literature on the historical role of US universities in fostering technological progress. See, for example, Rosenberg and

Nelson (1994).
25

Several papers in Rosenbloom and Spencer (1996) comment on these trends, including the contribution by Mowery and Teece.

26

For more details, see Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001).
16

university professors have been lifted, in an attempt to foster the development of universitylinked start-ups. Finally, there has been a substantial increase in Japanese public funding for
R&D and for graduate education.27 Unfortunately, to date these positive policy changes have
had little visible impact on research outcomes.
The positive impact of these policy changes has probably been limited by Japan’s
poor macroeconomic performance, and this brings us to another potential explanation for the
slowdown in R&D productivity – the long-run impact of Japan’s lengthy recession. Because
R&D at the technological frontier can be a very expensive investment with a highly uncertain
payoff, firms under severe financial pressure are often forced to limit their R&D spending
and transfer personnel out of R&D groups and into operational functions. If Japanese firms
are forced to restrain their R&D investments and pare back the ranks of R&D personnel year
after year, then they inevitably fall behind their international competitors – and the further
they fall behind, the harder it may be to catch up. While the nation’s most successful firms
have been able to maintain large R&D operations even in the face of Japan’s unprecedented
recession, the long recession may have left the research operations of others permanently
impaired. Similarly, the viability of start-up enterprises is limited in an environment where
the overall economy is shrinking or stagnating and equity markets are severely depressed.28
A full exploration of the increase in innovative activity in the US is beyond the scope
of this paper, but recent research suggests several potentially important casual factors.
Clearly the robust economy of the 1990s provided firms with profits to reinvest in R&D.
However, at the same time that R&D spending has been increasing, R&D productivity as
measured by patents per R&D dollar has also been rising, so one cannot explain the
difference in outcomes by focusing solely on the increase in inputs.
The increase has probably been driven in part by changes in scientific and
technological opportunity. Important fundamental scientific breakthroughs in molecular
biology, genetics, and genomics have helped fuel a sharp increase in the number of patents
granted in fields associated with biotechnology. Likewise, there has been a substantial

27

See Normile (2002) for a summary of these and other recent changes.

28

There is an interesting contrast here with South Korean firms. Under the impact of the Korean economic crisis of 1997-1998, the R&D

divisions of several Korean firms were spun off as high-tech start-ups. This arrangement kept South Korea’s best corporate R&D personnel
employed in research, albeit in a different organizational form. The fraying but still extant Japanese corporate commitment to lifetime
employment has kept many researchers employed in their original companies, but not always in a research function.
17

increase in software patenting.29
Corporate patents are increasingly citing scientific papers, suggesting that the link
between science and innovation is tighter than in the past.30 It is uncertain whether these
breakthroughs will continue to generate opportunities for industrial application, but it seems
reasonable that the ability of US universities to play a leading role in these scientific
breakthroughs has conferred some technological advantage on relatively proximate and
better-connected US firms.
However, as Kortum and Lerner (1999, 2000) point out, the increase in patenting is
not confined to those clusters of technologies that have seen recent fundamental
breakthroughs in academic science. Thus, one cannot argue that the increase in US research
productivity has been driven entirely by exogenous shifts in technological opportunity. In
other words, it is not simply that Japan missed out on the US surge in innovation because it
lacked a strong presence in the software industry and the biotech industry, where the positive
technological shocks of the 1990s were concentrated. Even in areas of traditional Japanese
strength, US firms have been relatively more successful. This point is driven home strongly
in Figure 3, which tracks innovation in IT-related patent classes.
Instead, Kortum and Lerner argue that the management of R&D has undergone an
institutional change. Specifically, they assert that a system of small start-up firms financed
by venture capital partnerships is more productive than the traditional big corporate R&D
system, and they present evidence that the increase in innovation has been highest where
venture capital investment is most concentrated.
Evidence on US patents suggests that, as the large corporate R&D labs have
downsized, knowledge generation by smaller firms and universities have more than
compensated.31 The early 2000s downturn in the information-technology sector and largescale bankruptcies of venture-backed high-tech firms suggest that the ultimate power of this
institutional innovation to propel increased innovation in the long run may have been
overstated, but it is almost certain to have played an important role over the course of the
1990s.
Although the failure of R&D-intensive Japanese firms to keep pace with their US

29

For recent studies touching on these issues, see Cockburn and Henderson (2000) and Hicks et al (2001).

30

See, for example, Narin et al (1997) and Branstetter (2001c).

31

See Hicks et al (2001) and Henderson et al (1998).
18

counterparts is clearly a cause of concern for the firms themselves, one might question the
implications of this for the Japanese economy as a whole. The macroeconomic impact of
research success should be evident in measures of total factor productivity (TFP). While
estimates of Japanese TFP growth vary widely, depending on the methodology and the level
of aggregation at which the analysis was conducted, at least some studies suggest that the
contribution of TFP growth to overall Japanese economic growth has been fairly modest in
recent decades, even in the 1980s when research productivity was growing rapidly. Does
this limit the economic relevance of our study? We would argue that Japan is unlikely to
sustain rapid economic growth solely through increases in factor inputs in the medium-tolong run future. Barring radical changes in Japanese immigration policy, Japan’s population
will age rapidly and actually begin to shrink in coming decades, sharply limiting the growth
in labor inputs. Likewise, if anything, Japan over-invested in physical capital in recent years
– a point addressed elsewhere in this volume. The prospects of investment-led growth are
therefore also limited. The sustainability of a reasonably high rate of macroeconomic growth
would thus seem to require growth in TFP.32
Of course, one could also question the linkage between TFP growth and domestic
R&D. Certainly, there are sources of TFP growth that are not directly linked to formal
research and development activity. Furthermore, the economic impact of slower growth in
research productivity at home can be cushioned by importing foreign-invented high-tech
products. In addition, Japanese investors could realize some of the returns from foreign
innovation by investing overseas. However, it is still likely to be the case that both Japan
and the world as a whole will grow more slowly if Japanese R&D productivity continues to
stagnate. Furthermore, modern growth theory has suggested a range of conditions under
which foreign innovation can be an imperfect substitute for domestic innovation.33 If these
conditions hold, the implications of Japan’s R&D productivity slowdown for domestic
economic growth could be even more severe.34
32

We thank Jenny Corbett for discussions on these issues.

33

See Grossman and Helpman (1991) and Feenstra (1996).

34

We acknowledge that our study focuses on a relatively narrow range of firms and industries that collectively constitute a relatively small

part of the Japanese economy. However, these are precisely the firms and industries where formal R&D activity is most highly
concentrated. Given that our objective is really to assess the changing productivity of formal R&D activity – rather than explain overall
performance of the macroeconomy -- we believe this focus is appropriate.
19

4
Tapping US Technology
In the face of a perceived relative decline in R&D productivity, Japanese R&D managers
have not stood still. While we eventually hope to explore all of the aspects of the Japanese
industrial R&D restructuring outlined in the previous section as part of a long-term research
project, here we focus on the international dimension of Japanese firms’ R&D restructuring.
In doing so, we endeavor to answer two questions. First, how and to what extent are
Japanese firms seeking to obtain useful technological information from US sources? Second,
is this strategy working? In other words, have Japanese firms that have made the effort to tap
US technology networks benefited in terms of raising their R&D productivity? Drawing on
recent research by one of the authors, we seek to shed light on these questions in this section.
As much prior research has documented, Japanese firms have historically been
enthusiastic licensees of US technology. However, the concept of tapping into US
technology networks that we attempt to measure here is more than passive implementation of
technology developed by another firm. Rather, it is the incorporation of ideas developed
outside the firm into the firm’s own R&D operation. It is much more pro-active than simple
licensing, and an important method by which this happens is the formation of technology
alliances with US firms. Japanese firms’ overseas R&D facilities obviously also play an
important role in these firms’ efforts to learn from US technological developments, but in
this section, we focus on the impact of technology alliances.35

4.1

35

Research Alliances

For evidence on the effectiveness with which Japanese firms have used their FDI in the US, including their US R&D facilities, to tap into

technology networks, see Branstetter (2000). For more general studies on the scale of overseas R&D by Japanese firms, see Belderbos
(2001) and Odagiri and Yasuda (1997).
20

Japanese firms have been aggressive about forming technology-sharing and technologydevelopment alliances with US firms. Several data sources track these over time, identifying
the Japanese and US partners. The source used here, the Securities Data Corporation (SDC)
alliance database, uses contemporary press accounts to track corporate alliances, of which the
“technology” alliances that are the focus of this section are a subset.36
4.2

Promoting Knowledge Flows

Do alliances with US firms and universities promote flows of knowledge to Japanese firms?
We assess this using data on the citations to prior US inventions found in the US patents of
Japanese firms. We are careful to exclude all Japanese-invented US patents from this set of
“American” inventions. Using an empirical methodology developed in Branstetter (2000),
we presume that the flow of patent citations is proportional to the flow of knowledge.37
Let CJit be the number of citations made by the patent applications Japanese firm i
filed in year t to the cumulated stock of “indigenous” US-invented patents granted as of year
t. Note that the US Patent and Trademark Office makes available data only on patent
applications that are eventually granted. In this paper, patents are dated by year of
application rather than year of grant, because it takes on average two years – sometimes
much longer – to grant a patent.
We can write the expectation of CJit as a function of several other observables
β

E[C Jit ] = ( N Jit ) β1 ( N At ) β 2 [e β 3 Allianceit ][e β 4 PROX i ]Rit 6 α iα t

(6)
Let E be the expectations operator. Here E[CJit] is a function of the number of patents
Japanese firm i has taken out in the US in year t (NJit), the number of potentially cited
indigenous US patents which exist as of year t (NAt), the level of firm i’s alliance activity
with US firms in year t (Allianceit), and the extent to which firm i is at a point in the
technology space which is “densely populated” by other indigenous US patents (PROXi).
Some Japanese firms might cite US patents more frequently simply because they
36

The authors subsequently began using an even more comprehensive database, the CATI database developed by John Hagedoorn at the

University of Maastricht, to explore the impact of alliances more thoroughly.
37

This framework builds on the methodology of Jaffe and Trajtenberg (1996) and uses the citations data described in Hall, Jaffe, and

Trajtenberg (2001). The exposition of the empirical framework closely follows Branstetter (2000) quite closely.
21

happen to be working on technologies in which a large number of indigenous US inventors
are active. If one wishes to control for this “technological proximity,” one could obtain a
measure of a firm's location in “technology space” by measuring the distribution of its R&D
effort across various technological fields. Let firm i’s R&D program be described by the
vector F, where
Fi = ( f 1 ,..., f k )
(7)
and each of the k elements of F represent the firm's research resources and expertise in the
kth technological category. These are constructed by aggregating the hundreds of patent
classes in the US Patent and Trademark Office system into 50 distinct areas. We then count
the number of patents taken out by firm i in each of the categories over the full length of the
sample period.
From the number of patents taken out in different categories, we can infer what the
distribution of R&D investment and technological expertise across different technical fields
has been. In the same way, we can also compute a vector of location in technology space for
the aggregate of all US inventors, treating them as though they belonged to a single giant
enterprise, and denoting that FUS. This suggests that PROXi might be measured as

PROX i =

Fi FUS

′

′
′
[( Fi Fi )( FUS FUS )]1/ 2

(8)

This is a technological proximity coefficient in the spirit of Jaffe (1986).
One may also wish to allow citations to be influenced by the firms’ R&D spending
(Rit) and by vectors of multiplicative “fixed effects” associated with the citing firm ( α i ) and
the (application) year in which the citation takes place ( α t ). Including these fixed effects
actually simplifies the equation, provided one is willing to make some assumptions. The
stock of cumulated potentially citable “indigenous” US patents will be the same for all
Japanese citing firms in each year, so that the NAt terms are effectively absorbed into the time
dummies. One may also want to assume that a firm’s location in technology space relative to
aggregate US inventive activity is relatively fixed over time. In that case, the effect of the
PROX measure is absorbed into the firm fixed effects in a standard fixed effects regression.
Industry effects also will be absorbed into the firm effects, because firms in the sample do
not change their primary industry affiliation over time.
The assumption that the technological proximity of a Japanese firm to US inventive
22

activity stays fixed over a long period is a strong one. The data permit us to allow this
proximity measure to vary within firms over time, although we lack sufficiently rich patent
data to do this for all firms or all years. The specification suggested by this line of thinking
is
c Jit = β 0 + β1 pit + β 2 rit + β 3 Allianceit + β 4 PROX it + ∑ α t Tt +α i + ε it
(9)
t
The focus of interest is on β 3 . Do firms that engage in more frequent technology
alliances and R&D joint ventures with US experience an increased tendency to cite US
patents? A positive, significant coefficients would suggest the answer is yes.
There is a data problem in that the dependent variable for a nontrivial number of
observations is 0. We deal with this by estimating a fixed effects negative binomial version
of equation (9). Results are given in Table 3.
We see clearly that alliances have a positive, statistically significant impact on the
measured flow of technological knowledge from US to Japanese firms when they are entered
separately into the regression. Although the coefficient is small in magnitude, one must
recall that it gives the increase in knowledge flows associated with the establishment of an
additional alliance. Because some firms in our data set went from zero alliances to several
dozen, the cumulative effect implied by the regression coefficients is quite substantial.
Our conversations with Japanese R&D managers suggest an important
complementarity between overseas R&D facilities and R&D alliances. Often, overseas R&D
centers are used as a base from which to search out alliance partners and, in many cases, the
site of R&D centers is selected with current or potential alliance partners in mind. In future
work, we hope to explore this apparent complementarity further.
4.3

Putting Knowledge Flows to Work

The finding that the establishment of research alliances enhances knowledge flows is of
limited interest unless firms that receive greater knowledge flows from the United States are
able to translate these flows into greater innovative productivity. Firmly establishing such a
causal linkage is difficult, but in the Table 4 we present evidence that is at least consistent
with such a linkage.
The first column reports the results of a fixed effects negative binomial regression. In
this case, the dependent variable is our citation-adjusted measure of US patent output. We
regress this on firm-level R&D spending and a firm-specific time-varying measure of
23

knowledge flows from the United States.
This measure is the count of citations to US patents – the dependent variable from our
previous set of regression results. We see clearly that US knowledge flows are positively
associated with higher quality patent output, and that this association is robust to the
inclusion of a control for patent counts.38 The coefficient is very small, but the statistical
interpretation of this coefficient is the increase in patent quality associated with an additional
citation. Because some firms make hundreds of such citations in a single year’s cohort of
patent applications, the cumulative effects of a substantial increase in such citations could be
quite substantial.
This point is demonstrated by the results in the second column. The measure of
knowledge flow used in this column is a simple dummy variable equal to one if the firm in
question receives higher than the median level of citations over the sample period. A random
effects negative binomial regression shows that this variable is highly significant and large in
magnitude, suggesting that there is a strong correlation in the cross section between high
levels of knowledge flow and high levels of quality-adjusted patent output. Frequently citing
firms generate patents that are nearly 90% “better,” as measured by their ex-post citations.
We cannot interpret this as strong causal evidence of a linkage between knowledge flows
from the United States and invention quality, because there are likely to be important
unmeasured differences in the research quality of firms which may be correlated with the
frequency with which they cite US patents. Nevertheless, these results offer large sample
statistical evidence consistent with the view expressed by our interviewees that tapping US
technology networks can be a useful component of an R&D reform strategy.
5

Conclusion

As the 1980s ended, Japanese firms were held up as exemplars of strength in technological
innovation. As the 21st century begins, leaders in government and industry are calling for a
reform of the national innovation system in order to raise the long-run sustainable growth
rate of the Japanese economy. This chapter has demonstrated that there are reasonable

38

The obvious relationship between counts of citations to prior US patents and the number of successful Japanese patent applications

requires the use of this control. This implies that our innovative output measure is, in effect, measuring the average quality of patents in a
given cohort.
24

grounds for concern about the relative performance of Japanese manufacturing firms in
technology-intensive industries.
To answer the question posed by our title, we do not find strong evidence that
Japanese innovative capacity has actually declined. However, that capacity has failed to
grow at the rate of the 1980s. As a result, US and worldwide patent statistics suggest that
Japanese firms in a number of sectors have fallen behind their US counterparts, even in areas
where Japanese firms were formerly quite strong and rapidly converging on US levels of
inventive output.
Microeconometric analysis suggests that this decline in relative performance cannot
be entirely ascribed to a relative reduction in R&D inputs, though such a relative reduction
has occurred. We find evidence consistent with the view that, outside the electronics sector,
R&D productivity growth has stagnated in the 1990s – perhaps even declined. This view is
strongly reflected in the US patent data, and the results are robust to an adjustment for the
quality of individual US patents.
Anecdotal evidence from R&D manager interviews is strongly consistent with a
slowdown or decline in Japanese R&D productivity relative to the firms’ US competitors and
relative to their own experience in the 1980s. These interviews suggest that the structural
shift in Japanese R&D over the course of the late 1980s and 1990s may have contributed to
the observed stagnation in R&D productivity growth. Japanese firms are not well equipped
for more fundamental research due to the educational backgrounds of their engineers, the
weakness of Japanese academic science, and the lack of a robust domestic venture capital
industry.
Firms are taking steps to increase the efficiency of their R&D operations, and one key
strategy adopted to varying degrees by all interviewed firms includes an increased emphasis
on tapping US technology networks. In the absence of strong domestic institutions, Japanese
firms are creating ties to US universities, start-ups, and established firms. Our
microeconometric assessment of the impact of one of the steps taken to accomplish this
strategic goal finds that the formation of technology-sharing alliances with US firms have a
positive impact on knowledge flow from US to Japanese firms. Finally, we show that
increased international knowledge flows are strongly correlated with higher levels of
innovative performance, at least in the firm cross-section. Therefore, Japanese firms that
have most successfully tapped into US technology networks enjoy a relatively higher level of
R&D productivity.
25

In terms of public policy implications, as we have already noted, the government has
taken a number of steps to improve Japan’s academic science base and enhance the business
environment for start-ups. However, these policy changes are unlikely to have substantial
positive impact until Japan’s overall macroeconomic situation improves. While the
downturn in innovative activity is not to blame for Japan’s poor macroeconomic
performance, continued stagnation of the Japanese economy could have long-lasting negative
effects on the research operations of Japanese firms. Thus, the most effective step the
government could take in the short run to enhance Japan’s innovative performance is to
revive economic growth. A discussion of macroeconomic policies to accomplish that is
beyond the scope of this paper, but we strongly concur with those who advocate the adoption
of a positive inflation target by the Bank of Japan, tax cuts to stimulate growth, and a careful
recapitalization of the banking system.
Like most empirical research projects, this essay leaves us with a number of
unanswered (or only partially answered) questions which we hope to pursue in further work.
First, do our tentative explanations for the observed decline in the growth of Japanese R&D
productivity stand up to more rigorous empirical testing? Our current hypothesis suggests a
negative relationship between a shift to more basic research and research productivity that
could be explored more thoroughly. Second, have the other dimensions of R&D reform
mentioned in the third section been enhancing research productivity? Our next-round
examination of R&D restructuring by Japanese firms will consider all aspects of the process.
We believe that this more comprehensive study could shed useful light on the extent of the
restructuring, the degree to which different components have had positive effects on research
productivity, and the role that public policy could play in enhancing the evolution of the
Japanese innovation system.
Our interviews strongly suggested that the move toward partial outsourcing of R&D
is a conscious imitation of a shift that is already well underway in the United States. A
Japanese perspective on the global process of vertical disintegration of R&D may offer
useful lessons on this process for the rest of the world.

26

References
Arison, Thomas, C. Fred Bergsten, Edward Graham, and Martha C. Harris, editors, 1992,
Japan’s Growing Technological Capability: Implications for the U.S. Economy, Washington
DC: National Academy Press.
Belderbos, Rene, 2001, “Overseas Innovations by Japanese Firms: An Analysis of Patent
and Subsidiary Data,” Research Policy 30: 313-332.
Branstetter, Lee and Mariko Sakakibara, 1998, “Japanese Research Consortia: A
Microeconometric Analysis of Industrial Policy,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2):
207-33.
Branstetter, Lee, 2000, “Is Foreign Direct Investment a Channel of Knowledge Spillovers?
Evidence from Japan’s FDI in the United States,” NBER Working Paper 8015.
Branstetter, Lee, 2001a, “Are Knowledge Spillovers International or Intranational in Scope?
Microeconometric Evidence from the U.S. and Japan,” Journal of International Economics,
53: 53-79.
Branstetter, Lee, 2001b, “The Roles of FDI and Interfirm R&D Alliances in International
Knowledge Spillovers: Evidence from Japanese Multinational Firms,” working paper,
Columbia Business School.
Branstetter, Lee, 2001c, “Measuring the Link between Academic Science and Industrial
Innovation – The Case of California’s Research Universities,” working paper, Columbia
Business School.
Clark, Kim and Takahiro Fujimoto, 1991, Product Development Performance, Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.

27

Cockburn, Iain and Rebecca Henderson, 2000, “Publicly Funded Science and the
Productivity of the Pharmaceutical Industry,” in Adam Jaffe, Joshua Lerner, and Scott Stern,
editors, Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 1, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cohen, Wesley, Akira Goto, Akiya Nagata, Richard Nelson, and John Walsh, 1998, “R&D
Spillovers, Patents, and the Incentives to Innovate in Japan and the United States,” working
paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
Feenstra, Robert, 1996, “Trade and Uneven Growth,” Journal of Development Economics,
49: 229-56.
Finan, William and Carl Williams, 1992, “Implications of Japan’s ‘Soft Crisis’: Forcing
New Directions for Japanese Electronics Companies,” in Arison, Thomas, C. Fred Bergsten,
Edward Graham, and Martha C. Harris, editors, 1992, Japan’s Growing Technological
Capability: Implications for the U.S. Economy, Washington DC: National Academy Press.

Gijutsu Yōran 2000 [Indicators of Science and Technology], published by the Science and
Technology Policy Bureau of the Science and Technology Agency, Government of Japan.
Goto, Akira, 1993, Nihon no Gijutsu Kakushin to Sangyō Soshiki, Tokyo: University of
Tokyo Press.
Goto, Akira, 1997, “Introduction,” in Innovation in Japan, Akira Goto and Hiroyuki Odagiri,
editors, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Goto, Akira and Akiya Nagata, 1997, Technological Opportunities and Appropriating the
Returns from Innovation: Comparison of Survey Results from Japan and the U.S., NISTEP
Report 48.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, 1991, Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

28

Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn Hall, and Zvi Griliches, 1984, “Econometric Models for Count
Data with an Application to the Patents – R&D Relationship,” Econometrica, 52(4): 909-38.
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2001, “The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights, and Methodological Tools” NBER Working Paper 8498.
Henderson, Rebecca, Adam Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1998, “Universities as a Source
of Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1): 119-27.
Hicks, Diana, Tony Breitzman, Dominic Olivastro, and Kimberly Hamilton, 2001, “The
Changing Composition of Innovative Activity in the U.S. – A Portrait Based on Patent
Analysis,” Research Policy, 30: 681-703.
Jaffe, Adam, 1986, “Technological Opportunity and the Spillover of R&D: Evidence from
Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76: 984-1001.
Jaffe, Adam and Manuel Trajtenberg, 1996, “Flows of Knowledge Spillovers from
Universities and Federal Labs: Modeling the Flow of Patent Citations Across Institutional
and Geographic Boundaries,” NBER Working Paper 5712.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, 1999, “What is Behind the Recent Surge in Patenting?”
Research Policy, 28: 1-22.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, 2000, “Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to
Innovation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 31: 674-92.
Mansfield, Edwin, 1988, “Industrial R&D in Japan and the United States: A Comparative
Study,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 78(2): 223-28.
National Academy of Engineering, 1987, Strengthening U.S. Engineering through
International Cooperation: Some Recommendations for Action, Washington DC: National
Academy Press.
29

Narin, Fran, Kimberly Hamilton, and Dominic Olivastro, 1997, “The Increasing Linkage
Between U.S. Technology and Public Science,” Research Policy, 26: 317-330.
Normile, Dennis, 2002, “Japan Asks Why More Yen Don’t Yield More Products,” Science
296: 1230-1231.
Odagiri, Hiroyuki and Hideto Yasuda, 1997, “Overseas R&D Activities of Japanese Firms,”
in Innovation in Japan, Akira Goto and Hiroyuki Odagiri, editors, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Okimoto, Daniel and Gary Saxonhouse, 1987, “Technology and the Future of the Economy”
in The Political Economy of Japan, Volume 1: The Domestic Transformation, Kozo
Yamamura and Yasukichi Yasuba, editors, Stanford CA: Stanford University Press.
Posen, Adam, 1998, Restoring Japan’s Economic Growth, Washington DC: Institute for
International Economics.
Posen, Adam, 2001, “Unchanging Innovation and Changing Economic Performance in
Japan,” in Richard Nelson, Benn Steil, and David Victor, editors, Technological Innovation
and National Economic Performance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rosenberg, Nathan and Richard Nelson, 1994, “American Universities and Technical
Advance in Industry,” Research Policy, 23: 323-48.
Rosenbloom, Richard and William Spencer, 1996, Engines of Innovation: U.S. Industrial
Research at the End of an Era, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Sakakibara, Mariko and Lee Branstetter, 2001, “Do Stronger Patents Induce More
Innovation? Evidence from the Japanese 1988 Patent Reforms,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 32(1): 77-100.

30

Wakasugi, Ryuhei and Fumihiko Koyata, 1997, “R&D, Firm Size and Innovation Outputs:
Are Japanese Firms Efficient in Product Development?” the Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 14: 383-92.

31

Figure 1
Private Sector R&D Spending in the U.S. and Japan, 1985-1999
30.0

25.0

20.0

United States

15.0

Japan
10.0

5.0

0.0
1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

The y axis is real private sector R&D spending converted into trillions of yen using OECD
purchasing power parity exchange rates for each year.
Source: Gijutsu Yōran 2000.

32

Figure 2
Counts of patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 1980-1999
70

60

50

United States
40

30

Japan
20

Germany

10

0
1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986 1987 1988 1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994 1995 1996 1997

1998

1999

(Units of the vertical axis are thousands of patents)
The Figure shows a dramatic jump in patenting after 1997. This may relate to a change in
US patent law regarding the length of patents, as pointed out by Hicks et al (2001). The law
included a clause allowing patents filed before 8 June 1995 to receive certain procedural
advantages. The expiration of these patents could be set either 17 years from the grant date
or 20 years from the priority date, whichever was later. Patent attorneys evidently
encouraged their clients to speed up their patent filing in order to meet this deadline.
Because of the delays typical in the patent review procedure, an increase in patents granted
would not be obvious in the data until two to three years after the deadline.
Source: Authors' calculations based on the NBER Patent Database.

33

Figure 3
Counts of IT patents granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 1980-1999
18

16

14

12

United States

10
Japan
8

6

4

2

Germany

0
1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986 1987 1988 1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994 1995 1996 1997

1998

1999

(Units of vertical axis are thousands of patents)
See note to Figure 2.
Source: Authors' calculations based on the NBER Patent Database.

34

Figure 4

Patent Applications by Nationality of Inventor, 1987-1997
1,800

1,600

United States

1,400

1,200
European
Union

1,000

800

600

400

Japan

200

0
1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

(Units of the vertical axis are thousands of patents)
This measures patent applications generated by inventors in the indicated country and
submitted world-wide.
Source: Gijutsu Yōran 2000.

35

Table 1
Japanese R&D Productivity Trends
Fixed effects negative binomial regression models Obs=2,726
Variable
Patent counts
Citation-adjusted patent
counts
new_lrnd
0.294
0.385
(0.0206)
(0.0190)
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
_cons
Log Likelihood

-0.0501
(0.100)
-0.0776
(0.0940)
0.0751
(0.0907)
0.131
(0.0894)
0.208
(0.0873)
0.261
(0.0863)
0.403
0.0844
0.553
(0.0830)
0.541
(0.0832)
0.552
(0.0830)
0.486
(0.0836)
0.513
(0.0840)
0.559
(0.0827)
0.609
(0.0827)
0.571
(0.0841)
0.463
(0.0849)
-0.515
(0.115)
-8,173.9

-0.0706
(0.109)
-0.0714
(0.101)
0.146
(0.0972)
0.167
(0.0962)
0.259
(0.0936)
0.328
(0.0923)
0.431
(0.0907)
0.586
(0.0891)
0.552
(0.0894)
0.535
(0.0890)
0.473
(0.0896)
0.516
(0.0889)
0.552
(0.0889)
0.396
(0.0908)
0.0720
(0.0958)
-0.193
(0.0988)
-1.32
(0.109)
-10,179.2

36

Figure 5
Trends in Japanese R&D Productivity, 1982-1997
Regression Results from Table 1, Column 1
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4
82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Regression results from Table 1, Column 1
Year dummy coefficients from Table 1, with associated 95% confidence bounds.

37

Figure 6
Trends in Japanese R&D Productivity
Regression results from Table 1, Column 2

1

Results after 1995 may reflect the truncation
of our citation measures

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6
82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Regression results from Table 1, Column 2
Year dummy coefficients from Table 1, with associated 95% confidence bounds.
The sharp decline in measured productivity in the last years of our sample is an artifact of
our data. Detailed studies of patent citations show that it takes several years for citations to a
particular invention to peak (see Jaffe and Trajtenberg 1996). A patent applied for in 1996
would not be granted, on average, until 1997 or 1998 – possibly even later. Thus, we picking
up less than four years’ of citations. For this reason, coefficients on year dummies for years
later than 1995 should be viewed with caution. Nevertheless, we see this graph as providing
confirming evidence of a stagnation of R&D productivity growth in the 1990s.

38

Figure 7

Divergence in R&D Productivity Growth after 1989
Electronics Firms vs. Other Manufacturing Industries
1.2

Electronics Firms
1

0.8

0.6

0.4

Firms in Other Manufacturing Industries

0.2

0

-0.2
82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

The measured decline after 1995 could reflect, in part, the “truncation” problem in our data
referred to in Figure 6. Not all patents applied for in 1996 and 1997 were granted by 1999.
Source: Authors' regression results.

39

Table 2
Japanese R&D Productivity Trends
Fixed effects negative binomial regression models
using Japanese patent application data
Variable
Patent counts
Patent counts
Patent counts
(electronics)
(other manufacturing)
New_lrnd
0.119
0.0470
0.186
(0.0147)
(0.0236)
(0.0212)
82
0.140
0.216
0.109
(0.0677)
(0.137)
(0.0748)
83
0.201
0.214
0.210
(0.0615)
(0.124)
(0.0682)
84
0.264
0.230
0.288
(0.0605)
(0.122)
(0.0669)
85
0.349
0.316
0.362
0.0597
(0.121)
(0.0659)
86
0.455
0.508
0.424
(0.0584)
(0.117)
(0.0648)
87
0.501
0.552
0.466
(0.0581)
(0.116)
(0.0646)
88
0.533
0.638
0.479
(0.0573)
(0.112)
(0.0644)
89
0.557
0.694
0.486
(0.0573)
(0.112)
(0.0645)
90
0.511
0.638
0.441
(0.0579)
(0.113)
(0.0651)
91
0.489
0.642
0.404
(0.0583)
(0.114)
(0.0659)
92
0.675
0.847
0.576
(0.0571)
(0.112)
(0.0645)
93
0.651
0.836
0.555
(0.0577)
(0.113)
(0.0648)
94
0.698
0.871
0.622
(0.0573)
(0.113)
(0.0641)
95
0.679
0.858
0.600
(0.0578)
(0.114)
(0.0645)
96
0.720
0.937
0.621
(0.0587)
(0.116)
(0.0655)
97
0.706
0.895
0.625
(0.0587)
(0.118)
(0.0652)
_cons
0.763
0.671
0.734
(0.0771)
(0.130)
(0.104)
Log Likelihood
-15,768.6
-5,772.1
-9,941.7
Observations
2,988
1,071
1,917

40

Table 3
Measuring Spillovers to Japanese Firms
Negative Binomial Regressions
Dependent Variable: Citations
Obs=1,857
Fixed Effects
log R&D

-.020
(.014)

log U.S. patents

.847
(.016)

Proximity

.579
(.085)

U.S. alliances

.004
(.002)

Time Dummies

Yes

Log Likelihood

-6440.5

Source: Branstetter (2001b)

41

Table 4
Do Increased Knowledge Flows Raise Innovative Productivity?
Negative Binomial Regressions
Dependent Variable: Citation-adjusted patent output
Fixed Effects(1) Random Effects(2)
log R&D

.031
(.021)

.023
(.027)

log real sales

.011
(.034)

.101
(.036)

log U.S. patents

.956
(.016)

.822
(.021)

log citations to U.S.
Patents

.0001
(.00002)

Dummy for citation
Greater than median

.899
(.096)

Time Dummies

Yes

Yes

Log Likelihood

-6,119.5

-7,884.8

Observations

2,066

2,160

42

Appendix: Data Sources
This data appendix briefly describes our data sources.
Japanese Patent Data. Japanese patent data are from PATOLIS, an on-line patent
database maintained by the Japan Patent Information Organization (JAPIO). The data are
counts of patent applications by firm and year.
US Patent Data. The data on patents taken out in the United States by Japanese firms
are from the NBER Patent Database, described in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001). The
data include counts of patent grants by firm and year. In work the patents are dated by the
year of application rather than the year of grant. We also include a firm-specific measure of
patent output that is quality-adjusted by counting subsequent citations received by these
patents, as described in the text.
R&D data. The overall R&D spending of individual Japanese firms is taken from
several consecutive issues of the Kaisha Shiki Hō, published by Toyo Keizai, and the Nikkei
Kaisha Jōhō, published by the Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha. All R&D expenditure data is
deflated by the R&D price index constructed by the Japanese Science and Technology
Agency and reported in Gijutsu Yōran.
Other firm variables. Data on firm sales and industry affiliation and are taken from
various issues of the Japan Development Bank Corporate Finance Database. Data on R&D
alliances with US firms are taken from the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) joint ventures
database.
Sample Selection Issues. Firms were selected on the basis of availability of a
sufficient quantity of R&D data and patent data in both Japan and the United States. We
further required that there be no major jumps in such series as capital stock over the course
of the 1980s, thereby screening out firms involved in major domestic mergers or acquisitions.
This means handful of large R&D performers are omitted due to data irregularities. The
screening tends to over-sample R&D intensive firms relative to the population as a whole. A
complete list of the firms in our sample and additional information on the sample are
available from the authors on request.

43

