NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RESPONSE OF THE INFORMAL
SECTOR TO TRADE LIBERALIZATION
Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Nina Pavcnik
Working Paper 9443
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9443
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

We wish to thank Hector Mejia at DANE and Andreas Blom at the World Bank for providing us with the data.
We are also grateful to Cristina Gamboa, Adriana Kugler, and Ximena Pena for answering our numerous
questions about the data and the Colombian reforms, and Steve Bronars, Eric Edmonds, Sebastian Edwards, Doug
Marcouiller, Dani Rodrik and participants at the NBER Inter-American Seminar on Economics in Monterrey,
Mexico for useful comments and suggestions. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
National Science Foundation Grant SES #0213459. Pavcnik also acknowledges the support from the Rockefeller
Social Science Faculty Grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including . notice, is given to the
source.

The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade Liberalization
Pinelopi K. Goldberg and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 9443
January 2003
JEL No. F10, F13, J31
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the relationship between trade liberalization and informality. It is often claimed that
increased foreign competition in developing countries leads to an expansion of the informal sector,
defined as the sector that does not comply with labor market legislation. Using data from two countries
that experienced large trade barrier reductions in the 1980's and 1990's, Brazil and Colombia, we
examine the response of the informal sector to liberalization. In Brazil, we find no evidence of a
relationship between trade policy and informality. In Colombia, we do find evidence of such a
relationship, but only for the period preceding a major labor market reform that increased the flexibility
of the Colombian labor market. These results point to the significance of labor market institutions in
assessing the effects of trade policy on the labor market.

Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu

Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Center
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu

1. Introduction
During the 1980’s and early 1990’s many Latin American economies drastically cut tariff
and non-tariff barriers, and opened their markets to foreign competition. While this massive trade
liberalization was celebrated as contributing to economic growth and efficiency, many have
expressed fears that it may have widened the gap between the poor and rich in these countries.
This paper focuses on one particular concern: that trade reforms led to a reallocation from the
formal to informal sector (Stallings and Peres (2000)). The informal sector is conventionally
defined as the sector of the economy that does not comply with labor market legislation and does
not provide worker benefits. It is primarily comprised of small firms. A broader definition
includes temporary, or part-time workers employed in formal establishments. The size of the
informal sector is significant in many developing countries; in Colombia, for example, it is
estimated that 50-60% of the labor force are employed in the informal sector. Because this
sector is often identified with worse working conditions and lower job “quality”, a reallocation
of employment from the formal to informal sector is considered undesirable. Naturally, such
claims are controversial. To the extent that employment in the informal sector is voluntary and
mainly sought by those placing a high value on flexible hours, informality is not necessarily an
inferior option.
We believe that a study of the impact of trade reforms on the informal sector is
worthwhile for two reasons. First, despite the prominence of this question in public debate, there
is hardly any empirical evidence linking increases in informal employment to trade policy – the
only exception being a study by Currie and Harrison (1997) on Morocco that finds that firms
started hiring more temporary workers after the completion of a comprehensive trade
liberalization program. Second, we view this study as part of a larger effort to understand how
the labor market in developing countries adjusts to trade reforms. In our earlier work on
Colombia (see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2001), and Attanasio, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2002)), we
document that there is little labor reallocation across industries in the aftermath of trade reforms;
in contrast, there is evidence that industry wages respond to trade liberalization in a manner
consistent with the predictions of the specific factors model, or, alternatively, the loss of industry
rents: wage premia decline in those industries in which the tariff cuts were largest. The stability
of industry employment shares is surprising. While such stability may be indicative of mobility
costs and other labor market rigidities, an alternative explanation that we put forward in our

2

previous work is that the informal sector provides an additional margin of adjustment, possibly
within industries. In this paper we attempt a more rigorous investigation of this hypothesis.
The usual argument that trade liberalization leads to a rise in informality goes something
like follows: Trade reforms expose formal establishments to increased foreign competition. In
response, such establishments try to reduce labor costs by cutting worker benefits, replacing
permanent workers with part-time labor, or subcontracting with establishments in the informal
sector, including home-based and self-employed microenterpreneurs. Alternatively, firms in the
formal sector may respond to the intensified competition from abroad by laying off workers who
subsequently seek employment in the informal sector.
From a theoretical point of view, the problem with this argument is that it immediately
raises the question of why profit-maximizing firms had not switched to informal employment
prior to the reforms in order to reduce costs. We start our analysis by presenting a theoretical
model that can potentially be used to justify the view expressed above. Our theoretical discussion
is based on the efficiency wage models considered in Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) and Bulow and
Summers (1986), and the dynamic extension of these models discussed in Saint-Paul (1996). We
use this framework to conduct comparative statics, and assess how permanent trade liberalization
would alter the optimal share of informal employment. Consistent with the claims presented
above, the model implies that trade liberalization should lead to an increase of informal
employment.
We should emphasize that we do not view the theoretical model we present as the only
possible explanation for the existence of an informal sector. One can certainly write down
alternative models (for example one in which wage differences across the formal and informal
sectors represent compensating differentials), which would have different, possibly even
opposite implications for the impact of trade reforms on informality. But such models would not
represent the thinking of those who associate free trade with a larger informal sector. The
purpose of our model is simply to capture this thinking, and present it in a logically consistent
way. Put differently, the point of the theoretical analysis is to demonstrate that the view that trade
reforms can lead to increased informality can be theoretically justified. Whether or not it is
relevant in practice is however an empirical question, and to answer this question is the goal of
the empirical part of our paper. In the same spirit, we should also emphasize that our empirical
analysis does not aim at “testing” the theory against alternative hypotheses. The objective is

3

rather to estimate the effects of trade liberalization on informality in order to assess whether the
fears expressed above are justified.
Our empirical analysis focuses on Colombia and Brazil, two countries that experienced
major trade liberalization episodes in the last two decades. Both countries are characterized by
the presence of a large informal sector. Moreover, the proportion of workers employed in the
informal sector has increased over time, peaking in the late 1990’s. It is this trend that has led
some to believe that intensified foreign competition could be contributing to the rise in
informality.
Inferences based on this macroeconomic trend are however misleading for several
reasons. First, the trend may be due to the expansion of the non-tradable service sector, which is
characterized by a larger share of informality. Second, it could partially reflect firms’ response to
the recession of the late 1990’s. More importantly, both Colombia and Brazil experienced a
series of other reforms during the late 1980s and 1990’s; among them, the most notable ones
concern changes in labor market regulation. In Colombia, these reforms introduced more
flexibility in labor markets, as they decreased firms’ hiring and firing costs, and very likely
affected firms’ incentives to employ informal workers. In a series of papers, Kugler shows that
the labor market deregulation in Colombia led to an increase in formal employment. These
results raise the concern that the partial overlap of labor market with trade reforms may prevent
us from finding any effects of trade liberalization on informality, since the two sets of reforms
are presumed to have opposite effects on the share of the informal sector (labor market reforms
supposedly reduce informality, while trade reforms increase it).
Fortunately, the nature of the trade reforms during this period is such that the effect of
trade policy changes on informality can be identified off the cross-sectional variation of trade
policy changes in our data. Trade liberalization in Colombia and Brazil did not just reduce
protection rates, but also changed the structure of protection in these countries. One of the great
advantages of focusing on Colombia and Brazil is that, because these countries were not
members of the GATT or WTO prior to trade liberalization, they used tariff rates as the main
trade policy instrument. Tariff rates are both well measured (relative to the non-tariff barriers
traditionally employed in more developed economies), and comparable across time. The trade
reforms affected tariff rates differentially in different sectors. Sectors that had traditionally
received high protection rates, such as textiles and apparel, experienced the largest tariff cuts. In

4

contrast, sectors with relatively low rates of protection experienced smaller tariff cuts. It is this
differential rate of tariff declines across industries that we exploit in order to identify the effects
of tariff changes on informality. A further advantage of focusing on countries that were not WTO
members prior to the trade reforms, is that the usual concerns about the endogeneity of trade
policy changes and political economy of protection are less pronounced here than in other
studies. This is because the government’s objective when reducing tariff rates across industries is
to achieve the uniform tariff rate negotiated with the WTO (in the case of Colombia, for
example, this rate is 13%). Policy makers are accordingly less concerned with catering to special
lobby interests; as we demonstrate in our earlier work (see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2001) for
Colombia, and Pavcnik, Blom, Goldberg, and Schady (2002) for Brazil), tariff declines in each
industry are proportional to the industry’s pre-reform tariff level in 1983.
The basic premise underlying our analysis is that mobility across the formal and informal
sectors within an industry is greater than mobility across industries. The descriptive statistics we
present in the empirical section seem to support this premise; during the 1986-1998 period,
approximately 88% of the change in the aggregate share of informal workers in Colombia (100%
in Brazil) is accounted for by “within”, as opposed to “between-industry” shifts. The results of
our earlier work concerning the stability of industry employment shares are also consistent with
this view. To identify the effects of tariff changes in each country on the informal sector we
relate changes in the likelihood of informal employment to tariff changes in each sector; thus, we
only rely on within industry variation to identify the effects of the trade reforms on informality.
This approach presumes that, while the effect of trade liberalization varied across industries, the
effect of labor market reforms did not vary in a systematic way across industries. While this is
certainly open to debate, we are not aware of any arguments or evidence that the effects of labor
market reforms on informality varied across industries, or, more importantly, that they were
systematically related to tariff cuts in each industry.
To preview our results, we find little evidence that the informal sector was impacted by
trade policy in any significant manner. For the case of Brazil, our attempts to link trade reforms
to increases in informal employment have simply failed. In Colombia, we find some weak
evidence that in the early years of our sample, prior to the labor reform, trade liberalization
contributed to an increase in informal employment in those sectors where the tariff cuts were
largest. However, the effects are small. For the period following the labor reform, we again find

5

no link between trade and informality. These results suggest that trade policy is likely a second
order concern compared to labor market legislation. Moreover, the trade policy effects are
dependent on the labor market institutions. When labor market rigidities are significant, as is the
case with Colombia in the early years, firms are more likely to respond to intensified competition
by reducing formal employment.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the theoretical
model. In section 3 we provide some background on Colombia and Brazil, and the trade reforms
implemented in these two countries, and discuss our data sources. In section 4 we discuss the
labor market institutions in the two countries and emphasize the differences that may account for
the differences in our empirical results. Section 5 contains some descriptive results on
informality, quality of work, and changes in informality over time and across and within
industries. Section 6 discusses our empirical results, and section 7 concludes.
2. Trade and Informality: Theory
The first question our analysis needs to address is why firms keen to maximize profits had not
made wider use of informal workers prior to the reforms, if such workers were indeed associated
with lower labor costs. Saint-Paul’s (1994) dynamic efficiency wage model provides a possible
justification for the simultaneous use of formal and informal workers, and is – in our view – best
suited to describe and formalize the thinking underlying the argument that trade liberalization
will lead to an increase in informality.
The basic structure of the models is as follows. Consider an infinite-horizon firm that
faces uncertain demand. In each period, the firms’ revenue Rt is given by:
Rt = pt f (lt )
where pt denotes the firm’s price in period t , f is a concave, increasing production function,
and lt denotes the level of employment. The price pt is a random variable, with a cumulative
density function G ( p ), and G ′ = g . For expositional purposes we assume that the pt ’s are i.i.d.

This assumption can however easily be relaxed to accommodate different degrees of persistence
in the price shocks. Furthermore, we assume that the price shock in period t + 1 is known at the
end of period t , so that lt +1 is known one period ahead. This assumption is again made to
facilitate exposition, but the results do not critically depend on it.

6

The assumptions that are central to the analysis are the following: (1) The firm faces
demand uncertainty. (2) The firm can hire workers from two pools: a pool of formal, and a pool
of informal workers; informal workers are defined broadly to encompass both part-time or
temporary workers employed within a firm, and small firms and individuals who may
subcontract with a formal firm. (3) The two pools differ in two important aspects: First, the
employment of formal workers is regulated by labor market legislation; such workers receive
benefits, cannot be dismissed unless the firm has accumulated sufficient evidence, and receive
severance pay when dismissed. This implies that the adjustment cost associated with the
employment of such workers is higher compared to the employment of informal workers, which
is not governed by any legislation. Second, the effort of informal workers can be monitored
perfectly, at some constant unit cost m . In contrast, the activities of formal workers cannot be
monitored. Note that this difference does not arise from any differences in the characteristics of
formal and informal workers (though such differences, e.g., differences in skill, experience, etc.,
can be built-in into extensions of the model); formal and informal workers are assumed to be
equivalent in every respect. A potential justification for the difference in monitoring costs across
formal and informal workers is the very existence of labor market regulation. Because firms
need to accumulate extensive evidence to justify firing formal workers, the cost of effectively
monitoring such workers (to meet the standard dictated by unjust dismissal legislation) is
substantial, so that firms may prefer to use alternative strategies to motivate such workers.
The model can be solved for the optimal shares of formal and informal workers. It can be
shown that firms will generally find it optimal to simultaneously employ formal and informal
workers. The main steps in the solution are the following:
a. Wages and Labor Cost

Consider the wage determination process first. Since informal workers can be monitored
perfectly, they will be paid their reservation wage, wI = R , and the total cost of employing lt I
informal workers in period t will be:
c ( l t I ) = ( w I + m )l t I
Next, consider the wages in the formal sector. Given that formal workers are not monitored, they
will have incentives to shirk. To prevent shirking, the firm offers efficiency wages. Specifically,

7

the optimal wage for formal workers is determined by the familiar no-shirking condition that
equalizes the expected utility associated with shirking, with the expected utility associated with
no-shirking. It is easy to show that this condition ultimately leads to the following wage equation
for formal workers:
wF = a +

1 1
1
b
=R− +
1 − φ t −1
x δx 1 − φ t − 1

where δ stands for the discount rate; x denotes the probability of catching (and firing) a shirker;

φt is the probability that a worker loses her job for reasons other than shirking (with a uniform
firing rule φt = max{

b=

F

lt − lt +1
lt

F

F

,0} ); a and b are constants, equal to a = R −

1
, and
x

1
respectively. The above wage equation implies that the cost of employing lt F formal
δx

workers in period t is:
c(lt F ) = alt F + b max(lt F , lt −1 F )
There are two features of the results so far that are worth noting. First, wages in the formal sector
are higher than in the informal sector, even though workers have the same qualifications. The
term

1 1 1
(
− 1) > 0 represents the rent to formality. The reason for this rent is that – in the
x δ 1 − φt −1

absence of monitoring – firms need to penalize formal workers who shirk. Since the penalty from
being caught shirking is losing one’s job, the existence of efficiency wages in the formal sector
implies that workers who are fired, are made strictly worse off.
Second, note that this setup implies a kink in the labor cost function at lt +1 F = lt F . The
cost of hiring an additional worker ( lt +1 F > lt F ) is higher than the cost of not hiring. In particular,
the marginal cost of labor is equal to a + b , if lt +1 F > lt F , and a if lt +1 F ≤ lt F . Put in a different
way, efficiency wages introduce an adjustment cost, because the expectation of being fired raises
the wage that needs to be paid to prevent workers from shirking.
b. The Firm’s Optimization Problem

At the end of period t the firm decides how many formal and informal workers to employ in
t + 1 . The value of the firm is:

8

V (lt F , pt +1 ) = max
pt +1 f (lt +1 F + lt +1 I ) − c(lt +1 F , lt F ) − ( wI + m )lt +1 I + δEtV (lt +1 F , pt +2 )
I
F
lt +1 ,lt +1

Note that since the informal labor force lt I does not have an influence on the value of the firm at
the beginning of period t + 1 , the only state variable is lt F . The first order conditions
characterizing the optimal solution are given by:
FOC with respect to lt +1 I :
pt +1 f ′(lt +1 F + lt +1 I ) = wI + m

if pt +1 f ′(lt +1 F ) > wI + m ,

(1)

lt +1 I = 0

if pt +1 f ′(lt +1 F ) < wI + m

(2)

FOC with respect to lt +1 F :
F

Define k (lt +1 ) =

E t ∂V ( l t + 1 F , p t + 2 )
∂l t + 1 F

. Given the kink in the labor cost function for formal

workers, one needs to distinguish between three cases in deriving the FOC:
Case 1: pt +1 f ′(lt F + lt +1 I ) + δk (lt F ) > a + b, so that lt +1 F > lt F
In this case the FOC is given by:
pt +1 f ′(lt +1 F + lt +1 I ) + δk (lt +1 F ) = a + b

(3)

Case 2: pt +1 f ′(lt F + lt +1 I ) + δk (lt F ) < a so that lt +1 F < lt F
In this case the FOC is given by:
pt +1 f ′(lt +1 F + lt +1 I ) + δk (lt +1 F ) = a

(4)

Case 3: a ≤ pt +1 f ′(lt F + lt +1 I ) + δk (lt F ) ≤ a + b. In this case lt +1 F = lt F

(5)

c. The Optimal Shares of Formal and Informal Workers
~
Given this structure, it can be shown that there exists a number l such that the firm will employ
~
at most l formal workers. This number is determined by the equation
~
δk ( l ) = a + b − w I − m ,

9

or equivalently1:
~ p
a + b − wI − m = −δf ′( l ) ∫ G ( p )dp

(6)

p

~
where p = ( wI + m) / f ′(l ) , and p = ( wI + m − b) / f ′(l ) . The value l has the following
~
interpretation: If the firm has a number of formal workers that is less than l , it will not start
~
hiring informal workers until the employment of formal workers reaches the value l .2 When

the firm has no informal workers, it operates as a purely formal firm. Vice versa, if the firm
operates in a dual zone, employing both formal and informal workers, it will not start firing
~
formal workers until all informal workers are fired first (that is if lt +1 F < l , then lt +1 I = 0 ).
Whether or not the firm employs informal workers, depends on the value of the shock pt +1 . If
the shock is large enough, the firm will find it profitable to expand into the informal sector. Note
that whenever the firm employs informal workers, the marginal product of labor is, according to
(1), pinned down by the marginal cost of these workers ( w I + m ) . Hence, it does not depend
on the current value of the shock pt +1 . This implies that a change in pt +1 is met with a change
in labor force, using informal workers as the adjustment margin, so that the marginal product
remains constant and equal to w I + m . The same logic implies that the informal workers are
the first to go, when the firm is hit with a negative shock. Formal workers are relatively
sheltered from negative shocks; only when shocks are negative enough to prompt the firm to fire
all its informal workers will formal workers be affected.
d. The Effects of Trade Liberalization

We are now ready to analyze the effects of a reduction in trade barriers on the size of the
informal sector. The first question that arises is how such a reduction enters the model. One
possible approach is to model trade liberalization as a negative price shock. As noted above, a
straightforward implication of the dynamic efficiency wage model is that the firm would react by
laying off its informal workers first, while keeping its formal work force intact. After all, this
1

The derivation is quite involved and can be found in the Appendix of Chapter 4 in Saint-Paul (1996).

2

There is an implicit assumption underlying the following analysis that the unit cost of informal labor ( w I + m )

exceeds the minimum efficiency wage ( a + b ). Otherwise the firm would employ only informal workers.

10

flexibility to let the informal workers go when times are bad is central to explaining the existence
of the informal sector. Only if the shock is sufficiently negative, will formal workers be
affected. Empirically, we would then expect the share of formal workers in total employment to
increase as the firm adjusts to the negative shock.
This interpretation of trade liberalization is however unsatisfactory for two reasons. First,
the derived implication, namely that trade reforms lead to an increase in the share of employed
formal workers, is exactly the opposite of what opponents of such reforms fear. But the sole
purpose of our model was to provide a justification for their claims based on economic theory.
This goal is clearly not achieved if the analysis presented above yields the opposite conclusion.
Second, the interpretation of the trade reforms in Brazil and Colombia as a one-time negative
demand shock is inconsistent with the nature of these reforms. The trade reforms were
implemented as part of these countries’ entry into the WTO; therefore they were permanent. This
suggests that a more appropriate interpretation of trade liberalization is as a process that leads to
an increase in the cumulative distribution function G ( p ) .
Specifically, we assume that the trade reforms lead to a new distribution function G * ( p ) ,
such that G * ( p ) > G ( p ) , for all p . This implies that the expected value of p is lower using

G * ( p ) than G ( p ) : EG* ( p ) < EG ( p ) . We believe that this modeling approach accurately reflects
the effects of a permanent decrease of trade barriers, as such a decrease leads to price declines in
the affected industries. While prices remain volatile, they are expected to be on average lower
once the trade reforms are implemented.
The effect of trade liberalization on the size of the informal sector can be derived by
differentiating the right hand side of (6) with respect to G ( p ) . Remember that

p = ( wI + m) / f ′(l ) , and p = ( wI + m − b) / f ′(l ) . Differentiation of (6) yields:

( p)
dl
= −δ b /{δ f ′′(l ) ∫ G ( p )dp − δ ( wI + m ) f ′′(l ) / f ′(l )[G ( p ) − G ( p ) + bG ( p )]}
dG ( p )
( p)

( p)

= −δ bf ′(l ) / f ′′(l ){δ f ′(l ) ∫ G ( p )dp − δ ( wI + m )[G ( p ) − G ( p ) + bG ( p )]}
( p)

11

(7)

Taking into account that b > 0 , f ′(l ) > 0, f ′′(l ) < 0, and that from (6)
~

( p)

δf ′( l ) ∫ G ( p )dp = −(a + b − wI − m ) , so that the term in the curly brackets is negative, it is easy
( p)

to show that

~
~
dl
< 0 , so that an increase in G will be matched by a lower value of l . This is
dG ( p )

precisely the effect described in the verbal argument in the introduction: trade liberalization leads
to a decline in the optimal number of formal workers, and an expansion of the informal sector.
From (7), the larger b is, the larger the effect of the reforms on the optimal size of the formal
sector. Note that b is inversely related to the probability of firing formal workers because of
shirking (b =

1
) . Taking the probability of detecting and firing shirkers as a proxy for the
δx

severity of firing restrictions, the implication is then that the stricter labor market legislation is
(that is, the smaller the probability of detection of shirking x is), the larger the impact of trade
liberalization on reallocation from the formal to the informal sector will be.
Note that the analysis above focused on the effects within representative firms of specific
industries, thus ignoring general equilibrium effects. In the general equilibrium, the effects of
trade policy on informality could potentially differ, as workers move from industries with large
trade barrier reductions towards industries that are less affected by trade liberalization. If the
expanding industries were industries that typically employ a larger share of formal workers, then
it is possible that trade liberalization would lead to an increase of formal employment in the
aggregate. And vice versa, if the workers moved towards industries employing more informal
workers (e.g., the service sector), we would have an increase in informality, which, however,
would be driven by labor re-allocation across industries rather than the mechanism outlined
above. While our theoretical discussion abstracts from such effects, in the empirical analysis we
try to assess the importance of general equilibrium effects by decomposing changes in
informality into “within” and “between” industry changes (see discussion in section 5). Our
results suggest that in Brazil “within” industry shifts account for 88% of the changes in the share
of informal workers, while in Colombia this number is close to 100%. We therefore believe that
general equilibrium effects, though in theory important, are in practice of secondary importance
in explaining changes in informal employment.

12

We now turn to the empirical part of the analysis to examine whether the implications of
this section are borne out in the data.
3. Data and Background
3.1 Trade Policy

During the 1980s and 1990s, Brazil and Colombia implemented large trade liberalization
programs. Prior to the reforms, both countries followed import-substitution trade policies that
protected domestic producers from foreign competition with high levels of tariffs and non-tariff
barriers to trade (NTBs). The degree of protection varied widely across industries. For example,
clothing faced tariffs of over 100% in Brazil in 1987 (over 90% in Colombia in 1984), while
petrochemicals faced a 32% tariff in Brazil, and chemicals had a 26% tariff in Colombia in
1984.3 The pattern of protection suggests that Brazil and Colombia protected relatively
unskilled-labor intensive industries; this corresponds to the pattern of protection reported for
other Latin American countries (see for example Hanson and Harrison (1999) on Mexico).
Brazil gradually liberalized its trade regime from 1988 to 1994. Similarly, Colombia
gradually reduced its trade barriers from 1984 to 1994, with the biggest tariff cuts occurring in
1990 and 1991.4 These liberalization episodes offer an excellent environment for studying the
labor market adjustment to trade reforms for three main reasons. First, the reforms significantly
reduced the level of protection. This is evident in Tables 1a and 1b that report average tariff
levels during the 1980s and 1990s for Brazil and Colombia, respectively. The average tariff
declined from 58.8% in 1987 to 15.4% in 1998 in Brazilian manufacturing. Similarly, the
average tariff declined from 27% to 10% between 1984 and 1998 in Colombia. The declines in
tariffs are lower in Colombia than in Brazil, because Brazilian tariff data include only
manufacturing, while the Colombian data include non-manufacturing sectors with typically
lower tariffs. The bottom panel in table 1b shows that the average tariff in manufacturing
3

The source of tariff information for Colombia is the Colombian National Planning Department (DNP). Tariffs are
at the 2-digit ISIC level, which matches the level of industry aggregation in the Colombian household data. See
Goldberg and Pavcnik (2001) for details about the Colombian tariff data. The source of the Brazilian trade data is
Muendler (2002) at http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~meundler/. These data are based on Kume et.al. (2000). The
original data provide the tariff levels at the nivel 80 industrial classification. We have aggregated the data to nivel
50, and made some additional adjustments so that the tariff information corresponds to the level of industry
aggregation in the Brazilian labor force data. See Pavcnik, Blom, Goldberg, and Schady (2002) for details about the
Brazilian tariff data.
4
See Pavcnik and Goldberg (2001) and Pavcnik, Blom, Goldberg, and Schady (2002) for details about the exact
timing of the reforms.

13

declined from 50% in 1984 to 13% in 1998 in Colombia, suggesting that the tariff declines in
manufacturing are similar in Brazil and Colombia. In addition to the drastic tariff reductions,
both countries virtually eliminated NTBs. In Colombia, the average coverage ratio declined
from 72.2% in 1986 to 1.1% in 1992. In our analysis, we focus on tariffs rather than NTBs,
since tariffs are the primary trade policy instruments in these countries. We consider the use of
tariff data to be a strength of our approach. Tariffs are much easier to measure and, unlike
NTBs, comparable over time.5 In addition, tariffs are positively correlated with NTBs in both
countries over our sample period; hence, it is not the case that tariff declines are matched by
increases in less transparent NTBs, as it happened in many developed economies in the 1980’s.
A second advantage of focusing on the Brazilian and Colombian trade liberalization
episodes is that both countries liberalized tariffs gradually, in the course of multiple trade
liberalization rounds; therefore, our data provide (in addition to the cross-sectional variation)
ample tariff variation over time that we can exploit for identification.
Third, in addition to drastically lowering the level of protection, the trade reforms also
altered the structure of protection across industries in both countries. Figures 1a and 1b plot
industry tariffs in 1998 against industry tariffs in 1986 in Brazil and 1984 in Colombia,
respectively. The figures show that the dispersion of tariffs was significantly reduced during the
reform. The low year-to year correlations of industry tariffs before and after the reform further
suggest that the structure of protection has changed. For example, the correlation between
industry tariffs in 1986 (the beginning of our sample) and 1992 (the year after the major trade
liberalization) in Colombia is .46. Similarly, the correlation between tariffs in 1987 (the year
prior to Brazilian trade reform) and 1995 (the year following the reform) is .6 in Brazil. The
changes in the structure of protection reflect Brazil’s and Colombia’s commitment to economywide trade reforms to achieve the low tariffs negotiated with the WTO. This commitment to
economy-wide reforms limited the ability of interest groups to affect trade policy changes and
translated into bigger tariff declines in industries with traditionally high levels of protection.
Finally, these declines in trade protection were also mirrored in an increase in import penetration.
5

Detailed industry information on NTBs is not available for Brazil, and it is available for only 3 years for Colombia.
We do not use NTBs for several reasons. First, NTBs are very difficult, if not impossible, to measure. The anecdotal
evidence suggests that while statistical agencies collecting NTB data make the data comparable across industries
within a year, little effort is spent on making the data consistent across years. This complicates the use of timeseries data on NTBs. Second, in our empirical framework we control for changes in imports, which partially
accounts for the effects of changes in NTBs. Finally, unlike in many developed countries, tariffs have always been
the main policy instrument in Brazil and Colombia.

14

Import penetration increased from around 20% in 1984 to over 30% in manufacturing in
Colombia; in Brazil, it grew from 5.7% in 1987 to 11.6% in 1998. It is interesting to note that
although trade liberalization almost doubled import penetration in Brazil, Brazilian firms
continue to be exposed to significantly lower import penetration than their Colombian
counterparts.
3.2 Labor Force Data

We link the data on trade exposure to labor force data on individual workers. For Brazil,
we use information from the Pesquisa Mensal de Emprego (PME), collected by the Brazilian
Statistical Bureau over 12 years, from 1987 to 1998. The data cover the 6 largest metropolitan
areas so that our results are representative of the urban labor markets. We focus on individuals
in the age range of 15-65, who work full time (defined as working more than 25 hours per week)
in manufacturing. Using the survey information, we create several variables that control for
worker characteristics such as age, gender, education, geographic location, informal sector of
employment, self-employment, industry affiliation, and wage. We match the PME industry
codes with tariff codes, which yields 20 manufacturing industries per year and 240 industry-year
observations. Our hourly wage measure is created by dividing monthly wage by 4 times the
reported number of hours worked in a given week. Based on completed years of education, we
classify workers into those with no complete education, complete elementary education,
complete lower secondary education, complete secondary education, and complete university
education.
Most importantly, the PME contains information on whether a worker has “carta

assinada”, a signed work card, which enables us to distinguish between workers employed in the
formal and informal sectors. In Brazil, workers employed by an employer complying with labor
market legislation have the terms of their employment contract written in their work card,
“cartiera de trabalho”. A worker with a signed work card is entitled to several benefits and
rights. Workers without a signed work card are considered to be working in the informal sector.
Based on this information, we create an indicator for informality.
For Colombia, we use labor force data from the June waves of the Colombian National
Household Survey (NHS), which is administered bi-annually by the Colombian National
Statistical Agency (DANE). Our data cover urban areas in the years 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992,

15

1994, 1996, and 1998. We construct several variables that control for worker demographics and
employment characteristics such as age, gender, marital status, family background, education,
literacy, occupation, industry of employment, geographical location, and hourly wage. We also
create controls for whether an individual works for a private company, government, or a private
household, and whether he/she is an employer or self-employed. Industry codes are reported at
the 2-digit ISIC level, yielding 33 industries per year.6 Hourly wages are constructed based on
the information on the reported earnings and the number of hours worked normally in a week.
Based on the information on highest completed grade, we classify workers into those with no
complete schooling, complete primary school, complete secondary school, and complete
university degree. Furthermore, the June waves of the NHS contain information on whether the
worker’s employer pays social security taxes. The employer’s compliance with the social
security legislation (and thus labor market regulation) provides an excellent indicator for whether
a worker is employed in the formal sector.
The main disadvantage of our individual worker data is that we do not have information
on unionization. This may not be that problematic in the case of Colombia. Edwards (1999) plus
anecdotal evidence suggest that unions do not have significant power in most Colombian
industries (public sector and the petroleum industry are an exception). Unions may potentially
have more power in Brazil where about 37% of manufacturing workers belong to the union
(Arbache and Carneiro (2000)). We address this potential problem in our empirical work.
4. Labor Market Regulation

Our theoretical discussion in section 2 suggests that the effects of trade liberalization on
informality may depend on the labor market institutions. In this section we briefly describe the
labor market reforms undertaken by Brazil and Colombia during our sample period and contrast
the labor market flexibility in the two countries.

6

Our tariff data provide information on 21 industries. Some of the industry-year cells contain very few worker
observations after we split the sample into formal and informal workers. Therefore, we explore the robustness of
our results when we exclude these industries. These industries are forestry (ISIC 12) fishing (13), coal mining (21)
metal ore mining (23), other mining (29), and international and other extra-territorial bodies (96).

16

Let us first focus on Colombia. The Colombian labor market is highly regulated and
formal firms face large dismissal costs when they fire a worker for “unjust” reasons.7 In order to
increase the labor market flexibility, Colombia implemented a labor market reform in 1990 (Law
50 of December 1990). Kugler (1999), Kugler and Cardenas (1999) and Edwards (1999) provide
compelling evidence that this reform significantly lowered the cost of firing a worker in several
ways. In addition, the reform increased the flexibility of fixed-term contracts and expedited the
process of mass layoffs. Overall, these changes are believed to have increased the flexibility of
the Colombian labor market. In fact, the empirical work by Kugler (1999) and Kugler and
Cardenas (1999) finds that the increased labor market flexibility following the reform induced
higher labor market turnover in Colombia. In particular, the reduction in the dismissal cost is
associated with a decline in average tenure and an increase in employment exit rates that are
larger in the formal sector (that was directly affected by the reform) than in the informal sector
(that was not affected by the reform).
Brazil also undertook a labor market reform in 1988. Paes de Barros, Corseuil, and Bahia
(2000) describe the changes in detail. In contrast to the Colombian reforms, the Brazilian
reforms are believed to have decreased the flexibility of the Brazilian labor market. However,
the empirical work on the impact of these reforms on firm turnover by Paes de Barros, Corseuil,
and Bahia (2000) finds little robust evidence that the increase in the dismissal costs had a
significant impact on employment exit rates.
The differences in the response to the labor market reforms in Brazil and Colombia are
not surprising. A study by Heckman and Pages (2000) on labor market regulation in Latin
America suggests that the labor market is substantially more regulated in Colombia than in
Brazil. In particular, the paper provides evidence that the expected cost of dismissing a worker is
much higher in Colombia than in Brazil, even after Colombia’s 1990 labor market reform. The
expected cost of dismissing a worker was about .9 of the monthly wage in Brazil and about 6.1
monthly wages in Colombia at the end of the 1980s. The expected cost of dismissing a worker
amounted to 1.8 monthly salaries in Brazil and 3.5 monthly salaries in Colombia at the end of the
1990s. Given the lower firing costs in Brazil, Brazilian formal firms may have had significant
more flexibility in firing relative to their Colombian counterparts before and after the labor
7

According to Kugler and Cardenas (1999), the only cases in which employers did not have to pay dismissal costs
were when employees were fired “because of undue care, sabotage, or release of the employers’ proprietary
information (page 7)”.

17

reform. Hence we would expect the effects of trade policy on informality to vary across the two
countries; moreover, the effects may also differ depending on whether we focus on the pre-, or
post-labor-reform period in Colombia. We explore these differences in our empirical work in
section 6.
5.

Informality and trade: Some preliminary evidence

Our distinction between a formal and informal sector in Brazil and Colombia is based on
compliance with labor market regulation. Since the selection of workers into the informal sector
is obviously not random, we first check how worker characteristics differ across the two sectors.
Table 2 summarizes worker characteristics in the formal and informal sectors for Colombia in
1994.8 Informal workers are more likely to be male, older, less educated, and illiterate.
Furthermore, informal workers are also more likely to be single, albeit more likely to be head of
the household.9 These differences in the demographic composition of the labor force across the
informal and formal sectors highlight the importance of controlling for individual worker
characteristics in our empirical analysis rather than relying on industry data.
Informal and formal workers also differ in their job characteristics. In particular, it is
often claimed that informal jobs are associated with lower job quality. This claim, controversial
as it is, is of particular interest to those studying the effects of trade on inequality. If trade
liberalization induces a shift to the informal sector, and if this sector offers “worse” jobs, then
trade would have contributed to inequality, whereas inequality is here broadly defined as the
difference between those with “good” and those with “bad” jobs.
We can get a rough idea about the job characteristics in the informal sector by analyzing
information from the 1994 June wave of the Colombian National Household Survey. In this year,
the survey contains a special module on the Quality of Employment. In particular, the survey
provides information on how workers view the workplace conditions, job characteristics, and
employee relations. For each of these questions, we create an indicator that is one if the
respondent evaluates the conditions as excellent or good, and 0 if the worker evaluates the
8

We focus our discussion on 1994 because the 1994 survey contains a special module on the quality of
employment. Descriptive statistics on worker demographics for other years yield similar findings, except that in
some years informal workers appear to be younger than formal workers (although the age differences are in all cases
very small). In Brazil, informal workers are also less educated and more likely to be men, but they are younger than
their informal counterparts.
9
This second finding is a bit surprising. Our regression results later reveal that conditional on other characteristics,
head of the households are less likely to be informal workers.

18

conditions as average or bad. In addition, workers also provide information on whether they
receive benefits and job training.
Table 2 provides survey means of the job characteristics of formal and informal workers.
The overall impression is that work in the informal sector is considered less satisfying. Several
differences between the responses of formal and informal workers are worth noting. First,
formal workers are more likely to be satisfied with the job characteristics, workplace conditions,
and employee relations. Second, formal jobs are associated with significantly more benefits than
informal positions. In particular, formal workers are much more likely than informal workers to
receive individual benefits such as health coverage, dental coverage, vacations, incentive
bonuses, maternity leave, unemployment benefits and pensions, sick leave, transportation
benefits, insurance, and family subsidy. Overall, 83% of informal workers report receiving no
benefits through their job – this number is only 4% for formal workers. Formal workers are also
more likely to receive on the job training than informal workers. Finally, informal jobs are
associated with a higher degree of uncertainty about employment duration.
Informal workers are more likely to hold temporary positions than formal workers. This,
however, could be considered a benefit of informality, reflecting the flexibility of informal labor
market arrangements. Table 2 reveals that the two groups do no differ much in the average
normal hours worked in a given week, though the variance of hours worked is bigger in the
informal sector. In addition, while there is no difference in average hours worked across the
formal and informal sectors for men (average hours worked is 50.6 and 50.9 respectively),
women in the informal sector work on average 2 hours less per week than women in the formal
sector (46.2 and 44.3, respectively). Lower average hours for women in the informal sector, and
higher dispersion of hours worked for all informal workers, indicate that the informal sector
provides a more flexible arrangement. Overall, this descriptive evidence suggests that
informality is associated with lower job and workplace satisfaction, very few benefits, lower
incidence of job training, and higher uncertainty about duration of employment. However,
informality is also associated with more flexibility in the job arrangement.
We next turn to the question of whether trade liberalization has contributed to the
incidence of informal employment in Brazil and Colombia. Tables 3a and 3b report the
aggregate shares of informal workers during our sample for the two countries. The incidence of
informal employment increased from .1 in 1987 to .2 in 1998 in Brazilian manufacturing

19

industries. The aggregate share of informal workers does not increase over time in Colombia.10
However, given that different sectors were exposed to differential trade shocks, aggregate data
could potentially mask industry level changes.
In addition, the tables suggest that the probability of informal employment is higher in
Colombia than in Brazil. However, the Colombian figures also include the non-manufacturing
sectors with higher shares of informal workers. Column 2 of table 3b reports the aggregate share
of informal workers in manufacturing sectors for Colombia. These figures confirm that
informality is more widespread in Colombia than in Brazil. Overall, 48% of all manufacturing
workers work in the informal sector. Moreover, the share of informal workers has increased
over time also in Colombian manufacturing. The difference in the share of informal workers in
Brazil and Colombia is not surprising. Kugler’s (1999) model predicts that the lower the cost of
dismissing a worker, the higher the compliance with labor market legislation (in other words, the
higher the share of the formal sector). Since Colombian firms face a more rigid labor market and
higher cost of dismissing a worker than Brazilian firms they less incentive to comply with labor
market regulation.
Naturally, the question arises whether these changes in informality stem from changes in
the composition of industry employment (i.e., trade liberalization may have expanded the
employment in industries that employ a proportionally larger share of informal workers) or from
within industry changes in informal employment (i.e., within an industry, workers move from
formal to informal jobs). Several pieces of evidence suggest that the within industry movements
from formal to informal jobs dominate. To begin with, in our previous work on Colombia and
Brazil (see Attanasio, Goldberg, and Pavcnik (2002) and Pavcnik, Blom, Goldberg, and Schady
(2002)) we found that industry shares in total employment do not vary much over time during
our sample period. If trade policy changes had led to reallocation of resources across industries,
we would expect low year-to-year correlations of industry shares in total employment. However,
the correlation between the 1986 and 1998 shares is .99 in Colombia, while in Brazil the
correlation between the 1987 and 1998 shares is .96. Moreover, if most of the increase in
informality stemmed from changes in the composition of employment across industries with
10

The data suggest that the aggregate informality share is lower in 1994 than in other years. This is a bit puzzling.
The comparison of the means of other worker characteristics for 1994 and other years suggests that the 1994 data
have similar means of other worker characteristics as the 1992 and 1996 survey (see table 1d in Goldberg and
Pavcnik (2001)). Moreover, the means of the characteristics of the formal and informal workers in 1994 are not
very different from those in other years.

20

different informality intensities, we would expect a large positive correlation between changes in
the industry shares in total employment and industry informality intensity. However, regressing
the change in the industry share in total employment between 1998 and 1987 on the share of
informal workers in industry employment in 198711 does not reveal such a strong positive
correlation. The coefficient of the share of informal workers is .047 (p-value .07) in Brazil, and .004 (p-value .33) in Colombia.
Most importantly, a decomposition of the change in the share of the informal workers
into changes that occurred within industries and the changes that occurred across industries
indicates that most of the increase in informality stems from movements of workers from formal
to informal jobs within industries. In particular, we decompose the change in the share of
informal workers in total employment between 1998 and 1987 (1986 in Colombia) ∆I into
within and between industry shifts, respectively: ∆I t = I t − Iτ = ∑ ∆i jt E j . + ∑ ∆E jt i j . , where Ejt
j

j

is the share of industry j's employment in total employment at time t, ijt is the share of informal
workers in total employment in industry j, E j . = .5( E jt + E jτ ) , and i j . = .5(i jt + i jτ ) .12 Table 3c
presents the results. 88% of the increase in the informal employment in Brazil stems from
movement of workers from formal to informal jobs within industries. In Colombia, withinindustry movements of workers account for almost all of the increase in the informal
employment. In fact, the negative sign on the between-industry shift suggests that the small
shifts in the employment across industries would actually lead to a decline in informal
employment. In sum, the evidence indicates that the mobility of workers across the formal and
informal sectors within an industry is greater than the mobility of workers across industries.13
As a result, our empirical work in the next section focuses on explaining whether trade
liberalization is associated with these within industry shifts in informality.
This preliminary evidence suggests that if trade policy had any effects on the incidence of
informal work in Brazil and Colombia at all, such effects would have operated through changes
11

In Colombia, we use 1986, the first year of our sample.
This decomposition has been often used in the literature on skill-upgrading to decompose the change in the share
of skilled workers between and within industries.
13
Obviously, given that we do not have very disaggregated industry data (especially in the case of Colombia), some
of the movements within industries could actually represent changes in composition of employment across more
detailed industry categories. In fact, in Brazil where industry classification is more detailed, movements across
industries do account for a larger share of the informality increase than in Colombia. However, the within industry
movements continue to dominate.
12

21

in the composition of formal and informal sectors within industries. However, many other
factors such as labor market reforms and macroeconomic conditions may be influencing the
aggregate trends. In the next section, we rely on detailed micro level data on worker
characteristics and industry panel data on tariffs to study the association between tariffs and
informality more formally.
6. Informal employment and trade policy
6.1 Empirical Methodology

We relate trade policy to the probability of working in the informal sector by employing a
two-step estimation approach that has been used in the labor literature on wage premia. In the
first stage, we use a linear probability model and regress the indicator Yijt for whether a worker i
employed in industry j at time t works in the informal sector on a vector of worker characteristics
Hijt, such as age, age squared, education indicators, gender, geographic location, and a set of
industry indicators Iijt indicating worker i’s industry affiliation:

Yijt = H ijt β Ht + I ijt * ip jt + ε ijt

(8)

The coefficient on the industry dummy ipj captures the part of the variation in informal
employment that cannot be explained by worker characteristics, but can be explained by
workers’ industry affiliation. We call these coefficients industry informality differentials.14 We
express the estimated informality differentials as deviations from the employment-weighted
average informality differential (ipj).15 This normalized informality differential can be
interpreted as the percentage point difference in probability of informal employment for a worker
in a given industry relative to an average worker in all industries with the same observable
characteristics. The normalized informality differentials and their standard errors are calculated
using the Haisken-DeNew and Schmidt (1997) two-step restricted least squares procedure
provided to us by John P. Haisken-DeNew and Christoph M. Schmidt.16 The first stage
14

In addition to the linear probability model, we have computed industry informality differentials using a probit.
The two specifications yield similar marginal industry effects. The correlation between industry informality
differentials based on the linear probability model and the probit is over .8 for Brazil and Colombia. We thus
continue to use the linear probability model.
15
The sum of the employment weighted normalized informality differentials is zero.
16
Haisken DeNew and Schmidt (1997) adjust the variance covariance matrix of the normalized industry indicators
to yield an exact standard error for the normalized coefficients. The adjustment of the variance covariance matrix
occurs by taking into account the linear restriction that the employment-share weighted sum of the normalized
coefficients is zero.

22

regressions are estimated separately for each year in our sample. In the second stage, we pool
the industry informality differentials ipj over time and regress them on trade related industry
characteristics:

ip jt = T jt β T + D jt β D + u jt

(9)

where Tjt is a vector of trade exposure measures such as tariffs, imports, and exports and Djt is a
vector of industry and time indicators. Because our dependent variable in the second stage is
estimated, we estimate (9) with weighted least squares (WLS), using the inverse of the variance
of the informality estimates from the first stage as weights. This puts more weight on industries
with smaller variance in informality differentials. We also account for general forms of
heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term in (9) by computing robust (HuberWhite) standard errors clustered by industry.
6.2 First Stage Results

Prior to discussing the relationship between trade policy and the probability of working in
the informal sector, we provide some information on the first stage results. Tables 4a and 4b
report the coefficients on the individual characteristics that are associated with working in the
informal sector in selected years for Brazil and Colombia, respectively. The results suggest that
younger workers are more likely to work in the informal sector. In Colombia, women and the
more educated workers are less likely to work in the informal sector. In Brazil, we also
persistently find that workers with complete university degree are less likely to work in the
informal sector, but the coefficients on the complete elementary, lower secondary, and secondary
education are usually statistically insignificant. Moreover, unlike in Colombia, women are more
likely to participate in informal work. In Colombia, we also control for household characteristics
that may affect a person’s propensity to work in the informal sector such as whether a person is
married, head of the household, the number of children in a household aged 0-4, number of
inactive adults in a household, and earnings of other household members. The results in table 4b
suggest that married individuals and household heads are more likely to work in the formal
sector. Moreover, workers living in households with children aged 0-4 are more likely to work
in the informal sector (albeit the coefficient is not always significant). Surprisingly, the
coefficient on the interaction of a female indicator with the number of children is insignificant.

23

Finally, workers living in households with higher income of other household members are less
likely to work in the informal sector.
Second, in both Brazil and Colombia, industry indicators in the first stage are always
jointly statistically significant, and most of them are also individually statistically different from
zero. This suggests that even conditional on worker characteristics, industry affiliation is an
important determinant of the probability of working in the informal sector. In particular, in
Brazil, workers employed in clothing, manufacture of wood and wood products, and oil
extraction are more likely to be employed in the informal sector than workers with the same
observable characteristics in other industries. In Colombia, workers are more likely to work in
the informal sector if they are employed in the manufacture of wood and wood products,
agriculture, restaurants and hotels, and household services. Finally, the industry informality
differentials are highly correlated over time in Brazil. Almost all year-to-year correlations are
above .9. For example, the correlation between 1987 and 1988 industry informality differentials
is .98 and the correlation between 1987 and 1995 informality differentials is .96 (1995 is the year
following the end of trade liberalization in Brazil). However, the year-to-year correlations
between informality differentials are lower in Colombia, ranging from .6 to .95.17 For example,
the correlation between 1986 and 1990 informality differentials is .92. However, the correlation
between 1986, the first year of our sample and 1994, the year that follows the period of dramatic
trade liberalizations is .71. High year-to-year correlations of industry informality differentials in
Brazil suggest that trade policy changes are unlikely to be associated with changes in the
informal employment. However, the lower correlation coefficients in informality differentials in
Colombia suggest that trade policy could at least in principle affect the incidence of informal
employment in this country.
6.3 Second Stage Results: Industry Informality Differentials and Trade Policy

In the second stage, we relate industry informality differentials to trade policy (tariffs in
particular) as suggested in equation (9).18 Note that controlling for individual worker
characteristics in the first stage eliminates some of the potential estimation biases in the
17

Correlations for Colombia are based on computations that exclude industries with few observations. Those
industries have very noisy measures of industry informality differentials and thus make these correlations even
lower.
18
A 20% tariff is denoted in our data as .2.

24

relationship between informality and tariffs stemming from differences in worker composition
across industries. For example, if industries with a higher share of unskilled workers receive
higher trade protection and unskilled workers are more likely to work in the informal sector,
reliance on industry level data could potentially yield a spurious positive relationship between
informality and trade policy. Since we control for worker characteristics in the first stage (and
thus control for industry composition each year), our second stage results are not driven by
differences in worker composition across sectors. Moreover, all second stage regressions include
industry fixed effects and year indicators. Inclusion of these controls additionally reduces the
potential estimation biases. For example, business cycle fluctuations might independently
impact tariff formation and the probability of informal employment. If government raises tariffs
during recessions and workers move from the formal to the informal sector, the tariff coefficient
could be biased upward. Similarly, to the extent that labor market reforms of 1988 in Brazil and
1990 in Colombia had similar affects across all industries (conditional on controlling for industry
composition in the first stage), year indicators capture their effects. Finally, industry fixed
effects control for unobserved industry characteristics that are time-invariant. Such controls are
important, since unobserved industry attributes, such as an industry’s ability to form a lobby,
industry productivity, or capital intensity may simultaneously affect industry tariff formation and
industry informal employment. For example, less productive industries may be more effective at
lobbying the government for higher tariffs and also employ relatively more informal workers.
The results for Brazil are reported in Table 5a. The table reports the coefficients on each
independent variable and p-values associated with the coefficients. Column 1 reports the results
from the regression of industry informality differentials on tariffs, industry indicators, and year
indicators. The coefficient on tariff in column 1 is small in magnitude and insignificantly
different from zero. This suggests that there is no statistical relationship between tariffs and
probability of working in the informal sector. Although tariffs are our preferred way of
measuring an industry’s exposure to trade because they capture the direct effect of policy on
informality, we also experiment with other measure of exposure to trade (such as imports and
exports) commonly used in trade studies. The use of these variables is not motivated by trade
theory, and we consider these regressions mostly as a robustness check on our estimates of the
tariff coefficients. In particular, in column 2, we add lagged import penetration and lagged

25

export orientation as regressors.19 The inclusion of additional regressors does not change the
magnitude or the significance of the tariff coefficient. Moreover, the coefficient on import
penetration is insignificant. However, the coefficient on export orientation is positive and
significant.
Trade reforms in Brazil were accompanied by significant exchange rate fluctuations.
These currency fluctuations could differentially impact employment in traded and non-traded
sectors. For example, an exchange rate appreciation is likely to lead to an expansion of the nontradable sector, which in general employs a higher share of informal workers (though this effect
is less relevant in our Brazilian data, which contain only manufacturing industries). Note
however, that if exchange rate fluctuations were driving our results, we would expect most of the
increase in aggregate informality to stem from reallocation of employment across industries.
Yet, the results reported in section 5 suggest that most of the changes in aggregate informality
are due to within industry changes. Accordingly, the focus in our empirical work is on
investigating whether these within industry changes in informality are associated with variation
in industry tariffs. Nevertheless, to be confident that our results are robust to controlling for
exchange rate fluctuations we also estimate a specification in which we interact lagged import
penetration and lagged export orientation with the exchange rate.20 The results are reported in
column 3 of Table 5a. The inclusion of the exchange rate interaction does not affect either the
magnitude or the significance of the tariff coefficient.21 Finally, in columns 4, 5, and 6 we also
estimate the relationship in first differences and obtain no significant relationship between trade
reform and probability of informal employment for Brazil.
The above analysis suffers from three potential problems. First, the 1988 labor reform
may have affected the relationship between trade policy and informality. Unfortunately, we do
not have sufficient data prior to the labor reform to explore whether the relationship between
trade policy and informality has changed after the reform. However, our prior is that this is not a
big issue. Heckman and Pages (2000) suggest that the labor market in Brazil was substantially
less regulated than in Colombia. In addition, we find that year-to-year correlations of industry
19

We use lagged values because trade flows are a function of factor prices. Of course, to the extent that trade flows
are serially correlated, our approach does not fully eliminate the simultaneity bias.
20
We use the nominal exchange rate (real/$US) from Muendler (2002). We do not use the nominal effective
exchange rate from IMF because it is only available since 1992.
21
Note that the year effects already control for the economy-wide effect of exchange rates (that does not vary across
industries). The interaction terms are meant to capture the possibility that exchange rate fluctuations have different
effects depending on a sector’s import or export orientation.

26

informality differentials are extremely high, and that the differentials are very similar in
magnitude before and after the 1988 labor reform. This limits the scope for important
interactions of labor market with trade reforms. Nevertheless, to be sure, we also repeat our
previous analysis using only the years in our sample after the labor market reform (i.e., from
1989 onwards). The results are reported in Table 5b, in the same order as the results in Table 5a,
and lead to the same conclusions.
The second potential problem with our analysis is that we cannot control for union
membership in the first stage of our estimation. If industry union power affects both the
probability of informal employment and tariff formation, our results could be biased. To the
extent that union power in each industry has not changed over time in Brazil, industry fixed
effects would capture union effects. This may in fact be a realistic assumption. Arbache and
Carneiro (2000) report the shares of unionized workers in various manufacturing industries in
1992 and 1995, and show that the shares are relatively stable over time.22
Finally, the lack of significant relationship between the changes in informal employment
and contemporaneous tariff changes might not be surprising if firms respond to trade reform with
a lag. In order to explore this possibility, we estimate specifications in which we use one-year
lagged tariffs (and tariff changes) rather than the contemporaneous tariffs (and tariff changes) as
the explanatory variable. The results are presented in Table 5c in the same order as the results in
Table 5a. We continue to find no association between tariff changes and changes in the share of
informal employment. In sum, our analysis suggests no relationship between trade reform and
the incidence of informal employment in Brazil.23
Table 6a presents the results for Colombia. The tariff coefficient in column 1 is negative
and significant, which suggests that tariff declines are associated with increases in informal
employment. In particular, a 1-percentage point decline in a tariff in a given industry is
22

They use data from PNAD. During the trade liberalization of the early 1990s, these data are only available for
1991 and 1994; the surveys for 1989 and 1990 do not contain information on union status.
23
In unreported regressions, we have also estimated the relationship between probability of informal employment
and tariffs by pooling worker level data over all years and including tariffs and year indicators directly in the first
stage in equation 8. We adjusted standard errors to reflect that tariffs vary over time and across industries only. As
expected, we continue to find no association between tariffs and probability of informal employment, as in our twostage approach. Note, however, that the one-stage estimation does not allow us to explore the relationship between
informality and tariffs in first differences because we do not have repeated observations on the same individual
across years. In these one-stage regressions, we have also allowed the effect of tariffs to vary across skilled and
unskilled workers (where skilled workers are defined as those with complete secondary or university education).
We find some suggestive evidence that relative to skilled workers, declines in tariffs are associated with increased
probability of informal employment for unskilled workers.

27

associated with a .1 percentage point (i.e. .001) increase in the probability of informal
employment. This would translate into a 4-percentage point increase in the probability of
informal employment in an industry that experienced a 40-percentage point decline in tariffs.
These effects seem relatively small in magnitude. In column 2, we add lagged imports and
exports as our regressors.24 The addition of these controls barely changes the magnitude of the
tariff coefficient, but the coefficient is now less precisely estimated. Moreover, the positive and
significant coefficient on imports suggests that increased import competition is associated with
higher probability of informal employment, while increases in industry export orientation are
associated with declines in probability of informal employment. As in Brazil, the Colombian
trade reforms were accompanied by large exchange rate fluctuations. But just as in Brazil, most
of the increase in informality in Colombia can be attributed to within industry changes rather
than reallocation across industries. We do not believe that exchange rate fluctuations are driving
the association between within industry changes in informality and changes in industry tariffs.
Nevertheless, we formally check the robustness of our tariff coefficient by estimating a
specification in which we interact lagged imports and exports with the exchange rate.25 The
results are presented in column 3. The inclusion of the exchange rate interactions hardly changes
the coefficient on tariffs. Finally, we also estimate the relationship between informality and
trade policy in first differences. The results are reported in columns 4, 5 and 6. The results on
tariffs are not robust to first differencing: the coefficients on tariffs are no longer statistically
different from zero. However, the results for imports and exports are robust.
The next three tables report several robustness checks. As pointed out in section 3.2,
some of the industry-informality-year cells do not contain many observations. In Table 6b, we
repeat our analysis excluding industries with very few workers (see data description on which
industries are excluded). This yields similar results to those obtained in Table 6a. Moreover,
given that the incidence of informality was unusually small in 1994, we have also repeated our
analysis without 1994. These results are reported in Table 6c and yield similar findings as Table
6a. Finally, as in the case of Brazil, we check whether it takes time for firms to adjust informal
employment to trade reform by exploring the relationship between informality and lagged

24

Unlike in Brazil, we cannot use import penetration and export orientation measures because we do not have output
data for non-manufacturing industries.
25
The exchange rate we use is the nominal effective exchange rate from the IMF.

28

tariffs.26 The results are reported in Table 6d in the same order as in Table 6a. All the
coefficients are well within the 95% confidence interval of the coefficients on contemporaneous
tariffs reported in Table 6a.27
We next turn our attention to the labor reform. As discussed in section 4, Colombia
underwent a large labor market reform in 1990. This reform significantly reduced the cost of
firing a worker and increased the labor market turnover. As a result, the reform may have
affected the relationship between trade policy and informality. The model in section 2 suggests
that high firing costs make monitoring of formal workers extremely costly, so that the probability
of establishing shirking is low. Reducing firing costs effectively increases the probability of
detecting and responding to shirking. This in turn implies that the response of the informal
sector to trade liberalization will be less pronounced if the trade reform is accompanied by
changes in the labor market regulation that decrease firing costs (see also the discussion in
section 2d). To explore this possibility, we allow the relationship between tariffs and informality
to vary across the pre- and post-1990 reform years; in particular, we interact tariffs with an
indicator that is 1 after the 1990 labor market reform, and zero otherwise. The results are
presented in table 7.
Two interesting results emerge. First, the coefficient on tariffs is negative in all columns.
This suggests that a tariff decline in an industry is associated with an increase in the probability
of informal employment prior to the labor reform, when the costs of firing formal workers were
high. Moreover, the coefficient on the interaction of tariff with the labor market reform indicator
is always positive. This suggests that a tariff decline in an industry is associated with a smaller
increase (and potentially an overall decrease) in the probability of informal employment after the
reform. The bottom of the table reports the p-value from the test that there is no statistical
association between tariffs and informality after the labor market reform. We either fail to reject

26

Because of data availability, we use two-year lags in tariffs.
As in the case of Brazil, in unreported regressions we have also estimated the relationship between probability of
informal employment and tariffs by pooling worker level data over all years and including tariffs and year indicators
directly into first stage equation 8. As expected, this yielded similar findings to our two-stage estimation results.
Note that we cannot estimate this specification in first differences because we do not observe the same individuals
over time. Moreover, in some of these specifications, we also allowed the coefficient on tariffs to differ across
skilled and unskilled workers (where skilled workers are defined as those with complete secondary or university
degree). We found that tariffs do not impact the probability of informal employment differentially across the two
groups.

27

29

the hypothesis (columns 1, 3, 5, and 6), or find a small, positive relationship between tariffs and
informality after the labor market reform (column 2 and 4).
To summarize, we find no relationship between tariff declines and increases in informal
employment in Brazil, while this relationship is estimated to be positive, but small, in Colombia

prior to labor market reforms. The differences between the findings for Brazil and Colombia, as
well as the differences between the pre- and post-labor-reform Colombia, are indicative of the
importance of labor market institutions, and can be interpreted within our model. The model
suggests that the response of informality to trade liberalization depends on the likelihood of
catching and firing shirkers, which in turn is affected by labor market legislation. Since
Colombia is more regulated than Brazil, and pre-reform Colombia in particular had the highest
firing costs in our sample, our findings are consistent with the theoretical predictions.
7. Conclusions

This paper has investigated the relationship between trade policy and the informal sector.
Our empirical work does not find significant evidence that the trade reforms contributed to
increases in informal employment in Brazil and Colombia. For Brazil, in particular, we find no
relationship between trade liberalization and informality. For Colombia, we find that tariff
declines are associated with an increase in informal employment in the industries with the largest
tariff cuts, but only in the period before the labor market reform. Even in this case, the magnitude
of the effect is small. These results suggest that compared to labor market rigidities, trade policy
is of secondary importance in determining the incidence of informal employment.
Our work points to the significance of labor market institutions when studying the effects
of trade reforms. The differences in the relationship between informality and trade policy
between Colombia and Brazil, and the differences in the response in Colombia before and after
the labor market reform indicate that labor market institutions play an important role in how
trade reform affects informal employment. Firms are more likely to respond to increased
exposure to foreign competition through reductions in formal employment, when they operate in
rigid labor markets. A similar conclusion is reached by Aghion, Burgess, and Redding (2002), in
a study of the impact of trade reforms on growth of Indian states subject to different labor market
regulation. Given that many Latin American countries underwent large trade liberalizations
during the 1980s and 1990s, and that labor markets in these economies exhibit different degrees

30

of flexibility, studying the interaction of labor and trade reforms in these economies remains a
fruitful topic for future research.
References
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, and S. Redding (2002): “Liberalisation, Institutions, and Industrial
Performance: Evidence from India” mimeo.
Arbache, J.S. and F.G. Carneiro (1999): “Unions and Interindustry Wage Differentials”,
World Development 27, pp. 1875-1883.
Attanasio, O., Goldberg P., and N. Pavcnik (2002): “Trade Reforms and Income Inequality in
Colombia,” mimeo.
Bulow, J. and L. Summers (1986): “A theory of dual labor markets with application to
industrial policy, discrimination, and Keynesian unemployment” Journal of Labor Economics,
Vol. 4:1, pp. 376-414.
Currie, J. and A. Harrison (1997): “Trade Reform and Labor Market Adjustment in Morocco”
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S44-71.
Edwards, S. (1999): The Political Economy of Incomplete Market-Oriented Reform: The Case
of Colombia. Forthcoming.
Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2001): “Trade, Wages and the Political Economy of Trade
Protection: Evidence from the Colombian Trade Reforms”, mimeo.
Haisken-DeNew, J.P. and C.M. Schmidt (1997): "Inter-Industry and Inter-Region Wage
Differentials: Mechanics and Interpretation", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 79, No. 3,
pp. 516-521.
Hanson, G. and A. Harrison (1999): “Who gains from trade reform? Some remaining
puzzles”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 59, pp. 125-154.
Harrison, A. and E. Leamer (1997): “Labor markets in developing countries: An agenda for
research”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S1-19.
Heckman J. and Pages C. (2000): “The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence from Latin
American Labor Market,” NBER Working Paper 7773.
Krueger, A.B. and L.H. Summers (1988): “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
Structure”, Econometrica, Vol. 56, pp. 259-293.
Kugler, A. (1999): “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment: Evidence
from The Colombian Labour Market Reform”, International Tax and Public Finance Journal,
Vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 389-410.

31

Kugler, A. and M. Cardenas (1999): “The Incidence of Job Security Regulation on Labor
Market Flexibility and Compliance in Colombia, mimeo.
Kume, H. (2000): “A politica brasileira de importação no period 1987 descrição e avaliação.”
Kume, H, Piani, G. And C.F. Souza (2000): “Instrumentos de Politica Comercial no Periodo
1987-1998,” mimeo.
Muendler, M. A. (2002): "Trade, Technology, and Productivity: A Study of Brazilian
Manufacturers, 1986-1998", University of California, Berkeley mimeo.
Paes de Barros R., C.H. Corseuil, and M. Bahia (2000): “Labor Market Regulations and the
Duration of Employment in Brazil,” IPEA mimeo.
Pavcnik, N., A Blom, P. Goldberg, N. Schady (2002): “Trade Liberalization and Labor
Market Adjustment in Brazil,” mimeo.
Saint-Paul, Gilles (1996): Dual Labor Markets: A Macroeconomic Perspective, MIT Press.
Shapiro, C. and J. Stiglitz (1984): “Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device”
American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 433-444.
Stallings, B. and Wilson Peres (2000): Growth, Employment and Equity. The Impact of the
Economic Reforms in Latin American and Caribbean. Economic Commission for Latin
American and Caribbean, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.

32

Figure 1a—Tariffs in 1986 and 1998 in Brazil
Tariff 1998 (%)

45 degree line

100

Tariff 1998 (%)

80

60

40
12
23

20

21

8

5
18

10
17
28
15 264

14

24

31
16

22

20

2
3

40

20

60
Tariff 1986 (%)

80

100

Figure 1b—Industry Tariffs in 1984 and 1998 in Colombia
y

Tariffs 1998
90
80

Tariff 1998

60

40

20

94
61
8322
95

0

31

13
11
12
23 2129

36
34
38

35
37

39

32
33

41

0

20

40
Tariffs 1984

60

80

90

Note: The line is 45 degree line. The numbers are industry symbols (they do not match across
the two countries).

33

Table 1a--Manufacturing Tariffs in Brazil 1987-1998
Year

Mean

S.D.

1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

58.8
50.1
39.1
34.1
25.2
19.1
14.4
12.9
10.9
12.5
12.8
15.4

22.8
18.3
16.4
17.0
13.3
10.3
7.2
6.2
5.7
6.6
7.0
6.5

Note: There are 20 industries in each
year.

Table 1b--Tariffs in Colombia 1984-1998
Year

N

Mean

S.D.

21
21
21
21
21
21
21
21

27.4
22.2
20.7
17.5
10.6
9.7
9.8
9.9

24.8
16.7
16.0
14.0
4.1
4.8
5.1
5.1

9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

49.8
36.6
33.5
29.1
12.9
12.9
13.0
13.1

19.0
9.5
11.1
9.1
3.4
3.6
3.9
3.8

All Industries
1984
1985
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Manufacturing
1984
1985
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998

Note: There are 21 industries overall and 9
manufacturing industries. Source: Authors'
calculations based on tariff data provided by DNP.

Table 2--Informal and Formal Workers Colombia 1994
Informal

Formal

Individual Characteristics
Hourly wage
Male
Age
Literate
No complete schooling
Elementary school complete
Secondary school complete
University complete
Married

1577.2
0.613
35.5
0.975
0.174
0.536
0.217
0.073
0.330

1660.3
0.567
33.8
0.996
0.065
0.389
0.397
0.148
0.386

Family background
Head of the household
Number of kids in a household (hh)
Number of inactive adults in a hh
Earnings of other hh members

0.477
0.447
1.215
1586.3

0.447
0.402
1.226
1782.7

0.206
0.861
0.869
0.891
0.099
0.074
0.111
0.111
0.026
0.099
0.034
0.064
0.033
0.830
0.169
0.771
48.4

0.753
0.922
0.930
0.948
0.796
0.686
0.829
0.841
0.271
0.783
0.273
0.543
0.428
0.044
0.364
0.865
48.7

Job characteristics
Work in 11 or more person establishment
Excellent or good job characteristics
Excellent or good workplace conditions
Excellent or good employee relations
Health benefits
Dental benefits
Vacation
Incentive bonuses
Maternity leave
Unemployment benefits/pension
Sick leave
Transportation benefit
Family subsidy
Receive no benefits
Job training
Permanent position
Normal hours worked in a week

Table 3a--Share of Informal Workers in Brazilian Manufacturing
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
Average

0.102
0.105
0.104
0.110
0.133
0.149
0.157
0.159
0.162
0.193
0.205
0.206
0.149

Table 3b--Share of Informal Workers in Colombia

1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Average

All

Manufacturing

.58
.57
.57
.56
.52
.61
.59

.47
.45
.47
.46
.42
.57
.54

.57

.48

Table 3c--Decomposition of Changes in Informal Employment

Total
Brazil
Colombia
Colombia--manufacturing only

.104
.012
.073

Within Industry Between Industries
.092
.020
.075

.012
-.008
-.002

-.010
.00015
-.032
-.002
.004
.009
-.018

.001
.00001
.005
.003
.003
.003
.003

s.e.
-.013
.00018
-.018
-.001
.005
.005
-.018

1991
coeff.
.001
.00001
.006
.003
.004
.004
.005

s.e.
-.015
.00020
-.033
.001
-.004
.002
-.012

1994
coeff.

Note: Regressions also include region indicators and an indicator for whether a worker is self employed.

Age
Age squred
Male
Complete elementary education
Complete lower secondary education
Complete secondary education
Complete tertiary education

1987
coeff.

Table 4a--First stage results for Brazil (selected years)

.001
.00002
.007
.004
.005
.005
.006

s.e.
-.015
.00021
-.018
-.002
-.021
-.008
-.017

1998
coeff.

.002
.00003
.011
.007
.008
.008
.011

s.e.

-.016
.00017
.029
-.055
-.140
-.131
-.050
-.038
-.038
.012
-.006
-.008
-.00002

1990
coeff.
s.e.

1994
coeff.
s.e.

1998
coeff.

s.e.

.001
-.018
.001
-.016
.001
-.018
.001
.00001 .00017 .00001
.00017
.00002
.00018
.00001
.007
.039
.008
.028
.009
.002
.006
.006
-.065
.007
-.030
.010
-.055
.006
.008
-.159
.009
-.145
.011
-.170
.008
.014
-.173
.015
-.188
.017
-.260
.012
.010
-.050
.014
-.075
.019
-.032
.010
.005
-.069
.006
-.043
.007
-.054
.005
.006
-.050
.007
-.046
.008
-.043
.006
.004
.006
.004
.006
.005
.008
.004
.006
.007
.007
.006
.008
-.002
.006
.002
.001
.002
-.006
.003
.000
.002
.00001 -.000010 .000003 -.0000007 .0000009 -.0000015 .0000006

s.e.

Notes: Regressions also include occupation indicators, whether a person lives in Bogota, job type indicators (self-employed, private employee,
employer, government employee), whether a person has been born in urban area, and the time the person has lived in current residence.

Age
Age squared
Male
Elementary education
Secondary education
University education
Literate
Married
Head of the household
Number of kids ages 0-4 in hh (kids)
Female*kids
Number of inactive adults in hh
Earnings of other hh members

1986
coeff.

Table 4b--First stage results for Colombia (selected years)

no
yes
yes

0.017

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

[0.026]

no
yes
yes

-0.03
[0.286]

-0.046**

[0.675]

[0.446]

0.026

[0.878]

-0.012

[0.921]

0.001

(6)

[0.112]

[0.570]

0.019

[0.999]

0

[0.924]

0.001

(5)

0.018

[0.014]

[0.040]

[0.954]

0.001

(4)

-0.095

0.143**

0.138**

-0.057
[0.648]

-0.169

[0.367]

[0.335]

0.01
[0.615]

0.014
[0.537]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance at a
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is 240 in columns 1-3 and 220 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using industry fixed
effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated using first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

EO*Exchange Rate

IP*Exchange Rate

Lagged Export Orientation (EO)

Lagged Import Penetration (IP)

Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 5a--Probability of informal employment and trade policy in Brazil 1987-1998

no
yes
yes

0.014

no
yes
yes

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

-0.03
[0.301]

-0.040*
[0.059]

[0.719]

[0.560]

0.018

[0.781]

-0.021

[0.429]

-0.012

(6)

[0.251]

[0.702]

0.012

[0.892]

-0.011

[0.425]

-0.012

(5)

0.016

[0.038]

[0.078]

[0.399]

-0.013

(4)

-0.064

0.120**

0.116*

-0.045
[0.725]

-0.13

[0.588]

[0.467]

0
[0.993]

0.003
[0.918]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate
significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is 200 in columns 1-3 and 180 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are
estimated using industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated using first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

EO*Exchange Rate

IP*Exchange Rate

Lagged Export Orientation (EO)

Lagged Import Penetration (IP)

Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 5b--Probability of informal employment and trade policy in Brazil 1989-1998

no
yes
yes

0.021

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

[0.016]

no
yes
yes

-0.03
[0.292]

-0.048**

[0.686]

[0.439]

0.026

[0.860]

-0.013

[0.980]

0

(6)

[0.101]

[0.558]

0.019

[0.975]

-0.002

[0.915]

-0.002

(5)

0.018

[0.012]

[0.037]

[0.913]

-0.002

(4)

-0.094

0.143**

0.137**

-0.057
[0.636]

-0.166

[0.226]

[0.334]

0.014
[0.439]

0.018
[0.400]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance at a
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is 240 in columns 1-3 and 220 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using industry fixed
effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated using first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

EO*Exchange Rate

IP*Exchange Rate

Lagged Export Orientation (EO)

Lagged Import Penetration (IP)

Lagged Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 5c--Probability of informal employment and lagged trade policy in Brazil 1987-1998

no
yes
yes

-0.098*

0.017

-0.011

no
yes
yes

[0.001]

[0.000]

yes
yes
no

[0.726]

no
yes
yes

-0.000002**
[0.043]

0
yes
yes
no

-0.000002***

[0.782]

-0.00002

[0.000]

0.00040***

[0.970]

-0.001

(6)

-0.000003***

yes
yes
no

[0.083]

[0.044]

[0.241]

-0.00021*

-0.00035** -0.00031

[0.000]

0.00011**

[0.750]
[0.042]

[0.197]

(5)

0.00026*** 0.00046***

[0.095]

(4)

[0.000]

-0.104*
[0.052]

-0.092**
[0.011]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance
at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is in 147 columns 1-3 and 126 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using
industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated in first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

E*Exchange rate

I*Exchange rate

Lagged Exports (E)

Lagged Imports (I)

Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 6a--Probability of informal employment and trade policy in Colombia

no
yes
yes

-0.101

0.019

-0.012

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

[0.844]

no
yes
yes

-0.000002*
[0.070]

0

yes
yes
no

[0.001]

[0.444]

[0.000]

[0.064]

-0.000002***

[0.234]

[0.050]

-0.00023* -0.00008

[0.000]

0.00039***

[0.932]

-0.003

(6)

-0.000003***

-0.00034

-0.00036*

[0.000]

0.00009*

[0.739]
[0.059]

[0.118]

(5)

0.00026*** 0.00047***

[0.101]

(4)

[0.000]

-0.105*
[0.058]

-0.093**
[0.013]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance
at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is 112 in columns 1-2 and 96 in columns 3-4. Columns 1-2 are estimated using
industry fixed effects. Columns 3-4 are estimated in first differences. This is based on first and second stage without industries
with a few observations.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

E*Exchange rate

I*Exchange rate

Lagged Exports (E)

Lagged Imports (I)

Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 6b--Probability of informal employment and trade policy in Colombia (robustness check)

no
yes
yes

-0.092

0.018

-0.006

no
yes
yes

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

-0.000002*
[0.055]

[0.643]

[0.000]

[0.848]

-0.000001

-0.000003***

0

[0.964]

[0.063]

[0.048]

[0.300]

-0.00019* 0

[0.006]

0.00035***

[0.917]

0.003

(6)

-0.00036** -0.00029

[0.000]

0.00008

[0.865]
[0.595]

[0.106]

(5)

0.00036*** 0.00038***

[0.152]

(4)

[0.000]

-0.097*
[0.099]

-0.092**
[0.028]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance
at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is 126 in columns 1-3 and 105 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using
industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated in first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

E*Exchange rate

I*Exchange rate

Lagged Exports (E)

Lagged Imports (I)

Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 6c--Probability of informal employment and trade policy in Colombia (robustness check, no 1994)

no
yes
yes

-0.067**

0.036

0.041*

no
yes
yes

yes
yes
no

[0.170]

no
yes
yes

-0.000002*
[0.077]

-0.000001
yes
yes
no

[0.001]

[0.000]

yes
yes
no

-0.000002***

-0.000003***

[0.534]

[0.001]

[0.003]

[0.350]

-0.00018*** -0.00005

[0.000]

0.00041***

[0.169]

0.033

(6)

-0.00028*** -0.00015

[0.000]

0.00013**

[0.091]
[0.044]

[0.165]

(5)

0.00025*** 0.00047***

[0.012]

(4)

[0.000]

-0.068**
[0.013]

-0.073**
[0.037]

(3)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance
at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is in 147 columns 1-3 and 126 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using
industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated in first differences.

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

E*Exchange rate

I*Exchange rate

Lagged Exports (E)

Lagged Imports (I)

Lagged Tariff

(2)

(1)

Table 6d--Probability of informal employment and lagged trade policy in Colombia

no
yes
yes

First differencing
Year Indicators
Industry Indicators

no
yes
yes

.083
.001
.011

no
yes
yes

.114
.004
.223

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
no

.584
.007
.899

0.000003
[0.313]

0.000002
[0.506]

.023
na
na

-0.000005**
[0.014]

-0.000004***
[0.000]

0.000002
[0.581]

0.000001
[0.848]

-0.000004*
[0.082]

.701
.051
.203

0.00072
[0.238]

-0.000004

[0.096]

-0.00076
[0.121]

[0.271]

-0.0005
[0.115]

-0.00017*
[0.068]

0.00059*

-0.00073*
[0.070]

[0.231]

-0.00031*** 0.00012
[0.003]

[0.753]

0.0001

[0.159]

0.00031

[0.072]

0.293*

[0.064]

-0.275*

(6)

Note: P values based on standard errors that are clustered on industry are reported in parethesis. ***, **, * indicate significance at a 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively. N is in 147 columns 1-3 and 126 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated using industry fixed effects.
Columns 4-6 are estimated in first differences.

.189
na
na

0.00003

[0.975]

[0.859]

[0.661]

0.00007

[0.060]

0.302*

[0.055]

-0.290*

(5)

0.00012*** -0.00001

[0.069]

0.278*

[0.098]

-0.245*

(4)

[0.003]

0.00042
[0.145]

0.00006

[0.012]

0.306**

[0.087]

-0.105*

(3)

[0.376]

0.295***
[0.007]

0.252*
[0.072]

-0.104*
[0.078]

-0.053

(2)

[0.149]

P-value for test that tar+tar*post=0
P-value for test that I+I*post=0
P-value for test that E+E*post=0

E*Exchange rate*Post Labor Reform

E*Exchange rate

I*Exchange rate*Post Labor Reform

I*Exchange rate

Lagged Exports*Post Labor Reform

Lagged Exports (E)

Lagged Imports*Post Labor Reform

Lagged Imports (I)

Tariff*Post Labor Reform

Tariff

(1)

Table 7--Probability of informal employment, trade policy, and labor reform in Colombia

