NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PRODUCTIVITY OF U.S. STATES SINCE 1880
Kris James Mitchener
Ian W. McLean
Working Paper 9445
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9445
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

This paper is forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Growth. The helpful comments of Brad De Long, Barry
Eichengreen, Tony Hughes, Christina Romer, Hans Joachim Voth and two anonymous referees are all
gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Timothy Nicolle and David Norman for research assistance.The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Kris Mitchener and Ian W. McLean. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including . notice, is given
to the source.

The Productivity of U.S. States Since 1880
Kris James Mitchener and Ian W. McLean
NBER Working Paper No. 9445
January 2003
JEL No. N1, O4, Q32, R11
ABSTRACT
This study uses state-level variation in labor productivity levels at twenty-year intervals between
1880 and 1980 to examine the relative importance of institutional and geographical influences in
explaining observed and persistent differences in standards of living over time and across regions.
Focusing on fundamental rather than proximate influences, we find that both institutional
characteristics and some physical geography characteristics account for a high proportion of the
differences in state productivity levels: states with navigable waterways, a large minerals
endowment, and no slaves in 1860, on average, had higher labor productivity levels throughout the
sample period. However, we find little support for two other influences that have previously
received attention n climate and latitude.

Kris James Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053-0385
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu

Ian W. McLean
Department of Economics
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, SA 5005
Australia
ian.mclean@adelaide.edu.au

THE PRODUCTIVITY OF U.S. STATES SINCE 1880

1. Introduction

A major issue in the literature on growth concerns the importance of institutional factors
relative to geographical influences in determining why some countries are rich and others poor.
Especially in studies that focus on the deeper rather than proximate sources of growth, debate
has centered on whether a country’s economic fortune is locked in by physical features or
whether institutional factors, often regarded as endogenous, influence its trajectory. As a
complement to the long-standing interest of economic historians in these issues (North and
Thomas, 1973, Jones, 1981, Rosenberg and Birdzell, 1986, Landes, 1998, and Pomeranz, 2000),
recent studies by economists (Hall and Jones, 1996, 1999) have departed from the standard
methodology of accounting for the variation in growth rates and instead focused attention on
explaining variation in income or productivity levels across countries.1
Recently, the debate has been sharpened by attempts to marshal a wider range of data
than typically used in the empirical growth literature, and assess directly the relative influence of
institutions and geography – both broadly defined – in cross-country regressions. Several authors
have stressed the geographical correlates of income per capita, such as latitude, the disease
environment, access to navigable water, and distance from the principal centers of the world
economies (Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger, 1999; Mellinger, Sachs, and Gallup, 1999). This
approach has been advocated especially in attempts to account for the relatively poor recent
performance of sub-Saharan economies (Bloom and Sachs, 1998).
1

However, Acemoglu,

For surveys of the empirical cross-country growth literature, nearly all of which examine growth rates rather than

Johnson, and Robinson (2001b) have argued that, although geographical attributes may appear
correlated with economic performance, the more influential determinants are institutional in
nature.2
This article provides a fresh empirical approach for assessing the relative importance of
institutions versus geography in explaining differences in standards of living over time. We
exploit the extraordinary range in productivity levels that existed across the U.S. states (Figure
1) over the past century as well as the methodological advantages that result from examining the
variation within a country rather than across countries to advance this debate. In 1880 the United
States was poised to overtake Britain as the most efficient industrial economy, and become the
century-long benchmark against which all other economies’ productivity performance would be
compared. Yet in that year, labor productivity in the least productive state (North Carolina) was
a mere 18 percent of that in the most productive (Nevada). Excluding the case of Nevada
because of its early stage of settlement and very small population, a comparison with the second
and third most productive states, California and New York, indicates North Carolina as being
only 23.6 and 24.4 percent as productive, respectively.3 Differences of such magnitude between
countries would today only be found in comparisons between developed and developing
economies.4 Until 1940 this wide range of productivity levels narrowed only gradually, when the
least productive state had a level of labor productivity 25 percent that of the most productive.
Thereafter the gap narrowed more rapidly, with the least productive state reaching 61 percent of
the level of the most productive in 1980. Just as the existence of large productivity gaps between

levels, see Temple (1999) and Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).
2
For related discussion, see McArthur and Sachs (2001).
3
This wide variation persists even when states are aggregated into regions. The South Atlantic region had a level of
labor productivity only 38 per cent that of the Pacific region (Mitchener and McLean, 1999).
4
For example, GDP per worker in both Morocco and Thailand was approximately 18 percent of that in the United
States in 1990.
2

countries constitutes a major analytical and policy challenge to growth economists, accounting
for the wide disparities in state productivity differences in the late nineteenth century United
States, and their persistence well into the twentieth century, poses a related challenge, and one
that has not been directly addressed.5
Given these large productivity differences, the experience of U.S. states provides an
alternative laboratory for testing whether institutions or geography matter, and one that has
several advantages. By employing regional data from within a country to analyze variation in
productivity levels, the approach of this paper is less susceptible to omitted variables bias than
the cross-country approach.6 Just as languages, cultures, and technology flows differ markedly
across countries, institutional differences are almost certainly more pronounced across countries
than across U.S. states. This is not to deny a role for institutions in explaining differences in
productivity across states; indeed, institutions still play a prominent role in our story. Rather it is
to point out that identifying observable differences or accounting for unobservable differences is
likely to be less of a problem in our case compared to the cross-country approach. Moreover,
since institutional differences are more muted within the U.S. and detailed climate data have
been collected on U.S. states for quite some time, the within-country sample should permit a

5

Since the U.S. average level of labor productivity is the weighted sum of that of the states, no account of the
sustained rise in U.S. productivity levels over the past century is going to be complete without an understanding of
the forces producing the changing regional contributions to that outcome. A second reason for attempting to account
for the range in productivity levels across states is that the variation in state labor productivity accounts, in turn, for
the major part of the variation in their living standards. Differences in the level of nominal income per capita
between states in any year can be decomposed into three elements: differences in prices, labor input per capita, and
a ‘residual’ measure of labor productivity. Only a small portion of the variation in incomes across states in any of
the six years in the study is due to variation in prices - from minus one to plus 16 percent. Variation in labor input
per capita contributes between 9 and 28 percent across these dates. The remaining difference in income levels (56
to 84 per cent) is attributed to variations in the average efficiency of workers. This analysis is reported in Mitchener
and McLean (1999).
6
It might be suggested that a greater degree of domestic than international labor mobility should be recognized as
an important difference between interstate and cross-country analysis. However, income convergence across
countries does not require migration. And the historical evidence of sustained regional segmentation within the U.S.
labor market is well known (for example, Wright, 1986, 1987).
3

cleaner test of whether differences in geography matter for standards of living.
To our knowledge, we are the first to analyze the determinants of variation in labor
productivity levels over time rather than at a single point in time. Our paper uses a limited
number of deeper determinants (such as geography and institutions) rather than proximate
influences (such as investment in physical and human capital) to analyze differences in state
productivity levels at twenty-year intervals between 1880 and 1980. Such an approach allows us
to assess whether a small number of determinants are capable of explaining the variation in
productivity levels for 100 years of U.S. history and to identify the influences that persist or
wane.
We find that institutional characteristics, physical geography, and resource abundance
together can account for a high proportion of the variation in state productivity level differences,
especially at the beginning of the period studied. Even within a country, institutions play a
prominent role and appear robust to the inclusion of geographical influences: the legacy of
slavery has a strong and persistent effect on productivity levels across U.S. states. However, no
consistent support was found for one other influence given prominence in the cross-country
regressions of income or productivity levels in recent years, namely climate. We find some
evidence that a (small) reversal of fortune took place between the colonial period and present,
with initially low productivity states achieving high levels by 1980. This is consistent with the
view that institutions contribute to the evolution of productivity differences across regions or
countries.
Following a review of literature in the next section, section 3 explains the selection of our
hypothesized key determinants of differences in productivity levels across states, drawing on the
insights embedded in American economic historiography as well as recent growth analyses.

4

Section 4 discusses the data and also presents the empirical results from our core model, together
with an assessment of their robustness by considering alternative proxies for the explanatory
variables. The next three sections offer extensions and further testing of our core model. In
Section 5, we use our data on U.S. states to further elucidate the nexus between latitude and
climate. We also more closely examine our findings for the legacy of slavery variable and
consider whether this institutional variable is endogenous (Section 6). Sections 7 and 8 extend
our discussion to consider the influence of colonial origins on productivity and whether there has
been a “reversal of fortune” in the economic performance of U.S. states. The main contributions
and wider significance of our study are summarized in a concluding section.

2. Literature and Conceptual Framework

The problem of economic development is widely acknowledged as one of “accounting for the
observed pattern, across countries and across times, in levels and rates of growth of per capita
income” (Lucas, 1988, p.3). However, most theoretical and empirical research has primarily
focused on the second half of this agenda – growth rates.7 The approach of this paper, and a
small but growing newer literature, is to explain why the substantial dispersion in per capita
income or productivity levels exists.8 Differences across countries in productivity levels usually
result from the cumulative effect of a host of prior influences operating gradually and over long
periods of time. Thus it is often difficult to detect the effects of such variables on growth rates,
which may be imperceptible in the short to medium term, even though their eventual impact on
7

The relevant literature is well surveyed in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) and Temple (1999).
To be sure, economic historians have long been aware of these differences in income and productivity levels, and
have also participated in the search for a suitable framework to explain them. For example, see Landes (1990),
Gerschenkron (1962), Engerman and Sokoloff (1997), Jones (1981), Lal (1998), and Diamond (1997).

8

5

levels can be large. Yet, because growth rates over the very long run have been uneven, these
level differences between countries are increasing.9
The new empirical literature has focused on explaining differences in income or
productivity levels across countries. Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999) argue that the variation
in the level of per capita income is determined by geographical factors (tropical diseases, natural
resource endowment per capita, distance from world markets, and the proportion of population
near coasts), and political and institutional factors (quality of government institutions, openness
to trade, and legacy of colonial rule). They report that the four geographic explanatory variables
alone account for 69 per cent of the variation in per capita income levels across 83 countries in
1995. And in their study of cross-country levels of output per worker for 1988, Hall and Jones
(1999) demonstrate that physical capital per worker, human capital per worker, and the Solow
residual (and hence output per worker) can be accounted for by “social infrastructure,” an index
covering the quality of government as well as openness to international trade. Since social
infrastructure is endogenous, they use measures of the historical extent of western European
influence as instruments for the quality of government (distance from the equator, and the extent
to which English or a major European language is spoken), and a measure of predicted trade
share (based on population and geography) as the instrument for openness. Most of the observed
variation in levels of output per worker is accounted for by social infrastructure.10
More recently, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001a, 2001b) have sought to identify
9

This has led to the suggestion that “divergence in relative productivity levels and living standards is the dominant
feature of modern economic history” (Pritchett 1997, p.3).
10
The importance of non-conventional influences has likewise been stressed in studies of the determinants of labor
productivity levels across U.S. states in recent years. Bernard and Jones (1996) highlight the relative size of
particular sectors, and note especially that states with the highest private non-farm labor productivity levels after
1963 were also those with the highest shares of output originating in mining. And in an investigation of the sources
of inter-state variation in gross state product per worker in 1988, Ciccone and Hall (1996) report that more than half
can be attributed to the agglomeration effects arising from the density of employment. See also Ram (1999),

6

the deeper and historical determinants of differential development – and hence currently
differing levels of per capita income – among countries that once were colonies of the European
powers. In particular, they emphasize the importance of institutions in their comparative analysis
of long-run economic performance. Geography mattered only in the sense of creating different
disease environments for potential settlement. The authors argue that the disease environment
facing potential settlers was crucial to the type of institutions that were put in place. Where white
settler mortality rates were high, European immigration was low, and the transfer of European
institutions was less than where the environment was more benign, as in the temperate-zone
colonies of European settlement. In the former, population density and incomes per capita were
relatively high, but the institutions established by the colonizers were less conducive to long-run
growth, encouraging an extractive basis for economic activity. In the latter, where pre-colonial
population density and incomes both tended to be low, but subsequent European immigration
high, there occurred a more comprehensive transfer of institutions which, it is hypothesized,
thereby enhanced long-run growth. The authors argue that a “reversal of fortune” in economic
performance of the sometime colonies has occurred, and that institutions are the critical
determinant in explaining this phenomenon.
This article strikes out on a new, but related path in order to further clarify the debate
over the relative importance of institutions versus geography. Our objective is to account for the
substantial differences in levels of labor productivity across U.S. states in 1880 and at twentyyear intervals thereafter. For this purpose, we identify fundamental influences (which we initially
assume are exogenous) and proceed directly to estimate the relationship between output per
worker and these hypothesized determinants. Such an approach will indicate either of two

Beeson, DeJong, and Troesken (2001) and Homes (1998).
7

possibilities: that a limited number of deeper determinants account for most level differences
across time and place (a result comforting to the economist’s desire to develop parsimonious
models of general applicability) or that these fundamental influences are more numerous, and
vary by period or place.

3. Determinants of Productivity Levels

Because we are not searching for that “model” which necessarily best fits each year in
the study, considering that year in isolation, the list of candidate determinants is considerably
shortened. In the absence of clear guidance from theory, our selection of deeper explanatory
variables draws partly on cross-country studies, which suggest that certain fundamental
influences on productivity levels such as locational advantage (or disadvantage), climate
(especially the advantage of temperate over tropical zones in terms of disease environment, soil
fertility, and working conditions), and natural resource endowment might apply fairly
generally.11 On the other hand, many institutional factors canvassed in the cross-country growth
literature (for example, language, culture, religion, legal system, or political system) are not
likely to be paramount in an inquiry confined within the borders of the United States.
Several of our fundamental determinants, including our primary institutional factor, are
also based on evidence and debates that have been exhaustively evaluated by historians. From
this rich literature we draw especially on one old and one new theme. The well-established
theme is that in a major region of the economy, the South, income levels that were depressed
during the Civil War did not converge on those in the rest of the country until after the 1930s.
11

In addition to previously cited references, see also Collier and Gunning (1999), Masters and McMillan (2000),

8

The reasons for this delayed catch-up appear rooted in the institutional arrangements in the South
dating from the end of slavery.12 The new theme concerns the importance of natural resource
abundance. Agricultural land was abundant in the 13 colonies, and the westward territorial
expansion of the United States reinforced this favorable feature of the economy. However,
Wright (1990) has argued that a related phenomenon, the discovery and exploitation of mineral
resources, was significant in underpinning industrial development until 1940.13 The following
subsections discuss the theoretical and historical underpinnings of the institutional and
geographical characteristics that we use to analyze the variation in productivity levels across
U.S. states.

3.1. The Legacy of Slavery

The trajectory of the Southern economy was disrupted by important political and social
events in the mid-nineteenth century. The Civil War (a negative shock) ushered in a well-known
process of relative stagnation and delayed convergence from below. From 1860 to 1880, income
levels in the South fell relative to the rest of the country and relative to its own 1860 level;
incomes only began to converge rapidly in the post-WWII period. Emancipation triggered postbellum institutional changes that altered the relationships between factors of production that may
have had a negative impact on the efficiency of production and hence on southern levels of
income per capita. For example, former slave owners could no longer determine the number of
hours worked and the type of work carried out by the free blacks, nor could they necessarily
and Temple and Johnson (1998).
12
See Ransom and Sutch (1977) and Wright (1986).
13
Thereafter, the basis of growth, and especially of economic leadership relative to other early-industrializing
countries, shifted to knowledge-based activities (Nelson and Wright, 1992).
9

influence the efficiency of production through the control of nutrition and health. Furthermore,
in both the workplace and southern society at large, discrimination and legal restrictions placed
on ex-slaves may have limited their access to education or their ability to secure either physical
capital or land. Denying productive agents these economic opportunities may have decreased the
efficiency of production in the post-bellum era. The heterogeneous institutional response to the
demise of slavery throughout the South therefore might be an important underlying determinant
of differences in the observed productivity levels across states. And this negative influence on
efficiency may have persisted for many decades, as the economic catch-up of the southern states
began only in the 1930s.14 To proxy the legacy of slavery, we use the percentage of the state
population in 1860 that were slaves.15 As slavery has been associated with a host of factors
detrimental to productivity levels long after emancipation, the expected sign on this variable
would be negative.16

14

Wright (1974, 1986) has argued that the antebellum growth in the South was unsustainable, with or without the
war, due to the decline in worldwide demand for cotton. Alternatively, Ransom and Sutch (1977) have focused on
the labor supply effects of African Americans in response to emancipation, suggesting that the decline in Southern
output is attributable to a reduction in hours worked by former slaves. These explanations, and others by Temin
(1976), Fogel and Engerman (1974), Brinkley (1997), and Irwin (1994), shed light on the decline in southern per
capita income after the war.
15
Slave population data are from the U.S. Census of 1860.
16
Explanations for the convergence of the South on national levels of income and productivity in the second half of
the 20th century are wide-ranging. Indeed, a vast literature exists on mechanisms linking the presence of slavery
with lowered post-bellum income and productivity levels and delayed catch-up in these performance indicators with
the rest of the country over the following century. Some examples include the rise of sharecropping in southern
agriculture; the reduction of labor input following the abolition of a coercive plantation labor system; the failure of
southern schooling to raise literacy and education levels among freedmen; the spread of legal discrimination based
on race; the limited financial endowment of the freedmen at emancipation and hence the time taken to for them to
accumulate assets; the territorial monopoly of sources of credit to freedmen resulting in debt peonage lock-in over
many years; and the failure of a truly national labor market to emerge which included southern labor markets until
after the 1930s. Surveys of this literature can be found in Ransom and Sutch (1977), Wright (1986, 1987) and
O’Brien and Shade (2001).
10

3.2. Minerals Endowment

Economists have reached no consensus as to whether resource abundance spurs or
inhibits growth. Sachs and Warner (1995b) have shown that, since 1960, resource-abundant
countries have experienced lower growth rates, suggesting that it is a curse rather than a blessing
to be resource rich. One hypothesis in support of this empirical evidence is that resource-based
development is likely to be accompanied by heavy government involvement, and the political
process encourages wasteful rent seeking.17 On the other hand, Wright (1990) has suggested that
much of the industrial success of the United States in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century was based on its ability to exploit quickly and efficiently its mineral resource base.18
Particularly in frontier economies, where labor and capital are often in scarce supply, having a
large initial endowment of resources, especially (but not limited to) minerals and fuels, may
improve the opportunities for economic agents to acquire scarce factors quickly – to grow
extensively, acquiring more capital and labor so the resource base can be further exploited.19
This suggests that a region rich in readily extractable natural resources may record higher levels
of output per worker.20
To test for the influence of resource endowment on productivity levels it would be ideal
to have a measure of total natural resource stocks by state. However, state-level data on resource
17

Matsuyama (1992) proposes an alternative model which suggests that countries choosing to exploit their
comparative advantage in natural resources may lock themselves into a long-run, low growth path if the neglected
manufacturing sector has more favorable externalities. See also Redding (1999).
18
For a broader historical discussion of the role of natural resource abundance in American economic growth, see
Abramovitz and David (1996).
19
Related themes are developed in Findlay (1995, Chapters 5 and 6).
20
Some fairly direct support is reported by Bernard and Jones (1996) in their study of productivity by sector across
U.S. states since 1963: those states with more than 20 percent of private non-farm product originating in mining
have higher levels of labor productivity than non-mining states. Indirect support is provided by Gallup, Sachs and
Mellinger (1999) who find that levels of per capita income across countries in 1995 are positively related to deposits
of natural resources.
11

stocks are unavailable, and production data for some minerals are difficult to assign by state
(major mines cross state borders and historical statistics often assign quantities or values to states
where mining companies were located rather than where the resources were mined). Hence, we
use the share of employment in mining in 1880 as a measure of natural resource abundance in a
state.21 (Summary statistics of this and other explanatory variables are reported in Table 1.) A
positive sign would be consistent with the frontier economy and Wright hypotheses.

3.3. Climate

In an era where air conditioning, heating, and climate control are standard in the
workplace, it is difficult to think that climate significantly reduces any state’s average labor
productivity. In 1880, however, weather may have severely altered both the hours worked and
the level of efficiency at which one worked. The notion that climate influences work effort and
thus productivity actually has a long tradition dating back at least to the 16th century and the
writings of Machiavelli (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001a).22 As U.S. statistics on
weather and temperature at the state level are quite detailed, we can assess the climate hypothesis
more explicitly than has been possible in many cross-country studies. We used the average
annual number of cooling degree days as our initial climate proxy – a measure which NOAA
uses to determine the need for air conditioning in buildings.23 Maine records the lowest value of
this measure of climate, while Arizona has the highest. If heat impaired labor productivity
(reflecting the disadvantages of working without air conditioning), then the expected sign on this
variable will be negative; moreover, it will decline in importance over the sample period
21

For Oklahoma, we use the figure for 1900. Our data sources are Miller and Brainerd (1957), Perloff et al (1960),

12

especially after 1940 as the use of air conditioning diffuses.

3.4. Locational Advantage and Trade

In country studies, the growth rate and the level of per capita income are both shown to
be positively related to the openness of the economy, conventionally measured as the ratio of
total trade (exports plus imports) to income.24 Other cross-country studies have emphasized
physical impediments to trade as reflected in such geographic features as access to a coast or
navigable waterway or distance to some relevantly defined point in the national or international
economies.25 Between U.S. states there exist only natural barriers to trade as opposed to
politically imposed impediments, so our concern is to identify an advantage due to geography
that reduces transport costs or improves the efficiency of production if a state was well served by
transportation and information networks.
For the period before the completion of the national railroad network freight rates for
water transport were significantly lower than those for land, with ocean rates the lowest of all.
Interstate trade, especially between non-contiguous states, was clearly facilitated by access to
navigable water – as illustrated by the trade along the Atlantic seaboard from colonial times on,
and the trade in raw materials on the Great Lakes (Taylor, 1951). International trade would also

and the U.S. censuses. Our measure also includes any employment in the oil industry, although in 1880, this
industry is in its infancy.
22
Some of the anthropological literature, however, contends that work efficiencies may not vary significantly across
temperature ranges.
23
Each degree that the average air temperature for a given day is above 65 degrees F produces one cooling degree
day. This means that if the average temperature is five degrees above 65F for a 30-day month, then that is 150
cooling degree days. Data are from the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1992). See Appendix table 1 for
further details.
24
For a survery of postwar evidence, see Sachs and Warner (1995a).
25
Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999) find that countries with access to navigable waterways or with primarily
coastal populations have higher levels of income.
13

be favored in coastal states or those with navigable rivers. Even when innovations in land
transportation eroded these natural advantages, path dependence may have ensured that the
advantages to states with navigable waterways persisted.
What constitutes a navigable waterway (or access to the ocean) may be influenced by
investment (e.g. in canals, locks, river-deepening) or by technological change (e.g. in riverboat
design). Both of these may, in turn, be more likely to be undertaken in higher productivity
regions or economies, suggesting the possibility of reverse causation.26 To maintain an
assumption of exogeneity, we initially define navigable waterways as an indicator variable
where positive values indicate states that are coastal or border the Great Lakes. Since this
variable is capturing how location can benefit trade, we expect that it will be positively related to
the level of labor productivity.

4. Data and Analysis of Determinants

The dependent variable in this study, what we call labor productivity, is derived from
estimates of personal income per capita for each state. To calculate labor productivity, the
personal income data were first adjusted for differences in price levels across states, for each of
six census years between 1880 (the first year data for western states are available) and 1980
using “relative” price indexes. This produced price-adjusted personal income per capita
estimates that are calculated relative to U.S. average prices for a given year. These estimates
were then further adjusted to a per worker basis using the employment-population ratio (or labor
26

This applies particularly to the issue of whether states along the Mississippi river system should be classified as
having access to navigable water, and which states in which years. Mellinger, Sachs and Gallup (1999, p.4) employ
a definition of navigable rivers as those that can accommodate vessels with a minimum draft of three meters; they
assert that anything smaller would not be considered “ocean-going.”
14

input per capita) in each state. The labor productivity measure is thus (log) price-adjusted
income per worker.27
The data set includes 47 states for 1880 and 48 for years thereafter.28 We obtained data
on our underlying determinants as well as state productivity for the six selected census years
from 1880 to 1980 such that we could also measure how the effects of various factors change
over a long period of time – something that previous cross-country studies examining differences
in income or labor productivity levels have not examined. The sources and definitions of our key
variables are given in Appendix Table 1, while the data are provided in Appendix Table 2.
Our initial identifying assumption is that the fundamental determinants are uncorrelated
with the random element of our measure of labor productivity; we therefore use ordinary least
squares to estimate the parameters of the relation. Given our definitions for our determinants,
this identifying assumption seems reasonable. Certainly climatic factors are exogenous as is the
location of a state with respect to navigable water. A strong justification (discussed below) can
also been made for the exogeneity of mining activity in a state. And since slave populations are
for 1860, twenty years prior to our first year of productivity data, we also assume that this
institutional variable is exogenous; however, given the debate in the literature over the
endogeneity of institutions, we later relax this assumption.

27

These data are shown in Appendix Table 2. Detailed estimation methods and data sources are provided in
Mitchener and McLean (1999), especially Appendix 1, which describes the derivation of the state price relatives.
Because the relative price indexes are computed at a point in time (and not over time as is the case with deflated
series), the price-adjusted dollar values of the labor productivity figures across our six time periods are not directly
comparable. Note also that the price variation was greatest in 1880, when a 33 percentage-point variation occurred
around the U.S. average price level and, unsurprisingly, when the highest price levels were recorded in the
Mountain states.
28
Because Alaska and Hawaii only become states in 1959 and reliable data are unavailable for earlier periods, we
exclude these two states from our overall analysis. No estimates for state personal income per capita are available
for Oklahoma in 1880, so we exclude it from our analysis for that year. The Dakota Territories are separated out
into North and South Dakota for purposes of analysis in 1880, even though they received statehood in 1889. We
also refer to Montana, Washington, Idaho, Utah, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Arizona as “states,” though they
were technically still territories in 1880; their boundaries did not change between territory status and statehood.
15

The results of the OLS regressions are reported in Table 2. Panel A shows the results for
all six periods, while in Panel B we show the effect of sequentially adding the explanatory
variables for 1880 only. In 1880, 1900, 1920 and 1940, the four identified determinants explain
approximately 70 percent of the variation in productivity levels across states (using the adjusted
R-squared). Figure 2 displays the overall fit of the equation for 1880 when the variation in state
productivity levels was greatest. States above the 45-degree line produce more price-adjusted
output per worker than our specification predicts, while states below the 45-degree line produce
less than predicted. In the post-World War II period, the fundamental determinants are somewhat
less successful, accounting for less than half of the variation in productivity in 1960 and 1980.
This result may be due in part to the decline in the dispersion of labor productivity across states,
making it more difficult to explain differences in productivity levels. (Expressed relative to the
U.S. average, between 1940 and 1980, the standard deviation in the labor productivity across
U.S. states falls from 25.8 to 11.0). It is also possible that one or more factors omitted from our
specification emerged as having a significant impact on productivity levels across states only
after 1940 or that underlying factors that drove economic development in its early stages (such
as natural resource abundance or geographical advantages) are less important for explaining
differences today. Even with these qualifications, our methodological approach of using a
simple, general model to explain the variation in state productivity levels at six widely separated
dates is largely borne out by the fit of the regressions. We now discuss the specific findings for
each of the fundamental determinants.

4.1. Minerals Endowment

16

A simple plot of labor productivity in 1880 on minerals endowment (as shown in
Appendix Figure 1) supports the hypothesis that natural resources enhance productivity.
Including the other elements of our model does not change this result. In all years of our sample,
the regression coefficient reported in Table 2 is positive. Moreover, this determinant was
statistically significant at conventional levels until 1940, suggesting that states obtained a
productivity advantage from their mineral abundance even after controlling for other
influences.29 In 1880, for example, 27 states had less than one percent of their workforce in
mining while seven states had more than 10 percent. An increase of 10 percentage points in the
share of mining in a state’s employment was, in that year, associated with an increase of 11
percent in labor productivity in that state. Moreover, the coefficient on mining employment is
positive and economically significant despite the fact that our measure of labor productivity
already factors in state-level differences in demographic characteristics. That is, it was entirely
possible that the estimated relationship between minerals endowment and labor productivity
would be zero since the specification of the dependent variable already accounts for the high
labor input per capita that the mining sector typically attracted.30
In principle, the natural resource endowment would seem unambiguously exogenous to
the level of productivity: a region either possesses gold, oil, or copper or it does not. Moreover,
the endowment of minerals is not evenly spread across the globe or political units. Yet the search
and exploitation stages of mineral development may require levels of investment and technology
that are positively related to the level of economic development. David and Wright (1997) have
advanced the view that the expansion of U.S. mining in the nineteenth century which led to
29

The positive sign is also consistent with what Bernard and Jones (1996) find for the 1980s.
The demographic characteristics of many western states in the late nineteenth century – high masculinity ratios
and a high percentage of people of working age – may reflect employment in resource-based industries (Mitchener
and McLean, 1999).

30

17

American dominance in world production of most economically important minerals (Wright,
1990) resulted in part from the American lead in relevant scientific and technological
knowledge, which in turn was the product of high U.S. incomes. However, their view is not
relevant to an examination of the experience of states and regions within the United States. There
were no barriers to the flow of capital and technology across state boundaries, and firms and
individuals could take their investment and talents wherever they saw the opportunity for the
highest potential return.31 In mining, this is likely to have been where the prospect of mineral
discovery was greatest, or where some prior mining activity existed.32 In this context, the
endowment of minerals is likely to be exogenous – a claim that is substantiated by regional
histories: mineral discoveries famously precede economic development in many states in the
Mountain and Pacific regions. We therefore interpret the positive coefficient as evidence that
there were indeed productivity effects of mineral abundance in addition to the boost to income
per capita that came from the favorable demography and workforce characteristics associated
with mining. In the context of the development of U.S. states before 1940, to be mineral rich led
to higher productivity levels.

4.2. Climate

If climate affects work effort, then warmer climates should have lower productivity
levels. This view suggests that the sign of the coefficient for number of cooling-degree days

31

The important contributions (as documented by David and Wright (1997)) made by faculty and graduates of
geology or mining programs at schools such as Yale, Columbia, and Harvard to the discovery and development of
minerals in the far western states, well illustrates the point.
32
An assessment of the determinants of gold discoveries across U.S. states in the late nineteenth century is
contained in Eichengreen and McLean (1994), who emphasize the importance of recent settlement (by Europeans)
to the timing of such finds: few occurred in states that were long settled.
18

would be negative. Appendix Figure 2 plots the simple relationship between climate and (log)
productivity in 1880 and is suggestive of this hypothesis. However, when the additional
covariates of our model are added, the negative relationship does not persist. Instead, the sign on
the coefficient reported in Table 2 is positive, small in magnitude, and statistically insignificant.
This suggests that climate does not account for any of the variation in productivity levels across
states in any of the years in the study once the other independent influences have been included.
We also considered whether climate influenced productivity via a quadratic relationship (rows 1
and 2, Table 3), but no statistically significant and negative relationship was found.
We have thus far focused on the potential benefits to productivity from altering climate.
An alternative hypothesis suggests that disease ecology and agronomic processes can be
influenced by climate and may, in turn, alter productivity. This has led Gallup, Sachs, and
Mellinger (1999) to conclude that temperate climates are more productive.33 Masters and
McMillan (2000) suggest that ecological zones experiencing frosts have higher crop yields
because frost episodes alter plant respiration, water-evaporation rates, crop spoilage, topsoil
availability, and the presence of pests and parasites. Similarly, vector and waterborne diseases
that flourish in warmer climates, and which affect human health and productivity if endemic, are
frustrated by frosts. To test for these relationships, we considered two further proxies that
emphasize the importance of climate’s effects through health and agronomic systems: total
accumulation of snow and ice pellets and the number of days in a year when the minimum
temperature was at or below 32F.34 The results shown in the rows 3 and 4 of Table 3 do not
support this alternative hypothesis. A positive sign on these two measures would be consistent
with this alternative climate hypothesis. In years where the sign is positive, the coefficient is
33

For variation in the disease ecology across states, see Brinkley (1997), Coehlo and McGuire (1997), and

19

statistically insignificant at conventional levels.

4.3. Locational Advantage and Trade

In contrast to the results for climate, Table 2 supports the proposition that physical
geography has an independent influence on productivity levels. States that border the ocean or
Great Lakes have significantly higher productivity in all years in this study. In 1880, the
locational advantage is associated with a 24 percent lift in labor productivity. This advantage
fluctuates between 18 and 33 percent through 1940, but declines in magnitude to around 10
percent in the last 40 years of the sample period. Our result is consistent with cross-country
studies that show that access to navigable waterways is associated with higher income or
productivity levels. Despite the ascendancy of rail, road, and air transport, having access to a
navigable waterway appears to lock in long-term productivity advantages.
This finding was also subjected to sensitivity analysis, by varying the definition of access
to navigable water. Table 4 reports the results from substituting six alternative measures for this
physical feature of a state. To save space we do not report the 36 regressions – just the
coefficients on the alternative proxy variables for access to navigable water from each
regression. A comparison of the results reported in the first row of Table 4 with those in Table 2
indicates that the removal of the states bordering the Great Lakes (leaving only those with access
to the ocean) reduces the size of the effect in both 1880 and 1980, but otherwise does not affect
this determinant. The second row considers the effects of the Great Lakes only. Access to the
Great Lakes is important to the explanation of differences in state productivity levels in four of
Bleakley (2002). For a longer run perspective across countries, see Jones (1981).

20

the six periods, although the size of the coefficients is somewhat smaller than having access to
an ocean. The positive and significant coefficient on Great Lakes is consistent with historical
studies that have emphasized how access to the Great Lakes facilitated interregional and
overseas trade. The Great Lakes greatly expanded the usefulness of canal systems (especially
New York’s), lowered freight rates, and permitted goods from the West to flow directly
eastward.35 Bulky or heavy agricultural products like wheat and corn, or natural resources, such
as lumber and lead, were predominantly carried by water, with the Great Lakes figuring centrally
in their eastward movement to oceans or to eastern cities; rail, on the other hand, typically
carried livestock, hides, and general merchandise (Taylor, 1951). When the variable is defined to
take into account access to navigable rivers, by itself or together with access to the ocean or
Great Lakes (rows 3-6), the estimated coefficients are almost never statistically significant.36 It
appears that, at least by 1880, any productivity advantage of having access to river transport and
communication that may have existed before the railroad era had already been lost. In contrast,
the locational advantage of the Great Lakes likely persisted since they served a complementary
role (as a conduit for bulky and heavy products) even as railroad tonnage increased.

4.4. Legacy of Slavery

Finally, the negative and statistically significant coefficient on 1860 slave population
shown in Table 2 strongly confirms the hypothesis that slavery had lasting and pernicious effects
on levels of state productivity. (The univariate relationship between 1880 (log) productivity and
34

Data are from the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1992). See Appendix Table 1 for further details.
Tonnage on the Erie Canal continued to grow despite railroad competition and did not peak until the 1880s
(Taylor, 1951).
36
We are grateful to Andrew Mellinger for assistance with these data.
35

21

the legacy of slavery variable is displayed in Appendix Figure 3.) The estimates in Table 2
indicate that as late as 1940, more than seven decades after emancipation, a state whose
population was 10 percent slaves in 1860 would have a 14 percent lower level of productivity. A
subsidiary hypothesis was that any measurable impact of the legacy of slavery in 1880 would
fade as the institutions inhibiting more efficient economic arrangements in the post-bellum South
underwent gradual change. Somewhat surprisingly, the legacy of slavery variable exerts a
negative and significant influence on state labor productivity for the entire century, but as
predicted, the magnitude of the coefficients on this variable declines over time. Since our data
are at 20-year intervals, some caution should be exercised in terms of pinpointing the precise
decline in this variable’s influence. But there is support here for the view that only in recent
decades has the distinct and independent drag on southern economic efficiency, originating in
the slave-plantation era, finally lifted (Wright, 1987).
To check the robustness of our legacy of slavery finding, we considered an alternative
measure: the number of slaves owned by slaveholders with 20 or more slaves in 1860 as a
percent of the total state population.37 This proxy captures the relative importance of plantation
slaveholding, recognizing the debate about the productivity consequences of scale economies in
antebellum agriculture (see, for example, Irwin (1994)). If the greatest dislocation to the
institutional arrangements in the post-bellum South was associated with the end of the plantation
system, then this alternative measure of the legacy of slavery may more precisely capture its
impact on productivity levels in 1880. A comparison of the results in Panel A of Table 5 with
those in Table 2 shows no change in sign and almost no change in significance in any year.
To test whether the legacy of slavery variable is simply capturing a “southern effect,”

37

These data are also from the U.S. Census of 1860.
22

instead of a measure of the intensity of slavery in a state, we re-estimated the core model
including interaction effects. Specifically, in Panel B of Table 5 we interact a dummy variable
(where one indicates a slaveholding state) with each of the (non-slave) explanatory variables and
include these with the other explanatory variables used in the original analysis. Since all but one
of the 18 interaction terms (across all years) has a coefficient that is insignificant at the 5-percent
level, we can reject the hypothesis that the legacy of slavery variable is standing in for a generic
“southern effect.”
As a final robustness check, we test whether our legacy of slavery variable is in fact
picking up some omitted influence from the importance of river transport and communications.
Some of the states with slaves in 1860 were also states with access to navigable portions of the
Mississippi river system. In Table 6 we report two tests designed to assess this hypothesis. In
Panel A the core model is re-estimated excluding the access to navigable water variable. The
coefficient on slavery is unchanged in sign and remains significant at the one percent level until
1960. In Panel B we drop slavery from the core model and substitute access to river as the proxy
for access to navigable water. The access to navigable river is not significant in any of the six
regressions even at the ten percent level, while the overall explanatory power of the model has
fallen sharply in all years. We conclude that our slavery variable is not simply reflecting an
omitted influence of river transport and communication.

5. On Latitude and Climate

We justified including a measure of climate as an explanatory variable because of its
potential impact on hours of work and the level of efficiency at which one works or its influence

23

on diseases and soil fertility. A number of cross-country studies have also found latitude to be an
important factor in accounting for differences in cross-country income growth rates and income
or labor productivity levels. Hall and Jones (1996, 1999) argue that national economies located
in temperate zones tend to be more successful than those in tropical regions. Using the distance
from the equator as a proxy for climate, they find that temperate climates favor productivity.38
On the other hand, Nordhaus (1994) finds that latitude contributes only small, but measurable
differences in income across countries.
We did not initially focus on latitude as a measure of climate partly because we had
reliable climate statistics that were better suited for tests of the climate hypotheses. Moreover,
latitude is highly correlated with our legacy of slavery variable, and we had solid grounds for
retaining a direct measure of the regional productivity effect of the legacy of slavery. However,
given the prominence it has been assigned in related studies, it is valuable to assess whether
latitude is a good proxy for climate – at least for the case of U.S. states.
The latitude (degrees from the equator) was chosen as that of the largest city in the state
in the relevant year, so this varied (slightly) between the years in this study. The values of the
other climate measures did not vary, as they are based on city data (usually for multiple cities)
using meteorological observations averaged over many years. In Table 7 the direct correlation is
displayed between latitude and each of the five other measures of climate. The correlation with
latitude varies according to the selected measure of climate, but all the correlations are quite
strong. This leaves open the question of which climatic feature is most relevant to the
determination of productivity levels, and does not rule out the possibility that latitude is a good
proxy for the effect of a region’s climate on its level of productive efficiency.
38

Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999) arrive at a similar conclusion with respect to climate and levels of income per

24

6. Endogeneity of Institutions?

Thus far, we have offered a simple framework for understanding the differences in levels
of labor productivity across U.S. states and over time, and have tested whether a core set of
underlying determinants provides insight into this issue. The estimation approach we have
employed requires that the hypothesized determinants of productivity levels in each state be
exogenous. We have argued that our measures of geography across U.S. states (climate, minerals
endowment, and access to navigable waterways) are unambiguously independent of the level of
productivity or of economic development more generally in 1880 and later years. Our additional
assumption in section 4 was that the legacy of slavery (measured by 1860 slave population) was
also exogenous. However, there is an extensive debate in the growth literature as to whether
institutions are truly exogenous to the level of development, and this issue has recently spilled
over into the literature on measuring differences in levels of productivity across countries
(Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001a, 2001b and McArthur and Sachs, 2001). This
subsection therefore considers whether the legacy of slavery is an endogenous variable.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001a, 2001b) have suggested that the mortality of
British soldiers and priests is a reasonable instrument for addressing the endogeneity of
institutions in cross-country regressions. They argue that the susceptibility of British settlers to
the disease environment influenced whether (former) colonies adopted extractive or wealthcreating institutions, and these institutions in turn explain observed differences in productivity
levels. Within a country, where institutional differences are less pronounced, the causal
capita. See also Masters and McMillan (2000), Mellinger, Sachs and Gallup (1999), and Ram (1999). Diamond

25

connection between disease and institutional adaptation may operate differently or not apply at
all. In the context of the U.S. states, settler mortality may have influenced the labor supply of
(future) states, and hence the states where the institution of slavery took hold. As Coehlo and
McGuire (1997) have noted, the importation of African slaves occurred in larger numbers in
British colonies (such as the future Southern states of the U.S.) where it was more difficult to
attract European settlers because of climates that fostered malaria, hookworm, and other tropical
diseases to which European settlers lacked genetic resistance. On the other hand, African slaves
faced higher mortality rates in the northern colonies due to cold-weather diseases; investments in
European indentured servants were therefore more profitable than slaves in these colonies. Given
the unwillingness of European settlers to migrate to southern colonies due to higher mortality
risk in these regions, the importation (and breeding) of slaves from tropical West Africa
presented itself as a cost-effective way for European settlers to overcome what otherwise would
have been a labor shortage in the production of agricultural crops such as rice, indigo, and
tobacco. Hence within the United States, it is possible that both settler mortality and climate (as
it relates to the disease environment and crop choice) determined the adoption of slavery.39
In cross-country regressions, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001b) use soldier
mortality of non-native soldiers to proxy for the relationship between settler mortality and the
“virgin-soil” disease environment. For their U.S. data point, they draw on soldier mortality
estimates derived from the records of disease mortality collected by the U.S. Surgeon General’s
Office for the periods 1829-38 and 1839-54. These soldier mortality data are also reported for
(1997) claims to identify a link between longitude and latitude and productivity over the very long run.
39
Given that slavery is the key institutional difference across U.S. states, it is somewhat puzzling (given slavery’s
exploitative and coercive nature) that Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson code the United States as uniformly
adopting non-extractive institutions. Surely labor contracts that deny liberty and mobility, and fail to protect an
individual’s economic choices would be classified as extractive institutions. The explanation advanced for the U.S.
states also differs from their work on countries in another way: the disease environment antithetical to European

26

individual forts (Lawson, 1840, 1856), which we used to compute mortality at the state level.40
Since these records are for a period pre-dating major medical advances in fighting tropical
diseases, previous research has assumed that they are a reasonable proxy for the mortality that
17th- or 18th-century settlers would have faced in the United States.
In Table 8 we present the results of instrumental variable (IV) regressions using soldier
mortality as an instrument for the legacy of slavery. (Appendix Figure 4 displays the relationship
between soldier mortality and the percentage of slaves in 1860.) The preliminary results suggest
that the legacy of slavery variable remains robust to IV specification – at least for the 1880 to
1940 period. Given that the OLS version also explains less of the variation in productivity levels
in 1960 and 1980, it is not terribly surprising that the model’s R-squared using the IV
specification is poor after 1940, especially since the coefficient on the legacy of slavery variable
declines in economic significance in either specification. One serious caveat to using the U.S.
Surgeon General data to proxy for differences in the mortality risk of settlement is that the
records are based on data for U.S. soldiers and not British or non-U.S. soldiers. Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson’s use of soldier mortality as an instrumental variable is predicated on the
notion that there has been no biological adaptation to the disease environment; this is a valid
assumption if the soldiers are non-native and have not developed a resistance to disease or
figured out (non-medical) ways to reduce the incidence of tropical diseases.41 Using the
mortality of U.S.-born soldiers as a proxy for the disease risk that Europeans settling in the
settlement in the U.S. is not necessarily correlated with population density.
40
Soldier mortality is expressed as a percent of “mean strength.” See Appendix Table 1 for data sources and a
description of our computations and Appendix Table 2 for the state estimates of soldier mortality.
41
Curiously, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001b) fail to point out that some soldier mortality rates in their
study, including those for the United States, are not based on British soldiers, but indigenous soldiers; although this
omission may matter less across countries. See Curtin (1989) for further discussion of the cross-country mortality
data. Curtin also notes that soldiers were able to figure out relatively quickly non-medical ways of reducing the
incidence of disease (such as moving to higher or less damp locations), and that these adjustments likely had a

27

(future) U.S. states in the 17th and 18th centuries faced therefore may be too strong of an
assumption. The IV estimates shown in Table 8 should therefore be viewed as suggestive
(especially given the small sample sizes) rather than conclusive.42
Moreover, additional econometric tests suggest that the legacy of slavery variable is not
endogenous, and that the OLS model is not inconsistent. A Hausman test comparing the
instrumental variable regression and the OLS regression does not reject the null hypothesis that
OLS is a consistent estimator for the model (prob > chi-squared = 0.94). The alternative test
suggested by Davidson and MacKinnon (1993, pp.236-42) also fails to reject the null hypothesis
that the OLS specification is inconsistent (prob > F = 0.42). Given our reservations about using
soldier mortality as an instrument for the legacy of slavery, these model specification tests
provide further justification for preferring the OLS specification.

7. Colonial Origins of Development

European colonists who settled the Americas carried with them their inherited ideals and
customs about landholding and land tenure practices, taxation, civil law, and crime and law
enforcement. Despite certain shared experiences as Europeans, their attitudes towards these and

significant impact on soldier mortality rates.
42
Due to our concerns about the applicability of the U.S. soldier mortality data, we considered constructing
alternative instruments. Our most promising alternative instrumental variable for the legacy of slavery was the
percentage of churches or congregations in a state that were tolerant towards slavery (see Appendix Table 1).
Across the nascent U.S. states, European colonists belonged to a variety of Christian sects, some of which were less
tolerant of slavery. As has been well documented (Hall, 1930 and Steckel, 2000), Puritans, Quakers, and
Congregationalists objected to slavery on moral grounds, and later played a role in the Northern abolitionist
movement. On the other hand, Presbyterians, Protestants, Episcopalians, Lutherans, and Catholics were more
tolerant of its presence, and viewed the scriptures as taking no moral position on it. Since attitudes toward slavery
varied across Christian sects in 1790, and since these attitudes are unlikely to be correlated with the error term in
labor productivity regressions, this variable looked promising. However, the R-squared in the first-stage regression
did not improve when this variable was added, suggesting that it is not a very good instrument, and the variable
itself was statistically insignificant in the first stage regression.
28

the laws that competing sovereigns initially enforced differed considerably.43 For example,
differences in landholding practices varied. In areas initially under Spanish dominion, private
property rights were established by virtue of land grants, title, and residency; in contrast, in areas
of French influence such as Louisiana, land was granted without fee but not guaranteed by any
official deed. Such differences may have persisted and this legacy of colonial origins may have
in turn exerted an influence on productivity even after the United States was formed.
In Table 9, we incorporate institutional differences that may have arisen due to
differences in the heritage of early settlement by focusing on the four major groups that
influenced colonial settlement in the part of North America that would become the United States:
England, Spain, France and Holland. An indicator variable takes a value of one in each state
where, prior to statehood, the area had ties with one of these North American colonial powers
(except for England, which is the omitted country). The results presented in earlier tables are
robust to the addition of colonial influence in all years, and suggest no significant influence from
this source prior to 1940. For these years, the coefficients for the colonial legacy variables are
(with one exception) statistically insignificant. The positive and significant signs on Spanish
Settler in 1960 and 1980 almost certainly reflect the favorable post-war growth experience of the
Sunbelt states (nearly all of whom had significant early Spanish settlement). We conclude there
is no clear evidence of any direct link between this measure of colonial origins and subsequent
productivity levels across states.

8. Reversal of Fortune?

43

For a detailed discussion of these differences, see Cooke (1993).
29

In this section, analogous to the recent cross-country work of Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001a), we explore whether there has been a reversal of fortune in the prosperity of
U.S. states. They argue that, where there was extensive European settlement (in countries such as
the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand), there occurred a comprehensive transfer
of institutions that were conducive to long-run economic growth. Where there was little
settlement by Europeans, the institutional transfer was much less, and colonial institutions were
more oriented towards the extraction than creation of wealth. The upshot has been that the settler
economies have prospered relative to those colonies that did not attract large numbers of
Europeans. Since the latter were probably richer in pre-colonial times, there has been a “reversal
of fortune” in the histories of these economies.
The comparative economic growth performance of regions or states of the United States
over the very long run offers the opportunity to assess the reversal of fortune hypothesis from a
new perspective. However, adapting the reversal hypothesis to the experience of U.S. states
requires taking into account several historical factors that complicate the application of this
theory to a cross-state context. First, in contrast to the analysis of countries, all of the original
U.S. states were major recipients of European settlers. Expanding the geographical coverage to
all states and not just the original British colonies, the experience of European settlement also
looks quite different from what Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson describe as taking place at the
country level. The sparsely populated areas west of the Appalachians remained largely unsettled
during the colonial period. The lack of initial settlement in these areas occurred in spite of the
fact that the land was made even more sparsely populated by the arrival of Europeans. Their
presence on the North American continent (even in small numbers) had a large negative impact
on populations of Native Americans due to the diseases they brought with them. These diseases

30

swept across the area that would become the United States, and this should have increased the
possibilities for settlement, but competing land claims by rival European governments,
uncertainty over property rights, and geographical barriers likely limited the scope of initial
settlement in other parts of the future United States. Finally, with the exception of slavery,
differences between extractive and wealth-promoting institutions across states are more muted
than across countries.
Our test of the reversal of fortune hypothesis is therefore performed to assess the relative
importance of institutions relative to geographical factors. If geography is relatively more
important than institutions in accounting for economic performance over the long run, then those
states that were relatively rich in earlier periods will still be rich today. In contrast, if institutions
are more important for economic performance a reversal of fortune will take place.
We examine this hypothesis by first considering the period from 1880 to 1980, and
noting whether the states which had relatively high (low) productivity levels in 1880 are now
states with relatively low (high) levels of productivity. The correlation is positive and
statistically significant (p = 0.048) and the Spearman rank correlation coefficient between the
labor productivity figures for 1880 and 1980 is 0.4253 (the p value for a test of independence is
0.0029). The positive signs in these tests suggest that no reversal of fortune took place over the
100-year period of this study. The first row of Table 10 reports a regression of 1980 log
productivity on 1880 log productivity. The coefficient on 1880 log productivity is positive even
when we include the other conditioning variables of our core model. While the Western states
converged from above between 1880 and 1940, and the Southern states made significant gains
relative to the U.S. average after 1940, there was not a dramatic reshuffling of the rank of states
over this 100-year period.

31

A somewhat more speculative test, but also more in the spirit of the approach used in the
cross-country literature, requires that we frame the reversal of fortune hypothesis as a
comparison of the American colonial period with the present. An obvious shortcoming of this
test is that we have to abandon our measure of price-adjusted income per worker for something
that may only crudely proxy the economic performance of the (future) U.S. states during the
period of initial European settlement. Following Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001a,
2001b), we use population density as a proxy for the level of productivity of a (future) state. As
Table 11 shows, state population density (urbanization) rates and the log of price-adjusted
income per worker are positively correlated for our original sample period of 1880 to 1980,
suggesting that these may be reasonable proxies for labor productivity in periods when labor
productivity data are not available.44 A serious drawback to using population density as a proxy
for labor productivity in the colonial period is that the data are, at best, highly speculative
because no censuses of Native Americans residing in what would become the United States were
attempted until well after the United States was a country, and because the precise impact on
Native Americans of diseases that European settlers brought with them is unknown. Estimates of
indigenous populations residing in the (future) United States at the time of contact vary
enormously, are highly dependent on the assumptions made by researchers (including estimates
of mortality due to smallpox, measles, and other diseases), and consequently paint very different
pictures of population density at the time of European settlement (Daniels, 1992).
Despite a long and contentious debate about the size of the indigenous population in
America, very little research has attempted to build up estimates at a tribal level – a necessary
44

We also substituted population density and urbanization for labor productivity into the regressions reported in
Table 2. For 1880, the signs for the legacy of slavery variable and access to navigable waterways remain the same
and the coefficients are still significant; however, in the urbanization regression mining is insignificant and in the
population density regression it enters with the opposite sign.
32

prerequisite for determining population density or urbanization at the state level. Given that the
extant data for constructing state populations are limited and fragile, our estimates of population
density during the colonial period (a more reliable measure than urbanization given what little is
known about specific, pre-Colombian settled populations of Native Americans) are therefore
quite speculative. Our procedure for compiling these estimates and adding them to the stock of
early European settlers and blacks (including slaves) in the United States is described in detail in
Appendix Table 1.
The correlation between population density in the colonial period and labor productivity
in 1980 is weakly negative for both the 1700 and 1770 estimates of population density (Table
11), suggesting that there may have been some reversal in economic fortune. This reversal stands
in contrast to the persistence observed in the post-1880 period (Figure 3); however, the result is
sensitive to outliers. Although the sign does not change, the statistical significance and size of
the negative coefficient are much smaller when Rhode Island (the state with the greatest colonial
population density in 1700 and 1770) is removed from the sample.45 To test the reversal
hypothesis more systematically, we regress 1980 labor productivity on colonial population
density and a constant, and then add additional covariates to control for the geographical factors
as well as the colonial origin of a state. To save space, only the coefficient on population density
is reported, but it is reported for both 1700 and 1770 (rows 2 and 3 of Table 10) to see if the
results are sensitive to the influx of European settlement between these two dates. The sign on
population density is negative and statistically significant using either the 1700 or 1770 figures.
The reversal of incomes persists when we include the additional covariates from our core model
45

The coefficient on population density is -0.002 (s.e. = 0.003) in 1700 and –0.0006 (s.e. = 0.001) in 1770 when
Rhode Island is excluded from the sample. The population density estimate for Rhode Island in 1700 is driven in
large part by a large native population relative to the state’s area, but it is much higher than any other state in 1770,
even if we consider the population density figures that exclude Native Americans (52.6).
33

(and as the last column shows, this is not simply a proxy for the colonial origins of a state);
however, the overall effect is quite small. With an average population density per square mile of
5.75 people in 1770, a one-standard deviation reduction in 1770 population density is associated
with approximately a 2-3 percent boost to labor productivity in 1980. The figure is only slightly
larger (around 7 percent) if we consider 1700 population density, and in either case, the result is
still sensitive to the outlier state, Rhode Island. Over the longer period of several centuries, the
data suggest that some reversal of fortune may have occurred across U.S. states, but the effect is
smaller when compared to what has been found across countries. Comparing our results to the
cross-country literature, a 10 percent higher population density in 1700 or 1770 is associated
with 1980 state labor productivity being 1.3 – 1.4 percent lower; the same increase in colonial
population density for a country would lead to current income per capita being around 4 percent
lower (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001a).
Finally, we can also take advantage of the fact that our study spans one hundred years of
U.S. history to identify whether the reversal of fortune had taken place by 1880 and to pin down
whether the reversal had materialized by the end of the nineteenth century, perhaps as the result
of the spread of European agricultural technologies from the 16th to 18th centuries (McCusker
and Menard, 1985). In the second panel of Table 10, we regress 1880 log labor productivity on
the population density estimates from the colonial period. The results suggest that states that
were rich in the colonial period were still rich as of 1880.

9. Conclusion

In the search for convincing explanations of massive and persistent differences in

34

productivity levels, and hence of living standards, we find in the historical experience of the
United States a fruitful natural extension to the cross-country approach. Indeed, the analysis of
states may offer a more fertile testing ground for competing hypotheses because, unlike
countries, states share a common language, a similar culture, and likely have the same access to
new technologies. Such features have often been difficult to control for in cross-country analysis.
This paper was motivated by the empirical observation that labor productivity levels
showed considerable variation across U.S. states at six census years from 1880 to 1980. In 1880
the differences were quite substantial, with the lowest-ranked state having a level of labor
productivity only 18 per cent of that of the highest-ranked; whereas by 1980 the lowest-ranked
state had risen to 60 percent of the top performer.
To account for this productivity dispersion, we have tested a number of hypotheses
drawn from both the growth and economic history literatures. Our results suggest that a small
number of exogenous variables (institutional, resource, and geographic characteristics) do
extremely well in capturing the variation in productivity levels across states for 100 years of U.S.
history. The relationship is especially strong through 1940, where our specification accounts for
approximately 70 percent of the variation in productivity levels across states.
The experience of the U.S. states suggests that both geography and institutions matter.
Consistent with historians’ emphasis on institutional impediments, we find that the legacy of
slavery has a persistently pernicious effect on productivity levels well into the 20th century. From
1880 to 1940, slavery had a significant effect on state labor productivity; states with slave
populations of 10% had productivity levels that were on average 14 to 20 percent lower than
those without slaves over this period. This finding is also consistent with cross-country studies
that have emphasized the role of institutions in explaining differences in incomes (Acemoglu,

35

Johnson, and Robinson (2001a, 2001b). On the other hand, productivity levels were positively
associated with both mineral abundance and geographic features suited to transportation. While
some studies have found growth rates to be negatively correlated with natural resource
abundance, our positive relationship with productivity levels seems quite plausible; particularly
in frontier economies, having a large initial endowment of resources may have propelled the
acquisition of scare factors (capital and labor), and permitted further exploitation of resources.
Over the course of development, states may have been able to overcome the tyranny of
geography by constructing locks and deepening rivers; nevertheless, we find that states initially
blessed with a seaport or located on the Great Lakes possessed a built-in advantage for trade (and
settlement), which resulted in long-term benefits to their productivity levels. As a result of the
importance of these geographic factors, state productivity levels do not show evidence of
reversal since 1880. Finally, in contrast to some of the cross-country literature, we find no
systematic role for climate. In part, this may reflect the smaller degree of variation of this factor
within a country.
We have contributed to the analysis of why levels of labor productivity differ across
space and time, complementing the more orthodox economic analysis of the reasons for variation
in rates of growth. We have argued the case for a direct attack on the deeper determinants of
levels of productivity, though we recognize the difficulty of the task given the paucity of clear
theoretical guidance in the growth literature, and are aware of the ensuing methodological
limitations. The challenge facing growth economists is to better explain why there are high- and
low-productivity economies, and hence rich and poor societies. In responding to this challenge,
we have suggested that the historical experience of U.S. states offers a valuable source of
pertinent evidence for developing models that explain these differences. Our cross-state and

36

historical approach thus complements the cross-country studies relating to recent years.

37

REFERNCES
Abramovitz, M., and P.A. David. (1996). “Convergence and Deferred Catch-up: Productivity
Leadership and the Waning of American Exceptionalism.” In Ralph Landau, Timothy
Taylor and Gavin Wright (eds.), The Mosaic of Economic Growth. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson (2001a). “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution”, Working Paper
8460, National Bureau of Economic Research; forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J.A. Robinson (2001b). “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, 91, 1369-1401.
Barro, R. J., and X. Sala-I-Martin. (1995). Economic Growth. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Beeson, P.E., D.N. DeJong, and W. Troesken, “Population Growth in U.S. Counties, 1840 –
1990,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 31(6), 669-99.
Bernard, A. B., and C.I. Jones. (1996). “Productivity and Convergence across U.S. States
and Industries,” Empirical Economics 21, 113-35.
Bleakley, H. (2002), “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in the
American South”, mimeo, available at http://web.mit.edu/hoyt/www/home.html
Bloom, D. E., and J. D. Sachs. (1998). “Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in
Africa,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 207-95.
Brinkley, G. L. (1997). “The Decline in Southern Agricultural Output, 1860-80,” Journal of
Economic History 57, 116-38.
Ciccone, A. and R. E. Hall. (1996). “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,”
American Economic Review 86, 54-70.
Coelho, P. R., and R. A. McGuire. (1997). “African and European Bound Labor in the British
New World: The Biological Consequences of Economic Choices,” Journal of
Economic History 57, 83-115.
Collier, P. and J. W. Gunning. (1999). “Explaining African Economic Performance,” Journal of
Economic Literature 37, 64-111.
Cooke, J. (ed.) (1993). Encyclopedia of the North American Colonies. Volume 1. New York,
NY: Charles Scribner’s Sons.

38

Curtin, P. D. (1989). Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical World in the
19th Century New York: Cambridge University Press.
Daniels, J. D. (1992). “The Indian Population of North America in 1492,” The William and
Mary Quarterly 49(2), 298 – 320.
David, P. A., and G. Wright. (1997). “Increasing Returns and the Genesis of American
Resource Abundance,” Industrial and Corporate Change 6, 203-45.
Davidson, R, and J.G. MacKinnon. (1993). Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. New
York: Oxford Unviersity Press.
Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York, NY:
Norton.
Eichengreen, B. J., and I. W. McLean. (1994). “The Supply of Gold under the Pre-1914 Gold
Standard,” Economic History Review 47, 288-309.
Engerman, S.L., and K.L. Sokoloff. (1997). “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
Paths of Growth Among New World Economics.” In S. Haber (ed.), How Latin America
Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Findlay, R. (1995). Factor Proportions, Trade, and Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Fogel, R., and S. Engerman. (1974). Time on the Cross. New York, NY: Little, Brown.
Gallup, J.L., J.D. Sachs, and A. Mellinger. (1999). “Geography and Economic Development” in
B. Pleskovic and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 1998 (Washington DC: World Bank), pp.127-178.
Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones. (1996). “The Productivity of Nations,” Working paper No 5812,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones. (1999). “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 83-116.
Hall, T. C. (1930). The Religious Background of American Culture Boston:
Little, Brown, and Company.
Holmes, T.J. (1998). “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing:
Evidence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4), 667-709.
39

Irwin, J. R. (1994). “Explaining the Decline in Southern per Capita Output after Emancipation,”
Explorations in Economic History 31, 336-56.
Jones, E. L. (1981). The European Miracle: Environments, Economies, and Geopolitics in the
History of Europe and Asia. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Lal, D. (1998). Unintended Consequences: The Impact of Factor Endowments, Culture, and
Politics on Long-Run Economic Performance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Landes, D. S. (1990). “Why Are We So Rich and They So Poor?” American Economic Review
80, 1-13.
Landes, D. S. (1998). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why Some are so Rich and
Some so Poor. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Lawson, T. (1840). Statistical Report on the Sickness and Mortality in the Army of the
United States. Washington: Jacob Gideon, Jr.
Lawson, T. (1856). Statistical Report on the Sickness and Mortality in the Army of the
United States. Washington: A.O.P. Nicholson.
Lucas, R. R. Jr. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22, 3-42.
Maddex, R.L. (1998). State Constitutions of the United States. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Quarterly.
Malinowski, S. (ed.). (1998). The Gale Encyclopedia of Native American Tribes. Gale:
Detroit.
McArthur, J.W., and J.D. Sachs (2001). “Institutions and Geography: Comment on Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2000)”, Working Paper 8114, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Masters, W.A., and M.S. McMillan. (2001). “Climate and Scale in Economic Growth,” Journal
of Economic Growth 6, 167-186.
Matsuyama, K. (1992). “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic
Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory 58, 317-34.
McCusker, John J. and Russell R. Menard. (1985). The Economy of British America, 16071789, Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Mellinger, A.D., J.D. Sachs, and J.L. Gallup. (2000). “Climate, Coastal Proximity, and
Development” in Gordon L. Clark, Maryann P. Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler, editors,
40

The Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography (Oxford: Oxford University Press),
pp.169-194.
Miller, A. R., and C. P. Brainerd. (1957). “Labor Force Estimates,” in Everett S. Lee et al.
Population Redistribution and Economic Growth: United States, 1870-1950, volume 1.
Philadelphia, PA: The American Philosophical Society.
Mitchener, K. J., and McLean, I. W. (1999). “U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence,
1880 – 1980,” Journal of Economic History 59, 1,016-42.
Mooney, J. (1928). The Aboriginal Population North of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution:
Washington, D.C.
Nelson, R. R., and G. Wright. (1992). “The Rise and Fall of American Technological
Leadership: The Postwar era in Historical Perspective,” Journal of Economic
Literature 30, 1,931-64.
Nordhaus, W. D. (1994). “Climate and Economic Development,” In Proceedings of the
World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1993. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
North, D.C., and R.P. Thomas (1973). The Rise of the Western World: An Economic History.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Brien, A.P., and W.G. Shade (2001). “One Kind of Freedom Reconsidered: African-American
Economic Life in the Segregation Era”, Special Issue, Explorations in Economic History,
38, 1-194.
Paullin, C. O. (1932). Atlas of the Historical Geography of the United States. Washington:
Carnegie Institution.
Perloff, H. S., et al. (1960). Regions, Resources, and Economic Growth. Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins Press.
Pomeranz, K. (2000). The Great Divergence: Europe, China, and the Making of the Modern
World Economy. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pritchett, L. (1997). “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 3-18.
Ram, R. (1999). “Tropics and Income: A Longitudinal Study of the U.S. States,” Review of
Income and Wealth 45, 373-78.
Ransom, R., and R. Sutch. (1977). One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of
Emancipation. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Redding, S. (1999). “Dynamic Comparative Advantage and the Welfare Effects of Trade,”
41

Oxford Economic Papers 51, 15-39.
Rosenberg, N., and L.E. Birdzell (1986). How the West grew Rich: The Economic
Transformation of the Western World. New York: Basic Books.
Sachs, J. D., and A. M. Warner. (1995a). “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-95.
Sachs, J. D., and A. M. Warner. (1995b). “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,”
Working paper 5398 (December), National Bureau of Economic Research.
Steckel, R. H. (2000). “African American Population,” in M. R. Haines and
R. H. Steckel (eds.), A Population History of North America New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Sturtevant, W. C. (ed.). (1978-). Handbook of North American Indians. Smithsonian
Institution: Washington, D.C.
Taylor, G. R. (1951). The Transportation Revolution, 1815-1860. New York, NY: Harper &
Row.
Temin, P. (1976). “The Postbellum Recovery of the South and the Cost of the Civil War,”
Journal of Economic History 36, 898-907.
Temple, J. (1999). “The New Growth Evidence,” Journal of Economic Literature 37, 112-56.
Temple, J., and P. A. Johnson. (1998). “Social Capability and Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 965-90.
Ubelaker, D. (1988). “North American Indian Population Size, A.D. 1500 to 1985,”
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 77(3), 289-94.
U.S. Department of Commerce. (1909). A Century of Population Growth in the United States
1790 – 1900. Department of Commerce and Labor Bureau of the Census:
Washington, D.C.
U.S. Department of Commerce. (1975). Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial
Times to 1970.Bureau of the Census: Washington, D.C: GPO.
U.S. Department of Commerce. (various years). Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Washington, D.C.: GPO.
Wright, G. (1974). “Cotton Competition and the Post Bellum Recovery of the American South,”
Journal of Economic History 34, 610-35.

42

Wright, G. (1986). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy. New York,
NY: Basic Books.
Wright, G. (1987). “Economic Revolution in the American South,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 1, 161-78.
Wright, G. (1990). “The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879-1940,” American
Economic Review 80, 651-68.

43

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Univariate Relationships
Panel A: Sample Descriptive Statistics
Standard
Mean deviation Minimum Maximum
Percentage of 1880 workforce in mining
Average number of cooling degree days (100's)
Percentage of 1860 population in slavery
Percentage of 1860 population in slavery on
large plantations

5.20
11.59
10.50
5.20

9.80
8.49
17.90
10.90

0.00
2.68
0.00
0.00

38.50
41.62
57.20
38.50

Panel B: Univariate Regressions for 1880
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.016***
(0.005)
[0.004]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.027**
(0.012)
[0.025]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

-0.019***
(0.002)
[0.000]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

-0.054
(0.120)
[0.656]
0.14
47

0.30
47

0.65
47

0.00
47

Notes: White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a
coefficient indicates significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent,
respectively. A constant term was also included (not reported). See Appendix Table 1
for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

44

Table 2. Explaining Productivity Levels Across U.S. States
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Panel A: Core Model
Independent Variable

Panel B: Additional Regressions for 1880
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Constant

6.106*** 6.182*** 7.306*** 7.046***
(0.075) (0.059) (0.049) (0.059)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]

8.549***
(0.042)
[0.000]

9.717***
(0.056)
[0.000]

6.018***
(0.070)
[0.000]

6.332***
(0.112)
[0.000]

6.285***
(0.049)
[0.000]

6.106***
(0.075)
[0.000]

Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.011**
(0.005)
[0.039]

0.008* 0.005***
(0.004) (0.001)
[0.058] [0.001]

0.006*
(0.003)
[0.068]

0.001
(0.002)
[0.633]

0.002
(0.002)
[0.351]

0.016***
(0.005)
[0.004]

0.015**
(0.007)
[0.040]

0.006
(0.005)
[0.185]

0.011**
(0.005)
[0.039]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.0001
(0.004)
[0.979]

0.003
(0.004)
[0.460]

0.002
(0.004)
[0.567]

0.005
(0.003)
[0.139]

0.007*
(0.004)
[0.061]

-0.027**
(0.008)
[0.003]

-0.003
(0.005)
[0.498]

0.000
(0.004)
[0.979]

0.002
(0.003)
[0.446]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

-0.019*** -0.021*** -0.015*** -0.014*** -0.006*** -0.003**
(0.002) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]
[0.044]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

0.238*** 0.197*** 0.183*** 0.331***
(0.072) (0.063) (0.052) (0.050)
[0.002] [0.003] [0.000] [0.000]

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

0.71
47

0.77
48

0.79
48

0.68
48

0.106***
(0.029)
[0.001]

0.087**
(0.039)
[0.029]

0.42
48

0.13
48

-0.017*** -0.019***
(0.003)
(0.002)
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.238***
(0.072)
[0.002]
0.12
47

0.40
47

0.65
47

0.71
47

Notes: White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are shown in square
Brackets. One, two, or three stars on a coefficient indicates significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels, respectively.
See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

Table 3. Sensitivity Tests for Climate
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker

Cooling Degree Days (100's)
(with quadratic term included)

Cooling Degree Days Squared
(100,000's)

1880
-0.008
(0.019)
[0.669]

1900
-0.003
(0.017)
[0.861]

1920
0.009
(0.013)
[0.497]

1940
0.007
(0.014)
[0.595]

1960
0.019*
(0.009)
[0.031]

1980
0.017
(0.013)
[0.186]

0.002
(0.004)
[0.645]

0.001
(0.004)
[0.699]

-0.002
(0.003)
[0.553]

-0.001
(0.003)
[0.699]

-0.003
(0.002)
[0.123]

-0.002
(0.003)
[0.433]

Ice and Snowfall Accumulation (inches)

1.89E-04
(0.002)
[0.912]

3.04E-04 -1.17E-03 0.000
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
[0.840]
[0.229]
[0.770]

-0.001*
(0.001)
[0.091]

-0.002**
(0.001)
[0.035]

Minimum Temperature (days)

5.15E-05
(0.001)
[0.950]

5.82E-06 -0.001*
(0.001)
(0.000)
[0.993]
[0.099]

-0.001**
(0.000)
[0.036]

-0.001***
(0.000)
[0.004]

-0.001
(0.001)
[0.443]

Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients for alternative specifications and measures of climate
when they are substituted for the benchmark definition of climate (cooling degree days) used in table 2. The
first two rows show an alternative specification which includes a quadratic term, while the second two
report coefficients using alternative measures emphasizing the effects of frost and freezing. White's
consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are shown
in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a coefficient indicates significance at the10-percent,
5-percent, and 1-percent levels, respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data
sources and variable definitions.

Table 4. Sensitivity Tests for Access to Navigable Waterway
1900
1920
1940
1880
0.173** 0.155** 0.178*** 0.293***
(0.069) (0.059) (0.044) (0.056)
[0.016] [0.012] [0.000]
[0.000]

1960
0.075**
(0.036)
[0.045]

1980
0.032
(0.042)
[0.456]

Access to Great Lake

0.159** 0.124*
(0.074) (0.067)
[0.038] [0.072]

0.075
(0.064)
[0.249]

0.114
(0.092)
[0.221]

0.061*
(0.035)
[0.093]

0.108***
(0.037)
[0.006]

Access to River

0.011 -0.005
(0.078) (0.065)
[0.891] [0.934]

-0.040
(0.052)
[0.443]

-0.163**
(0.069)
[0.023]

-0.030
(0.035)
[0.387]

0.021
(0.039)
[0.595]

Access to ocean or River

0.127
0.095
(0.118) (0.069)
[0.287] [0.175]

0.086
(0.067)
[0.203]

0.093
(0.105)
[0.380]

0.006
(0.055)
[0.913]

0.011
(0.074)
[0.881]

Access to Great Lake or River

0.061
0.027
(0.080) (0.064)
[0.454] [0.668]

0.001
(0.052)
[0.984]

-0.115
(0.074)
[0.127]

-0.004
(0.037)
[0.912]

0.059
(0.039)
[0.140]

Access to ocean or Great Lake
or River

0.1990 0.124
(0.136) (0.075)
[0.149] [0.106]

0.128
(0.076)
[0.102]

0.174
(0.107)
[0.112]

0.058
(0.053)
[0.275]

0.080
(0.080)
[0.325]

Access to ocean

Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients for various measures of locational advantage
when they are substituted for the benchmark definition used in table 2 for access to navigable
waterways (by ocean or Great Lakes.) White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard
errors are shown in parentheses and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three
stars on a coefficient indicates significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels,
respectively. See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable
definitions.

47

Table 5. Testing for the Impact of Slavery
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Panel A: Robustness test of legacy of slavery: substituting large plantation slave population
Independent Variable

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Constant

6.076*** 6.146*** 7.280***
(0.077) (0.061) (0.051)
[0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]

7.016***
(0.060)
[0.000]

8.537***
(0.041)
[0.000]

9.713***
(0.057)
[0.000]

Percentage of 1880 workforce
in mining

0.013**
(0.005)
[0.012]

0.011**
(0.004)
[0.017]

0.007**
(0.002)
[0.000]

0.007**
(0.003)
[0.019]

0.002
(0.002)
[0.397]

0.002
(0.002)
[0.249]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.003
(0.005)
[0.454]

0.000
(0.003)
[0.977]

0.000
(0.002)
[0.892]

0.001
(0.004)
[0.733]

0.005
(0.003)
[0.146]

0.007*
(0.004)
[0.061]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery on large
plantations

-0.028*** -0.032*** -0.023*** -0.022*** -0.010***
(0.005) (0.004) (0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
[0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]

-0.004*
(0.002)
[0.051]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

0.263*** 0.225*** 0.204***
(0.071) (0.065) (0.047)
[0.001] [0.001]
[0.000]

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

0.66
47

0.73
48

0.75
48

48

0.355***
(0.053)
[0.000]

0.115***
(0.031)
[0.001]

0.090**
(0.041)
[0.032]

0.67
48

0.39
48

0.11
48

Table 5. Testing for the Impact of Slavery
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Panel B: Specification test for the impact of slavery
Independent Variable

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Constant

6.104*** 6.220*** 7.329***
(0.094) (0.069) (0.057)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000]

7.049***
(0.066)
[0.000]

8.573***
(0.044)
[0.000]

9.741***
(0.065)
[0.000]

Percentage of workforce 1880
in mining

0.012** 0.008*
(0.006) (0.005)
[0.045] [0.094]

0.005***
(0.002)
[0.003]

0.006**
(0.003)
[0.050]

0.001
(0.002)
[0.685]

0.002
(0.002)
[0.340]

Slave dummy times
0.153
0.435
percentage of workforce 1880 in (0.793) (0.827)
mining
[0.848] [0.602]

0.624
(0.576)
[0.285]

1.055*
(0.612)
[0.093]

0.344
(0.256)
[0.187]

-0.005
(0.221)
[0.981]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.002 0.000
(0.005) (0.004)
[0.655] [0.974]

0.001
(0.003)
[0.728]

0.000
(0.003)
[0.950]

0.004
(0.003)
[0.271]

0.005
(0.003)
[0.143]

Slave dummy times average
number of cooling degree
days (100's)

0.000
0.000
(0.000) (0.000)
[0.433] [0.199]

0.000
(0.000)
[0.337]

0.000
(0.000)
[0.200]

0.000*
(0.000)
[0.057]

0.000**
(0.000)
[0.034]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

-0.021** -0.031*** -0.023*** -0.022*** -0.013*** -0.007**
(0.009) (0.008) (0.005)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.003)
[0.026] [0.001] [0.000]
[0.002]
[0.000]
[0.023]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

0.259*** 0.175**
(0.092) (0.076)
[0.008] [0.027]

0.161***
(0.052)
[0.003]

0.334***
(0.062)
[0.000]

0.089**
(0.036)
[0.017]

0.082
(0.053)
[0.126]

Slave dummy times access
to ocean or Great Lakes

-0.004 0.001
(0.006) (0.006)
[0.465] [0.820]

0.004
(0.002)
[0.143]

0.000
(0.003)
[0.951]

0.001
(0.002)
[0.427]

-0.002
(0.002)
[0.447]

0.79
48

0.68
48

0.43
48

0.15
48

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

0.69
47

0.77
48

Notes: White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a
coefficient indicates significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels, respectively.
See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

49

Table 6. Impact of Slavery and Navigable River
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Panel A: The Impact of Slavery Omitting Navigable Water
1880
1900
1920
Independent Variable

1940

1960

1980

Constant

6.285*** 6.330***
(0.049) (0.039)
[0.000]
[0.000]

7.445***
(0.034)
[0.000]

7.295***
(0.059)
[0.000]

8.629***
(0.032)
[0.000]

9.783***
(0.038)
[0.000]

Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.006
(0.005)
[0.185]

0.005
(0.004)
[0.203]

0.002
(0.001)
[0.144]

0.000
(0.004)
[0.954]

-0.001
(0.002)
[0.611]

0.000
(0.001)
[0.998]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.003
(0.005)
[0.498]

0.000
(0.005)
[0.941]

-0.001
(0.002)
[0.731]

-0.003
(0.005)
[0.564]

0.004
(0.003)
[0.198]

0.006*
(0.003)
[0.059]

-0.011***
(0.003)
[0.000]

-0.005***
(0.001)
[0.000]

-0.002*
(0.001)
[0.075]

0.72
48

0.44
48

0.31
48

0.04
48

Panel B: Test for Navigable River as a Proxy for Slavery
1880
1900
1920
Independent Variable

1940

1960

1980

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

-0.017*** -0.019*** -0.013***
(0.003) (0.003)
(0.001)
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.65
47

0.74
48

Constant

6.298*** 6.345***
(0.126) (0.119)
[0.000]
[0.000]

7.471***
(0.081)
[0.000]

7.376***
(0.084)
[0.000]

8.646***
(0.039)
[0.000]

9.775***
(0.042)
[0.000]

Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.016*
(0.007)
[0.036]

0.009*
(0.004)
[0.033]

0.004
(0.004)
[0.375]

0.002
(0.002)
[0.395]

0.001
(0.002)
[0.363]

-0.017***
(0.005)
[0.003]

-0.004*
(0.002)
[0.097]

0.003
(0.002)
[0.139]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

Access to River

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

0.016*
(0.007)
[0.034]

-0.027*** -0.026*** -0.019***
(0.009) (0.009)
(0.006)
[0.003]
[0.004]
[0.002]
0.072
(0.090)
[0.429]

0.083
(0.091)
[0.366]

0.022
(0.067)
[0.743]

-0.109
(0.077)
[0.164]

-0.005
(0.039)
[0.899]

0.030
(0.038)
[0.441]

0.39
47

0.38
48

0.36
48

0.26
48

0.01
48

0.01
48

50

Table 7. Climate, Latitude, and Productivity
The Relationship Between Latitude and Climate

Correlation Matrix
Cooling Degree Days
Heating Degree Days
Sum of Cooling & Heating Days
Ice and Snowfall Accumulation
Minimum Temperature
Latitude

Cooling Heating
Sum of
Degree Degree Cooling and
Minimum
Days
Days Heating Days Snowfall Temperature Latitude
1.00
-0.84
-0.63
-0.72
-0.77
-0.85

1.00
0.95
0.87
0.94
0.90

1.00
0.84
0.91
0.79

1.00
0.83
0.73

1.00
0.76

Notes: See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

51

1.00

Table 8. Instrumental Variables Regressions
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker

Independent Variable

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

First-stage
Regression

Constant

6.152*** 6.200*** 7.336***
(0.106) (0.076) (0.045)
[0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]

7.092***
(0.068)
[0.000]

8.598***
(0.038)
[0.000]

9.766***
(0.045)
[0.000]

-14.911***
(4.902)
[0.004]

Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.013**
(0.006)
[0.027]

0.009**
(0.004)
[0.046]

0.007***
(0.002)
[0.002]

0.007**
(0.003)
[0.034]

0.003
(0.002)
[0.231]

0.003
(0.002)
[0.108]

-0.2345
(0.202)
[0.251]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.008
(0.010)
[0.428]

0.000
(0.006)
[0.996]

-0.003
(0.004)
[0.476]

-0.005
(0.007)
[0.464]

-0.002
(0.004)
[0.533]

0.000
(0.004)
[0.964]

1.004***
(0.249)
[0.000]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

-0.013** -0.019*** -0.012***
(0.006) (0.005) (0.003)
[0.044] [0.000]
[0.001]

-0.009*
(0.005)
[0.080]

-0.001
(0.003)
[0.766]

0.003
(0.003)
[0.342]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

0.197**
(0.091)
[0.037]

0.287***
(0.059)
[0.000]

0.060
(0.038)
[0.124]

0.042
(0.043)
[0.343]

0.181**
(0.081)
[0.031]

0.156***
(0.045)
[0.001]

Soldier Mortality

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

3.678*
(1.506)
[0.019]
4.204***
(1.561)
[0.010]

0.70
47

0.79
48

0.79
48

0.66
48

0.20
48

0.01
48

Notes: Soldier mortality is used as an instrumental variable for the percentage of 1860 population
who were slaves. White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a coefficient
indicates significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels, respectively. See
Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

52

0.59
48

Table 9. The Impact of Settler Origins on GDP per Capita
Dependent Variable: Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker
Independent Variable

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

Constant

5.978*** 6.095*** 7.330*** 7.123***
(0.127) (0.093) (0.075) (0.077)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]

8.536***
(0.043)
[0.000]

9.670***
(0.049)
[0.000]

Percentage of workforce
in mining in 1880

0.012**
(0.005)
[0.019]

0.009**
(0.004)
[0.036]

0.004**
(0.002)
[0.010]

0.004
(0.003)
[0.180]

0.000
(0.001)
[0.855]

0.001
(0.001)
[0.728]

Average number of cooling
degree days (100's)

-0.001
(0.005)
[0.871]

0.002
(0.004)
[0.653]

0.001
(0.003)
[0.834]

0.000
(0.004)
[0.922]

0.003
(0.003)
[0.318]

0.005
(0.003)
[0.119]

Percentage of 1860 population
in slavery

-0.019*** -0.021*** -0.015*** -0.013*** -0.006*** -0.003**
(0.002) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002)
(0.001)
(0.001)
[0.000] [0.000] [0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.030]

Access to ocean or Great
Lakes

0.275*** 0.228*** 0.161*** 0.273***
(0.084) (0.067) (0.049) (0.051)
[0.002] [0.002] [0.002]
[0.000]

0.109***
(0.032)
[0.001]

0.111***
(0.039)
[0.006]

French Settler

0.095
(0.084)
[0.265]

0.059
(0.063)
[0.351]

-0.042
(0.048)
[0.379]

-0.108*
(0.050)
[0.038]

-0.015
(0.030)
[0.621]

0.016
(0.031)
[0.599]

Spanish Settler

0.091
(0.080)
[0.261]

0.088
(0.067)
[0.197]

0.048
(0.048)
[0.321]

0.067
(0.054)
[0.224]

0.105***
(0.027)
[0.000]

0.130***
(0.032)
[0.000]

Dutch Settler

0.183**
(0.090)
[0.050]

0.109
(0.080)
[0.182]

0.086
(0.068)
[0.211]

0.152**
(0.070)
[0.036]

0.064
(0.049)
[0.200]

0.050
(0.063)
[0.426]

0.71
47

0.77
48

0.80
48

0.73
48

0.54
48

0.31
48

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

Notes: White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are in parentheses
and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a coefficient indicates
significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels, respectively. Data on settlement
are based on Maddex (1998) and Cooke (1993). See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of
the data sources and variable definitions.

53

Table 10. Testing the Reversal of Fortune Hypothesis
Panel A: Dependent Variable, Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker in 1980
Including Percent

Proxy for Labor Productivity

Including Access to
Constant only to Ocean or Great Lakes

Including
Minimum Temp

of workforce
in Mining

Including Settler
Origin Dummies

Price-adjusted income per
Worker in 1880

0.084**
(0.042)
[0.050]

0.088**
(0.041)
[0.039]

0.174***
(0.055)
[0.003]

0.176***
(0.054)
[0.002]

0.171***
(0.054)
[0.003]

Population Density, 1700

-0.005***
(0.001)
[0.000]

-0.007***
(0.001)
[0.000]

-0.006***
(0.002)
[0.000]

-0.006***
(0.002)
[0.001]

-0.005**
(0.002)
[0.050]

Population Density, 1770

-0.002**
(0.001)
[0.028]

-0.002***
(0.001)
[0.002]

-0.002***
(0.001)
[0.010]

-0.002**
(0.001)
[0.014]

-0.001
(0.001)
[0.127]

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

.09/.04/.03
47/48/48

.14/.09/.09
47/48/48

.35/.12/.13
47/48/48

.35/.15/.15
47/48/48

.44/.29/.28
47/48/48

Panel B: Dependent Variable, Log Price-Adjusted Income per Worker in 1880
Proxy for Labor Productivity
Population Density, 1700

0.020***
(0.007)
[0.006]

0.023***
(0.009)
[0.011]

0.015**
(0.007)
[0.047]

0.016**
(0.007)
[0.027]

0.025**
(0.010)
[0.017]

Population Density, 1770

0.007***
(0.002)
[0.004]

0.008***
(0.003)
[0.008]

0.006**
(0.003)
[0.036]

0.006**
(0.002)
[0.018]

0.009**
(0.003)
[0.011]

Adjusted R-Squared
Number of observations

.04/.05
47

.06/.07
47

.33/.33
47

.46/.47
47

.54/.55
47

Notes: White's consistent covariance estimator is used. Standard errors are shown in parentheses
and p-values are shown in square brackets. One, two, or three stars on a coefficient indicates
significance at the 10-percent, 5-percent and 1-percent levels, respectively. Population density
is computed as persons per square mile in 1700, and includes European settlers and indigenous
populations. See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

54

Table 11. Urbanization, Labor Productivity, and Population Density

Correlation Coefficient

Pop. Density
1880

Urbanization, 1880
Urbanization, 1900
Urbanization, 1920
Urbanization, 1940
Urbanization, 1960
Urbanization, 1980

0.8321

Labor Productivity, 1880
Labor Productivity, 1900
Labor Productivity, 1920
Labor Productivity, 1940
Labor Productivity, 1960
Labor Productivity, 1980

0.2968

Pop. Density
1900

Pop. Density Pop. Density Pop. Density Pop. Density
1920
1940
1960
1980

0.7875
0.7465
0.7411
0.5781
0.4891

0.23
0.271
0.41
0.266
0.067
Labor
Productivity
1880

Urbanization, 1880
Urbanization, 1900
Urbanization, 1920
Urbanization, 1940
Urbanization, 1960
Urbanization, 1980

0.6563

Population Density 1700
Population Density 1770

0.2076
0.2265

Labor
Productivity
1900

Labor
Productivity
1920

Labor
Labor
Labor
Productivity Productivity Productivity
1940
1960
1980

0.6155
0.6477
0.77
0.7817
0.677
-0.1886
-0.1801

Notes: Urbanization is the fraction of a state's population that is resides in municipalities with populations greater
than 2,500 persons. Population density is computed as persons per square mile, and for 1700 and 1770,
Includes both European settlers and indigenous populations. Labor Productivity is log price-adjusted income
per worker. See Appendix Table 1 for a full description of the data sources and variable definitions.

55

40
Low est

35

Highest

200

Standard Deviation

30
25

150

20
100

15
10

50
5
0

0
1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

Figure 1. Price-adjusted state income per worker
(Relative to U.S. Average)

56

1980

Standard deviation relative to U.S. average

Highest and lowest state values relative to
U.S. average = 100

250

7.0
NV

NY CA
IL

6.5

WY
MO

IA
NE

Actual

ND

MA NJ
MT
AZ CT PA
MN OH
RI CO
DE
MD MI
OR
WA
WI IN
NH
ID

VT
UT SD

6.0
KY

LA

WV
TX

5.5

TN

ME

KS

NM

AR VA

MS
FL
AL
SC

GA
NC

5.0
5.0

5.5

6.0

6.5

Fitted

Figure 2 . Labor productivity levels in 1880: actual and predicted
(Logs)

57

7.0

Figure 3. Reversal of Fortune and Persistence

10.0747

FL

CA
WY
TX
OK
IL
LA
MI
NYWA
PA NJ

1980 Log Productivity

NV
OH
MO
AZ
CO
KSOR
AL
GA
IA
MN
IN
NM
NE
WI
UT
MT
ID
AR
SC
TN
WV
KY

CT
DE
MD
MA

VA

MS
NH

RI

ND
SD
ME

9.57006

NC
VT

.037837

FL

10.0747

CA

WY
TX
LA

IL

MI

WA

PA

NJ

MO
KS
NEIN
WI

NM
AR
VA

UT
TN

WV

AZ
CO
CT

OR

AL
GA

SC

NY
NV

OH

1980 Log Productivity

27.1713

1700 Population Density (Persons per square mile)

ID

DE
IA MN
MD

MT

MA

KY

MS
NH

RI

ND
ME SD

9.57006

NC

5.21086

VT

1880 Labor Productivity

58

6.94178

Appendix Table 1. Data Description and Sources
______________________________________________________________________________
Labor productivity (price-adjusted personal income per worker):
Personal income per capita in each state has been adjusted for the variation in price levels across states in each of
1880, 1900, 1920, 1940, 1960 and 1980. Due to limitations of the available data, this adjustment cannot be made
across these years, and hence to a common base year (thus accounting for our use of the term ‘price-adjusted’ rather
than ‘deflated’ or ‘real’). The price-adjusted per capita income is then converted to a per worker basis (that is,
allowing for variation across states in the age distribution and workforce participation rates of both males and
females). The resulting series is therefore a measure of average labor productivity in each state and year rather than
a measure of real gross state product per capita. A full description of the sources and estimation methods employed
is provided in Mitchener and McLean (1999).
Percentage of the workforce employed in mining in 1880:
The data on mining employment by state in 1880 are from Miller and Brainerd (1957), Table L-5, pp.623-631.
Climate Data:
Climate and temperature data are based on a standard 30-year period from 1961 through 1990. The average number
of cooling degree days is computed as the number of days in which the average air temperature rose above 65
degrees F times the number of degrees on those days which the average daily air temperature exceeded 65 over the
year. The average number of heating degree days is computed as the number of days in which the average air
temperature was below 65 degrees F times the number of degrees on those days which the average daily air
temperature was below 65. The sum of cooling and heating days is the sum of these two series. For all three series,
the data reported in 100s of degree days. Minimum temperature is the average number of days per year where the
average temperature is 32F or less. Ice and snowfall accumulation is the average total inches of snow and ice pellets
per year (trace accumulations are counted as zero). Data for U.S. cities are used to compute state averages and are
from the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1992, pp.226-9). In states where multiple cities were listed, the
simple arithmetic average was computed to arrive at a state estimate.
Latitude:
Latitude is measured as degrees from the equator, and is taken relative to the state’s largest city. The measure can
vary slightly over our 6 periods as a result of changes in the largest city for a given state. Data are from Rand
McNally World Atlas. State “centroid” data from the National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
(ftp://ncgia.ucsb.edu/publications/tech_reports/95/95-6/data) were used as an alternative measure, and yielded
similar results to those reported in the tables.
Percentage of 1860 population in slavery, and in slavery on large plantations:
Respectively, these are defined as the total number of slaves as a percentage of the total population of each state in
1860 and the number of slaves owned by slaveholders having more than 20 slaves as a percentage of the total
population of each state in 1860. Data on the total number of slaves and the number of slaves per slaveholder were
obtained from census returns in Agriculture of the United States in 1860: The Eighth Census (Washington:
Government Printing Office, 1864), p.247.
Access to ocean/Great Lakes/river:
An indicator variable takes the value of one if a state borders the ocean/Great Lake/river, and zero if it does not.
Various combinations of these three forms of access to navigable water are used. The data on states with access to
navigable rivers were kindly provided by Andrew Mellinger of the Center for International Development at Harvard
University.

59

Soldier Mortality:
Soldier mortality rates at the state level are calculated as percentages. They are derived using U.S. soldier mortality
data for individual forts as reported in Lawson (1840, 1856). Quarterly data were collected by the U.S. Surgeon
General and Adjutant General’s Offices for 1829-38 and by the U.S. Surgeon General’s Office for 1839-54. Yearly
mortality rates for each fort are computed by dividing the number of deaths each year by the average, annual “mean
strength” of soldiers. Mean strength represents the population of soldiers stationed at a fort. (We exclude cholera
outbreaks that swept through Europe and the US in the 19th century since prevention of the spread of the disease
was a matter of sanitation and unrelated to the climatic environment). The annual estimates are then averaged using
all existing data for a state. In states where more than one fort was located, the arithmetic mean of the forts located
in that state are used to compute state mortality. If a state had no forts (15 for the 1839-54 period), the average of
bordering states within a similar climatic zone (based on rainfall, snow accumulation, mean temperature, and
minimum temperature) was used as the state’s mortality figure. For the 1829-38 period, Lawson reports two sets of
records on deaths, the adjutant general’s and medical returns; we computed mortality figures using both data sets. In
table 5, we report the results using medical returns since this is what is used for the 1839-54 period and because this
series excludes deaths from accidental causes or detachments. If the adjutant general’s series is used instead, the
results do not differ significantly from those reported in table 5.
Christian Sects Tolerant of Slavery:
This is computed as the percentage of Christian churches in a state in 1790 that were more tolerant of slavery. The
term church is defined in the data as a congregation of people who meet periodically for religious services. The
maximum interval between meetings is generally no more than several months. Itinerant ministries or temporary
ones are not included in these figures. The meeting place may be a building, although the definition does not make
the structure the emphasis, but rather the act of meeting regularly. Data on churches are from Paullin (1932, plate
80). The classification of Christian sects as tolerant of slavery is based on Hall (1930) and Steckel (2000).
Colonial origin of state:
A series of indicator variables which take on positive values if a state, prior to statehood, had ties with that colonial
power (except England, which is the omitted country). Data are based on Maddex (1998) and Cooke (1993).
Population Density Estimates for the Colonial Period, 1700 and 1770:
There is a long and contentious debate among anthropologists, historians, demographers, and ethnologists
concerning the population of Native Americans or North American Indians at the time of European contact. The
estimates vary enormously, ranging from as little as 1 million to as much as 17 million for all of North America (See
John D. Daniels (1992) for a discussion). To a large extent, the imprecise measurement reflects a lack of historical
evidence: none of the American Indians at the time of European contact kept written records, so researchers rely on
incomplete and often inaccurate accounts of contemporary Europeans. Consequently, there is no single, agreed upon
methodology for estimating tribal populations when the records are defective or lacking specificity. Moreover, the
precise impact of European diseases on the native population are unknown, and differences in opinion concerning
the epidemiological impact invite widely different “corrections” to population estimates.
The lack of scholarly agreement on the indigenous population at the time of European contact and the subsequent
effects of disease pose a serious impediment for estimating population density by state in 1700, a time at which
European settlers were living alongside Native Americans. The debate over which numbers to use is simplified by
the fact that few scholars have actually published tribal-level estimates of Native American populations. In fact,
despite their limitations, Mooney’s (1928) estimates are still the most complete and detailed tribal estimates
published, and many scholars have used his work as a starting point for their estimates. Using revised tribal
estimates that are part of a massive, but still unfinished, scholarly undertaking entitled the Handbook of North
American Indians (edited by Sturtevant, (1978-)), Ubelaker (1988) has revised Mooney’s estimates and reported
them on a regional basis. Unfortunately, he has not provided these data on a more disaggregate level.
The tribe-based estimates of Mooney, Ubelaker, and others in their scholarly tradition tend to be on the low range of

60

the figures reported above, but for our purposes this is unimportant. Our objective is not to measure accurately the
total population of Native Americans in the entire United States, but to estimate the relative populations within each
future state, so that population density in 1700 can be calculated. We therefore make an important simplifying
assumption so that we can use tribal-based estimates of Native Americans as a starting point for calculating
population density in 1700. We assume that European diseases had an approximately equal impact on tribal
populations, so that the relative sizes of tribes are left unaffected. Clearly, this is a strong assumption, but will have
to suffice until epidemiological evidence is translated to individual tribal population counts. Tribal populations and
locations of tribes at the time of European contact are obtained from the series edited by Sturtevant (1978-). To date,
this source lacks detailed information on the Southeast region, so we obtained estimates from Malinowski (1998).
The tribal population counts were then aggregated to a state level based on the maps shown in Sturtevant (1978-).
When tribes spanned multiple states, they were assigned fractions based on the percentage of their range within a
state or based on more detailed historical information provided in Sturtevant (1978-) about where the population
resided. These estimates were then aggregated to a regional level and compared to Ubelaker’s estimates. Ubelaker’s
figures include tribes in Mexico and Canada, but after adjusting for this difference, the figures were fairly similar.
Our aggregate estimate of Native American population at the time of contact lies between the Mooney and Ubelaker
estimates. Since European contact with specific North American tribes actually spanned centuries, we make the
assumption that there was little population growth for indigenous populations prior to contact. This allows us to use
the population figure at the time of contact and apply it to 1700.
We calculated population density (persons per square mile) by summing the estimates of Native Americans with
those for European settlers and free and slave black populations and dividing the total by the area figures from the
Statistical Abstract of the United States (1992, table 340, p.205). Population of European colonists and blacks by
state are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1975, table Z1-19), McCusker and Menard (1985, p.136) for
Maryland and Virginia, and U.S. Department of Commerce (1909, p.9) for imputed estimates of New Hampshire
and Maine. We consider two dates, 1700 and 1770, reflecting the growth of European settlers in the 18th century;
however, because our figures for Native Americans only approximate the populations at the time of European
contact, we use the same figure for this portion of a state’s population at both dates.
Urbanization and Population Density, 1880 to 1980:
Urbanization is the fraction of a state’s population residing in urban areas. Urban areas are defined by the U.S.
Census as those places containing more than 2,500 persons. Population density is thousands of persons per square
mile for 1880 to 1980. Data on urbanization are from U.S. Department of Commerce (1975, Series A202) and the
Statistical Abstract of the United States (1985, table 12, p.12). Data on population density are computed using state
population data from U.S. Department of Commerce (1975, Series A7 and A195) and the Statistical Abstract of the
United States (1992, table 25, p.22), and state area data from the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1992,
table 340, p.205).

61

Appendix Table 2 - Data for Basic Model

State
AL
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DE
FL
GA
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS
MO
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
SD
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

Labour Productivity (Price-adjusted income per worker)
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
214.1
212.5
796.9
785.0
4854.2
18835.8
650.1
689.8
1747.5
1331.3
5553.0
19744.2
241.0
235.6
927.4
748.5
4621.9
17768.4
777.1
754.9
2223.0
1846.1
6652.5
22471.8
638.6
733.5
1817.6
1389.3
6312.9
19633.4
638.4
604.7
1727.4
1942.7
6557.0
19494.3
566.0
589.9
1794.1
2309.3
6881.6
18761.8
218.8
269.1
1040.5
1221.0
5821.3
23734.1
213.5
206.8
857.2
861.8
4868.3
18802.0
474.9
479.4
1771.8
1270.7
4952.6
17810.0
669.6
729.2
2042.1
1746.2
6342.8
21513.9
498.4
545.5
1610.2
1456.3
5511.0
18388.1
565.0
625.4
1585.7
1300.4
5428.6
18623.1
362.5
530.8
1670.8
1138.1
5850.3
19314.5
382.6
382.0
1117.6
891.2
4926.4
17235.7
362.7
331.9
1283.6
1026.8
5641.1
21362.0
413.1
464.5
1558.5
1361.3
4761.6
14880.0
536.1
559.9
1809.2
1618.2
5820.8
18044.7
693.1
677.6
1891.2
1743.2
5746.2
17665.2
536.2
528.0
1641.0
1631.8
6610.3
21355.5
590.2
619.9
1522.0
1280.9
5500.0
18563.6
239.2
213.8
686.9
570.0
3911.2
16516.2
531.8
565.3
1513.3
1292.5
5738.8
19831.7
647.9
738.7
1643.2
1384.2
5369.4
17810.2
483.0
632.9
1585.2
1155.1
5627.2
18266.4
1034.6
776.8
1976.0
2011.9
6233.7
20390.3
482.9
494.0
1478.9
1412.4
5047.8
15840.5
699.5
668.2
2015.6
1818.1
6499.3
20838.7
275.8
408.7
1370.5
1075.1
6063.1
18382.7
750.7
778.5
2438.5
1922.8
6177.8
21165.7
183.3
182.0
984.0
823.7
4287.2
14360.2
448.9
536.5
1441.7
930.8
4912.6
15416.5
593.4
624.8
1842.0
1619.6
6226.2
20167.1
317.7
1407.2
1040.7
5819.4
21609.7
550.5
570.0
1920.4
1507.3
5749.6
19183.8
644.2
635.2
1953.8
1623.3
6030.9
20808.6
622.4
617.6
1745.2
1582.6
5043.3
15827.3
190.6
176.4
805.7
803.9
4227.2
17533.2
433.9
559.8
1596.5
934.6
4920.3
14964.9
285.9
284.3
1000.1
904.0
4520.0
17515.9
289.0
389.6
1371.3
1086.3
5743.5
21794.1
431.8
558.9
1629.5
1397.2
5812.7
17907.1
442.1
454.3
1413.4
1293.1
4775.9
14329.3
248.8
286.8
1132.6
1150.5
5021.3
17526.5
500.2
606.6
1896.6
1545.8
6039.3
21077.3
337.8
363.4
1535.5
1171.2
5146.3
17352.4
508.1
523.7
1537.4
1345.4
5511.9
18257.5
638.3
574.7
2093.6
1430.5
5886.5
22184.2

Percentage
of
Workforce
in Mining
1880

Average
No. of
Cooling
Degree
Days

0.3
30.0
0.0
13.1
32.2
0.7
0.4
0.0
0.1
38.5
1.7
0.8
0.9
1.2
0.6
0.0
0.6
1.5
0.2
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.9
27.8
0.1
28.6
0.2
1.3
6.6
0.3
0.2
0.6
0.8
1.9
7.1
7.3
0.2
0.1
14.0
0.4
0.0
9.5
1.6
0.4
4.0
2.7
0.4
4.5

2627
4162
2005
773
679
677
1046
3375
1667
754
867
1014
1036
1628
1288
2655
268
1137
678
379
431
2215
1411
388
1072
508
328
826
1244
693
1500
488
805
1859
371
878
606
1966
744
1867
2466
1047
388
1385
294
1031
479
285

Average
Access to Percentage
Settler
Annual
Navigable
of 1860
Origin
Soldier
Percentage
Water
Population Percentage of (English=E, Mortality in
of 1860
(Ocean=O, on Large
Cotton
French=F,
1829-38,
Population
Lake=L,
Slave
Harvested Spanish=S,
1839-54
in Slavery
River=R) Plantations Mechanically Dutch=D)
(Percent)
45.1
0.0
25.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.6
44.1
43.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
19.5
46.9
0.0
13.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
55.2
9.7
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
33.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
57.2
0.0
24.8
30.2
0.1
0.0
38.7
0.0
4.9
0.0
0.0

O
R
O,R
O
O
O
O
L,R
L,R
R
R
R
O,R
O
O
O
L
L,R
O,R
R
R
O
O
O,L
O
L,R
R
O,R
L
O
O
R
R
O
O
O,R
R
L,R
-

28.4
0.0
13.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
25.6
24.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.8
33.9
0.0
4.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
36.3
1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
37.9
0.0
8.9
13.0
0.0
0.0
19.4
0.0
2.3
0.0
0.0

8.0
73.0
42.0
87.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.0
14.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
49.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
40.0
56.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
64.0
0.0
12.0
0.0
0.0
64.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.0
0.0
19.0
58.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

F,S
S
F,S
S
F,S
E
E,D
E,S
E,S
E
E,F
E,F
E,F
E,F
F
F,S
E,F
E
E
E,F
E,F,S
E,F
F,S
E,F,S
F,S
S
E
E,D
S
E,D
E
F
E,F
F,S
F
E,D
E
E
F
E,F
S
S
E,F,D
E
E,S
E
E,F
F,S

3.4
1.8
3.4
3.1
1.9
1.0
3.0
3.2
3.7
1.6
1.3
2.1
1.1
1.6
4.1
4.1
1.4
2.1
1.0
1.1
0.9
4.0
4.1
1.2
1.1
2.1
1.1
2.4
2.4
1.7
2.5
1.1
2.3
2.8
1.6
1.7
0.9
2.6
1.0
3.4
4.0
2.1
1.1
2.2
1.6
2.5
1.2
1.1

Appendix Figure 1. Productivity and Minerals Endowment in 1880
NV

6.94178

CA

NY

1880 Log Productivity

MA NJ
IL
CT
RI
OH
MN
DEIA
MD
MI
MO
WI
IN
NE
NH

WY

MT

PA

AZ

CO

OR
WA

ID

ND VT

UT

ME

SD

KY
LA KS
WV
TX
TN

NM

VA
AR
MS
FL
AL
GA

5.21086

SC
NC

0

1880 Employment in Mining (%)

63

38.4615

Appendix Figure 2. Productivity in 1880 and Climate

NV

6.94178

WYMT

1880 Log Productivity

MN
OR
MI
WA WI
NH
VTND
ME

CA
NY
MA NJ
IL
CO
CT PA
RI
OH

AZ
DE
IA
MD

ID

IN
NE

SD

UT

MO

KY

LA

KS

WV
TX

TN

NM
VA

AR

AL

GA
NC

5.21086
2.68

MS
FL

SC

Degree Cooling Days (100s)

64

41.62

Appendix Figure 3. Productivity in 1880 and the Legacy of Slavery
6.94178

NV

1880 Log Productivity

CA
NY
NJ
MA
IL
AZ
MT
PA
WY
CO
CT
RI
OH
MN
IA DE
OR
MI
WI
WA
IN
NH
NE
ID
ND
VT
SD
UT
ME

MO

MD

KY

KS

LA

WV

NM

TX

TN

VA

AR

MS
FLAL
GA

NC

5.21086
0

Slave Population in 1860 (%)

65

SC

57.1599

Appendix Figure 4. The Legacy of Slavery and Soldier Mortality

SC

57.1599

MS

Slave Population in 1860 (%)

FL

AL

LA
GA

VA
NC
TX
ARTN
KY

MD
MO
WV

0

NE
MN
IA
RIMAMI
SD
ND
NH
MT IL ME
WY
VTWI
CT

.90015

ID
KS NY
ORPA
WA
AZ

IN OH NM
NJ
CO UTNV

OK

Soldier Mortality (%)

66

DE
CA

4.14179

