NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY HAVE AMERICANS BECOME MORE OBESE?
David M. Cutler
Edward L. Glaeser
Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 9446
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9446
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

We are grateful to Melissa Eccleston, Daniel Michalow, and Vladimir Novakovski, for research assistance,
and to the National Institutes on Aging for research support. We thank Gary Becker, Darius Lakdawalla,
Tomas Philipson, and seminar participants at Ohio State University and the University of Chicago for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by David M. Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including notice, is given to the source.

Why Have Americans Become More Obese?
David M. Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 9446
January 2003
JEL No. I1, O3, D1
ABSTRACT
Americans have become considerably more obese over the past 25 years. This increase is primarily
the result of consuming more calories. The increase in food consumption is itself the result of
technological innovations which made it possible for food to be mass prepared far from the point
of consumption, and consumed with lower time costs of preparation and cleaning. Price changes
are normally beneficial, but may not be if people have self-control problems. This applies to some,
but not most, of the population.

David Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
Jesse Shapiro
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
jmshapir@fas.harvard.edu

Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@kuznets.harvard.edu

I.

Introduction

In the early 1960s, the average American male weighed 168 pounds. Today, he weighs nearly
180 pounds. Over the same time period, the average female weight rose from 142 pounds to 152
pounds. The trends in very high weight are even more striking. In the early 1970s, 14 percent of
the population was classified as medically obese. Today, obesity rates are two times higher.
Weights have been rising in the US throughout the 20th century, but the rise in obesity since
1980 is fundamentally different from past changes. For most of the 20th century, weights were
below levels recommended for maximum longevity (Fogel, 1994), and the increase in weight
represented an increase in health, not a decrease. Today, Americans are fatter than medical
science recommends, and weights are still increasing. While many other countries have
experienced significant increases in obesity (the UK is a prime example), no other developed
country is quite as heavy as the U.S.
What explains this growth in obesity? Why is obesity higher in the U.S. than in any other
developed country? As an accounting statement, people gain weight if there is an increase in
calories taken in or a decrease in calories expended.1 As such, we begin by examining whether
increased obesity results from decreases in exercise or increases in food consumption. Although
we cannot be absolutely certain of the split, the evidence suggests increased caloric intake is far
more important than reduced caloric expenditure in explaining recent increases in obesity.
Calories expended have not changed significantly since 1980, while calories consumed have
risen markedly.
But this just pushes the puzzle back a step: why has there been an increase in calories consumed?
We propose a theory based on the division of labor in food preparation. In the 1960s, the bulk of
food preparation was done by the family. People cooked their own food and ate it at home.
Since then, there has been a revolution in the mass preparation of food that is roughly
comparable to the mass production revolution in manufactured goods that happened a century
ago. Technological innovations, including vacuum packing, improved preservatives, deep
1

Recent developments in dietetic science emphasize that in many cases other variables, such as the fat or
carbohydrate composition of food, may also influence weight patterns. Given the lack of scientific consensus, we
ignore these issues in this paper.

1

freezing, artificial flavors, and microwaves, have enabled food manufacturers to cook food
centrally and ship it to consumers for rapid consumption. In 1965, a married women who didn’t
work spent over two hours per day cooking and cleaning up from meals. In 1995, the same tasks
take less than half the time. The switch from individual to mass preparation lowered the time
price of food consumption and led to increased quantity and variety of foods consumed.
Our theory is perhaps best illustrated by the potato. Before World War II, Americans ate
massive amounts of potatoes, largely baked, boiled or mashed. They were generally consumed
at home. French fries were rare, both at home and in restaurants, because the preparation of
French fries requires a significant amount of peeling, cutting and cooking. Without expensive
machinery, these activities take a lot of time. In the post-war period, a number of innovations
allowed the centralization of French fry production. French fries are now typically peeled, cut
and cooked in a few central locations using sophisticated new technologies. They are then
frozen at -40 degrees and shipped to the point of consumption, where they are quickly re-heated
either in a deep fryer (in a fast food restaurant), in an oven or recently a microwave (at home).
Today, the French fry is the dominant form of potato and America’s favorite vegetable. This
change shows up in consumption data. From 1977 to 1995, total potato consumption increased
by about 30 percent, accounted for almost exclusively by increased consumption of potato chips
and French fries.
The technical change theory has several implications, which we test and find support for
empirically. First, we show that increased caloric intake is largely a result of consuming more
meals rather than more calories per meal. This is consistent with lower fixed costs of food
preparation. Second, we show that consumption of mass produced food has increased the most
in the past two decades. Third, we show that groups in the population that have had the most
ability to take advantage of the technological changes have had the biggest increases in weight.
Married women spent a large amount of time preparing food in 1970, while single men spent
little. Obesity increased much more among married women. Finally, we show that obesity
across countries is correlated with access to new food technologies and to processed food. Food
and its delivery systems are among the most regulated areas of the economy. Some regulations
are explicit (for example, the European Union has taken a strong stance against genetically

2

engineered food, Germany for many years had a Beer Purity Law), and others are cultural (Jose
Bove’s crusade against McDonalds’ in France). Empirically, countries that are more regulatory
and that support traditional agriculture and delivery systems have lower rates of obesity.
While the medical profession deplores the increase in obesity, the standard economic view is the
opposite. Lower prices for any good – either monetary or time costs – expand the budget set and
make people better off. But self-control issues complicate this interpretation. If people have
difficulty controlling how much they eat, lowering the time costs of food consumption may
exacerbate these problems. Certainly, the $30-$50 billion spent annually on diets testifies to the
self-control problems that many people face. In the last part of the paper, we consider the
welfare implication of lower food production costs in a model where individuals have selfcontrol problems. Such a model helps explain why the increases in weight have been biggest at
the upper end of the weight distribution, where self-control problems are the most severe. For
the vast majority of people, however, price reductions lead to welfare increases.
In the next section, we discuss the basic facts about obesity and its rise over time. Section III
shows the calculus between calories in and out and weight gain, and argues that caloric intake is
the major factor in increased obesity Section IV discusses the technological changes we
hypothesize to be important and documents their likely effects. We test the implications of our
model empirically in Section V. Section VI takes up the welfare economics of obesity. The last
section concludes.

II.

Trends in Obesity

We start by reviewing trends in obesity, putting the recent increase in context historically and
internationally. It is not always known historically what average heights and weights were. In
older times, these data were not kept regularly. Some sporadic historical evidence exists,
though, and has been compiled by Dora Costa and Richard Steckel (1997). We supplement their
data with information from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES)
were conducted in 1959-62, 1971-75, 1976-80, 1988-94, and 1999-2001. All but the last survey

3

have been released in micro data form. We present data through 1999 where we can, but
conduct most of our detailed analysis using data through 1994.
The NHANES surveys measure height and weight directly, using mobile research vans, so
obesity calculations are exact. This is increasingly important as more people are overweight and
embarrassed to admit it. We use the NHANES data extensively in our analysis.
The primary measure of obesity is Body Mass Index, or BMI.2 BMI is measured as weight in
kilograms divided by height in meters squared. Optimal BMI levels are generally believed to lie
between 20 and 25. BMI below 20 is considered thin, BMI between 25 and 30 is overweight,
and BMI above 30 is obese.3 The medical evidence shows increasingly high rates of disease and
death as BMI increases above 25.
Figure 1 shows average BMI over the 20th century for young and prime age males. Early in the
century, BMI was either optimal medically, or too low, depending on the country (Fogel, 1994).
Between 1894 and 1961, average BMI for men in their 40s increased from 23.6 to 26.0, with a
somewhat smaller, but comparable, increase for men in their 30s. The increase for men in their
40s corresponds to roughly 16 pounds for a typical American male (five feet, nine inches tall).
Fogel (1994) shows that increases in BMI over the past few centuries were a major source of
improved health.
Since 1960, BMI has increased by another .7. While this continues the previous trend, the more
recent trend is different in that weight increases in the more recent period are substantially less
healthy than in the earlier time period. An average BMI above 25 places a large share of people
in the medically overweight category. Figure 2 shows overweight and obesity rates over the past
four decades. The share of the population that is either overweight or obese increased from 45 to
61 percent. The share of people that are obese increased from 13 percent to 27 percent, more
than doubling. Obesity has increased for both men and women. For both men and women,
2

BMI is a better measure of obesity than weight alone because it corrects for changes in height.

3

These distinctions are based on the medical literature which shows increasingly high rates of disease and death for
levels of BMI above 25 (see e.g. World Health Organization, 2000; Sturm et al., 2002).

4

most of this increase is in the 1980s and 1990s (after the 1976-80 survey). We thus restrict much
of our subsequent analysis to the 1971-75 and 1988-94 NHANES, spanning the period of the
large increase.
Not only is average weight increasing, but the right tail of the distribution is expanding
particularly rapidly. Figure 3 shows the BMI distribution in detail. Median BMI increased by .9
between the 1971-75 and 1988-94 surveys. The 75th percentile increased by 1.5 and the 95th
percentile increased by 2.7. There has been a global increase in weight, but that has been
particularly true at the upper tail of the distribution. In contrast, there has been little change in
the left tail of the distribution – people at very low weights. While eating disorders, such as
anorexia nervosa, are believed to have increased over the past 30 years (Hsu 1996), the
prevalence of this disease is still very low.4
Table 1 shows data on obesity for adults. The left columns report average BMI; the right
columns report the share of the population that is obese. The average increase in BMI between
the 1970s and the 1990s, shown in the first row, is 1.9. There are some differential increases in
obesity by demographic group, which we examine later in the paper. In particular, married
women and women with exactly 12 years of schooling have had the largest increases in average
BMI. These groups traditionally spent a lot of time preparing meals at home, and spend less
time now.
Table 1 shows some first evidence that increased obesity is not a result of ore women working.
Less than 10 percent of increased obesity is because more men are in families where women
work, or because the women themselves are working.5
The bottom panels show changes in obesity by education group, separately for men and women.
Obesity for women is strongly negatively associated with education. This was true in the early
4

The Surgeon General estimates an incidence of around 0.1 percent, or that about 300,000 people suffer from
anorexia nervosa (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999). We do not find a significant increase in
the population with very low weight even among younger women.

5

This statement is based on a shift-share analysis that examines the impact of more men having working spouses
and more women being workers compared to non-workers.

5

1970s and continues to be true today. But obesity has increased for all education groups. For
men, obesity is relatively independent of education, and has been for the past few decades.
These trends belie an obvious income-based explanation for increasing obesity.6 Higher
incomes, at least as reflected in increased education, would actually lower obesity
Table 2 presents this in a regression framework. We regress BMI or obesity on a dummy
variable for the 1988-94 survey, and, in the even columns, a number of demographic variables.
All told, trends in education, age, race, marital status, employment, occupation, and the
employment status of the spouse of the head of the household explain at most 10% of the
increase in BMI or obesity over this time period. Explanations of the rise in obesity that are
based solely on demographic change are unlikely to be correct.
Figure 4 puts the US in international perspective, showing data on obesity in OECD countries.
The U.S. is a clear outlier, but other countries are heavy as well. Obesity levels in several former
Warsaw Pact countries are nearly as high as they are in the U.S. Obesity in England is also
extremely high. France, Italy and Sweden rank much lower in their obesity levels, and the
Japanese are quite thin.
Data on changes in obesity across countries are harder to find. Some countries have scattered
information, which is shown in Appendix Table 1. The increase in obesity in the UK is similar
to that of the US, although it starts from a lower level. Australia has also seen a rise, although
not as large. Canada, a country which one might think would parallel the US, had much more
modest increases in obesity for men and a decrease in obesity for women between 1978 and
1988. Obesity has increased since then, however (Katzmarzyk, 2002). A good theory of the
changes in obesity should be able to explain why obesity has risen so much in some countries
and so little in others.

III.

6

Calories In vs. Calories Out

They also reject theories of obesity based on more frequent participation in the marriage market.

6

Arithmetically, people get heavier if they consume more calories or expend fewer calories. On
average, about 3,500 calories is one pound. Any increase in calorie consumption or reduction in
caloric expenditure of that amount increases weight by one pound for a typical person.7 In this
section, we evaluate which of these factors explains changes in obesity.
We start with some basic energy accounting. People burn calories in three ways. The first is
through basal metabolism – the energy cost associated with keeping the body alive and at rest.
Basal metabolism represents the bulk of energy utilization for most people – about 60 percent.
The energy cost of basal metabolism depends on weight. The more a person weighs, the more
energy is required to sustain basic bodily functions. The most recent estimates (Schofield,
Schofield and James, 1985) express the basic metabolic rate (BMR) as a linear function of
weight: BMR = α + β * Weight .8 A 70 kilogram (155 pound) man burns on average about
1800 calories before he does any activity. A 60 kilogram woman (132 pounds) burns about 1400
calories.
The second source of energy expenditure is the thermic effect of food. Processing food requires
energy. On average, the thermic effect is about 10 percent of the amount of calories consumed.9
This is relatively low; only about 10 percent of total energy expenditures during a day come from
the thermic effect of food.
Finally, calories are burned by physical activity. The caloric needs of a given amount of physical
activity is proportional to weight: Energy = η • Weight • Time , where η varies with the activity
done. ηa is typically grouped into categories such as light activity (walking, light housework),
7

There are differences in metabolisms across human beings, and it is also possible that different caloric
expenditures may have different impacts on the amount of weight gained or lost. But, these statements are true on
average. We also focus on total caloric intake, and not the composition across macronutrients (protein,
carbohydrates, and fats). Substantial recent attention has focused on this division of caloric intake, and its
implications for weight gain (Atkins, 2000). According to aggregate production data, consumption of carbohydrates
has increased by 28 percent in the past two decades, protein consumption has increased by 18 percent, and fat
consumption has increased by only 9 percent. Whether this change in food mix has led to increased weight is a
subject for future research.

8

9

The appendix discusses the units and presents specific values for

α

and

β.

Of course, this differs by type of food. As with all of our calculations in this section, we present only averages.

7

moderate activity (fast walking, gardening) and heavy activity (strenuous exercise, farm work).
Summing across activities, we denote an exercise index E = Σa ηa Timea, reflecting total physical
activity in a period of time.
In steady-state, calories in equal calories out. Denoting K as daily calories consumed, this
implies a weight equation of the form:
(1) K = α + ( β + E ) * Weight + .1 * K ,
Using estimates of β and E from the literature (Schofield, Schofield, and James, 1985; Whitney
and Cataldo, 1983), equation (1) can be inverted to form the net caloric imbalance associated
with a given increase in weight. The 10 to 12 point increase in median weight we observe in the
past two decades requires a net caloric imbalance of about 100 to 150 calories per day.10
These calorie numbers are strikingly small. One hundred and fifty calories per day is three Oreo
cookies or one can of Pepsi. It is about a mile and a half of walking. Given the small size of this
change, it is obviously difficult, if not impossible, to determine exactly what explains it. We
would have to know about dietary habits and activities in extreme detail to be able to do that.
We do not have high quality data that is that detailed. Accordingly, we use a more indirect
measures to infer the causes of rising weight. We discuss evidence on changing intake first, and
then turn to energy expenditure.
Evidence on Caloric Intake
We begin with the change in calories consumed. There are two sources of data on food intake:
food diaries and agricultural sales data. Food diaries are kept by respondents, who detail
everything they eat over some time period (usually three days). Detailed food diaries are
available for 1977-78 and 1994-96 from the Continuing Surveys of Food Intake by Individuals,
10

These calculations are subject to a certain amount of error. However even under relatively conservative
assumptions about calculation error, the message is clear: very little change in caloric intake is required to explain
the observed change in BMI.

8

conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 11 In principle, all food consumption is
recorded. In practice, however, consumption is surely understated. People do not record
everything they eat, and the act of keeping a diary lowers consumption for some people.
Evidence on this underreporting is seen in average caloric intake recorded in these surveys. The
average male in 1994-96 reports consuming 2347 calories – corresponding to roughly 106 lbs in
steady state. The average female reports caloric intake of 1658 calories, consistent with a
steady-state weight of 64 lbs. Underreporting is not necessarily a problem for our analysis, if it
is constant over time. As surveys have improved, underreporting has likely fallen. This
difficulty explains why we look at aggregate production data as well.
Table 3 shows changes in food consumption between the mid-1970s and the mid-1990s for
males and females. The top row in each panel reports overall caloric intake. Reported
consumption increased by 268 calories for men and 143 calories for women between the two
surveys. This increase is more than enough to explain the increase in steady-state weight.
The rows of the table show the distribution of those calories by meal. Somewhat surprisingly,
most of the increase in calories is from calories consumed during snacks. Dinnertime calories
have actually fallen somewhat. Americans are not just eating more; they are spreading their
consumption out over the day. Consistent with this, the increase in caloric intake is because of
greater frequency of eating, not eating more at any one sitting.
The finding that increased caloric intake is from more snacks rules out two obvious accounting
explanations for increased obesity. The first is that obesity is a result of increased portion sizes
in restaurants (Young and Nestle, 2002). If this theory were true, calories at main meals,
particularly dinner, would have increased. Similarly, the evidence also rules out the view that
fattening meals at fast food restaurants have made America obese.
Table 4 shows more detail on where calories are consumed. Fast food has certainly increased,
from about 60 calories per day to over 200 calories per day. But this increase is largely at formal
11

Consistent with other researchers, we use consumption information from only the first day, although these too are
believed to be underreported (Enns, Goldman and Cook 1997).

9

meals, where it has been offset by reduced home consumption. The increase in snacks, in
contrast, is largely concentrated in snacks consumed at home, and to a lesser extent in snacks
purchased in stores and restaurants.
Because of the substantial underreporting in the food diaries, we also examine agricultural data
on food sales. The Department of Agriculture publishes data on total calories available for
consumption. The data are from production sources and are adjusted for exports, imports, and
feed stock. In recent years, the data have also been adjusted for wastage, although this is less
precise.
Figure 5 shows agricultural production data since 1909. Food supply declined relatively steadily
between 1909 and 1950. There were significant downturns during World War I and the Great
Depression, and moderate declines in other periods. This decline is almost certainly related to
reduced need for food, as people moved off of farms and into cities. The decline in food
consumption explains why obesity increased only mildly during this earlier time period, despite a
large reduction in energy expenditures.
Since 1965, however, food supply has increased markedly, particularly in the last two decades.
In 1978, food supply was 3200 calories per person. By 1999, food supply was 3900 calories per
person, 700 calories higher. Adjusted for wastage, the increase is 418 calories. This is three to
four times the increase that is needed to explain the increase in average obesity over the time
period.
Evidence on Energy Expenditure
We examine two components of energy expenditure: voluntary exercise, and involuntary energy
expenditure associated with employment. Data on voluntary exercise come from time diary
studies. Like food consumption data, time diaries are in principle an ideal way to learn about
daily activities. In practice, however, time diaries have several problems. As with food diaries,
the very act of keeping the diaries induces some people to alter their behavior. Moreover, some

10

of the data is retrospective and there are natural memory problems. People may lie as well. Still,
it is not clear that these problems bias trends in time allocation, which is our concern.
Table 5 displays information on time usage in 1965, 1975, 1985 and 1995. The data from the
first three time periods is taken from Robinson and Godbey (1997); the data from 1995 is from
our calculations. Timeu se has been remarkably stable they are. The biggest change occurred
between 1965 and 1975 when television watching increased by 40 minutes. Some of the
increase in TV time appears to have come out of other forms of socializing (see Putnam, 2000,
for more discussion) and a decline in meal cleanup activities. Using our energy expenditure
equation above, we calculate that a 40 minute change from light household activity to sedentary
activity would lead to a four-pound increase in steady-state weight for the average male (see the
Appendix).
Since 1975 television viewing has increased by 22 minutes, half of the increase in the previous
decade. Furthermore, this has been offset by a decline in other passive categories such as
sleeping and an increase in more active categories such as sports or walking have increased. At
the bottom of table 5, we calculate values of E – the energy expenditure index – for the different
time periods. The estimated value of E fell between 1965 and 1975, but has been quite stable
since then. We cannot explain changes in obesity in the past two decades on that basis.
The second component of energy expenditure is energy spent on the job and commuting to work.
Philipson and Posner (1999) stress this hypothesis in explaining the increase in obesity over
time. This view is certainly true over the longer run. Between 1910 and 1970, the share of
people employed in jobs that are highly active (farm workers, laborers, etc.) fell from 68 to 49
percent. Since then, the change has been more modest. Between 1980 and 1990, the share of the
population in highly active occupations declined by a mere 3 percent, from 45 to 42 percent. As
Table 2 showed, occupation changes are not a major cause of the recent increase in obesity.
Changes in transportation to work are another possible source of reduced energy expenditure –
driving a car instead of walking or using public transportation. Over the longer time period, cars
have replaced walking and public transportation as means of commuting. But this change had

11

largely run its course by 1980. In 1980, 84 percent of people drove to work, 6 percent walked
and 6 percent used public transportation. In 2000, 87 percent drove to work, 3 percent walked,
and 5 percent used public transportation. Changes of this minor magnitude are much too small
to explain the trend in obesity.12
A final piece of evidence on the importance of energy expenditure comes from examining
population subgroups. Children and the elderly do not work now, and they did not work in 1980.
However, Figure 5 shows large increases in obesity among children and adolescents.13 Further,
the elderly may be more active now than in 1980, yet they are also more obese now than in 1980.
One needs a richer story than just changes in energy expenditure to explain why people are
heavier.
In sum, our results suggest that increased caloric intake explains the rise in obesity, not reduced
caloric expenditure. While we cannot be certain that this explanation is right, or that it is the
entire explanation for the rise in obesity, that explanation is the most plausible. Accepting this
conclusion, we turn next to theories of why caloric consumption has increased so greatly.

IV.

Technology, The Division of Labor, and Obesity

There are several possible theories that could potentially explain the increase in caloric intake
over the past 25 years. Price and income changes are one explanation. As people get richer,
they will demand more food. Relative price declines for food would also explain increased
consumption. Changes in the monetary costs of food have not been great, however. From 1970
to 1999, the consumer price index for food items increased only 3 percent slower than the CPI
for non-food items. Similarly, income changes cannot explain our results. Income and obesity
are negatively associated today, at least for women. Furthermore, for much of the period real

12

For a 70 kilogram man with a typical commute time of around 22 minutes, this change would lead to an increase
of less than .4 pounds in steady state.

13

Anderson, Butcher and Levine (2002) offer evidence that children of working mothers are more likely to be
overweight than children of nonworking mothers, although this effect explains only a small portion of the total
increase in child overweight in the last thirty years.

12

incomes were not increasing greatly at the bottom of the income distribution, but obesity for
those groups still increased.
We also reject a theory of obesity based on increased numbers of women at work, and thus more
demand for eating out. This theory has drawn much support, and the unhealthiness of fast food
has drawn wide critique. We showed above, however, that increased female Furthermore, it is
not clear that eating out by itself should increase caloric intake. Restaurants can cook low
calorie food just as easily as high calorie food. Indeed, substitution of dinners from homecooked to eaten out seems not to have increased caloric intake at dinner.
The income and labor force participation theories are not right in their simple framework, but we
believe there is some truth in them. We propose a new theory of increased obesity that has as its
premise reductions in the time cost of food. This has allowed more frequent food consumption
of greater variety, and thus higher weights.14
The Rise of Mass Preparation
Traditionally, consumers took raw agricultural products and transformed them into edible food.
This preparation involved significant amounts of time. As late as the 1960s, 57 percent of the
total costs of food were preparation and cleanup time.15 The primary cost of food may well have
been the time spent in the household preparing that food. Over the past 30 years, the range of
foods available has barely changed at all, but the time involved in preparing food has fallen
substantially.
People could always make almost any form of food that is currently available, if they were
willing to spend the time to do so. Cream-filled cakes could be made by ambitious cooks, for
example, but it took time. Technological innovations since 1970 mean that preparation can now

14

As a sidelight, it may also explain why more women have chosen to go to work (Greenwood, Seshandri and
Yorukoglu, 2001), although we do not explore this path.

15

In 1960, the average family spent $15 per day on purchased food (in 1990 dollars). The time involved in
preparation was 130 minutes. At the average wage of women, this is perhaps $20, or 57 percent of total costs.

13

be done in restaurants and factories, exploiting technology and returns to scale. Cream cakes are
now available widely for less than a dollar. This time savings is a key aspect of our theory.
In order to produce food in one location that will be nearly ready for consumption in another
location, one must surmount five main technological obstacles (Kelsey, 1989): controlling the
atmosphere; preventing spoilage due to microorganisms; preserving flavor; preserving moisture;
and controlling temperature. Innovations in food processing and packaging over the last three
decades have improved food manufacturers’ ability to address each of these issues.
Controlled atmosphere processing (CAP) and, more recently, modified atmosphere processing
(MAP), allow food manufacturers to control the gaseous environment in which their foods are
stored. In the case of fruits, vegetables, and other foods with living cells, these technologies
allow the control of the food’s respiration, to slow down ripening and prevent spoilage. For
recently introduced packaged goods such as fresh pasta, prepared salads, and cooked chicken,
control of the atmosphere inside the package can greatly lengthen shelf life (Testin, 1995).
Hydrogen-peroxide sterilization (approved for use in 1981) and stretch-wrap films (introduced in
1976) have improved food producers’ ability to kill and seal out harmful microorganisms. Since
the 1970s, there have also been significant advances in food irradiation technology, although the
diffusion of this technology has been slowed by the FDA.
A persistent problem in food processing and packaging is that the packaging and packaging
process can adversely affect food flavor. This is especially troublesome for food products that
attempt to replicate a homemade or “like mom used to make” flavor. The 1980s saw huge
advances in “flavor barrier” technology, which involves the use of barrier materials specially
tailored to the food in question. These barriers prevent migration of flavor-related chemicals to
and from the food. Complementary to advances in flavor barriers, the food industry has
increasingly made use of chemists as flavor specialists to design food flavors to suit consumers’
tastes (Schlosser, 2002). These chemists hone in on exactly what makes certain foods desirable
and synthesize it in the laboratory. These artificial flavors can then be added to make preprepared food more appealing.

14

Temperature and moisture pose a particular problem in the case of frozen foods. If moisture is
allowed to build up in the package, ice crystals can form, which separate ingredients and alter the
food’s texture (Kelsey, 1989). In addition, moisture can sublimate in the freezer, leading to
dehydration of the food and resulting “freezer-burn.” Advances in materials technology such as
polyethylene plastics have improved control over the internal moisture of food packages and
limited many of these problems, thus extending the freezer/shelf life of many foods and
improving end-use flavor.
Other technologies are available at the user end. Microwave ovens allow for rapid heating of
frozen and pre-prepared foods. Microwaves were developed in the 1940s as an outgrowth of
radar technology, and became available for a reasonable consumer in the 1970s.16 As late as
1978, only 8 percent of American households had microwaves. By 1999, 83 percent of
American households had microwave ovens. Other kitchen appliances, such as refrigerators,
have also improved.
These technologies did not impact all foods or all places equally. For example, controlled
atmosphere processing was available for use in the bulk storage of produce decades before
modified atmosphere processing, a related technology, was applied to retail foods in the late
1980s. Generally, foods that are consumed in more-or-less the same form that they leave the
farm (e.g. fruit) stand to gain less from advances in packaging and processing. Foods that
involve significant amounts of preparation have been able to benefit most from the new
technologies.
American technological leadership and the large size of the American market meant that many of
the most important innovations were first developed in the U.S. Other countries have often
limited the incursions of American food products or food retailers (such as fast food outlets).
Moreover, as food is one of the most regulated areas of the economy, highly regulated
economies have generally put substantial roadblocks to the incorporation of new food

16

As early the 1950s, prototypes for home use were available, but these were extremely expensive and as large as
dishwashers.

15

technologies. The examples of genetically altered food and Germany’s Beer Purity Law were
noted above.17
Perhaps the most telling evidence for the revolution in time costs of food production has been the
reduction in the time spent cooking and cleaning. Table 6 shows food preparation times for
different subgroups of the population in 1965 and 1995. The food preparation and clean-up
times for both working and non-working women fell by about 50 percent. These changes hold
work status constant. They reflect technology, not labor force participation.
The trend towards increased levels of commercial preparation also appears in data on the
distribution of food payments. In 1972, 44 percent of the cost of food went to farmers. By 1997,
only 23 percent of the cost of food represented the input of farmers. The rest is input from the
retail sector. This is not just a statement about the restaurant sector. Eighty percent of the cost
of food eaten at home is now spent non-farm related expenses. Labor in the supermarket and the
factory has replaced labor in the home, and this has been associated with dramatic time savings
within the home.
Implications of Technological Change
Food preparation involves both fixed and variable costs. The peeling and cutting of French fries
is a marginal time cost, while deep frying is generally a fixed cost (up to the point where the
fryer is full). Mass preparation means that the fixed time component can be shared over a wide
range of consumers. This is the first benefit from improvements in technology. In addition,
mass preparation reduces the marginal cost of preparing food, by substituting capital for labor.
Finally, mass preparation exploits the division of labor. Food professionals now prepare food
instead of everyday people, reducing both fixed and marginal costs.
Reductions in the time cost of food preparation should lead to an increase in the amount of food
consumed. This increase can occur through several channels: (1) increased variety of foods
consumed, (2) increased frequency of food consumption, (3) a switch to high calorie/high flavor
17

The Beer Purity Law was eventually struck down by the EU as a trade barrier.

16

prepared foods which had previously been unavailable, or (4) an increase in the overall
consumption of each individual food item. As fixed costs decline, we would expect most of the
increase in calories to come from increased variety of foods and frequency of food consumption,
rather than more food during each meal. Indeed, reductions in time costs have an ambiguous
effect on calories per food item. If the quantity of meals and food at each meal are substitutes
(for example, as people become sated), the calories at any given meal will decline.18
There are four empirical implications of the mass preparation theory. First, the lower costs of
food preparation mean that individuals should consume a wider range of products at more times
during the day. Second, the increase in food consumption should come mostly in foods that had
an improvement in mass preparation technology (and complements to those foods). We will test
this implication by looking at changes in food consumption across food groups. Third,
individuals who have taken the most advantage of the new technologies should have had the
biggest increase in obesity. We test this empirically by correlating the time spent by different
demographic groups in food preparation in the 1960s and the change in time spent in food
preparation with the increase in BMI. Finally, we examine whether obesity rates are higher in
countries with greater access to technological changes in food consumption.

V.

Testing the Implications of the Theory

Implication 1: Changes in Food Type, Composition, and Timing
The first implication of the theory concerns the change in the nature and composition of food
consumption. The theory predicts that people will consume a greater variety of foods now than
in the past, and at more times during the day. We already noted the evidence for this above
(table 3). Snacks are where a significant portion of the changes in food production have
occurred. Snacks are also largely pre-prepared.

18

These predictions follow from a standard quantity-quality model of food consumption. See Becker and Lewis
(1973) for the structure.

17

Implication 2: Calories From Different Food Products
A second prediction of our model is that consumption should have increased most for food items
that have experienced the most technological change. The best measure of the degree of mass
preparation is the USDA’s measure of the share of costs going to farmers instead of other food
preparers (the farm value share). Food items with a great deal of mass preparation have low
farm values. The USDA has calculated this for some, but not all, food categories. The farm
value share varies greatly, from over 60 percent for eggs to near 10 percent for grains.
Figure 7 shows the relationship between farm value share and caloric growth across thirteen food
categories. Consistent with the model, there is a statistically significant negative relationship
between the two: food items with large amounts of commercial preparation have increased in
consumption, and food items with less commercial preparation have fallen. The correlation is .68, which is relatively large.
Because the farm value share is not calculated for all products, we also test this theory in a
second way – by looking at consumption of food categories that are more and less branded.
Branded foods are more pre-processed than unbranded foods (potato chips vs. raw potatoes, for
example), so the prediction is that consumption of branded food groups should rise relative to
consumption of unbranded food groups. Figure 8 shows this to be the case. The correlation
between the degree of branding and the rise in calories is .51 across food categories, which is
significant at the 5 percent level.
Implication 3: Changes in Obesity Across Demographic Groups
Our third prediction is across groups: obesity should increase the most among groups for whom
the costs of production fell the most. One natural demarcation of these groups is by the
percentage of food consumption that was formerly produced at home. Groups that have
traditionally cooked at home were more limited in the type of foods they could consume because
of the fixed costs of production. Groups that ate out more, in contrast, were not as constrained.
Thus, the theory predicts that obesity should increase the most among groups who formerly

18

made most of their food in the house, and should have increased the least among groups that ate
out more.
To test this prediction, we relate changes in obesity across demographic groups to the amount of
time spent preparing food in 1965, and to changes in the amount of time spent preparing food
between 1965 and 1995. We divide the adult population into the 8 demographic groups shown
in Table 6. An important issue is whether the time costs should be for the person or the family.
Under the assumption of joint household decision-making, it is the total time usage that matters,
not the individual time spent. In other models, the time that each person spends in food
preparation would matter. For example, if men eat at work in ways their wives cannot control,
we would not expect reduced time costs for wives to have much effect on weight of married
men.
Figures 9 and 10 show the relationship between the initial time spent preparing food and the
change in BMI. Figure 9 shows the relationship where time spent in food preparation is personspecific. In figure 10, the time is for the family as a whole. There is a positive relationship
between time costs and obesity changes in Figure 9, but less so in Figure 10. Basically, women
spend less time preparing food now than they used to, and they are much more obese than they
used to be. The difference between the two may be related to the fact that variety has increased
the most for women (men already ate out more), or to lack of joint decision-making. The data in
figure 9 indicate that each ½ hour of initial food preparation time is associated with an increase
in BMI of nearly .5. This does not explain all of the increase in obesity – the constant is
statistically significantly positive – but it explains a good share.
Figure 11 shows the correlation between the change in BMI and the change in the time spent
preparing food, using person-specific time costs. The results are similar: groups that saw a large
reduction in the time spent preparing food also had large increases in BMI.

19

Implication 4: Obesity Across Countries
The final implication of the theory is that obesity should increase more in countries where
technological innovations are more encouraged. All of the technologies we describe can in
principle be used in any country. But the extent to which they are used varies across countries,
driven in part by differential public policies. Many countries have explicit or implicit restrictions
on the ability of food producers or consumers to have access to such technologies. We examine
whether such restrictions are related to obesity.
For data reasons, our sample is OECD countries.19 Table 7 shows the results. In all of our
regressions, we control for female labor force participation rates and GDP per capita, to test
these theories of obesity. The first column includes just female labor force participation rates
and income. Neither is significantly related to obesity (nor are they related when other variables
are included). Ideally, we would have data directly on food industry regulation. Such data are
not always available, however. We use a number of proxies. The second column includes the
frequency of price controls in the economy as a whole. This variable is an average of the 1989
and 1994 Economic Freedom of the World index of price controls (Gwartney, Lawson, and
Block 1995). The index ranges from 0 to 10. We have normalized it to have a mean of 0 and a
standard deviation of 1. People in countries with more price controls are much less obese than
people in countries without price controls. A one standard deviation increase in price controls is
associated with about 3.7 percentage points less obesity. As figure 12 shows, this effect is not
driven by any individual country.
The third column looks at the relation between producer protection – measured as the ratio of
agricultural prices in the country to and worldwide prices – and obesity. The measure captures
tariff and non-tariff barriers to agriculture, but is only available for 9 countries. Figure 13 shows
a strong relation between relative food prices (normalized in the same way) and obesity not
driven by any one country. A one standard deviation increase in domestic prices above world
prices reduces obesity by a statistically significant 4.5 percentage points (the third column of the

19

Appendix Table 3 shows the countries included in each regression.

20

table).20 The fourth column includes a simple count of the number of food laws listed in nine
countries, taken from Kellan and Guanino (2000).21 The mean country for which data are
available has 26 food laws. The few observations still suggest a pattern. Countries with more
food laws have lower levels of obesity.
Recent research has highlighted the link between regulation and the structure of the legal system
(La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1999). Countries with a common law legal
origin (the British model) are much less regulated than are countries with a civil law origin (the
French model). The fifth column includes a measure of civil law legal origin to capture the
overall prevalence of regulation. More regulated countries are 7 percent less obese than are less
regulated countries.
One way that regulation works is to stop new technology. To measure the ease of technology
importation, the sixth column relates obesity to the Djankov et al. (2002) measure of the time
required in days to open a new business (in days). Countries with greater time delays to opening
new businesses are less obese than countries with shorter times.
The last column relates obesity to the price of a Big Mac, taken from the Economist. Although
not necessarily exogenous (Big Mac prices will depend on demand as well as supply22), Big Mac
prices are an approximate measure of relative food costs in different countries. Countries in
which Big Macs cost more are less obese than countries in which they cost less.
While our international results are not definitive, they are strongly consistent with the theory.
People in more regulated countries, and particularly countries with a more regulated agricultural

20

One concern is that this relationship is driven by pure price effects – higher prices would lead to lower
consumption – but the strong correlation between our measure of protectionism and our other measures of regulation
suggests that price effects are not the whole story.

21

These laws include factors such as packaging and labeling requirements, preservative tolerances, and pesticide
regulations.

22

In defense of this measure, we note that if variation in Big Mac prices were due to demand differences across
countries, we would expect to see lower prices associated with lower obesity.

21

sector, are less obese. Female labor force participation rates and real income are unrelated to
obesity.

VI.

Obesity and Self-Control

Lower time costs of food preparation may affect consumption through two channels. The first is
a standard price mechanism. The cost of food consumption includes time and money costs. As
time costs fall, one would expect a standard demand response to price (assuming demand is
downward sloping).
This effect could be large enough to explain the increase in consumption we observe.
Reductions in the time required to prepare food reduced the per calorie cost of food by 29
percent from 1965 to 1995.23 If the elasticity of caloric intake with respect to price is -.7, this
could explain the increase in caloric intake. An elasticity of -.7 is possible, but probably on the
high side. Typical food price elasticities are on the order of -.6 (Blundell, Browning, and
Meghir, 1994). The elasticity of caloric intake with respect to price is likely smaller than this,
however, since the food spending elasticity includes increased quality of food in addition to
quantity. We do not know how much smaller, however.
We suspect, however, that this is not the only reason why lower time costs lead to increased
consumption. Rather, self-control issues are likely to be important as well. The standard model
of consumption involves rational individuals – people decide how much to consume on the basis
of price and income, fully accounting for the future health consequences of their actions. But at
least some food consumption is almost certainly not rational. People continue to overeat, despite
substantial evidence that they want to be thinner and try to lose weight (there is a $30 to $50
billion annual diet industry). Food is addictive and brings immediate gratification, while health
costs of overconsumption occur only in the future. Maintaining a diet is also very difficult.
People on diets frequently yo-yo; their weight rises and falls as they start and stop dieting.
23

In the early 1960s, time costs accounted for 57 percent of food costs. Preparation and cleanup time fell by about
50 percent since then, from 130 minutes to 62 minutes per day. At the same time, caloric intake increased. On a per
calorie basis, this represents a 29 percent reduction in cost.

22

Survey evidence confirms this difficulty. Figure 14 shows the relation between current weight
and the person’s self-described optimal weight. In general, desired weight rises only slightly
with actual weight, particularly for obese individuals. One might argue that these desired
weights only reflect desired weights if moving to that weight were costless, when in fact it is not.
But the caloric reduction required to lose weight is so low that we suspect many obese people
would be willing to make that sort of tradeoff, if they could do it.
As a result, people with self-control problems may find themselves overconsuming food,
particularly when the time costs of food preparation fall. In this situation, lower time costs of
food preparation may be a welfare loss.24 In this section, we present a framework for self-control
problems and evaluate the welfare implications of technical change in such a situation.
A Model of Self-Control Problems
Consider an individual who discounts all times in the future at a rater higher than the pure time
discount rate, but trades off consumption in future states at the time discount rate. Such an
individual will always want to begin a diet tomorrow (because the long-term benefits justify the
lost utility tomorrow) but not today (because the immediate gratification from food is high).
Reductions in the time cost of food preparation may significantly reduce the welfare of this
person, by increasing the immediate consumption value of food relative to the long-term health
costs.
The logic of this argument can be illustrated by thinking about a hungry worker and a vending
machine filled with cookies. If the vending machine is 10 feet away, a person might each midafternoon cookies, even if he is on a diet (the diet can always start tomorrow). The same person,
however, might not be willing to walk 10 minutes to and from the store to get cookies, or to
spend a half-hour baking cookies (if at home). The benefits 10 minutes or one-half hour down
the road are too far away to justify it. It is a common feature of many behavioral change
24

Increased food consumption might be a welfare loss for another reason as well – the external costs of individual
weight for medical and disability programs. As with smoking, however, we suspect that such external costs are
relatively small (Gruber, 2001).

23

programs – smoking and drinking cessation, weight loss – that they encourage keeping the
offending items as far away as possible. Raising time costs is believed to reduce consumption.
We model this formally using the hyperbolic discounting framework of Laibson (1997) and
Harris and Laibson (2001). At each point in time, people receive utility from consumption of a
durable composite commodity (C) and food (represented by caloric intake, K) and lose utility
from being overweight. To eliminate income effects, we assume utility is linear in composite
consumption. The instantaneous utility function is therefore
(2)

Utility t = C t + U ( K t ) − h • Weight t ,

The cost of food is P, including both time and money costs. Thus, Ct = Y – PKt, where Y is
income.
A rational consumer will consume food until the marginal consumption benefit is equal to the
marginal cost. The consumption benefit at the time of consumption is U’(Kt). We assume that
food decisions made today are only implemented τ units of time in the future; it takes that long
to prepare or shop for the food. Thus, the benefits of consumption are discounted by that
interval. Following Harris and Laibson, we assume that people discount the future in two ways.
The first is standard exponential utility: for a period of time “t” periods in the future, people get
e − ρt units of utility. In addition, people also make a distinction between the “current self” and

the “future self.” This distinction is the essence of the hyperbolic model.25 People discount the
future self’s utility with parameter 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 . If γ =1, the future is considered the same as today;
if γ =0, the future is ignored. With hazard rate λ , people switch from being “current” selves to
being “future” selves.

25

Changes in the time cost of food preparation will affect people with self-control problems in two ways. First,
since time costs must be aid before one gets to eat, these costs will be particularly salient for people who are very
present oriented. Second, time costs delay consumption, which mean that food consumption is more likely to be
enjoyed by the future, rather than current, self.

24

Individuals have perfect knowledge about all of the parameters of the system (they are
sophisticated hyperbolic agents), but they don’t know when they will switch to being a “future
self.” Thus, the value of future consumption is probabilistic. With probability e − λt , the future
utility remains connected to the current self and with probability 1- e − λt , the future utility is
associated with the future self and is worth only γ as much. Putting this together, the marginal

(

)

utility from food consumed τ units of time in the future equals e − ρτ (e − λτ + (1 − e − λτ )γ U ' ( K ) .
For a typical food consumption decision, the standard discounting effect is small (time costs are
on the order of 10 minutes to a few hours). Thus, ρτ is approximately 0, and the utility of food
consumed τ units of time in the future is just the hyperbolic term.
Food consumption carries two costs – the dollar value of foregone consumption (the C not
consumed), and the health and social costs of increased weight. Consider the foregone
consumption first. If the composite commodity is durable, consumption is given by the
differential equation C t = −δC t + I t , where It = Y-PKt is spending at time t. With both standard
and hyperbolic discounting, spending one unit of income on the durable composite commodity
generates welfare benefits of:

(3) Utility from Durable =

ò

t >0

æ 1−γ
γ
+
e −( ρ +δ ) t e −λt + (1 − e −λt )γ dt = çç
èλ + ρ +δ ρ +δ

(

)

ö
÷÷
ø

The hyperbolic discounting literature (Frederick, Lowenstein, and O’Donoghue, 2002) suggests
that people switch from current selves to future selves over the course of a day, and quite
possibly over a matter of hours, which implies a very high value of λ (i.e. 1,000 or more). As
such, the marginal value of an extra unit of the future commodity is well approximated by

γ
. The value of foregone consumption from consuming one more unit of food is P times
ρ +δ
this amount.
The health and social consequences of being heavier are the second cost of food consumption.
We assume these costs are linear with slope h. Following the discussion of Section II, weight

25

•

evolves according to the differential equation W t

=

− α~ − µWt + wK t . Integrating this equation

and using the same approximations as above, the health costs of current consumption
approximately equal

whγ
.
ρ+µ

In equilibrium, therefore, the consumer will choose K so that:

(4)

Pγ
whγ
+
= e − λτ + γ (1 − e − λτ ) U ′( K ) .
ρ +δ ρ + µ

(

)

The benefit from food consumption, which will be enjoyed by the current self, or, with lower
value, the future self, is on the right hand side of the equation. This is weighed against the costs
from lost income (the first term on the left-hand side), and lower health (the second term on the
left-hand side). These other costs are born almost entirely by future selves.
One can show several points about this optimization. First, as long as hyperbolic concerns are
real ( λ is large), the level of food consumed will decrease with increases in γ and reductions
in λ . Increases in γ make consumers more forward looking and so lead to less present-oriented
consumption. Increases in λ , on the other hand, make the value of consumption more likely to
benefit a future self, and thus lead to lower consumption.
Second, a reduction in the price of food will lead to increased food consumption and higher
steady-state weights. Technological innovation that allows mass preparation of food will impact
consumption through two variables: the price P, and the delay before consumption τ .26
Importantly, the weight gain from a reduction in time delay will be particularly important for
26

Differentiating equation (4) shows that

æ 1ö
d ln( K ) = ç ÷
èσ ø

ìæ
ü
ö
Pγ
÷
ïç
ï
K U ''
δ
d ln( P) − d ln(e − λτ + (1 − e − λτ )γ ) ý , where σ =
í ç Pγ
÷
U ' , the
wh
γ
ç
÷
ïè
ï
δ +
µø
î
þ

elasticity of substitution of utility. The first term is the price effect, weighted by the price component of the cost of
food consumption; the second term is the time effect.

26

more hyperbolic people -- more hyperbolic people will gain more weight than less hyperbolic
people from a reduction in time cost.27 This result is intuitive – people with self-control
problems respond more to the ready availability of food than people without such problems.
This result helps explains one of the most striking facts about the recent rise in obesity -- the
dramatic increase at the upper tail of the weight distribution. People with self-control problems
(lower levels of γ ) are more likely to have high initial weight levels and are more likely to gain
more weight with further improvements in food technology. This result also helps explain why
reductions in the time cost of food might have a much larger impact on the level of obesity than
reductions in the monetary cost of food. Because reduced time costs affect both the price of the
food and the delay before consumption, hyperbolic consumers will be very sensitive to changes
in time delay, even if they are not very price sensitive.
Welfare Implications of Lower Time Costs
To simplify the welfare analysis, we abstract from non-hyperbolic discounting, i.e. we assume
that ρ = 0 . This implies that in the absence of self-control problems, the individual’s choice of
calories will maximize steady state consumption. We will focus on steady-state utility, which
equals:
(5)

State-state Utility = (Y − PK *) / δ − hwK * / µ + U ( K *) .

The impact on welfare of a change in a parameter that impacts both K* and P equals

(6)

∆Utility = − ∆P •

æ 1
ö
K*
hw
+ ∆K • çç − P −
+ U ′( K *) ÷÷ .
δ
µ
è δ
ø

27

From footnote (2), τ affects consumption in two ways. The first is by changing the price of food. This effect is
independent of γ (γ cancels from the ratio multiplying the change in price). The second effect is through the time
− λτ
æ 1 ö æ λ e (1 − γ ) ö
÷ dτ . If
cost. Differentiating the second term in footnote (2) shows that d ln( K ) = ç ÷ ç − λτ
è σ ø è e + (1 − e − λτ )γ ø

γ=1, this term is zero.

27

= − ∆P •

æ 1−γ
K*
− ∆K • çç
λτ
δ
è 1 − γ + γe

ö æ Pγ ö
æ 1−γ
÷÷ • ç
÷ − ∆K • çç
λτ
ø è δ ø
è 1 − γ + γe

ö æ whγ ö
÷÷ • çç
÷÷
ø è µ ø

where the latter equation comes from substituting the first order condition in (4). The first term
is the direct impact on price. Because prices are falling (the time component, if not the money
component), this term is positive. The second term is the reduction in other goods consumption
resulting from the fact that people spend more on food, weighted by the extent to which
preferences are not rational. We suspect that this term is small; the chief harm from people
overconsuming food is not the fact that they are immiserized, but the health costs of increased
weight. The third term is the health cost. It is the product of the weight gained and the health
costs of additional weight, 28 again weighted by the non-rational degree of discounting. If
preferences were rational ( γ = 1 ), the second and third terms would disappear; individuals are
maximizing long run utility and the increase in calories cannot cause a utility loss. With
hyperbolic preferences, however, individuals overconsume food, and a further increase in
calories adversely affects welfare.
In particular, equation (6) implies that a necessary condition for welfare will fall with a reduction
in time costs is:29

(7’)

1−γ
* Change in Weight * Cost of Weight > Change in Costs of Food ,
1 − γ + γeλτ

People are worse off if the weight consequences of excessive obesity are greater than the value
of less time spent preparing food. To compare these terms, we need to express everything in the
same units. It is easiest to evaluate them in units of time. We do not know the monetary
willingness to pay for lower weight, but we can use exercise technology to figure out a rough
estimate of the time cost. In terms of time costs, people are worse off if:

hγ
is the utility cost of increased weight.
µ

28

w∆K is the change in weight, and

29

This ignores the second term in equation (6), the lost utility from having less income to spend on other goods.

28

(7’’)

1−γ
*Time Costs of Losing the Weight Gained > Reduction in Time Costs of Food
1 − γ + γeλτ

On average in the U.S., there has been a reduction in time costs of food preparation of about 20
minutes.30 The 10 lb weight gain that corresponds to this time reduction represents about 100
calories per day, or about 1 mile of daily exercise. If it takes 15 minutes to walk or jog a mile,
the time cost of the 10 lbs gained is about 15 minutes per day. 31 This is less than the 20 minutes
of time savings that resulted in the weight increase.
It is clear that the typical person cannot be made worse off by the reduction in time costs. To put
it simply, people have an additional 20 minutes per day in free time. They could spend 15 of
those minutes exercising, lose the weight gained, and still have 5 minutes left over.
The only way people might be made worse off is if they are particularly impatient and as a result
would be willing to forgo more than 15 minutes per day to lose 10 pounds in steady state, but
cannot seem to do so. For example a person who always vows to exercise but never starts can be
viewed conceptually as someone willing to pay more than 15 minutes per day to lose 10 lbs.
Consider a person who is willing to spend 30 minutes per day to lose ten pounds. In that case,
they will have lost utility if

1− γ
is less than two-thirds. Assuming a value of e λτ of 2
λτ
1 − γ + γe

(there is a fifty percent chance of changing into a future self by the time the food is prepared),
then they will have lost utility if γ <.2. Extremely hyperbolic individuals can be hurt by the
change in technology, but people without extreme self-control problems will be better off. While
there is no evidence on the distribution of γ in the population, we suspect that most – but
certainly not all -- people are better off by the technological advance.

30

This 20 minute saving does not include the larger time savings in cleaning up which is also, in part, due to
changes in food technology.

31

This is the time cost for people who exercise. Standard economic logic suggests that the people who don’t
exercise probably value losing weight by less than 15 minutes a day. Of course, hyperbolic concerns can complicate
this picture. We consider higher values of the willingness to forgo time for weight in some cases, to reflect this.

29

VII.

Conclusion

Over the past 25 years, there has been a startling increase in the rate of obesity in the United
States. Weights have increased for all demographic groups, and have done so particularly at the
upper end of the weight distribution. In this paper, we argue that this increase is primarily a
result of increased food consumption, rather than reduced exercise. Since 1975, Americans have
been eating a lot more.
The increase in food consumption itself appears to be related to a host of technological
innovations in food production and transportation. Technology has made it increasingly possible
for firms to mass prepare food and ship it to consumers for ready consumption, thereby taking
advantages of scale economies in food preparation. This situation is similar to the one that
occurred a century ago, when manufacturers used mass production to bring about the widespread
distribution of manufactured goods. The result of this change has been a significant reduction in
the time costs of food. These lower time costs have led to increased food consumption, and
ultimately increased weights.
Several facts are consistent with this theory. First, food variety has increased significantly in
recent decades, and people eat many more times during the day. Both of these are implications
of declining prices for mass produced goods. Indeed, the increase in food consumption has
occurred largely in prepared foods. Foods that involve significant home production have not had
major increases in caloric consumption. Looking across demographic groups, people who were
most constrained in their food choices a few decades ago had the largest increases in obesity.
Finally, countries with significant regulation, especially of the food industry, have had less of an
increase in obesity.
The usual economic logic suggests that this time cost savings and the corresponding increase in
consumption represent pure economic benefit. However, the presence of self-control problems
make it possible that the changes have been welfare reducing. Eliminating the time cost of food
preparation disproportionately increases consumption for hyperbolic discounters, because time
delay is a particularly important mechanism for discouraging those individuals from consuming.

30

Our model shows that some people were likely hurt by the improved technology, although most
have surely benefited. Thus, while the rise in obesity has significant health costs, those costs are
likely offset by the dramatic savings in time of food preparation.

31

References

Ainsworth B.E.; Haskell W.L.; Leon A.S.; Jacobs D.R.; Montoye H.J.; Sallis J.F.;
Paffenbarger R.S. (1993) Compendium of physical activities: Classification of
Energy Costs of Human Physical Activities. Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise 25(1): 71-80.
Anderson, Patricia M.; Butcher, Kristin F.; Levine, Phillip B. (2002) Maternal employment and
overweight children. NBER Working Paper No. 8770.
Atkins, Robert C. (2000) Dr. Atkins’ new diet revolution. New York: Avon Books.
Becker, Gary S. (1965) A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal 40(299): 493-508.
Becker, Gary S & Lewis, H Gregg (1973) On the interaction between the quantity and quality of
children, Journal of Political Economy S279-88 Vol. 81 (2) pp. S279-88.
Blundell, Richard, Martin Browning, and Costas Meghir. (1994) Consumer demand and the lifecycle allocation of household expenditures. The Review of Economic Studies, 61(1): 5780.
Centers for Disease Control. (2001) Health, United States, Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
Costa, Dora; Steckel, Richard. (1997) Long-term trends in health, welfare, and economic growth
in the United States. In R. Floud and R. Steckel, (Eds.) Health and welfare during
industrialization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Djankov, Simeon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei. (2002) The
regulation of entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1): 1-38.
Enns, Cecilia Wilkinson; Goldman, Joseph D.; Cook, Annetta. (1997) Trends in Food and
Nutrient Intakes by Adults: NFCS 1977-78, CSFI 1989-91, and CSFII 1994-95. Family
Economics and Nutrition Review 10(4): 2-15.
Fogel, Robert W. (1994) Economic growth, population theory, and physiology: The bearing of
long-term processes on the making of economic policy. American Economic Review
84(3): 369-395.
Frederick, Shane; Lowenstein, George; O’Donoghue, Ted. (2002) Time discounting and time
preference: A critical review. Journal of Economic Literature 40(6):351-401.
Greenwood, Jeremy; Seshadri, Ananth; Yorukoglu, Mehmet. (2001). Engines of liberation.
University of Rochester, mimeo.

Gruber, Jonathan. (2001) Tobacco at the crossroads: The past and future of smoking regulation
in the U.S. Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(2): 193-212.
Gruber, Jonathan; Koszegi, Botond. (2001). Is addiction “rational”? Theory and evidence.
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Gwartney, James; Lawson, Robert; Block, Walter. (1995) Economic Freedom of the World
1975-1995. Canada: The Fraser Institute.
Harris, Christopher; Laibson, David. (2001) Dynamic choices of hyperbolic discounters.
Econometrica 69(4): 935-957.
Hsu, L. K. George. (1996) Epidemiology of the eating disorders. The Psychiatric Clinics of
North America 19(4): 681-700.
Kellam, Jocelyn; Guarino, Elizabeth T. (2000) International Food Laws. Norwich: The
Stationery Office.
Kelsey, Robert J. (1989) Packaging in Today’s Society. Third edition. Lancaster, PA:
Technomic Publishing Company, Inc.
Katzmarzyk, Peter T. (2002), “The Canadian obesity epidemic”, Canadian Medical Association
Journal, 166(8), April 16, 2002, 1039-2040.
Laibson, David. (1997) Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 62 443-477.
LaPorta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei; Vishny, Robert. (1999) The
quality of government. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15: 222-279.
Manson, JoAnn E.; Willett, Walter C.; Stampfer, Meir J.; Colditz, Graham
A.; Hunter, David J.; Hankinson, Susan E.; Hennekens, Charles H.; Speizer,
Frank E. (1995) Body Weight and Mortality among Women. New England Journal of
Medicine 333(11): 677-685.
Philipson, Tomas J.; Posner, Richard A. (1999) The long-run growth in obesity as a function of
technological change. NBER Working Paper No. 7423.
Putnam, Robert. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
New York: Simon & Schuster.
Quesenberry, Charles P.; Caan, Bette; Jacobson, Alice. (1998) Obesity, Health Services
Use, and Health Care Costs Among Members of a Health Maintenance Organization.
Archives of Internal Medicine 158(5): 466-472.

Robinson, John P.; Godbey, Geoffrey. (1997) Time for Life: The Surprising Ways Americans
Use Their Time. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Schlosser, Eric. (2002) Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal.
New York: Perennial.
Schofield, W.N.; Schofield, C.; James, W.P.T. (1985) Basal metabolic rate - review
and prediction together with annotated bibliography of source material.
Human Nutrition: Clinical Nutrition 39C, Supplement 1, 5-96
Testin, Robert F. (1995) New packaging technologies. Food and Drug Law Journal
50(4): 399-413.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. (1978) National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey I. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Health and
Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics, producer. Ann Arbor: Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research, distributor.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics. (1996)
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey IIII. Washington: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Statistics, producer. Ann Arbor:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, distributor.
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services. (1999) Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health Services,
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Mental Health, 1999.
Whitney, Eleanor N.; Cataldo, Corinne B. (1983) Understanding Normal and Clinical
Nutrition. Belmont, CA: West-Wadsworth Publishing Company, Co.
World Health Organization. (2000) Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic.
WHO Technical Report #894.
Young, Lisa R.; Marion Nestle. (2002) The contribution of expanding portion sizes to the U.S.
obesity epidemic. American Journal of Public Health 92(2): 246-249.

Table 1: Increase in Weight by Population Group
Average BMI (kg/m2)

Percent Obese (BMI≥30)

1971-75

1988-94

Change

1971-75

1988-94

Change

25.4

27.3

1.9

16%

30%

13%

All

25.0

27.1

2.1

15

28

14

Single male

24.4

25.5

1.1

9

18

8

Married male, non-working
spouse

25.6

27.1

1.5

13

26

13

Married male, working spouse

25.7

27.3

1.6

11

24

13

Single female

24.9

27.4

2.5

18

32

14

Married female, working

24.3

27.4

3.1

13

33

21

Married female, not working

24.9

28.0

3.1

16

36

19

All

26.1

27.6

1.5

19

32

12

Male

25.4

27.0

1.6

13

28

15

Female

26.7

28.2

1.5

25

36

12

Average
Adults

Elderly

Women Aged 20+, By Education Group
<High School

26.3

28.4

2.1

24

38

14

High School

24.2

27.5

3.3

13

33

19

College or More

22.8

25.4

2.6

7

20

13

<High School

25.6

26.5

0.9

15

23

8

High School

25.7

26.7

1.0

13

24

11

College or More

25.2

26.4

1.2

8

21

13

Men Aged 20+, By Education Group

Note: Data are from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES). BMI is
measured in kg/m2.

Table 2: Correlates of BMI and Obesity
BMI (kg/m2)
Men

Women

Dummy for Obesity (BMI≥30)
Men

Women

Dependent variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Dummy for 1988-94

1.19
(0.08)

1.46
(0.10)

2.32
(0.09)

2.04
(0.10)

0.088
(0.006)

0.095
(0.008)

0.126
(0.006)

0.109
(0.007)

12-15 years education

0.32
(0.09)

-1.16
(0.10)

0.004
(0.007)

-0.059
(0.007)

16+ years education

-0.13
(0.14)

-2.65
(0.17)

-0.030
(0.012)

-0.140
(0.012)

Age (years)

0.24
(0.02)

0.37
(0.02)

0.011
(0.001)

0.019
(0.001)

Age squared

-0.0023
(0.0002)

-0.0034
(0.0002)

-0.0001
(0.0000)

-0.0002
(0.0000)

black (dummy)

0.59
(0.25)

2.52
(0.31)

0.034
(0.020)

0.121
(0.022)

married (dummy)

0.91
(0.10)

-0.06
(0.10)

0.040
(0.008)

-0.016
(0.007)

white (dummy)

0.77
(0.24)

0.57
(0.30)

0.024
(0.020)

0.014
(0.021)

spouse of household
head working (dummy)

0.12
(0.16)

---

-0.009
(0.013)

---

employed (dummy)

0.13
(0.10)

-0.45
(0.12)

0.007
(0.008)

-0.025
(0.008)

Occupation dummies

NO

YES

NO

YES

NO

YES

NO

YES

Constant

25.4
(0.05)

18.3
(0.38)

25.2
(0.06)

16.6
(0.45)

0.118
(0.005)

-0.177
(0.031)

0.175
(0.004)

-0.216
(0.031)

Observations
R-squared

13,765
0.017

13,765
0.076

18,256
0.034

18,256
0.129

13,765
0.014

13,765
0.034

18,256
0.022

18,256
0.074

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The data are from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys.

Table 3: Changes in Food Consumption, 1977-78 to 1994-1996

Meal
Male

Calories*
1977-78 1994-96

Percent of
Change total change

TOTAL

2080

2347

268

100%

Breakfast

384

420

36

13

Lunch

517

567

50

19

Dinner

918

859

-59

-22

Snacks

261

501

241

90

Calories per meal

573

566

-7

Meals per day

3.92

4.53

.61

1515

1658

143

100%

Breakfast

286

312

26

18

Lunch

368

398

31

22

Dinner

676

602

-74

-52

Snacks

186

346

160

112

Calories per meal

422

408

-14

Meals per day

3.86

4.44

.58

Female TOTAL

Note: Data are from the Continuing Survey of Food Intake 1977-78 and 1994-96.
* Average calories except for the row reporting average meals per day.

Table 4: Distribution of Calories by Meal and Location
Men
Women
Meal
Location
1977-78 1994-96 Change
1977-78 1994-96
Breakfast Home
350
328
-23
271
260
Store
3
14
11
0
7
Restaurant
13
26
13
4
13
Fast food
5
26
21
2
12
Work / school
8
14
7
5
11
Other
6
12
6
4
10

Change
-12
6
8
11
6
6

Lunch

Home
Store
Restaurant
Fast food
Work / school
Other

331
5
45
30
78
28

296
26
51
103
61
30

-35
21
6
73
-16
2

258
2
23
18
52
14

239
10
36
46
40
26

-19
8
14
28
-12
12

Dinner

Home
Store
Restaurant
Fast food
Work / school
Other

800
0
48
21
10
40

630
15
88
60
10
56

-170
14
40
40
0
16

597
0
29
13
5
31

451
9
61
33
7
40

-146
9
32
20
2
10

Snacks

Home
Store
Restaurant
Fast food
Work / school
Other

199
7
7
10
16
22

358
38
27
18
19
41

160
31
20
8
4
19

146
5
4
5
9
17

258
19
11
11
14
32

112
14
8
6
6
16

Note: Data are from the Continuing Survey of Food Intake.

Table 5: Time use, 1965-1995
[Minutes per day, age 18-64]
Activity

1965

1975

1985

1995

Paid work
Eating on the job
Breaks

290
11
8

258
8
4

259
8
3

266
-1

Household work
Food preparation
Meal cleanup

146
44
21

128
41
12

124
39
10

102
27
4

Child care

37

31

31

18

Obtaining goods and services

51

45

53

49

Personal needs and care
Meals at home
Meals out

622
58
11

644
54
19

634
50
19

Sleeping/napping

473

496

479

632
65
(meals at
home & out)
495

Education and training

12

16

18

23

Organizational activities

20

24

18

17

Entertainment / Social

78

65

65

72

Recreation
Active sports
Outdoor
Walking/hiking/exercise

27
5
1
1

37
4
7
2

43
10
5
4

47
13
6
5

Communication
TV

158
89

191
129

195
129

212
151

TOTAL

1440

1440

1440

1440

Kcal per minute per kilogram

1.69

1.57

1.62

1.53

“E” for 70 kilogram man

16.4

13.5

14.7

12.6

“E” for 60 kilogram woman

15.1

12.3

13.5

11.3

Note: Time use data from Robinson and Godbey (1997) and authors' calculations from
1995 time diary. Energy expenditure data from authors’ calculations based on
Compendium of Physical Activities.

Table 6: Time costs by demographic group
[minutes]
1965

1995

Meal
Prep.

Meal Prep.
+ Cleanup

Meal
Prep.

Meal Prep.
+ Cleanup

Single male

13.6

18.1

15.5

17.3

Married male, non-working spouse

6.5

9.4

13.2

14.4

Married male, working spouse

8.1

11.9

13.2

14.4

Single female

38.1

60.1

28.9

33.1

Married female, working

58.3

84.8

35.7

41.4

Married female, not working

94.2

137.7

57.7

68.8

Male

16.6

26.3

18.5

20.2

Female

65.9

10.4

50.1

60.3

Adults

Elderly

Source: Authors’ calculations from Americans’ Use of Time Survey Archives, 1965 and
1995.

Table 7: International Regressions
[Dependent Variable: Percent of Adult Population That is Obese]
Independent variable
frequency of price controls*

(1)

(2)
-3.7
(1.3)

producer protection*

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-4.5
(1.7)

number of food statutes*

-7.4
(2.2)

Civil law origin

-7.5
(2.2)

log(time to open business)

-2.6
(1.1)

cost of a Big Mac (US2000$)*

-4.7
(2.3)

log(GDP per capita), 1998

0.68
(4.57)

-4.63
(4.25)

6.78
(4.59)

5.10
(3.76)

-1.58
(3.72)

-4.72
(4.56)

10.65
(6.80)

% females in labor force, 1992

0.24
(0.31)

0.04
(0.27)

0.81
(0.66)

0.69
(0.41)

0.26
(0.25)

-0.15
(0.31)

0.46
(0.47)

Constant

-0.35
22.73
(19.27) (17.98)

-42.96
(33.38)

-31.42
(22.05)

11.15
(15.82)

39.75
(23.15)

-39.30
(31.83)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

22
-0.072

9
0.491

9
0.310

22
0.557

21
0.128

13
0.124

21
0.204

Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. Appendix Table 3 shows the available countries and source of data.
* Data are standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1.

Figure 1: Historical trends in BMI

BMI for Men Age 40-49

27

Men 40-49
26
25
24

Men 30-34

23
22
1840

1860

1880

1900

1920
Year

Data are from Costa and Steckel (1997).

1940

1960

1980

2000

Figure 2: Overweight and obese, 1960-1999
All adults, age 20+

Percent

80
60
40
20
0
1960-62

1971-74

1976-80

1988-94

1999

Males, age 20+

Percent

80
60
40
20
0
1960-62

1971-74

1976-80

1988-94

Females, age 20+

Percent

80
60
40
20
0
1960-62

1971-74

1976-80

Overweight

1988-94

Obese

Source: CDC (2001). Overweight is defined as 25<=BMI<=30. Obese is defined as
BMI>=30. Data for 1999 are not available by gender.

Figure 3: Distribution of BMI, 1971-75 and 1988-94
Figure 3a: Males, age 20-55
1971-75

1988-94

.1

.05

0
10

20

30
BMI (kg/m^2)

40

50

40

50

Figure 3b: Females, age 20-55
1971-75

1988-94

.1

.05

0
10

20

30
BMI (kg/m^2)

Source: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys

Country

Source: OECD Health Statistics (2000)
Au
st
ria
Sw
ed
N
en
et
he
rl a
nd
s
D
en
m
ar
Sw
k
itz
er
la
nd
Fr
an
ce
N
or
w
ay
Ja
pa
n

Ita
ly

U
ni
te
d
U
St
ni
at
te
es
d
Ki
ng
do
m
G
er
m
an
y
Au
st
ra
lia
Ic
el
N
an
ew
d
Ze
al
an
d
C
C
a
ze
na
ch
da
R
ep
ub
lic
Sp
ai
n
Po
rtu
ga
l
Po
la
nd
Fi
nl
an
d
Be
lg
iu
m
Ire
la
nd

% obese

Figure 4: Obesity in International Perspective

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Figure 5: Trends in the Food Supply, 1909-1999

Kilocalories per person per day

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000
1909

1919

1929

1939

Unadjusted for wastage

1949

1959

1969

1979

Adjusted for wastage

Source: USDA, Economic Research Service.

1989

1999

Figure 6: Overweight Among Children and Adolescents

16
14

Percent overweight

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1963-65

1971-74

1976-80

Ages 6-11

1988-94

Ages 12-19

Source: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys

1999

Percent Change in Calories, 1970-1999

Figure 7: Food Preparation and Changes in Intake

.4

noncitrus

.2

grains
fats
sugars

veggies
greens
misc

0

citrus
legumes

dairy
potato

-.2
meat

eggs

-.4
0

20

40
60
Farm Share of Value, 1990

80

Notes: Data on calories for each food group are from the Per Capita Food Consumption
Data System (2002). Data on farm share of value were obtained by personal
correspondence with Howard Elitzak of United States Department of Agriculture,
Economic Research Service. The regression equation is: ∆ln(cals, 1970-1999) = 0.185
(.075) - 0.008 (.003) * farm share of value, 1990 ; N=13, Adj. R2=0.409

Percent Change in Calories, 1970-1999

Figure 8: Brand Name Foods and Changes in Calories

2

yogurt
cereals

1
legumes

nonalcbevgs

mixed
poultry
saltysnacks

sweets
aclbevgs
seafood
fruits,etc.cheese
0organ meats
eggs
sausage,etc.
bread
meat
milk
fats&oils

-1
soup

-2
0

20
40
60
80
Percent of Calories from Brand Name Foods

100

Notes: The table plots the percent change in caloric intake from 1971-75 to 1988-94
against the percent of calories in 1988-94 coming from brand name foods. The
calculations are restricted to home consumption of males aged 20-55. The regression
equation is: ∆ln(cals, 1971-75 to 1988-94) = -0.145 (.175) + 0.016 (.006) * (% of
calories from brand name foods, 1988-94); N=20, Adj. R2=0.223.

Figure 9: Time Costs and Changes in BMI
Using Sex-Specific Time

4

Change in BMI

Married female, working

Married female, not worki

3

Single female

2
Married male, working
Elderly
spouse
Male
Married male,
Elderly
non-working
Female spouse

Single male

1
0

50

100

150

Initial Time Cost

Note: The change in BMI is from the NHANES surveys of 1971-75 to 1988-94. The
initial time cost is from 1965, computed as time spent preparing and cleaning up after
meals. The data are from the Americans Use of Time Survey Archive. The regression
line is: ∆BMI (1971-75 to 1988-94) = 0.06 (0.19) + 1.30 (0.17) * Initial Time Cost;
N=8, Adj. R2=0.816

Figure 10: Time Costs and Changes in BMI
Using Total Household Time
4

Change in BMI

Married female, working
Married female, not working

3

Single female

2
Elderly Male
Elderly Female

Married male, working spouse
Married male, non-working spouse

Single male

1
0

50

100
Inital Time Cost

150

200

Note: The change in BMI is from the NHANES surveys of 1971-75 to 1988-94. The
initial time cost is from 1965, computed as time spent preparing and cleaning up after
meals. The data are from the Americans Use of Time Survey Archive.

Figure 11: Changes in Time Costs and Changes in BMI
Using Sex-Specific Time Costs

4

Change in BMI

Married female, not
Married
working
female, working

3
Single female

2
Elderly
Male
Married
male,
working spouse
Married male, non-working spouse

Elderly Female

Single male

1
-75

-50

-25
0
25
Change in Time Cost

50

75

Note: The change in BMI is from the NHANES surveys of 1971-75 to 1988-94. The
initial time cost is from 1965, computed as time spent preparing and cleaning up after
meals. The data are from the Americans Use of Time Survey Archive. The regression
line is: ∆BMI (1971-75 to 1988-94) = -0.02 (0.01) + 1.80 (0.18) * ∆Time Cost; N=8,
Adj. R2=0.634

Figure 12: Obesity and Price Controls

United States

10
United Kingdom
Germany

Australia

Percent Obese

5

New Zealand

Canada

Czech Republic
Spain

0

Finland

Poland
Portugal
Belgium

Ireland
Italy
Austria
Sweden
Netherlands
Denmark
France Switzerland
Norway

-5

Japan

-10
-4

-2

0
2
Frequency of Price Controls

4

Note: Variables are partialled with respect to GDP per capita in 1998. Data on obesity
are from OECD Health Statistics (2000). Data on price controls are from the Economic
Freedom of the World.

Figure 13: Obesity and Producer Protection

United States

10

Australia
New Zealand

5
Percent Obese

Iceland

Canada

Czech Republic

Poland

0

-5

Switzerland
Norway

Japan

-10
-1

0
Producer Protection

1

Note: The variables are partialled with respect to GDP per capita in 1998. Data on
obesity are from OECD Health Statistics (2000). Data on producer protection are from
OECD Producer and Consumer Supports Database (2000).

Figure 14: Actual and Desired BMI

50

45

Desired BMI

40

35

30

Male
Female
25

20

15
15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

Actual BMI

Notes: Calculated using data from Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS).
Lines are based on a nonparametric Gaussian kernel regression with a bandwith of 2.

Appendix – Energy Accounting

In this appendix, we describe in more detail the components of energy accounting. As
noted in the text, people expend energy in three ways. The first is basal metabolism – the
energy cost of keeping the body alive and the organs functioning. Scientific evidence
estimates that the basal metabolic rate (BMR) is proportional to weight:
BMR = α + β* Weight
Schofield, Schofield, and James (1985) estimate that α = 879 for men and 829 for
women. They also estimate that β = 11.6 for men and 8.7 for women (where weight is
measured in kilograms).
The second form of energy expenditure is the thermic effect of food. This is proportional
to food intake, with the typical food costing about 10 percent of the energy it supplies to
digest. Finally, people use energy engaging in physical activity. Energy use is proposal
to how strenuous the exercise is, and to the person’s weight. We summarize this energy
cost as
Energy = η * Weight * Time
Ainsworth et al. (1993) classify activities into different categories. The categories are
very detailed. In evaluating changes in time use, we group activities into these
categories. The Compendium of Physical Activities reports the energy expenditure
associated as a ratio of activity metabolic rate to resting metabolic rate. These units are
referred to as METs. The table below shows a list of sample activities (the ten activities
taking up the most time on average in 1995), their associated METs, and their
corresponding activity descriptions in the time use diaries. A full list of time diary
activities and their associated METs is available from the authors at
jmshapir@fas.harvard.edu.
Compendium Description
Sleeping
Sitting-light office work
Sitting quietly
Eating (sitting)
Standing-talking or talking on the phone
Cooking or food preparation
Cleaning, house or cabin, general
Automobile or light truck driving
Walking-shopping (non-grocery shopping)
Sitting quietly

Time Diary Description
Sleeping/napping
At work
Television watching
Eating
Visiting
Food preparation
Cleaning house
Travel to/from work
Shopping for clothes
Thinking/relaxing

METs
0.9
1.5
1.0
1.5
1.8
2.5
3.5
2.0
2.3
1.0

Appendix Table 1: Trends in obesity in selected countries
Percent obese
(men)
12%
20

Percent obese
(women)
17%
25

1978
1988

7
9

10
9

16-64

1980
1991

6
13

8
15

Finland

20-75

1978-79
1991-93

10
14

10
11

Sweden

16-84

1980-81
1988-89

5
5

9
9

Australia

25-64

1980
1989

9
12

8
13

Japan

20+

1976
1993

1
2

3
3

Country
USA

Age group
20-74

Year
1976-80
1988-94

Canada

20-70

England

Source: World Health Organization (2000).

Appendix Table 2: Changes in food variety, 1977-78 to 1994-96
Variety Index
Food category
Male

1977-78

1994-96

Change

Dairy

0.222

0.238

0.016

Meat, poultry and fish

0.302

0.281

-0.021

Eggs

0.013

0.014

0.001

Legumes

0.038

0.040

0.002

Grains

0.475

0.505

0.031

Fruits

0.196

0.222

0.027

Vegetables

0.305

0.301

-0.004

Fats and oils

0.114

0.108

-0.006

Sweets

0.286

0.326

0.041

0.218

0.234

0.016

Meat, poultry and fish

0.241

0.226

-0.014

Eggs

0.012

0.015

0.002

Legumes

0.035

0.040

0.005

Grains

0.444

0.498

0.054

Fruits

0.206

0.229

0.023

Vegetables

0.287

0.314

0.027

Fats and oils

0.104

0.107

0.003

Sweets

0.281

0.310

0.029

Female Dairy

Note: The data are from the Continuing Survey of Food Intake 1977-78 and 1994-96.

Appendix Table 3: International Data
Time to
Frequency of price
open a
Number of
Ratio of farm
Percent of Price of a Big Civil controls (10=most),
Percent females
prices to world food statutes business
average 1989 and
GDP per capita, in labor force, adults obese, Mac in US$, legal
Country
(days)
(max=)
prices, 1998
1994
origin
2000
latest available
1992
1998 ($PPP)
Australia
24181
42
18.7
1.54
0
3.5
1.03
2
Austria
23574
43
8.5
1
4.5
33
37
Belgium
23805
43
10.8
1
6.5
33
Canada
25293
47
14.6
1.94
0
2
1.15
28
2
Denmark
25702
48
7.6
3.08
1
3
36
3
Finland
21793
47
11.2
1
3
24
France
21785
45
6.5
2.62
1
3.5
44
53
Germany
22953
43
19.4
2.37
1
0.5
28
42
Iceland
25277
46
18.7
1
10
2.74
Ireland
22710
36
10
0
2.5
16
Italy
22271
35
8.8
2.16
1
5
21
62
Japan
24102
38
2.2
2.78
1
4.5
2.87
26
Netherlands
24714
40
7.6
1
3
31
New Zealand
17745
43
17
1.69
0
0.5
1
3
Norway
26161
45
6
1
4
2.83
18
Poland
8181
46
11.4
1.28
1
6.5
1.26
25
58
Portugal
15696
43
11.5
1
5
76
Spain
17027
35
12.9
1
4
82
Sweden
21855
48
7.9
2.71
1
3
13
Switzerland
27336
43
6.8
3.48
1
3.5
3.06
16
United Kingdom
22119
44
20
3
0
1.5
17
4
United States
32299
45
22.6
2.51
0
2
1.19
20
4
OECD Producer
La
World
World
Porta et Economic Freedom and Consumer Kellam and Djankov et
Development OECD Health
Development
al
of the World
Statistics The Economist al
Source
Supports Database Guarino
Indicators
Indicators

