                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DISTANCE, SKILL DEEPENING AND DEVELOPMENT:
                     WILL PERIPHERAL COUNTRIES EVER GET RICH?

                                            Stephen Redding
                                             Peter K. Schott

                                          Working Paper 9447
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9447


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




We thank Joshua Aizenman, Mary Amiti, Andrew Bernard, Sebastian Edwards, David Hummels, Jon Temple,
Henry Thompson, and Tony Venables for valuable comments. We are also grateful for feedback received
during seminars at the EIIT9, the London School of Economics and the NBER IASE conference in Monterrey
Mexico. Marco Schonborn and Martin Stewart provided able research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.
Distance, Skill Deepening and Development: Will Peripheral Countries Ever Get Rich?
Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 9447
January 2003
JEL No. F12, F14, O10

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper models the relationship between countries’ distance from global economic
activity, endogenous investments in education, and economic development. Firms in remote
locations pay greater trade costs on both exports and intermediate imports, reducing the amount of
value added left to remunerate domestic factors of production. If skill-intensive sectors have higher

trade costs, more pervasive input-output linkages, or stronger increasing returns to scale, we show

theoretically that remoteness depresses the skill premium and therefore incentives for human capital
accumulation. Empirically, we exploit structural relationships from the model to demonstrate that

countries with lower market access have lower levels of educational attainment. We also show that
the world’s most peripheral countries are becoming increasingly remote over time.

Stephen Redding                                       Peter K. Schott
London School of Economics                            Yale School of Management
Houghton Street, London                               135 Prospect Street
WC2A 2AE                                              New Haven, CT 06520-8200
United Kingdom                                        and NBER
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk                                 peter.schott@yale.edu
               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                              2


1.       Introduction

    Why some nations are rich and others are poor is perhaps one of the
oldest and most fundamental questions in economics. In 1996, the per
capita income of the country at the 90th percentile of the world income
distribution was more than 30 times higher than the country at the 10th
percentile. The persistence of such diﬀerences is surprising in light of the
increasing integration of goods and financial markets in the post-war pe-
riod. Economists have pointed to a number of factors which may have
prevented these income diﬀerences from being arbitraged away, including
institutional ineﬀectiveness, sluggish technology diﬀusion and endowment
disadvantages.1
    A more recent line of research has highlighted the potential importance
of trade costs in reducing per capita income.2 These trade costs include not
only the expense of physically moving products between locations but also
all information, monitoring and policy (e.g. tariﬀ) costs associated with
transacting at a distance. Because firms located in remote locations pay
greater trade costs on both their sales to final markets and their purchases
of imported intermediate inputs, they have less value added available to
remunerate domestic factors of production.
    In this paper we focus on an additional penalty of remoteness. We
demonstrate that being located on the economic periphery can reduce the
return to skill, thereby reducing incentives for investment in human capital
accumulation. This penalty magnifies the eﬀect that economic geography
can have on cross-country per capita income; increasing a country’s relative
trade costs not only reduces contemporaneous factor rewards, but also low-
ers gross domestic product by suppressing human capital accumulation and
     1
     Engerman and Sokoloﬀ (1997) and Leamer et al. (1999), for example, analyse the
eﬀect of institutions and resource endowments on educational attainment in Latin Amer-
ica. Studies examining the links between human capital, development, and growth in-
clude Benhabib and Spiegel (1994), Bils and Klenow (2000), Eicher and Garcia-Penalosa
(2001), Galor and Mountford (2001), Lucas (1988), and Mankiw et al. (1992).
   2
     See, in particular, Hanson (1998) and Redding and Venables (2001). For earlier, more
informal analyses of location and per capita income, see Hummels (1995) and Leamer
(1997). This paper focuses on economic geography (the location of economic agents
relative to oneanother in space) rather than physical geography (e.g climate). For a
discussion of the latter, see for example Gallup et al (1998).
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                3


decreasing the supply of high-income skilled workers.3 This result emerges
from an extension of the standard two sector (agriculture and manufac-
turing) Fujita et al (1999) economic geography model to allow unskilled
individuals to endogenously choose whether to invest in education. We
believe the role of economic geography in explaining persistent low levels of
educational attainment in developing countries to be important and largely
neglected in the existing literature.
    The paper reports three main theoretical results. First, we show that
countries located further from global economic activity have a lower skill
premium if manufactured goods are relatively skill intensive and face rela-
tively large trade costs. The intuition for this result can be conveyed via
the well-known Stolper-Samuelson theorem: increased remoteness has the
same aﬀect as a reduction in the relative price of the manufactured good.
Because manufacturing is relatively skill intense, the relative wage of skilled
workers — and the incentive to educate — falls.
    Second, we demonstrate that this result is robust to more general as-
sumptions regarding trade costs, in particular the assumption that trade
costs are higher for agriculture than for manufacturing.4 The result gen-
eralizes because of input-output linkages and increasing returns to scale in
skill intensive manufacturing. Input-ouput linkages are important because
trade costs must be paid on both imports and exports, with the result that
even relatively small trade costs can be magnified into a relatively large
share of value added. Increasing returns to scale, on the other hand, em-
phasizes the importance of proximity to large markets. Firms that are
remote from large markets have to charge a lower price net of trade costs
in order to export suﬃcient quantity to cover fixed costs. As a result,
the equilibrium skill premium depends upon both physical remoteness (i.e.
bilateral trade costs) and economic remoteness (i.e. the spatial distribution
of economic activity).
    Third, we show how our model can be used to formalize the role of a
number of other determinants of human capital investment, including agri-
   3
     A wide range of empirical studies for developed and developing countries provide
evidence that skilled or educated workers receive higher wages (see Psacharopoulos 1994
for a survey of this literature).
   4
     Bernard et al (2002), for example, show that while US tariﬀs are higher for skill
intensive manufactures (e.g. electronics), freight and insurance costs are higher for bulk
commodities (e.g. Food).
               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                  4


cultural productivity and technology. We demonstrate that higher agricul-
tural productivity (or, more generally, an abundance of natural resources)
hinders manufacturing development and reduces incentives to invest in hu-
man capital. We also show that a transfer of manufacturing technology
from developed to developing countries not only raises output per capita
directly but also has a positive indirect eﬀect through induced human cap-
ital accumulation. In general, the indirect eﬀect will not be internalized
by private sector agents, and the existence of this pecuniary externality
provides a potential rationale for policies designed to accelerate technology
transfer.
    While the main focus of the paper is theoretical, we exploit structural
relationships from the model to provide empirical evidence that countries
located far from centers of world economic activity are characterized by
relatively low levels of educational attainment. We also provide evidence
that the world’s most peripheral countries are becoming relatively more
remote from global economic activity over time.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 outline the theoret-
ical model and explore the relationship between remoteness and equilib-
rium investments in skill. Section 4 generalizes the analysis to allow for
a more general specification of trade costs. Section 5 examines the role
of other determinants of human capital investments. Sections 6 and 7 use
the structure of the model to derive empirical measures of market access
and examine the link between market access and educational attainment.
Section 8 concludes.

2.       Theoretical Model

   This paper builds upon existing theoretical research on new economic
geography as synthesized in Fujita et al (1999).5 We extend the stan-
dard economic geography model by introducing endogenous human capital
accumulation. The analysis emphasizes the importance of the interplay
between increasing returns to scale, transport costs, input-output linkages,
     5
     See also Krugman (1991), Krugman and Venables (1990, 1995), and Venables (1996).
In the interests of tractability, much of this literature has assumed a single factor of pro-
duction, labor. Recent research by Amiti (2001) and Strauss-Kahn (2001) has introduced
considerations of Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory into this framework by endowing coun-
tries with exogenous quantities of multiple factors of production.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                5


and human capital investments.6 We derive predictions for the relation-
ship between remoteness, international trade, human capital investment,
and levels of per capita income.

2.1.   Preferences and Endowments
    The world consists of i ∈ {1, ..., R} countries. Each country is endowed
with a mass of L̄i consumers. Consumers have one unit of labour which
is supplied inelastically with zero disutility. This unit of labour begins
in an unskilled state, but individuals choose endogenously whether or not
to invest in becoming skilled. Consumer preferences are identical and ho-
mothetic, and are defined over consumption of a homogenous agricultural
good and a variety of diﬀerentiated manufacturing goods. For simplicity,
the utility function is assumed to take the Cobb-Douglas form,
               (1−µ)
       Uj = Aj         Mjµ ,    0<µ<1                                                 (1)

where A denotes consumption of the homogeneous agricultural good and
M corresponds to a consumption index of diﬀerentiated varieties. Going
forward, we use j to denote a country that is demanding or importing a
good and i to denote a country that is producing or exporting a good. The
consumption index of diﬀerentiated varieties takes the form
            " R Z                       #σ/(σ−1) " R                    #σ/(σ−1)
             X ni                                 X ¡         ¢ (σ−1)/σ
     Mj =            mCij (z)
                             (σ−1)/σ
                                     dz         =    ni mC ij                    ,(2)
                i=1    0                                    i=1

where σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between manufacturing va-
rieties and the second equation exploits the fact that, in the equilibrium
established below, all products produced in a country i are demanded by
country j in the same quantity. As a result, we dispense with the index z
and rewrite the integral as a product. ni denotes the number of varieties
produced in country i and mC ij denotes the amount of each variety produced
in country i for final consumption in country j.
   6
    In terms of Marshall (1920)’s three forces of agglomeration (a pooled market for
specialized skills, input-output linkages, and knowledge spillovers), our analysis focuses
on input-output linkages. For a model of agglomeration emphasizing search frictions
in the labour market, see Amiti and Pissarides (2002), while Mori and Turrini (2002)
emphasize complementarities between product variety, product quality, and skills.
               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                6


    Dual to the manufacturing goods consumption index (Mj ) is a manufac-
turing goods price index (Gj ) defined over the prices of individual varieties
produced in i and sold in j (i.e. pM
                                   ij ),
            " R Z                 #1/(1−σ) " R                #1/(1−σ)
             X ni                             X
                      M     1−σ                        M 1−σ
      Gj =           pij (z) dz           =       ni (pij )            , (3)
                i=1   0                                i=1
where the second equation makes use of the symmetry in equilibrium prices.

2.2.   Production Technologies
    The homogenous agricultural good is produced under conditions of per-
fect competition with the following constant returns to scale technology,
       Yi = θYi (SiY )φ (LYi )1−φ ,     0<φ<1                                          (4)
where Yi denotes output of the agricultural good; LYi denotes the amount of
unskilled labour allocated to this sector; SiY denotes the amount of skilled
labour allocation; and θYi indexes agricultural productivity.7
    To facilitate comparison of our results with the standard economic ge-
ography model without endogenous human capital investments, we begin
with the conventional assumption that the homogenous agricultural good is
traded at no cost. We relax this assumption below to explore further how
relative trade costs across sectors influence incentives for human capital
accumulation.8
    Varieties of traded goods are produced with an increasing returns to
scale technology using a composite of primary factors of production (skilled
and unskilled labour) and the output of all manufacturing goods (interme-
diate inputs). The representative country i firm thus faces the following
cost function,
            ¡ ¢α           (1−α−β)
      Γi = wiS (wiU )β Gi          ci [F + xi ] ,                        (5)
   7
     While not explicitly modelled here, θYi may be thought of as capturing the eﬀects
of endowments of land, other factors of production, and the nature of land holdings on
agricultural productivity. Introducing these other factors of production more explicitly
merely complicates the analysis without adding any insight.
   8
     Our focus is on endogenous human capital investments. Davis (1999) examines
how agricultural trade costs aﬀect the ‘home market eﬀect’, while Venables and Limao
(2002) consider the relationship between relative trade costs across sectors and industrial
structure.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                7


where ci denotes a constant
                       P marginal input requirement; ci F is a fixed input
requirement; and xi = R   j=1 xij is the total output of the firm produced for
all markets. We assume that the composite of primary factors of production
and intermediate inputs takes the Cobb-Douglas form, where wiS is the
wage of skilled workers (with input share α), wiU is the wage of unskilled
workers (with input share β), and Gi is the price index for manufacturing
goods from equation (3) (with input share (1 − α − β)). The parameter
ci corresponds to an index of technological eﬃciency that may potentially
vary across countries.
    We assume trade costs take the iceberg form.9 In order for one unit of
a traded good to arrive in location j from location i, TijM > 1 units must be
shipped. Thus, when TijM = 1 trade is costless, and TijM − 1 measures the
proportion of output lost in shipping from i to j. We assume the parameter
TijM captures all trade costs between locations i and j, including physical
transportation costs, information, communication, and monitoring costs,
tariﬀ barriers and non-tariﬀ barriers.10

2.3.   Human Capital Investment
    An individual z in country i is endowed with one unit of unskilled
labour, which can be converted into a unit of skilled labour by incurring
a fixed education cost of Ωi (z) units of unskilled labour. Denominating
the education cost in terms of unskilled labour captures the idea that real
resources are used in the process of becoming skilled. As a result, the cost
of education is proportional to the unskilled wage, reflecting the higher op-
portunity cost of the real resources used in countries with a higher unskilled
wage (see also Eicher and Garcia-Penalosa 2001).
    The amount of unskilled labour used in becoming skilled depends on two
components: Ωi (z) = hi /a(z). First, the parameter hi captures the eﬀect
of all aspects of the institutional environment and of government policies
   9
      We use iceberg trade costs for tractability. All we require is that remote locations
face greater trade costs.
   10
      Hummels (1999) and Limao and Venables (2001) provide evidence on the importance
of transport costs and the role of geography in determining their magnitude. See Leamer
and Storper (2001) and Venables (2001) for a discussion of the continuing and sometimes
increasing importance of location following the introduction of new information and com-
munication technologies such as e-mail and the internet.
               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                   8


that influence individuals’ private costs of education. These include, for
example, the extent of public versus private provision of education, com-
pulsory schooling laws and other government regulations, as well as explicit
subsidies and grants. The parameter hi is an inverse measure of the ex-
tent of public provision, so that higher values of hi correspond to a higher
private cost of education.
    Second, an individual’s education cost depends on their ability a(z),
and we assume that high ability individuals face lower education costs.
This captures the idea that high-ability individuals have to work less hard
in order to attain a given level of education or are able to complete their
education in a shorter period of time. Although we have chosen here to
make the costs of education a function of ability, one could equivalently
assume that the cost of education is the same for all individuals but that
the rate of return varies with ability.11
    We assume that there are upper and lower bounds to ability determined
by human biology and that an individual’s ability is drawn from a distri-
bution over the interval [a, a]. The probability density function of ability
is denoted by λ(a), so that the mass of individuals in country i with a
particular level of ability a0 is λ(a0 )L̄i . We assume the probability density
function of ability is determined by human biology and is therefore the
same in all countries.
    An individual z in country i will choose to become educated if the wage
diﬀerential between skilled and unskilled workers exceeds education costs,
                       hi U
       wiS − wiU ≥        w .                                                             (6)
                      a(z) i
We
R a assume that the cumulative distribution function of ability Λ(a) =
 a λ(a)da is continuous and monotonically increasing in ability. That is,
as we consider successively higher and higher levels of ability, there will
be fewer individuals more able than this level. The analysis is compatible
  11
     In this alternative specification, the wage wiS in firms’ cost function is the wage per
ability-adjusted (quality-adjusted) unit of skilled labour. An individual z of ability a(z)
receives an actual wage of a(z)wiS . In the alternative formulation, the ability-adjusted
skilled wage is the same for all individuals, but actual wages vary with individual ability.
All of the paper’s results are robust to considering the alternative specification. It is only
necessary to slightly modify the condition for an individual to become skilled in equation
(6) to: a(z)wiS − wiU ≥ hi wiU .
               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                      9


with a wide range of probability density functions for ability. A particularly
tractable case is where ability is uniformly distributed over the interval
[a, a], in which case λ(a) = 1/[a − a].

2.4.     General Equilibrium
2.4.1.    Consumer Equilibrium

     Consumers maximize utility subject to their budget constraint. The
first-order conditions imply the following demand-side relationship between
the relative price and relative consumption of the two goods,
         pYj   1 − µ Mj
             =          ,                                                    (7)
         Gj      µ Aj

where pYj is the price of the agricultural good and Gj is the manufacturing
goods price index from above. Equation (7) determines country j’s con-
sumption of all manufacturing goods (of the consumption index Mj ). Final
consumption demand for individual varieties produced in i may be derived
by applying Shepherd’s Lemma to the manufacturing price index (Gj ),

         mC      M −σ
          ij = (pij ) EjC Gσ−1
                           j   ,                                             (8)

where EjC denotes total consumer expenditure on manufacturing goods in
country j.

2.5.     Equilibrium Supply of Skills
    The individual’s education decision compares the wage diﬀerential be-
tween skilled and unskilled workers with the costs of education. Equation
(6) implicitly defines a critical value for ability a∗i such that all individuals
with levels of ability a(z) ≥ a∗i (z ∗ ) choose to become skilled. From above,
this critical value for ability is,
                                hi
         (S)         a∗i = ¡ S U      ¢.                                     (9)
                            wi /wi − 1
The marginal individual with the critical level of ability a∗i is indiﬀerent be-
tween becoming skilled and remaining unskilled, and equation (9) is there-
fore termed the skill indiﬀerence condition (S).
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                         10


Proposition 1 The equilibrium critical level of ability a∗i above which in-
dividuals become skilled is monotonically decreasing in the relative skilled
wage (wiS /wiU ) and monotonically increasing in the cost of education para-
meter (hi )
Proof. Proposition 1 follows immediately from the skill indiﬀerence con-
dition (S).
    Intuitively, as the relative wage of skilled workers (wiS /wiU ) increases, it
becomes profitable for individuals of lower ability to invest in education. As
the critical level of ability a∗i falls, the equilibrium number of skilled workers
increases and the equilibrium number of unskilled workers decreases. The
equilibrium masses of skilled and unskilled workers are,
                                         Z a
                                  Si =       λ(a)L̄i da                       (10)
                                                a∗i
                              Z    a∗i                   Z   a
                                                                 h
                       Li =              λ(a)L̄i da −              λ(a)L̄i da   (11)
                               a                          a∗i    a
                                            Z   a
                                                    h
                           Si + Li +                  λ(a)L̄i da = L̄i          (12)
                                             a∗i    a
    Figure 1 graphs the relationship between the relative wage and the
critical level of ability above which individuals become skilled (the right-
hand side of equation (9)).

2.6.   Producer Equilibrium
    In the agricultural sector, profit maximization and constant returns to
scale imply that price equals unit costs of production if the agricultural
good is produced,
                  1
      pYi = 1 = Y (wiS )φ (wiU )1−φ ,                                  (13)
                 θi
where we choose the agricultural good for the numeraire and hence pYi = 1
for all i. In the manufacturing sector, the representative country i firm
maximizes the following profit function,
              R
              X pM
                 ij xij     ¡ ¢α          (1−α−β)
       πi =                − wiS (wiU )β Gi       ci [F + xi ] .                (14)
              j=1
                    TijM
             Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                            11


The first-order conditions for profit-maximization yield the standard result
that equilibrium prices are a constant mark-up over marginal cost,
            µ       ¶
       M         σ    ¡ S ¢α U β (1−α−β)
      pi =             wi (wi ) Gi          ci ,                        (15)
               σ−1
where pM       M    M
        i = pij /Tij is the ‘free on board’ or ‘customs’ price charged by
the firm prior to trade costs. Substituting this pricing rule into equation
(14), we obtain the following expression for the equilibrium profit function,
           µ M¶
             pi
      πi =         [xi − (σ − 1)F ] .                                    (16)
              σ
In order to break even in a monopolistically competitive equilibrium, the
firm’s output must equal a constant: x̄ = (σ − 1)F . The price needed to
sell this many units is determined by the firm’s demand function, where
demand consists of the sum of final consumption and intermediate demand
across all markets. A firm in country i will therefore sell the quantity x̄
when it charges a price,12
               µ ¶X  R
                 1              ¡ M ¢1−σ
         M σ
       (pi ) =          Ej Gσ−1
                             j   Tij     ,                            (17)
                x̄
                        j=1

where Ej =   EjC +EjI denotes total country j expenditure (final consumption
and intermediate) on manufacturing goods.
    Combining the expression in equation (17) with the fact that, in equi-
librium, prices are a constant mark-up over marginal cost, we obtain the
following zero-profit condition,
              µ                                 ¶σ µ ¶ X    R
                  σ ¡ S ¢α U β (1−α−β)                1                ¡ M ¢1−σ
      (W)              wi (wi ) Gi           ci   =            Ej Gσ−1
                                                                   j    Tij     .(18)
                σ−1                                   x̄
                                                                 j=1

This relationship is termed the wage equation (W). It pins down the max-
imum wages of skilled and unskilled workers that a firm in country i can
aﬀord to pay, given demand for its products (as captured in the summation
on the right-hand side of the equation), and given the cost of intermediate
inputs (as captured in the manufacturing price index on the left-hand side
of the equation).
  12
     The transport cost term (Tij ) enters with exponent 1 − σ and not σ because total
shipments to market j are Tij times quantities consumed.
                Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                 12


2.6.1.    Market Clearing Conditions

   Factors are relatively immobile internationally, and we therefore make
the standard trade theory assumption of factor mobility across sectors
within a country and immobility across countries. General equilibrium
requires that each country’s labour market clears,
         SiY + SiM    = Si                                               (19)
         LYi   + LM
                  i   = Li                                               (20)
where {SiM ,LM           Y    Y
               i } and {Si ,Li } denote skilled and unskilled employment in
the manufacturing and agricultural sectors respectively. The total sup-
plies of skilled and unskilled labour {Si ,Li } are determined according to
equations (10) and (11) above.
    In equilibrium, we also require goods markets to clear at the world level,
for manufacturing varieties and the homogeneous agricultural good.

3.   Geography and Skill Deepening

    The full general equilibrium of the model combines consumer optimiza-
tion, education optimization, and producer optimization with the market
clearing conditions to solve for equilibrium prices, equilibrium expenditures,
and the equilibrium location of production.
    In this section, we use structural equations of the model to characterize
the nature of the relationship between location and incentives to invest
in skills that must hold in general equilibrium. We follow Redding and
Venables (2001) in using the model to derive theory-consistent measures
of a country’s location relative to its markets and sources of supply. We
then go on to demonstrate how market access and supplier access influence
incentives to invest in human capital acquisition.
    We begin by combining final consumption demand (from equation (8))
and intermediate demand to obtain an expression for bilateral trade flows
between countries i and j. Expressing this relationship in aggregate value
terms, yields,
                                    ¡ M ¢1−σ
      (T)       ni pi xij = ni p1−σ
                                i    Tij     Ej Gσ−1
                                                 j   .                    (21)
In this gravity equation (the trade equation (T)), bilateral exports depend
on three sets of considerations. First, on a measure of demand in the
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                     13


importing country j termed market capacity (mj ≡ Ej Gσ−1  j    ) and comprised
of total expenditure on manufacturing goods in market j (Ej ) as well as
the number of competing firms and the prices they charge as summarized
in the manufacturing price index (Gj ). Second, on a measure of supply
potential in the exporting country i termed supply capacity (si ≡ ni p1−σi   )
and comprised of the number of manufacturing firms (ni ) together with the
prices they charge (pi ). Third, on bilateral trade costs (TijM )1−σ .
    For each exporter i, we may sum market capacities in the importers
it serves, weighting by bilateral trade costs. This yields a measure of the
country’s overall access to markets - market access (M Ai ),
             R
             X                R
                              X
                  M 1−σ   σ−1
      M Ai ≡   (Tij ) Ej Gj =   (TijM )1−σ mj .                          (22)
              j=1                     j=1

Similarly, for each importer j, we may sum supply capacities in the ex-
porters that it receives goods from, weighting by bilateral trade costs. This
yields a measure of the country’s overall access to sources of supply - sup-
plier access (SAj ),
            R
            X                  R
                               X
                 M 1−σ   1−σ
      SAj ≡   (Tij ) ni pi   =   (TijM )1−σ si .                         (23)
             i=1                    i=1

From the trade equation (T), market and supplier access may be con-
structed from information on bilateral trade flows. We now show how the
wage equation (W), which pins down the maximum wages of skilled and
unskilled workers that firms in each location can aﬀord to pay, may be writ-
ten as a function of market and supplier access. Taking the manufacturing
price index over to the right-hand side of (W) and using the definition in
equation (22), we have,
      ¡ S ¢α U β   1        1  (α+β−1)
       wi (wi ) = ξ (M Ai ) σ Gi       ,                                 (24)
                   ci
where ξ absorbs earlier constants. Now note from equations (3) and (23)
that the manufacturing price index (Gi ) may be written as a function of a
country’s supplier access alone,
                           1
      (P)     Gi = [SAi ] 1−σ .                                          (25)
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                               14


Combining the expression for the price index (P) with equation (24), the
maximum skilled and unskilled wages that a firm in location i can aﬀord
to pay can be written as,
                                         1          1       (1−α−β)
      (W’)         (wiS )α (wiU )β = ξ      (M Ai ) σ (SAi ) (σ−1) .                 (26)
                                         ci
Intuitively, countries whose locations provide easy access to supplies of
manufacturing goods (a high value of SAi ) are characterized by low values
of the manufacturing price index. This itself reduces unit costs of produc-
tion and increases the maximum wages that manufacturing firms in those
locations can aﬀord to pay. If a country’s location also provides easy access
to markets for manufacturing goods (a high value of M Ai ), this increases
the ‘free on board’ price that manufacturing firms can charge for their prod-
ucts while still selling enough output to cover the fixed costs of production,
thereby again increasing the maximum wages that the firms can aﬀord to
pay.
    Consider a country that is incompletely specialized in agriculture and
manufacturing. We establish below the conditions under which this oc-
curs.13 The zero profit conditions in agriculture (13) and manufacturing
(26) together implicitly define the equilibrium wages of skilled and un-
skilled workers. Manipulating these zero profit conditions and combining
them with the skill indiﬀerence condition (S), we are able to completely
characterize the equilibrium relationship between geographical location and
endogenous human capital investments. Taking logarithms and totally dif-
ferentiating each zero profit condition, we have,
             dwiS          dwU
      0=φ      S
                  + (1 − φ) Ui                                                       (27)
              wi           wi
   13
      As in the standard economic geography model, incomplete specialization will occur
for relatively high values of trade costs and, empirically, we find that countries produce
both agriculture and manufacturing. It is straightforward to also examine the complete
specialization case. For a country completely specialized in manufacturing, the rela-
tive wage will be determined by combining the relative supply of skilled workers from
Proposition 1 with a relative demand relationship derived from the manufacturing wage
equation. This relative demand relationship is a function of market and supplier access,
and hence geographical location again plays an important role in determining relative
factor prices.
             Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                        15


          dwiS     dwiU   1 dM Ai (1 − α − β) dSAi
      α     S
               + β   U
                        =         +                                          (28)
           wi       wi    σ  M Ai   (σ − 1) SAi

Proposition 2 Suppose a country becomes more remote in the sense that
equilibrium market and supplier access fall (dM Ai /M Ai = dSAi /SAi =
−γ < 0). If manufacturing is skill-intensive relative to agriculture and
the country remains incompletely specialized, the new equilibrium must be
characterized by a lower relative wage of skilled workers.

Proof. See Appendix.
    Intuitively, a fall in market and supplier access in the manufacturing
zero profit condition acts exactly like a fall in the price of the skill-intensive
good in the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem of Heckscher-Ohlin trade theory.
A fall in market and supplier access leads to a violation of the manufactur-
ing zero profit condition at initial equilibrium factor prices and results in a
decline in the size of the manufacturing sector. The decline in manufactur-
ing releases relatively more skilled labour than is demanded in agriculture
at initial equilibrium relative factor prices. Hence, at the new equilibrium,
the nominal skilled wage is lower, the nominal unskilled wage is higher (so
that the agricultural zero profit condition continues to be satisfied), and
these together imply that the relative wage of skilled workers is lower.
    A lower relative wage of skilled workers unambiguously reduces the
incentive to invest in skills. Hence, as a country’s equilibrium values of
market and supplier access fall, the number of skilled workers falls and the
number of unskilled workers rises.

Proposition 3 Suppose a country becomes more remote in the sense that
equilibrium market and supplier access fall (dM Ai /M Ai = dSAi /SAi =
−γ < 0). If manufacturing is skill-intensive relative to agriculture and
the country remains incompletely specialized, the new equilibrium must be
characterized by:
(a) a higher critical level of ability a∗i above which individuals become skilled
(b) a reduced supply of skilled workers and an increased supply of unskilled
workers

Proof. See Appendix.
    Equilibrium relative wages and employment in the two sectors for given
levels of market and supplier access are shown graphically in Figure 2. This
             Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                             16


is the direct analogue of the isoprice line representation of equilibrium in the
Heckscher-Ohlin trade model (the dual of the Lerner diagram). The more
steeply-sloped curve is the unit cost function in agriculture, which must
equal price in an equilibrium where agriculture is produced. The more
shallow-sloped curve is the marginal cost function in manufacturing (bi =
                (1−α−β)
(wiS )(wiU )Gi          ci ), which is drawn in skilled wage-unskilled wage space
for a given level of market and supplier access. The level of supplier access
                                                                               1
pins down the value of the manufacturing price index (Gi = [SAi ] 1−σ ).
The manufacturing wage equation (W’) implies that, in an equilibrium
where manufacturing goods are produced, marginal costs are proportional
                                      1
to market access (bi = ξ(M Ai ) σ ).
     A reduction in market and supplier access corresponds to an inward
shift in the manufacturing isoprice line (less value added is available to re-
munerate the factors of production). From Figure 2, the new equilibrium
must be characterized by a lower skilled wage and higher unskilled wage.
The manufacturing production technology implies that marginal and aver-
age relative unit factor input requirements are the same. Hence, the slope
of each isoprice line corresponds to relative employment of skilled and un-
skilled labour by a representative firm in that sector. In order for both
manufacturing and agriculture to be produced in equilibrium, we require
that, at the equilibrium relative factor prices (ŵiS , ŵiU ), the slope of a line
indicating the endogenous relative supply of skilled and unskilled workers
(Si , Li ) lies in between the tangents to the two isoprice lines.
     In the full general equilibrium of the model, market and supplier access
are endogenously determined by the distribution of production and expen-
diture across locations. Propositions 2 and 3 characterize relationships that
hold in the full general equilibrium. They exploit the equilibrium structure
of production and the supply of skills to characterize the relationship be-
tween market access, supplier access, and human capital investments when
countries are incompletely specialized.14 In our empirical work, we use the
trade equation (T) to measure market and supplier access from bilateral
trade data. We take as given the location of production and expenditure,
  14
    Again, note the analogy with the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem. In general, relative
goods prices are endogenously determined. The Stolper-Samuelson Theorem exploits
the equilibrium structure of production to derive a relationship between relative goods
and relative factor prices when countries are incompletely specialized.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                17


as revealed by bilateral trade, and examine to what extent cross-country in-
vestments in human capital are consistent with the equilibrium relationship
predicted by the model.
    To keep the analysis as clean as possible and to facilitate comparison
with the standard economic geography model, we have so far assumed that
the agricultural good is freely traded. In the next Section, we relax this
assumption.

4.     Equilibrium with Trade Costs in Manufacturing and
       Agriculture

   To introduce agricultural trade costs in as tractable way as possible, we
modify consumers’ utility functions slightly. Specifically, we assume that
each country produces a single diﬀerentiated agricultural good.15 These
diﬀerentiated goods enter a consumption index Aj in equation (1) that
takes the Dixit-Stiglitz form,
           " R             #σ/(σ−1)
             X (σ−1)/σ
      Aj =       Aij                ,  σ > 1.                           (29)
               i=1
The diﬀerentiation of goods across countries may be interpreted in two
ways, which for our purposes are equivalent. First, there are a number of
diﬀerent agricultural goods (e.g. wheat, corn, barley, maize) which are im-
perfect substitutes for one another, and each country completely specializes
in a diﬀerent agricultural good due to Ricardian diﬀerences in technology
or unmodelled variation in land endowments (as in Davis 1997; see also
Deardorﬀ 1998 and Krugman and Venables 2001). Second, there is Arm-
ington diﬀerentiation by country of origin. The first is the more plausible
interpretation and the one taken here.
    In order for one unit of an agricultural good to arrive in location j from
location i, we assume that TijA > 1 units must be shipped, so that TijA −1 is a
  15
     It is possible to analyze the role of agricultural trade costs while retaining the as-
sumption that agricultural goods are homogenous. This complicates the analysis because,
with an homogenous product and trade costs, exporters of agriculture will not generally
export to all locations and importers will not generally import from all locations (see
for example Venables and Limao 2002). As discussed further below, one interpretation
of the specification here is that countries are specialized in diﬀerent agricultural goods
which are imperfect substitutes for oneanother.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                      18


measure of agricultural trade costs. With perfect competition and constant
returns to scale, the free on board (fob) price of agricultural goods in each
location i will equal average cost, while the cost inclusive of freight price
(cif ) charged in an importing location j will be a mark-up over average
cost with the size of the mark-up determined by bilateral trade costs,
      pYij              1
             = pYi =       (wiS )φ (wiU )1−φ ,                              (30)
      TijA             θYi
and we choose the cif price of country i’s agricultural good in one location
(for example, j = 1) as the numeraire (so that pYi1 = 1 and pYi = 1/Ti1A ).

    The manufacturing zero profit condition (26) continues to depend on
market and supplier access, while agricultural trade costs (TijA ) now enter
directly into the agricultural zero profit condition (30). To examine the
eﬀects of increased remoteness, we again totally diﬀerentiate the two zero
profit conditions, assuming that a country remains incompletely specialized
in agriculture and manufacturing,
             A
          dTi1     dwiS           dwiU
      −     A
               = φ      + (1 − φ)      ,                                    (31)
          Ti1      wiS            wiU

          dwiS     dwiU   1 dM Ai (1 − α − β) dSAi
      α     S
               + β   U
                        =        +                 ,                        (32)
           wi       wi    σ M Ai    (σ − 1) SAi

where we have used our choice of numeraire (pYi = 1/Ti1      A ) and manufactur-

ing is assumed to be skill intensive relative to agriculture (α/β > φ/(1−φ)).
     Suppose that the country experiences an equiproportionate increase in
the value of agricultural and manufacturing trade costs to all locations:
dTijM /TijM = dTijA /TijA = γ > 0. The increase in agricultural trade costs
(TijA ) enters directly into the agricultural zero profit condition and directly
shifts the isoprice line for this sector inwards in Figure 2. For given values of
production and expenditure in each location (i.e. for given values of market
capacity, mj , and supply capacity, si ), the increase in manufacturing trade
costs (TijM ) reduces market and supplier access (since σ > 1 in equations
(22) and (23)). As a result, the manufacturing isoprice line also shifts
inwards in Figure 2. Though nominal wages both fall (in terms of the
numeraire), the eﬀect of these shifts on the relative wage — and human
capital accumulation — appears ambiguous.
             Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                              19


    This analysis yields an important insight. When both manufacturing
and agriculture face trade costs, the eﬀect of increased remoteness on skill
accumulation depends upon both relative skill intensity and relative trade
costs. If, as in Section 3, trade costs are more important in the skill in-
tensive sector, remote locations will experience reduced incentives to invest
in skill. However, the same outcome can emerge even if ad valorem trade
costs are lower in the high skill sector due to asymmetries in the aﬀect of
trade costs on agriculture and manufacturing.
    First, though shipping costs may be lower for skill-intensive sectors,
other trade costs, including all search, communication, and monitoring
costs, are likely to be relatively high in these sectors.16
    Second, a given level of ad valorem trade costs has a stronger aﬀect
on manufacturing than agriculture because input-output linkages require
firms to incur trade costs on both imported intermediate imports as well
as exports. Indeed, because intermediate inputs account for a substantial
proportion of costs, even relatively small trade costs can become large as
a proportion of value added. The relative importance of trade costs in
manufacturing can be seen by noting that the change in trade costs enters
once in the agricultural zero profit condition (31) but twice in the manufac-
turing zero profit condition (32) via its eﬀect on both market and supplier
access.17
    Third, skill-intensive manufacturing is increasing returns to scale, while
low-skill agriculture is constant returns to scale. The presence of increasing
returns to scale in manufacturing means that market size is important: in
equilibrium, firms must sell enough units of output in order to cover the
fixed costs of production. Hence, trade costs do not enter the manufacturing
zero profit condition (32) directly, but instead enter through market and
supplier access, which respectively weight market size and supply capacity
in all of a country’s trade partners by bilateral trade costs. In agriculture
in contrast, the presence of constant returns to scale means that it is per-
unit trade costs which are important, and these enter directly into the
  16
     New technologies (e.g. the internet) may reduce trade costs in some skill intensive
sectors. One prominent example is the emergence of Bangalore as a software program-
ming centre in India. See Leamer and Storper (2001) and Venables (2001) for further
discussion of geography and new technologies.
  17
     See Radelet and Sachs (1998) for further discussion of how trade costs which are
small as a share of gross output can have very large eﬀects on value-added.
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                     20


agricultural zero profit condition.
    The importance of this distinction can be seen by holding a country’s
bilateral trade costs constant but moving production and expenditure from
neighboring to distant locations. This will have no eﬀect in the agricultural
zero profit condition where only per unit trade costs matter (equation (31)
where dTijA /TijA = 0). However, reducing market and supply capacity at
neighboring locations and increasing them by the same amount at distant
locations (i.e. increasing a country’s economic remoteness rather than its
geographical remoteness) unambiguously reduces a country’s market and
supplier access (i.e. dM Ai /M Ai < 0 and dSAi /SAi < 0 in the manufac-
turing zero profit condition (32)). As above, the fall in market and supplier
access reduces the relative wage and equilibrium supply of skilled workers
if manufacturing is skill intensive relative to agriculture.
    Finally, in the full general equilibrium of the model, changes in agricul-
tural and manufacturing trade costs will themselves influence the distrib-
ution of production and expenditure across locations (of market capacity,
mj , and supply capacity, si ), with the resulting changes in economic re-
moteness influencing the skill premium and incentives to invest in human
capital in the way discussed above.
    The importance of input-output linkages and increasing returns to scale
in skill-intensive manufacturing suggests that our earlier finding that remote
countries have lower incentives to invest in human capital accumulation
carries over to a world where trade costs are paid on both agricultural
and manufacturing goods. The analysis also suggests that reductions in
trade costs in relatively skill-intensive sectors (through, for example, trade
liberalization) may be particularly important in elevating human capital
investments in peripheral countries.

5.   Other Determinants of Human Capital Investment

    The discussion so far has emphasized the importance of geographical
location for incentives to invest in human capital. In this section, we ex-
amine the eﬀects of changes in other parameters of the model which are
related to potential determinants of human capital investment emphasized
in the existing literature. To isolate the eﬀects of these other variables, we
consider the eﬀect of parameter changes holding constant a country’s mar-
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                         21


ket and supplier access. We continue to assume countries are incompletely
specialized in agriculture and manufacturing (the conditions for which are
derived above).

Proposition 4 The critical level of ability a∗i above which individuals be-
come skilled is monotonically increasing and the equilibrium supply of
skilled workers Si is monotonically decreasing in
(a) productivity in agriculture θYi
(b) the cost of manufacturing production parameter ci
(c) the cost of education parameter hi


Proof. See Appendix.

    Intuitively, increases in agricultural productivity θYi act like a rise in the
price of the agricultural good. By analogy with the Stolper-Samuelson The-
orem, an increase in agricultural productivity reduces the relative skilled
wage, and hence reduces equilibrium human capital investments. Our the-
oretical framework, therefore, formalizes the idea that a productive agri-
cultural sector or, more generally, an abundance of agricultural land and
other natural resources may both hinder the development of manufacturing
and impede investments in human capital (see for example the analysis of
Latin America in Engerman and Sokoloﬀ 1997 and Leamer et al 1999).
    The model also captures the idea that technology and, in particular, the
transfer of technology from advanced countries is important for economic
development. Technology transfer that reduces manufacturing production
costs, ci , raises the maximum skilled and unskilled wage that a manufac-
turing firm in country i can aﬀord to pay given market and supplier access.
In terms of Figure 2, the manufacturing isoprice lines shifts outwards away
from the origin. Since manufacturing is skill intensive relative to agricul-
ture, this increases the relative wage of skilled workers, and hence raises
equilibrium human capital investments.
    Thus, there is an important general equilibrium complementarity be-
tween technology and skills. The transfer of technology to skill intensive
manufacturing industries in developing countries not only directly raises
output per capita but also has positive indirect eﬀects through induced hu-
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                               22


man capital investment.18 The incentive to transfer technology depends, in
part, on a country’s institutions and policy environment (see for example
Acemoglu et al 2001). Hence, the analysis is consistent with an important
eﬀect of institutions on the process of economic development and with a
complementarity between institutions and human capital investment.
    Finally, institutions are also important via their eﬀects on the cost of
education parameter, hi . Increases in the extent of public versus private
provision of education, or changes in government regulations that reduce
the private costs of education, hi , will increase equilibrium investments in
human capital. As the supply of skilled workers rises, output of the skill-
intensive manufacturing sector will also rise.

6.     Empirical Measurement of Market and Supplier Access

    Using bilateral trade flow data compiled by Feenstra et al (1997), we
construct theoretically consistent measures of market access and supplier
access for all countries at five year intervals from 1970 to 1995 using equa-
tions (22) and (23). To ensure that these measures are not driven by small
countries that trade very little with the rest of the world, we restrict our
sample to the 137 countries that trade with at least 5 partners.
    From the trade equation (T), the model predicts that bilateral trade
flows depend upon exporting country characteristics (i.e. supply capac-
ity, si ≡ ni p1−σ
              i    ), importing partner characteristics (i.e. market capacity,
mj ≡ Ej Gσ−1
           j    ), and bilateral transportation costs (TijM ). We use country
dummy variables (denoted by di and dj , respectively) to capture market
and supply characteristics for each pair of countries i and j. This has
the advantage of controlling for all observed and unobserved variables that
aﬀect market and supply capacity.19 The dummy variables also capture
any component of transport costs or trade policy that is common across
all of a particular country’s export partners and import suppliers. We
model the bilateral component of transportation costs as depending upon
distance (distanceij ) and whether or not two countries share a common
  18
      See Redding (1996) for an analysis of technology-skill complementarity within indus-
tries in advanced countries.
   19
      In particular, the dummies capture the role of the manufacturing price index, Gj .
They control, therefore, for what Anderson and Van Wincoop (2001) term ‘multilateral
resistance’ (a country’s average trade barrier with all partners).
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                             23


border (borderij ). Distance is the great circle distance, in kilometers, be-
tween the two countries largest cities. Thus, the empirical counterpart of
equation (21) is:

      ln(Xijt ) = αt +β 1t di +β 2t dj +δ 1t ln(distanceij )+δ 2t borderij +uijt .(33)

for each time period separately, where Xijt denotes the value of exports
from i to j at time t and uijt is a stochastic error.
     Table 1 presents the results of estimating this equation on the sample of
non-zero trade flows, by year. The distance and common border variables
have the expected sign and are statistically significant at the 1% level.
The null hypothesis that the coeﬃcients on either the country dummies or
the partner dummies are equal to zero is easily rejected at conventional
significance levels using a standard F-test, and the model explains over
90% of the cross-sectional variation in bilateral trade flows. The economic
importance of distance appears to grow with time: whereas a 1% increase
in distance is associated with a 1.2% reduction in bilateral exports in 1970,
it is associated with a 1.5% reduction in exports by 1990.
     Estimated market access (M   g  Ait ) for exporter i and supplier access
  f jt ) for importer j can be constructed using coeﬃcient estimates from
(SA
equation (33) and equations (22) and (23) from Section 3.:
                   R
                   X      b
                          β                 b              b
      g
      M Ait =            dj 2t (distanceij )δ1t (borderij )δ2t
                   j=1
                   R
                   X      b
                          β                 b              b
      f jt =
      SA                 di 1t (distanceij )δ1t (borderij )δ2t
                   i=1

    Empirically, market and supplier access are highly correlated. As a
result, we use Mg Ait as a proxy of countries’ distance from world economic
activity in our empirical analysis below. Very similar results are obtained
   f jt is used instead.
if SA
    Mg          f jt have a number of advantages compared to traditional
       Ait and SA
estimates of distance. Most important, they derived from a general equi-
librium model of international trade that incorporates economic geography.
Second, they rely upon bilateral trade data to uncover revealed access to
markets and are thereby able to incorporate the eﬀects of unobservable
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                       24


transportation costs, trade barriers, and determinants of market and sup-
ply capacity. Finally, they capture in a single measure several dimensions
of physical distance.
                                              g
    Table 2 reports the results of regressing M Ait on countries’ great circle
distance from the US, Japan and Belgium in kilometers. Distance from
these three economic centers explains 90% of the variation in market ac-
cess. Of the three locations, market access is most negatively correlated
with distance from Brussels; coeﬃcient estimates imply that a 1% increase
in a country’s distance from that Brussels reduces market access by 0.77%.
Figure 3 provides a visual representation of this correlation in 1990. No-
table outliers in the figure, including Canada and several Asian countries,
are markets which are located near either the US or Japan.
    Comparison of the distributions of market access from 1970 to 1995 in-
dicates that peripheral countries are becoming more economically remote
over time. Table 3 reports the ratios of various percentiles of these distri-
butions at five year intervals and indicates that the distributions are char-
acterized by increasing inequality. All three ratios — 90th /10th , 80th /20th
and 75th /25th — increase with time. This trend is interesting in its own
right and worthy of further inquiry. Potential explanations include an
increasingly uneven distribution of world economic activity and the rising
coeﬃcient on distance in the trade equation estimation.

7.    Empirical Relationship Between Geography and
      Human Capital

    In this section, we check whether the human capital implications of the
model are supported by the data. Consistent with the model, we provide
evidence that educational attainment is higher in countries with greater
market access. Data on educational attainment for a large cross-section of
developed and developing countries in 1990 is available from Barro and Lee
(2001). These data record the percent of each country’s over-15 population
that has attained secondary and tertiary education.20        Data on both
market access and educational attainment are available for approximately
100 countries, depending upon the year. More detail on the data used in
 20
   For further information, see Barro and Lee (1993), (2001). Domenech and de la
Fuente (2000) provides a complementary source of information for OECD countries.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                 25


this section is provided in a data Appendix.
    Table 4 reports the results of regressing higher education attainment —
defined as the proportion of the population who have attained secondary
or tertiary education — on market access for a cross section of countries in
1990. Because the proportion of the population with higher education is
bounded between 0 and 1, we employ a logistic specification:
         µ                         ¶
             Higher Education                       g
      ln                             = α0t + α1t ln(M Ait ) + εit .     (34)
           1 − Higher Education
The first column of the table reports results of this bivariate regression for
the 105 countries for which data are available in 1990. The estimated
coeﬃcient on market access is positive and statistically significant at the
1% level.
    The second column of Table 4 shows that this relationship is robust
to restricting attention to a smaller set of countries where we have data
on additional control variables The third column of the table indicates
that market access retains a significant positive relationship with higher
education even in the presence of indicators thought to be important in
cross country studies of development (e.g. Gallup et al 1998 and Hall and
Jones 1998). The indicators, available from the Center for International
Development21 , consist of a measure of the risk of expropriation by the
government, the percent of countries’ land that is tropical, and dummies
for socialist rule and external wars. Including these variables in column
(3) reduces the magnitude of the market access coeﬃcient from 0.61 to 0.30
although it remains statistically significant at conventional critical values.
Among the controls, only risk of expropriation is statistically significant:
greater risk of expropriation is negatively associated with higher education
attainment.22 For comparison, the final three columns of Table 4 report
similar results when OECD countries are excluded or when geographic dis-
  21
    http://www.cid.harvard.edu/
  22
    Similar results are obtained for various definitions of higher education (e.g. just sec-
ondary education attainment) as well as for variations on the additional control variables
used (e.g. distance from the equator in place of percent of tropical land). The US,
Belgium, and Japan are excluded in columns (2) to (5) to keep the sample size consistent
with results reported in the last two columns. Results in earlier columns are similar if
these three countries are included. All additional results, omitted to conserve space, are
available from the authors upon request.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                26


tances from three centers of world economic activity are used in place of
market access.
    This paper provides some of the first evidence of a positive correlation
between countries’ human capital investments and measures of access to
centers of world economic activity. Shedding further light on the mech-
anisms behind this correlation is an interesting area for future research.
Potentially fruitful avenues for further inquiry include looking for a sim-
ilar relationship across regions within countries23 ; analyzing the relation-
ship between changes in educational attainment and changes in market
access within countries and regions; using richer identification strategies
with cross-country and cross-region data (see for example the analysis of
spatial income inequality in Redding and Venables 2001); and exploiting
exogenous changes in market access associated with shifts in policy regime
such as trade liberalization (see for example the analysis of spatial income
inequality and Mexican trade liberalization in Hanson 1996).

8.   Conclusion

    We present a model which ties a country’s human capital accumulation
to its distance from global economic activity. If skill intensive sectors are
relatively trade-cost intensive, are characterized by stronger increasing re-
turns to scale, or feature more pervasive input-output linkages, relatively
peripheral countries will experience a lower skill premium and reduced in-
centives to educate their workers. Consistent with the predictions of theory,
we provide empirical evidence that countries with lower market access have
lower levels of educational attainment.
    To the extent that human capital accumulation accelerates develop-
ment, our analysis suggests that remoteness impedes income convergence
with developed nations. An obvious policy implication is that periph-
eral countries need to get closer to the center of global economic activity.
Though countries obviously cannot move, and thereby reduce their physical
distance, it is possible to reduce the costs of remoteness. Perhaps most
important in this regard is the need for advanced economies to lower formal
  23
     Across countries, the model’s assumption of factor immobility is relatively plausible.
Within countries, peripheral regions may also be disadvantaged by the migration of skilled
workers to more central regions (the ‘brain drain’).
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                    27


and informal trade barriers vis a vis the world’s more isolated economies.
The planned dismantling of the global Multifiber Arrangement in 2005, for
example, is a step in this direction.
    Also likely to be important are eﬀorts to reduce transport costs directly
via improvements in infrastructure (e.g. roads, ports, etc.) or the frequency
of port calls by shipping lines. Shipping routes themselves, of course, are
endogenous to economic activity, but there may be a role for developed
countries to subsidize the establishment of such routes as a way of ele-
vating opportunity on the periphery. Further evaluation of these policy
options is needed to identify the relevant market failures and examine how
they compare in cost-benefit terms to other policies, such as subsidizing
education directly.
           Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                 28




References

Acemoglu, D, Johnson, S, and Robinson, J (2001) ‘The Colonial Origins
   of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation’, American
   Economic Review, 91(5), 1369-1401.

Amiti, M (2001) ‘Location of Vertically Linked Industries: Agglomeration
  Versus Comparative Advantage’, CEPR Discussion Paper, 2800.

Amiti, M and Pissarides, C (2002) ‘Trade and Industrial Location with
  Heterogeneous Labor’, CEP Discussion Paper, 541.

Anderson, J and van Wincoop, E (2001) ‘Gravity with Gravitas: a Solution
  to the Border Puzzle’, NBER Working Paper, 8079.

Barro, R and Lee, J (1993) ‘International Comparisons of Educational At-
   tainment’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 32(3), 363-94.

Barro, R and Lee, J (2001) ‘International Data on Educational Attainment:
   Updates and Implications’, Oxford Economic Papers, 53(3), 541-63.

Benhabib, J and Spiegel, M (1994) ‘The Role of Human Capital in Eco-
   nomic Development: Evidence from Aggregate Cross-country Data’,
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 34, 143-73.

Bernard, A, Jensen, B, and Schott, P (2002) ‘Falling Trade Costs, Hetero-
   geneous Firms and Industry Dynamics’, Yale School of Management,
   mimeograph.

Bils, M and Klenow, P (2000) ‘Does Schooling Cause Growth?’, American
    Economic Review, 90(5), 1160-83.

Davis, D (1997) ‘Intra-industry Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo Ap-
   proach’, Journal of International Economics, 39, 201-6.

Davis, D (1999) ‘The Home Market, Trade, and Industrial Structure’,
   American Economic Review, 88(5), 1264-76.
           Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                 29


Deardorﬀ, A (1998) ‘Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work
   in a Neoclassical World?’, Chapter 1 in (ed) Frankel, J, The Regional-
   ization of the World Economy, NBER& Chicago University Press.
De la Fuente, A and Domenech, R (2000) ‘Human Capital in Growth Re-
   gressions: How Much Diﬀerence Does Data Quality Make?’, CEPR
   Discussion Paper, 2466.
Eicher, T and Garcia-Penalosa, C (2001) ‘Inequality and Growth: The
   Dual Role of Human Capital in Development’, Journal of Development
   Economics, 66(1), 173-97.
Engerman, S and Sokoloﬀ, K (1997) ‘Factor Endowments, Institutions,
   and Diﬀerential Paths of Growth among New World Economies: a
   View from Economic Historians of the United States’, in (ed) Haber, S,
   How Latin American Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic Histories of
   Brazil and Mexico, 1800-1914, Stanford University Press.
Feenstra, R, R. Lipsey, and H. Bowen, (1997) ‘World Trade Flows, 1970-
   1992, with Production and Tariﬀ Data’, NBER Working Paper, 5910.
Fujita, M, Krugman, P, and Venables, A (1999) The Spatial Economy:
   Cities, Regions, and International Trade, MIT Press : Cambridge MA.
Gallup, J, Sachs, J, and Mellinger, A (1998) ‘Geography and Economic
   Development’, Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on
   Development Economics, World Bank: Washington.
Galor, O and Mountford, A (2002) ‘Why are One third of People Indian and
   Chinese: Trade, Industrialization and Demography’, Brown University
   Working Paper, 38-01.
Hall, Robert and Chad Jones (1999) ‘Why Do Some Countries Produce
   So Much More Output per Worker than Others?’ Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, February, 83-116.
Hanson, G (1996) ‘Localization Economies, Vertical Organization, and
   Trade’, American Economic Review, 86(5), 1266-78.
Hanson, G (1998) ‘Market Potential, Increasing Returns, and Geographic
   Concentration’, NBER Working Paper, 6429.
           Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                 30


Hummels, D (1995) ‘Global Income Patterns: Does Geography Play a
  Role?’, Chapter 2 of Phd Thesis, University of Michigan.

Hummels, D (1999) ‘Toward a Geography of Trade Costs’, mimeograph,
  Purdue University.

Krugman, P (1991) ‘Increasing Returns and Economic Geography’, Journal
   of Political Economy, 99(3), 483-99.

Krugman, P and Venables, A (1990) ‘Integration and the Competitiveness
   of the Peripheral Industry’, in C. Bliss and J Braga De Macedo,(eds),
   Unity With Diversity in the European Economy: The Community’s
   Southern Frontier, Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

Krugman, P and Venables, A (1995) ‘Globalisation and the Inequality of
   Nations’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4), 857-80.

Krugman, P and Venables, A (2001) ‘How Robust is the Home Market
   Eﬀect?’, mimeograph, London School of Economics.

Leamer, E (1997) ‘Access to Western Markets and Eastern Eﬀort’, in (ed)
   Zecchini, S, Lessons from the Economic Transition, Central and Eastern
   Europe in the 1990s, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 503-26.

Leamer, E, Maul, H, Rodriguez, S, and Schott, P (1999) ‘Does Natural Re-
   source Abundance Increase Latin American Income Inequality?’, Jour-
   nal of Development Economics, 59, 3-42.

Leamer, E and Storper, M (2001) ‘The Economic Geography of the Internet
   Age’, NBER Working Paper, 8450.

Limao, N and Venables, A (2001) ‘Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvan-
   tage, Transport Costs, and Trade’, World Bank Economic Review, 15,
   315-43.

Mankiw, G, Romer, D, and Weil, D (1992) ‘A Contribution to the Empirics
  of Economic Growth’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), 407-37.

Marshall, A (1920) Principles of Economics, London: Macmillan.
           Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                   31


Mori, T and Turrini, A (2002) ‘Skills, Agglomeration, and Segmentation’,
  European Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Psacharopoulos, G (1994) ‘Returns to Investment in Education: a Global
   Update’, World Development, 22(9), 1325-43.

Radelet, S and Sachs, J (1998) ‘Shipping Costs, Manufactured Exports,
   and Economic Growth’, paper presented at the American Economic
   Association Meetings, Harvard University, mimeo.

Redding, S (1996) ‘The Low-skill, Low-quality Trap: Strategic Comple-
   mentarities between Human Capital and R & D’, Economic Journal,
   March, 458-70.

Redding, S and Venables, A (2001) ‘Economic Geography and International
   Inequality’, CEP Discussion Paper, 495, London School of Economics.

Strauss-Kahn, V (2001) ‘Globalization, Agglomeration, and Wage Premia’,
   paper presented at CEPR Erwit Conference, London, mimeograph.

Venables, A (1996) ‘Equilibrium Locations of Vertically Linked Industries’,
   International Economic Review, 37, 341-59.

Venables, A (2001) ‘Geography and International Inequalities: the Impact
   of New Technologies’, Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Confer-
   ence on Development Economics, Forthcoming.

Venables, A and Limao, N (2002) ‘Geographical Disadvantage: A
   Heckscher-Ohlin-Von Thunen Model of International Specialization’,
   Journal of International Economics, 58(2), 239-63.
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                     32


A     Theory Appendix

A1.   Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. From equation (27), the zero profit condition in agriculture implies,
              µ      ¶
    dwiU          φ    dwiS
       U
          = −                                                          (35)
     wi         1 − φ wiS
Substituting this expression into the zero profit condition in manufacturing
(28), we have,
               µ           ¶            ·                  ¸
                       βφ     dwiS        1 (1 − α − β)
                 α−                 =−       +               γ
                     1 − φ wiS            σ       (σ − 1)
                        µ           ¶
                               βφ                         α      φ
        Note that        α−           > 0,       ⇐⇒          >
                              1−φ                         β    1−φ
                                           α       φ
                        Therefore, if         >
                                           β     1−φ
                    dwiS       dwiU       d(wi /wiU )
                                               S
                         < 0,        > 0,              <0
                    wiS        wiU          wiS /wiU



A2.   Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. (a) follows immediately from Proposition 2 and Proposition 1
(b) follows immediately from the fact that the equilibrium number of skilled
workers is negatively related to the critical level of ability a∗i , while the
equilibrium number of unskilled workers is positively related to a∗i
             Z a                    Z a∗               Z a
                                        i                   hi
        Si =      λ(a)L̄i da, Li =        λ(a)L̄i da −         λ(a)L̄i da
              a∗i                     a                 a∗i a




A3.   Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. Proposition 4 is most easily proved combining Figure 2 and the
results in Proposition 1.
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                     33


(a) an increase in θYi shifts the agriculture isoprice line in Figure 2 out-
wards. For given values of market and supplier access, which determine the
position of the manufacturing isoprice line, this unambiguously reduces the
relative wage of skilled workers. From Proposition 1, the fall in the rela-
tive wage of skilled workers increases
                                 R ā   a∗i and hence reduces the equilibrium
supply of skilled workers Si = a∗ λ(a)L̄i da
                                    i
(b) an increase in ci shifts the manufacturing isoprice line in Figure 2 in-
wards for given values of market and supplier access. This unambiguously
reduces the relative wage of skilled workers. From Proposition 1, the fall
in the relative wage of skilled workers increases
                                              R ā  a∗i and hence reduces the
equilibrium supply of skilled workers Si = a∗ λ(a)L̄i da
                                                 i
(c) following an increase in hi , the agriculture and manufacturing isoprice
lines in Figure 2 are unchanged for given values of market and supplier ac-
cess. Hence, the equilibrium relative wage of skilled workers is unchanged.
For a given relative wage of skilled workers, Proposition 1 implies that an
increase in hi increases    ∗
                      R ā ai and hence reduces the equilibrium supply of
skilled workers Si = a∗ λ(a)L̄i da.
                       i



B   Data Appendix

    Bilateral trade data are from Feenstra et al (1997) at five year intervals
from 1970-95. To ensure that our results are not driven by small coun-
tries that trade relatively little with the rest of the world, we restrict our
sample to the 137 countries that trade with at least five partners. Dis-
tance is the great circle distance, in km, between two countries’ largest
cities. Common border information is from the CIA World Factbook:
http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/.
    Educational attainment data from Barro and Lee (2001). Higher ed-
ucation is defined as the proportion of the over-15 population that has
attained secondary or tertiary education.
    Development indicators from Gallup et al. (1998) and Hall and Jones
(1998), and include: risk of expropriation by the government, the per cent of
countries’ land that is tropical, and dummies for socialist rule and external
wars. These data can be downloaded from http://www.cid.harvard.edu.
    The trade equation estimation yields measures of supply and market
capacity for all countries (the country and partner dummies). To measure
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                    34


internal distance, we use information on internal area (the average distance
between two points in a circular country is: distii = 0.66(areai /π)1/2 )
and the coeﬃcient on internal distance is assumed to be one half of that
on external distance. As shown in Redding and Venables (2001), market
access measures using alternative measures of internal trade costs are highly
correlated. All estimation results are robust to considering alternative
measures of internal trade costs and to focusing solely on access to foreign
markets.
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                            35




                             1970        1975        1980        1985        1990        1995
    Regressor               ln(X ij )   ln(X ij )   ln(X ij )   ln(X ij )   ln(X ij )   ln(X ij )
    ln(distance ij )         -1.18       -1.27       -1.27       -1.33      -1.37       -1.49
                              0.03        0.03        0.03        0.03       0.03        0.03
    ln(border ij )            0.48        0.41        0.42        0.31       0.42        0.44
                              0.16        0.14        0.14        0.14       0.13        0.15
    Country Dummies           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
    Observations             9191        9936        9717        9551       10302       11182
    R2                       0.94       0.94       0.96       0.96      0.97      0.97
    Notes: Results, by year, of regressing bilateral exports on distance and border,
    country and partner dummy variables. Huber-White heteroscedasticity robust
    standard errors note below each estimated coefficient.


                       Table 1: Trade Equation Estimation




             Regressors                                         Ln(Market Access)
             Ln(Distance to US)                                          -0.53 ***
                                                                          8.22
             Ln(Distance to Belgium)                                     -0.77 ***
                                                                        22.40
             Ln(Distance to Japan)                                       -0.70 ***
                                                                        11.01
             Observations (Countries)                                      137
             Adjusted R-squared                                           0.90
             Notes: Table displays OLS coefficients. T-values are listed below
             coefficient estimates and are based on Huber-White robust standard
             errors. See text for definition of Market Access (MA). ***, ** and
             * signify statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
             Results on the included constant are suppressed.


Table 2: OLS Regression of Market Access on the Physical Distance of
Countries from Three Economic Centers
           Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                       36




                                Ratio of Market Access Percentiles
              Year               75th/25th      80th/20th       90th/10th
              1970                     2.5            3.4             6.8
              1975                     2.6            3.5             7.3
              1980                     2.6            3.7             7.2
              1985                     2.6            3.8             7.4
              1990                     2.7            4.2             8.6
              1995                     2.9            4.2            10.3
              Notes: Table displays the ratio of various percentiles of
              the distribution of Foreign Market Access across countries
              over time. Each year contains 137 country observations.



Table 3: The Relative Distribution of Countries’ Market Access Over Time,
1970 to 1990
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                       37




                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                 Higher        Higher         Higher        Higher        Higher        Higher
 Regressors                                   Education     Education      Education     Education      Education     Education
 ln(Market Access)                             0.66 ***      0.61 ***       0.30 **       0.59 **
                                               5.99          4.32           2.22          0.27
 Risk of Expropriation                                                     -0.58 ***     -0.41 ***                    -0.56 ***
                                                                            4.40          0.13                         4.44
 Percent of Land in Tropics                                                -0.67         -0.55                        -0.82
                                                                            1.19          0.57                         1.42
 Socialist Rule (1950-1995)                                                 0.28         -0.01                         0.33
                                                                            0.78          0.45                         0.94
 External War (1960-1985)                                                  -0.13         -0.14                        -0.14
                                                                            0.30          0.43                         0.31
 Ln(Distance to US)                                                                                      -0.65 ***    -0.51 ***
                                                                                                          2.85         2.73
 Ln(Distance to Belgium)                                                                                 -0.29 ***    -0.09
                                                                                                          3.12         0.92
 Ln(Distance to Japan)                                                                                   -0.95 ***    -0.55 ***
                                                                                                          4.59         3.28
 US, Japan and Belgium Excluded                       No           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
 OECD Excluded                                        No            No            No            Yes             No             No
 Observations (Countries)                            105             66            66            49              66            66
 R2                                                 0.23          0.26           0.48          0.36            0.30          0.50
 Notes: Table displays OLS coefficients and T-values based upon Huber-White robust standard errors. Dependent variable is
 a logistic transformation of higher education, defined as the over 15 year old population share attaining secondary or tertiary
 education. The transformation is ln(Higher/(1-Higher). See text for definition of market access. Risk of Expropriation is a
 measure of property rights protection and varies from 1 (low) to 5 (high). Data on this measure, the percent of land in tropics,
 and dummies for socialist rule and external war are from the Center for International Development at Harvard
 (http://www.cid.harvard.edu/). Great circle geographic distance measures are in thousands of kilometers and are available
 from the World Bank. ***, ** and * signify statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels. Results on the included
 constant are suppressed.


Table 4: OLS Regression of Higher Education Attainment on Market Ac-
cess, 1990
            Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                     38




              ai(z)




                 ā




                ai*




                a
                      1   (wiS / wiU)*                 wiS / wiU




Figure 1: The relationship between the critical value of ability a∗i and the
relative wage wiS /wiU . Only individuals with ability greater than a∗i become
educated given the relative wage (wiS /wiU )∗ .
              Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                            39




        wiS

                             -LiY/SiY



                  -LiM/SiM


         ŵiS                            (wiS)α(wiU)β SA-(1-α-β)/(σ-1) ci =ξMA1/σ




                                                  1=1/θiY(wiS)φ(wiU)1-φ


              0                   ŵiU                         wiU



Figure 2: Equilibrium skilled wage, unskilled wage, and relative unit factor
input requirements in each sector
                               Distance, Skill Deepening, and Development                                          40




                                   NLD                  CSK
                         4.2e+07
                                         FRA     CHE     DKF                              CAN
                                           GBR             AUT
                                                         IRL   POL
                                                       DEU    HUN
Foreign Market Access




                                                                                                 PRK
                                                             NORYUF
                                                                SWE
                                                               ITA  ALB
                                                                     BGR
                                                                 ESPTUN
                                                                      GIB
                                                                     FIN
                                                                     ROM
                                                                     PRT
                                                                   DZA MLT      JOR
                                                                         GRC               BMU
                                                                          TUR
                                                                         LBY
                                                                         MAR   SYR                   MYS
                                                                           SUN LBN
                                                                                ISR               KOR
                                                                          ISL CYP              BHSCHN
                                                                               EGYIRQ
                                                                                 GRL KWT           TWN
                                                                                       QAT
                                                                                       BHR      CUB
                                                                                                HTIHKG
                                                                                    IRNBEN DOM
                                                                                           USA  JAMKHM
                                                                                              KNZ
                                                                                      SAUARE
                                                                                          OMNGPM   MEX
                                                                                                 MMR SGP
                                                                                                    VNM
                                                                                                  BLZ
                                                                                   MRT    AFG   ANT
                                                                                              BRB HND
                                                                                                   SLV
                                                                                                  GTMPHL
                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                      GMB
                                                                                      SDN
                                                                                      SEN
                                                                                      MLIYEMPAK VEN
                                                                                               TTO NIC
                                                                                                   CRI
                                                                                       GBC
                                                                                         GNQ NPL
                                                                                        GIN
                                                                                        SLE
                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                        NGA        THA
                                                                                                  PAN
                                                                                         CIV
                                                                                         LBR
                                                                                         CMR   GUY
                                                                                               SUR
                                                                                           ETFIND COL IDM
                                                                                               GUF
                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                             KEN LKA
                                                                                            UGA
                                                                                             SOM
                                                                                            ZAR     ECU
                                                                                                      URY
                                                                                             AGO
                                                                                               TZA
                                                                                                SYC
                                                                                                ZMB  PER
                                                                                                MWI BOL
                                                                                                      ARGPNG
                                                                                                ZWE
                                                                                                  MDG
                                                                                                    BRA KIZ
                                                                                                  MOZ
                                                                                                   MUS
                                                                                                    ZAFCHL NCZ
                                                                                                           FJI
                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                           AUS
                         1.1e+06
                                   0.2                                                                    18.3
                                                   Distance from Belgium (000 km)



                        Figure 3: Foreign Market Access versus Distance to Belgium, 1990
