                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                LEGACIES IN BLACK AND WHITE:
                                 THE RACIAL COMPOSITION OF
                                      THE LEGACY POOL

                                            Cameron Howell
                                            Sarah E. Turner

                                          Working Paper 9448
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9448


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




We have benefitted from the comments of seminar participants at the University of Virginia, the University
of Texas-Dallas, and the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management annual meeting. We thank
the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Cameron Howell and Sarah E. Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.
Legacies in Black and White: The Racial Composition of the Legacy Pool
Cameron Howell and Sarah E. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 9448
January 2003
JEL No. I2, J1, J15

                                           ABSTRACT

       Selective universities regularly employ policies that favor children of alumni (known as
"legacies") in undergraduate admissions. Since alumni from selective colleges and universities have,
historically, been disproportionately white, admissions policies that favor legacies have

disproportionately benefited white students. For this reason, legacy policies lead to additional costs
in terms of reductions in racial diversity. As larger numbers of minority students graduate from

colleges and universities and have children, however, the potential pool of legacy applicants will
change markedly in racial composition. This analysis begins with a review of the history and
objectives of the preference for children of alumni in undergraduate admissions. We then consider
the specific case of the University of Virginia and employ demographic techniques to predict the

racial composition of the pool of potential legacy applicants to the University. Significant changes
in the racial composition of classes that graduated from the University of Virginia from the late
1960s through the 1970s foreshadow similar changes in the characteristics of alumni children

maturing through the next two decades.



Cameron Howell                                        Sarah E. Turner
Center for the Study of Higher Education              Curry School of Education
Curry School of Education                             Department of Economics
University of Virginia                                University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903-2495                        Charlottesville, VA 22903-2495
lch5x@virginia.edu                                    and NBER
                                                      sturner@virginia.edu
                               Legacies in Black and White:

                      The Racial Composition of the Legacy Pool


                       leg·a·cy (lĕg'c-sē) n., pl. –cies. 1. Money
                       or property bequeathed to someone by will.
                       2. Something handed on from those who
                       have come before. [< Lat. legare, to
                       bequeath as a legacy.]
                       —American Heritage Dictionary, Second College Edition



       In the world of college and university admissions, the word “legacy” has a

peculiar definition that cannot be found in most standard dictionaries. It means “the son

or daughter of an alumnus or alumna”—but the practical application of the word, in the

admissions community, reveals how it has been derived from its original meaning of

inheritance. Graduates of many of America’s most elite institutions of higher education

bequeath to their sons and daughters a sizable advantage in the admissions process.

Known as legacies, these children are admitted at twice the rate of other applicants at

some universities, and average SAT scores for legacies are, in some cases, lower than the

average scores of their peers. On the surface, these facts raise serious questions for the

admissions enterprise, which heralds the ideals of merit and equity.

       Debates concerning merit and equity in the admissions process inevitably lead to

comparisons of legacy policies and affirmative action, since both policies are forms of

preference employed by institutions (Bowen and Bok, 1998; Cross, 1994; Cross and

Slater, 1994; Karabel and Karen, 1990; Larew, 1991; Lederman, 1995; Megalli, 1995;

“Naked hypocrisy,” 1997; Wilson, 1995; Woo, 1995). Although comparisons of legacy

policies and affirmative action often treat children of alumni and minorities separately,




                                                                                      Page 1
the interaction of race and legacy status makes the comparison all the more stark.

Historically, the overwhelming majority of alumni from selective colleges and

universities have been white, so admissions policies that favor legacies have

disproportionately benefited white students. For this reason, legacy preferences

potentially decrease racial diversity. This relationship is not static, however. As larger

numbers of minority students graduate from selective colleges and have children, the

potential pool of legacy applicants will change in racial composition.

       In this paper, we examine the relationship between the current racial composition

of undergraduate degree recipients and the projected racial composition of the pool of

potential legacy applicants. By forecasting changes in the racial distribution of legacies

in the admissions pool, this paper focuses on the number of potential legacy applicants—

not on the number of legacies who will actually apply to selective colleges and

universities. Therefore, a question for further exploration is whether the realized

application behavior among legacies differs by race and whether subsequent

matriculation decisions differ by race as well.

       This paper begins with an examination of admissions policies for children of

alumni. Using the University of Virginia as an example, this paper then employs

demographic techniques to predict the University of Virginia’s potential legacy

applicants by race. After applying a range of assumptions regarding age- and education-

specific fertility among college graduates, we project that the racial composition of

UVa’s legacy pool will resemble the composition of the University’s contemporary

student body by the year 2020. Perhaps of more interest is our finding that the current




                                                                                        Page 2
period of admissions activity involves a dramatic transition, with quite sizable changes in

the relative representation of African-American youth in the legacy pool expected over

the next decade.

       Beyond the question of the racial composition of the legacy pool, the more drastic

impending change will be the rapid increase in the overall size of the legacy pool—an

echo of the expansion of class sizes in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Although the

empirical results in this paper are specific to the University of Virginia, the broad

demographic results apply to a much wider range of selective colleges and universities.

The basic results of this analysis are descriptive: the apparent tradeoff between

supporting institutional history with a preference for legacies and furthering racial

diversity in the college environment is not as dichotomous as it once was. Coming

decades should bring greater racial diversity to the pool of legacy applicants—but

differences between the demographic composition of alumni and the demographic

composition of incoming groups of college applicants will continue to pose tradeoffs in

“crafting a class.”

                           Legacy Policies: Historical Context

       Institutions of higher education have promoted intergenerational attachments

since the earliest days of Harvard College. Henry Adams (1907), who graduated from

Harvard in 1858, described the familial ties among Harvard alumni in his autobiography:

               For generation after generation, Adamses and Brookses and Boylstons and
               Gorhams had gone to Harvard College, and although none of them, as far
               as known, had ever done any good there, or thought himself the better for
               it, custom, social ties, convenience, and, above all, economy, kept each
               generation in the track (p. 55).




                                                                                        Page 3
In the era before increased competition in college admissions, “all alumni children who

could demonstrate a minimum level of ability were admitted” to U.S. institutions of

higher education (Duffy and Goldberg, 1998, p. 47). This policy attracted no attention

until it was threatened. The threat materialized early in the twentieth century, when a

series of dynamics increased the quantity and quality of applicants vying for admission to

elite colleges. Among these applicants were a growing number of highly-qualified

Jewish students. In the 1920s, Ivy League institutions such as Harvard, Yale, and

Princeton formalized their admissions policies that favored children of alumni—in order

to appease graduate fathers and in order to limit the number of Jewish matriculants

(Lamb, 1993; Synnott, 1979).

       Later in the twentieth century, a boom in the number of college-age students

coincided with improved access to institutions of higher education. Increasingly,

students began to apply to and attend colleges and universities outside of their home

states (Hoxby, 1999). Geographic integration of selective institutions began in earnest

after World War II, when a combination of factors including reduced transportation costs

and increased reliance on standardized testing enabled the recruitment of highly talented

students from across the nation. Then, beginning in the late 1960s, many institutions

entered the era of coeducation, admitting women to undergraduate degree programs.

(Coeducation at selective institutions had the dual effects of increasing the number of

qualified applicants while also increasing the size of the legacy pool.) During the same

decade, colleges and universities responded to the Civil Rights movement by actively

seeking to increase minority enrollment. In some Southern states, this era brought an end




                                                                                      Page 4
to segregation in higher education. These changes in the gender, race, and geographic

representation of applicants increased the overall level of competition for admission to

these institutions—infringing upon the traditional advantages of legacy applicants while

also making legacy preferences more valuable to their potential recipients. Alumni

fathers feared that more and better applicants would surely displace their children in the

admissions process.

         These fears became especially frenzied at Yale University, when R. Inslee Clark

was named the Dean of Admissions in 1965 (Lemann, 1999). The share of alumni sons

admitted to the university plummeted from 20 to 12 percent in Clark’s first year as dean,

and “open warfare” commenced (p. 149). “An apocrypha of Clark horror stories”

circulated among the alumni, who felt insulted and threatened (p. 150). William F.

Buckley, Jr. lobbied for a position on the Yale Corporation, the university’s overseeing

board, on the premise that Yale’s favoritism of alumni sons should be restored. Kingman

Brewster, Jr., the President of Yale, managed to ease tensions among the alumni after he

published an apologetic piece in the university’s alumni magazine and leaked an internal

letter stating that “[t]he only preference by inheritance which seems to deserve

recognition is the Yale son” (p. 151).

         To this day, a preference by inheritance persists at Yale and other selective

colleges.1 Three national surveys—conducted by the American Association of Collegiate

Registrars and Admissions Officers, American College Testing, the College Board,


         1
           A key point (often forgotten in a wide array of discussions of admission policy) is that an
institution must be truly selective in order for a policy of offering an admissions advantage to legacies to be
meaningful.




                                                                                                       Page 5
Educational Testing Service, and National Association of College Admission

Counselors—track the use of legacy policies among college and universities across time

(Breland, Maxey, McLure, Valiga, Boatwright, Ganley, & Jenkins, 1995). The survey

results show that both public and private institutions of higher education commonly

provide some preference for children of alumni.2

        The language selected by admissions professionals in describing the advantage

accorded to legacies often evokes a “nudge” given to children of alumni, ceteris paribus.3

Understanding the magnitude of this advantage or preference is complicated by the

possibility that children of alumni may be systematically different from the pool of

college applicants at large—since, by definition, legacies are born to graduates of

selective colleges and universities (a trait that is often related to excellent academic

opportunities at the secondary level and a strong emphasis on academic achievement in

the home). Thus, simple comparisons of the admission differences between children of

alumni and children of non-alumni may well significantly overstate any legacy advantage

in admission.




        2
           According to the survey data, 23 percent of four-year, public institutions reported favoring
children of alumni in 1979. This percentage fell to 14 percent in 1985 and climbed to 16 percent in 1992.
32 percent of four-year, private institutions reported favoring children of alumni in 1979. These
percentages changed to 20 and 21 percent in 1985 and 1992, respectively. It is unclear whether these
percentage changes represent real alterations of legacy admissions policies in private and public
universities or whether these percentage changes may be due to shifts in the number of institutions
responding to the national survey.
         3
           Jean H. Fetter (1995), a former Dean of Admissions at Stanford University, states Stanford’s
admissions policy for legacies as follows: “Children of Stanford graduates receive preference in choices
among applicants of approximately equal qualifications” (p. 9). Like Stanford, Harvard explains its
admissions policy for children of alumni as one where “Harvard-Radcliffe sons or daughters” are preferred
only when all other factors are equal (Bromley, 2000).




                                                                                                  Page 6
           When one compares admissions trends for legacies to other applicants, however,

the observed differences in acceptance rates are sizable.4 For example, in Yale’s entering

classes of 1986 to 1995, 19.4 percent of all applicants were admitted—versus 42.5

percent of children of alumni (Lamb, 1993). Specifically, 22 percent of all applicants to

the Class of 1995 were admitted, while 45.2 percent of legacies were admitted. For the

Class of 1994, the rate of admission for non-legacies was 19.7 percent and the rate for

legacies was 45.4 percent. These data parallel the findings of Bowen and Bok (1998),

whose study of twenty-eight selective institutions of higher education measured the

competitive advantage of legacies who began college in the fall of 1989. They found that

“[t]he overall admission rate for legacies was almost twice that for all other candidates”

(p. 28).

           Although these admission rates confirm that legacy applicants are admitted more

often that their peers, these rates do not reflect the quality of legacy applicants—their

GPAs, standardized test scores, or extracurricular accomplishments. These percentages

therefore cannot prove that legacies are more or less qualified than their peers. Shulman

and Bowen (2000) contrast the likelihood of admission for differing groups while

controlling for differences in SAT scores. For male applicants to one particular

institution in their study, legacies enjoyed a 20 percent admissions advantage in 1976—

compared to a 49 percent advantage for minorities and a 23 percent advantage for

athletes. By 1989, the admissions advantage for legacies grew to 23 percent, while the


           4
          At Princeton University, a 1998 internal report of its Undergraduate Admission Study Group
advised that an “accurate measure of the preference accorded legacy applicants is the percentage of legacy
applicants offered admission versus the percentage of non-legacy applicants offered admission.”




                                                                                                   Page 7
advantage for minorities shrank to 26 percent and the advantage for athletes grew to 30

percent. In 1999, the admissions advantages for legacies, minorities, and athletes were

25 percent, 18 percent, and 48 percent, respectively. Statistics for female applicants

yielded similar percentages and changes across time.

       There are competing theories that explain the institutional purpose of legacy

favoritism. Since the yield rate among legacies is often higher than average, admissions

offices can boost their overall yield rates by admitting legacies instead of other, similarly

qualified students. Bowen and Bok suggest that legacies are admitted at higher rates in

order to preserve “long-term institutional loyalties and traditions” (1998, p. 24). Richard

Shaw, Dean of Admissions at Yale, echoes the belief “that tradition is important and

generational ties are additional factors that [legacies] have” (Han, 1996). Universities

certainly have a vested interest in maintaining distinctive traditions. Children of alumni,

having learned of these traditions from their parents, possess a special knowledge of (and

a desire to protect) these traditions. Legacies therefore reinforce a university’s

institutional memory.

       Another reason for favoring legacies is purely monetary in nature. Admissions

scholars admit this purpose readily. Michele A. Hernandez explains that Dartmouth

legacies “are given preferential treatment because the college wants to keep alumni (read:

donors) happy” (Gose, 1997). In presenting the advantage of children of alumni at the

University of Virginia, Lederman (1995) states that “[l]egacies get a break because

Virginia likes to keep its alumni happy—and donating.”




                                                                                       Page 8
       Brittingham and Pezzullo (1990) offer models of donor behavior that capture this

relationship between alumni happiness and alumni giving:

               The more promising models of individuals' behavior as donors depart
               from models of pure altruism in favor of exchange models, which attempt
               to explain donors' motives based on receipt of "goods"—perquisites,
               tokens, or honors—in exchange for the gift, and a repeated disequilibrium
               that follows, leaving the donor with a need to respond to recognition and
               acknowledgment with yet more gifts.

Exchange models of donative behavior explain that parents of legacies make donations to

universities in exchange for a preferential good, the acceptance of their children.

Repeated disequilibrium occurs as these children proceed through and graduate from

college, garnering the benefits of an elite education. Exchange models also may explain

the donative behavior of legacies themselves, who make gifts to universities in exchange

for having been favored in the admissions process.

         Legacy Policies and the Racial Composition of the Admissions Pool

       In the long history of higher education in the United States, integration at

selective colleges and universities is a very recent event. The children of the men and

women who broke the color barrier in the 1960s and 1970s have only recently come of

college age. Thus, for many years, admissions policies favoring children of alumni have

provided an advantage to students from non-minority, non-immigrant families.

Accordingly, the long-standing policy of offering preference in admission to children of

alumni has conflicted with the objective of increasing opportunities for minority students

or for the economically disadvantaged.

       A number of scholars have criticized legacy policies on these grounds. Megalli

(1995) claims that—in 1995—“96 percent of all living Ivy League alumni [were] white”



                                                                                      Page 9
(p. 72). He therefore laments the fact that legacy admissions policies at elite colleges and

universities benefit families that are largely white.5 Guinier deems legacy preferences

“proxies for privilege” on the basis that, by definition, they favor children of well-

educated families who, it is assumed, possess greater-than-average wealth (2001, p. B12).

         It is no surprise, then, that policies favoring children of alumni are often

compared to and contrasted with affirmative action policies (Bowen & Bok, 1998; Cross,

1994; Cross & Slater, 1994; Karabel & Karen, 1990; Larew, 1991; Lederman, 1995;

Megalli, 1995; “Naked hypocrisy,” 1997; Wilson, 1995; Woo, 1995). Although these

policies serve different purposes, they often amount to nominally similar kinds of

favoritism in the admissions process. Both admissions policies for legacies and

affirmative action produce acceptance rates for their respective constituencies that are

much higher than acceptance rates for other applicants. In the debate over admissions

practices, legacy policies and affirmative action are also juxtaposed because legacy

preferences have remained largely untouched while race-sensitive policies have been the

subject of repeated legislative and judicial action.

         Wilson (1995) maintains that “only a trivial number of white students are actually

denied admission to an elite college because of affirmative action; highly qualified white

students are far more likely to be squeezed out of a space by a white son or daughter of

an alumnus” (p. 93). Although he does not provide a research base to illustrate his




         5
         It is the case that the elite, historically black colleges and universities (Spelman, Morehouse,
Howard, Hampton, Dillard, Xavier, and Fisk) employ legacy policies (Marybeth Gasman, personal
communication, December 11, 2001).




                                                                                                    Page 10
claims, Wilson finds it remarkable that “there is no crusade against legacies, especially

not among the educated elite of affirmative action critics who are its beneficiaries.”

         Putting aside the policy comparison between affirmative action and the preference

for children of alumni, it is undisputed that the latter has disproportionately benefited

white applicants. “[T]he established white admissions advantage replicates itself”

through policies that favor children of alumni because the overwhelming majority of

alumni from elite colleges and universities are white (Cross, 1994, p. 50).6 The racial

distribution of alumni at these colleges will not remain so homogenous indefinitely,

however. Older cohorts of homogeneous alumni are repeatedly joined by more diverse,

younger cohorts of alumni. Minority alumni in these younger cohorts will have children

who will grow up and potentially apply to college as legacies. The central question

regarding this metamorphosis is one of timing: At what point will the percentage of

potential non-white applicants among children of alumni reach a share that is

proportional to the percentage of non-white attendees in today’s selective colleges and

universities?

         The remainder of this paper attempts to answer this question by focusing on the

University of Virginia as an example. The University’s legacy policies, its admissions

history, and its current student demographics provide a unique opportunity to forecast

changes in the racial distribution of its potential legacy applicants.

         6
           In addition to the issue of the racial distribution of those admitted to selective institutions,
sociologists have studied the extent to which elite universities serve to replicate class distinctions. A study
by Farnum (1990) examines the fraction of the protestant elite (represented by inclusion in the social
registries of urban areas in the Northeast) graduating from Harvard, Yale, and Princeton. He finds that this
share was over 50 percent through much of the early 20th century, before declining precipitously to 30
percent among those graduating in the 1960s. This dramatic change within elite institutions will of course
affect future generations of legacy applicants.




                                                                                                      Page 11
                     Legacy Policies at the University Of Virginia

       One of the nation’s premier public universities, the University of Virginia quietly

awards an admissions privilege to the children of its alumni. A hint of the importance of

alumni status can be found in the information provided by UVa’s Common Data Set

(University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies, 2000), a listing of facts and

figures compiled for use in national surveys. Of the factors affecting first-year admission

to the university, “Alumni/ae relation” merits a ranking of “Very important.” The only

other factors ranked similarly are high school record, Virginia residency, and minority

status. The Common Data Set does not account for the precise influence of these factors

on admissions decisions, however.

       Our conversations with UVa’s Dean of Undergraduate Admission, John A.

Blackburn, and other admissions officers shed more light on the history, mechanics, and

effects of the University’s legacy policies. According to Blackburn, the University

historically defined a legacy as the child of any student who had been enrolled at the

University of Virginia, regardless of degree status. This definition changed in 1979,

when the University’s Admissions Policy Committee formalized its definition of

“legacy” to exclude the step-children and grandchildren of alumni. (The University of

Virginia has since reversed this decision, in part. UVa now awards legacy status to

alumni step-children.) Furthermore, the Admissions Policy Committee restricted legacy

designation to the children of UVa degree-recipients; degree-recipients from all of the

University’s undergraduate and graduate programs are applicable under this policy.

These programs include the School of Architecture, the College of Arts and Sciences, the




                                                                                    Page 12
Curry School of Education, the Darden Graduate School of Business Administration, the

School of Engineering and Applied Science, the School of Law, the McIntire School of

Commerce, the School of Medicine, and the School of Nursing.

       UVa also recognizes as legacies the children of Mary Washington College

alumnae from the years before 1972. Although the University of Virginia first admitted a

woman, Caroline Preston Davis, in 1892, the University’s Board of Visitors voted to bar

women from attending the school in 1894 (Dabney, 1981; Hitchcock, 1999). Small

numbers of women entered the University with special permission until 1920, when

women were first admitted to UVa’s graduate and professional schools (Dabney, 1981).

The undergraduate College of Arts and Sciences did not admit first-year women during

this era, so the Commonwealth of Virginia established Mary Washington College in

Fredericksburg as a single-sex institution for its women. The University of Virginia

eventually opened its doors to undergraduate women in 1970. UVa’s policy of treating

as legacies the children of Mary Washington’s alumnae from before 1972 therefore

reconciles its past admissions practices that discriminated against applicants on the basis

of their gender.

       The primary admissions advantage for UVa’s children of alumni is that out-of-

state legacy applicants are considered as if they were in-state students. According to

Dean Blackburn, this policy results in the acceptance of approximately 50 percent of out-

of-state legacies—whereas approximately 27 percent of all out-of-state applicants are

accepted by the University. The advantage for in-state legacies is marginal. Again,




                                                                                    Page 13
according to Blackburn, approximately 52 percent of in-state legacies are admitted versus

49 percent of all Virginians.

       Table 1 illustrates the difference in admission rates for legacy applicants relative

to all applicants to the University of Virginia over the past decade. For all applicants to

the University of Virginia, about one third of applicants are admitted. Roughly 50

percent of those admitted elect to attend UVa. These percentages are quite different for

legacy applicants; the percentage of legacies admitted to UVa is nearly double that for

regular applicants. The yield is also appreciably higher. The higher yield among legacies

demonstrates that children of alumni are a “safe bet” in the admissions game. Since

legacies are more likely to attend UVa, the University’s admissions office can increase its

overall yield by admitting more children of alumni.

       According to Dean Blackburn, the favoritism awarded to UVa legacies is not

equivalent to lowering the University’s academic standards, however. With the help of

the University’s Office for Institutional Assessment and Studies, Blackburn has

compared the undergraduate grade-point averages of in-state students (excepting

legacies), out-of-state students (excepting legacies), and all legacies. Legacy GPAs

trailed just behind the GPAs of out-of-state students, and in-state students finished last in

the three-way comparison.

       Given the University of Virginia’s admissions policies for the children of its

alumni, the racial composition of these alumni should be noted. The University does not

have a long history of admitting racial minorities—especially African Americans.

Gregory Hayes Swanson was the first black student at the University of Virginia




                                                                                      Page 14
(Dabney, 1981; Hitchcock, 1999). Hayes began his studies in the Law School in 1950,

but he dropped out during the next year. Walter N. Ridley was the first African

American to receive a degree from the University. He earned his PhD in Education in

1953. Robert Bland, George Harris, and Theodore Thomas were the first African-

American undergraduates admitted to UVa, in 1955 (Slater, 1994, 1996). Bland

graduated first, in 1959. By 1967, the first year for which UVa has precise statistics on

enrollment for minority undergraduates, 19 of the University’s 5,096 undergraduates

were African Americans (Crystal, 2001).

         More recently, the racial distribution of all degree recipients at the University of

Virginia has been changing. As Table 2 indicates, the number of African-American

degree recipients has doubled since 1980. The number of Asian-American and Hispanic-

American degree recipients has increased much more dramatically.7 Although there have

been slight fluctuations in the number of white degree recipients, white graduates clearly

constitute the majority of students graduating from the University of Virginia.

         UVa recognizes the children of Mary Washington alumnae as legacies in order to

rectify its history of barring women from its undergraduate classrooms, but the

University implements no such policy to account for its long history of segregation. As

the statistics for all degree recipients for 1980 to 2001 indicate, UVa’s white alumni far



         7
          To place these percentages in context, it is illustrative to compare the racial composition of
undergraduate degree recipients from the University of Virginia to the racial composition of the similarly
aged population of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Table 3 lists the number of bachelors-degree recipients
at the University of Virginia over the last two decades. For 2000, 70 percent of bachelors-degree recipients
were white; African Americans and Asian Americans each represented 10 percent of these graduates.
According to the Virginia Employment Commission’s census data for 2000, 67 percent of 18-24 year-old
Virginians were white, 22 percent were black, and 4 percent were Asian.




                                                                                                   Page 15
outnumber alumni of other races. Therefore, the vast majority of legacy applicants to the

University of Virginia are white as well.

       Since the number of minority alumni has increased so markedly in the last two

decades, it is reasonable to assume that the number of minority legacies will increase in

the future—as the children of minority alumni complete high school. How long will it

take for this trend to emerge, ending the favoritism of white legacies that has inspired so

much criticism in the debate concerning legacy policies and affirmative action? For the

year 2001, African-Americans constituted 8 percent of all degree recipients from the

University of Virginia. Asian-American students constituted 7 percent of the total, and

Hispanic-American students constituted 2 percent. The sections of the paper that follow

will calculate the number of children that will be born to University of Virginia alumni,

by race. The number of potential legacy applicants will then be calculated, in order to

determine the number of years that will be required for the expected number of UVa

legacies to reflect the racial distribution found in the most recent class of graduates.

                                       Methodology

       The question of how the size and racial composition of the pool of potential

legacy applicants to a university will change over time is, at its essence, a basic

application of demographic methods. Demography—the statistical study of the size,

density, and vital statistics of human populations—has been applied to a number of broad

policy and commerce purposes, including the prediction of population changes in specific

geographic regions and the determination of actuarial liabilities associated with different

policies in the insurance industry. In higher education, demography has quite general




                                                                                      Page 16
applications in the prediction of enrollment demand or the consideration of the age

distribution of faculty. More specifically, it is the life events of marriage, death, and

childbearing that combine to determine the intergenerational “links” valued by colleges

and university legacy policies.

        In the empirical analysis that follows, we focus on data for the University of

Virginia, although the same analytics could be applied at any institution. To predict the

size and racial composition of cohorts of applicants who are the children of alumni, we

begin with the data that are known with certainty: the number of UVa graduates in each

academic year. For baccalaureate degree recipients at the University of Virginia (and at

other selective institutions), the modal age of degree receipt has remained relatively

steady at 22 years of age over a relatively long period of time. For recipients of

professional and graduate degrees, age at degree receipt is known with less certainty,

inherently requiring some inference and estimation.

        For each year, we should identify the number of alumni by age, race, and sex.

More formally, denote Lxtj the number of individuals age a in year t of racial group j. We

use standard age-specific mortality rates to capture mortality among the alumni

population [Latj= La t-1j(1-a-1dt)].

        These alumni are “at risk” of childbearing (or may have children already).

Knowing the number of alumni by age, race, and sex provides the basis for the

estimation of the expected number of alumni children in subsequent years. For each age




                                                                                      Page 17
and year, we apply population estimates of fertility.8 The application of age-specific

birth rates to an age-cohort at any point in time produces the size of the potential legacy

pool. Thus, if b(a) is the age-specific birthrate, births in any year t—what we will call

legacy births Bt —are defined as follows:

                                                   β
                                            Bt = ∫ b(a ) Lat da
                                                  α

where α is the youngest age of reproduction and β is the highest age of reproduction. In

practice, age-specific birth rates surely change over time, although as a matter of

simplification we set aside this problem in the analysis.

         Of course, there will be some mortality among legacies between birth and the age

of college application, thus the actual potential applicant pool is somewhat lower—

multiplied by 0q18, or the probability of surviving from age 0 to age 18.9 Again, we

assume these parameters are constant over time and racial group. In these calculations,

assumptions of race neutrality in mortality within the pool of college graduates seem

appropriate and can be shown to be largely innocuous. Thus, the size and racial

composition of the potential pool of legacy applicants in any year of admission is largely

determined 18 years prior by the fertility behavior among existing age cohorts of alumni.



         8
            The level and timing of fertility among college-educated women differs from the population at
large. Also, within a pool of college students the marriage patterns are likely to differ from the population
at large. Most significantly, and discussed later in this section, many selective institutions that employ a
preference for legacy admissions were, at one point, all-male. Thus, predicting the pool of legacy
applicants requires inferences about the marriage rates and subsequent fertility of wives. In later years,
after coeducation, rates of marriage among UVa alumni as well as the gender composition of the class may
well affect the size of potential cohorts of legacy applicants.
          9
            In this case, we apply a standard survival probability equal to .98782, which is derived from the
total population life table published by the National Center for Health Statistics (2002). This may well
overestimate mortality if college graduates have lower child mortality than non-graduates.




                                                                                                    Page 18
       An interesting dimension of this empirical problem concerns movement in racial

composition of the pool of applicants from one equilibrium to another. Over time, we

would, of course, expect the composition of the legacy applicant pool to mirror the

composition of the contemporary graduating class, but the long period of fecundity

necessarily implies that the transition from one racial distribution to another will require a

lag time of nearly one half of a century.

       One dimension over which the projection of fertility among cohorts of college

students is more difficult than traditional closed-country analyses is that graduates marry

both other graduates of the same university and those from outside a given university.

The extremes bound this problem, defined by graduates of Institution A marrying only

other graduates of Institution A and graduates never marrying other graduates of

Institution A. More troublesome analytically is the likely problem that the rate of

marriages among graduates changes over time and that this rate may also vary by race.

For our analysis of the University of Virginia, this problem is complicated by the

changing gender composition of UVa’s graduating classes—driven particularly by the

introduction of undergraduate coeducation in 1970. We discuss this problem further in

the following section.

                                  Empirical Predictions

       Understanding the aggregate trends in degree attainment is the starting point to

understanding likely changes in the pool of potential legacy applicants at the

undergraduate level. The last four decades have been characterized by substantial

changes in both the size and demographic composition of UVa’s graduating classes.




                                                                                      Page 19
Figure 1 shows the size of the University of Virginia’s graduating classes from 1900 to

2000. What stands out in this figure is the period of explosive growth in the overall

number of graduates between 1960 and 1980. Over this interval, total degrees conferred

at the University increased by a factor of four, while undergraduate degrees increased by

a factor of 4.3 (from 572 in 1960 to 2,492 in 1980). Growth has continued in the most

recent two decades, but at an appreciably slower pace.

        Beyond the changes in the size of the graduating class, the admission of first-year

women in 1970 and the racial integration of the undergraduate program are central

changes occurring in the last four decades. By 1980, nearly one-half of undergraduate

degree recipients were women (see Figure 2). For minorities, particularly African

Americans, explicit segregation was eliminated in the 1950s, but minority undergraduates

remained less than 3 percent of all undergraduates as late as 1973. Thereafter, the urging

of the courts under the Fordice ruling10 and the more general social initiative calling for

an affirmative response to the history of discrimination and minority underrepresentation

in Southern institutions led to a dramatic increase in the share of minority graduates at the

University of Virginia (see Figure 3). The share of black graduates reached a local peak

of about 8 percent in 1985, experienced a modest decline, and then established a

relatively steady proportion between 10 and 12 percent in the last decade.

        With these data as a background, it is surely no surprise that minority

representation among the pool of potential legacy applicants has been quite low. Very

        10
           In United States v. Fordice, 112 S. Ct. 2727 (1992), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that remnants
of segregation remained in the structure and admissions policies of Mississippi’s system of higher
education. As a result, states in the South have applied various corrective measures to end lingering
discriminatory effects in their colleges and universities.




                                                                                                 Page 20
few African Americans received degrees from the University of Virginia in the 1960s,

thus the number of minorities within the legacy pool has been quite small. Table 4 shows

available data on applicants by legacy status and race for 1991 and 2001. In the last

decade, the share of legacies among those completing applications has risen markedly (by

about 60 percent) from about 4 percent of completed applications to about 6.9 percent of

completed applicants. For African Americans, this increase has been even more marked,

with African-American children of alumni accounting for less than 1 percent of

completed applications in 1991 and nearly 3 percent of completed applicants in 2002.

African Americans were dramatically underrepresented in the pool of legacy applicants

even in the most recent year, accounting for about 3 percent of this group relative to

about 10 percent of the entering student body. At issue, then, is the description of the

time path over which a new steady state will be established in which the representation of

minorities in the legacy applicant pool will mirror their current representation in the

overall student body. To answer this question, we predict the size and composition of the

potential pool of legacy applicants using the demographic methods outlined in the prior

section.

       Several assumptions in the mechanical process of predicting the likely pool of

legacy applicants merit brief note. First, data from the University of Virginia’s Office of

Assessment and Studies provide precise undergraduate graduation figures for African

Americans from only 1976 to the very recent past, but it is known that very small

numbers of minority students graduated before 1976. Because the size of the graduating

cohort as far back as 1965 continues to affect the size of today’s potential applicant pool,




                                                                                     Page 21
we assume that the number of African American degree recipients declined at a constant

rate between 1976 and 1965, reaching 0 at this point.11 Similarly, gender data are limited

before 1965, so we make an assumption of no women before 1940 (with World War II

leading to marked increases in the nursing program) and a simple assumption that the

nursing school was 1/10 the size of the program for undergraduate men between 1940

and 1965.

        A more significant set of assumptions concerns the appropriate fertility rates and

the degree of marriage among university graduates. It is well known that the fertility

rates among college graduates differ appreciably from those of women at large, since

college graduates typically have fewer and somewhat later births. If there were no

marriages among graduates, we would wish to calculate fertility for both male and female

graduates. We begin with this proposition, although it is quite plain that the assumption

is unrealistic and leads to an overstatement of the growth in the potential legacy pool. In

effect, ignoring marriage among graduates of the same institution leads to double-

counting of alumni children. Figure 4 shows the total pool of potential legacy applicants,

using the methodology described in the previous section with a range of different

assumptions about the extent to which there is overlap among the children of male and

female alumni.

        The level of marriages between university graduates effectively dampens the

expected increase in the size of the legacy pool between 1990 and 2000. Still, the


        11
            The University of Virginia first awarded a degree to an African American in 1953 (Dabney,
1981; Hitchcock, 1999); however, there was not a consistent rate of minority admission (and, in turn, a
consistent rate of degrees produced) until 1965.




                                                                                                  Page 22
magnitude of the increase in the size of the pool is quite striking. Under the marriage

assumption that would yield the lowest rate of change (the 75-percent marriage rate), we

would still expect growth of about 80 percent over this decade, with a sharp rate of

increase persisting through 2005. Data from the University of Virginia Alumni

Association indicate that approximately 12 percent of UVa alumni are married to another

UVa alumnus or alumna (Helen Dwyer, personal communications, February 18 and 19,

2002). An accurate forecast of the number of UVa’s potential legacy applicants may

therefore fall between the 0- and 25-percent marriage rates represented in Figure 4.

         Figure 5 gets to the substance of the analytic question in this paper, showing the

expected increase in the share of African-American legacies in the coming years. While

the growth in the share of black students in the legacy pool started more than a decade

ago, there appears to be much growth yet to be realized. The share of African Americans

in the pool of potential legacy applicants is likely to double in the coming decade, before

reaching the plateau of about 9 percent in 2020.12 To this end, long-standing images of

legacy admissions as disproportionately benefiting white students still hold, but are

eroding quickly. This change in the composition of the pool of potential legacy

applicants occurs against the backdrop of population demographics that are very different

than the composition of entering cohorts, with a quarter-century lag. Since policies

favoring children of alumni necessarily reflect the demographic composition of a




         12
            The differential gender composition by race has a curious effect on the likely racial composition
of the legacy pool, as African-American women are appreciably more likely to graduate than African-
American men (and this has been true for a considerable period time). White women have only recently
surpassed white men in their representation among college graduates.




                                                                                                    Page 23
college’s past graduates, these policies are inevitably in some conflict with the overall

demographic composition of current students and applicants.

        The significant accomplishment of this analysis is to provide clear calculations of

the potential pool of legacy applicants by race at a selective institution that is likely to

mirror other institutions in its historical enrollment patterns. In this sense, the

demographic evidence presented here has broader applicability than simply providing a

case study of the University of Virginia. Beyond predicting potential outcomes,

however, policy makers in higher education focus on realized outcomes. To this end, the

examination of projections leads naturally to the consideration of the realization of

outcomes.

        Conversations with UVa’s Dean of Admission make clear that the admissions

advantage for legacy students accrues only to out-of-state residents and does not create a

“double” advantage associated with both legacy and minority status. Because children of

alumni may be systematically different from the broader applicant pool in ways that have

direct bearing on admission (independent of legacy preference), comparisons of averages

need to be conducted with some caution. Table 5 shows the admissions rates and yields

for African American and white legacy applicants. What is clear for both groups is that

the yield among legacy applicants is appreciably greater than among non-legacies, for

both races. Yield is a particularly important variable to consider in the calculus of

“crafting a class.”13 Relatively low yield rates for African-American students who are

not legacies (most of the minority applicants to selective institutions, historically)

        13
          Recent debate concerning yield rates in college admissions has addressed early decision policies
(Hoover, 2002) and the practice of rejecting applicants who are not likely to attend (Young, 2002).




                                                                                                 Page 24
complicate the objectives of admissions officers attempting to achieve diversity in their

student populations.

                        Conclusion and Implications for Policy

       Policies favoring legacies in the admission process may serve legitimate

institutional purposes. Among the institutional purposes for providing an admissions

advantage to children of alumni is that this preference enables colleges and universities to

encourage monetary support and volunteer activity from alumni parents, while also

promoting positive intergenerational links within the student community.

       This rationale was endorsed, in part, by the U.S. Department of Education’s

Office for Civil Rights (1990) in its conclusion of a two-year investigation of Harvard’s

admissions policies. Despite evidence that white legacies were admitted to Harvard at

the expense of other racial groups, OCR did not charge Harvard with a violation of Title

VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In his letter accompanying OCR’s Statement of

Findings, Thomas J. Hibino (1990), Acting Regional Director, explained that—although

Harvard’s legacy policies “disproportionately benefit[ed] white applicants” (p. 7)—the

school had “legitimate institutional goals” that were accomplished through its legacy

policies (p. 6). These goals included the following: “(1) to encourage alumni volunteer

services (such as recruiting prospective students to Harvard), (2) to encourage alumni

financial contributions, and (3) to maintain community relations.” OCR acknowledged




                                                                                    Page 25
“that there are no alternatives to these preferences that could effectively accomplish the

same legitimate goals.” 14

         Our demographic forecasts predict that the once extreme racial imbalance in the

composition of the pool of potential legacy applicants will change dramatically in coming

decades. Still, it will be some number of years before the representation of African-

American students in the legacy pool resembles the share of black students in the

contemporary student body or the population of college-age students more generally.

This lag reflects a tautological law of demographic change: the racial and ethnic

composition of the pool of potential legacy students necessarily resembles the

composition of past student generations; as such, shifts in the racial and ethnic

composition of student populations will be followed, decades later, by similar shifts in

the pool of potential legacy applicants.

         Although social critics have often juxtaposed affirmative action and legacy

preferences in college admissions, it need not be the case that such policies are in

absolute conflict, theoretically or empirically. The prerogative of an institution to “craft a

class,” seeking those students well positioned to further a college’s educational goals, is

implicit in both policies. To argue that either the consideration of race or the

consideration of legacy status in college and university admissions is protected by


         14
            Legacy policies have also attracted attention during recent judicial inquiries regarding
affirmative action. In December of 2001, the University of Michigan defended its affirmative action
policies in U.S. District Court (Steinberg, 2001). Judge Eric L. Clay questioned a plaintiff’s attorney “why
he opposed points for black applicants but did not object to giving points to the offspring of alumni” (p.
A27). The attorney answered, “I’m not aware of a constitutional provision that says you can’t discriminate
on the basis of an alumni connection.” Both the University of California Regents v. Bakke (1978) and the
Hopwood v. State of Texas (1996) decisions make note of this tension between affirmative action and
legacy policies.




                                                                                                   Page 26
academic freedom and associated case law is to allow the viability that the other policy is

protected by the same claims of institutional self-determination.

        Legacy policies nevertheless face a self-perpetuated challenge, which is in many

respects independent of race. The University of Virginia and its peers must soon reckon

with the expanding size of their respective legacy pools. An after-effect of the expansion

of graduating classes in the 1960s and 1970s, the increasing size of future legacy cohorts

may force admissions offices to reevaluate their favoritism for alumni children. This

reevaluation will coincide with other allocative choices that must be made in the face of

larger demographic growth. In order to maintain the size of incoming classes, the

University of Virginia will be forced to reject an increasing number (and share) of

legacies and other applicants. In order to continue admitting comparable numbers (and

shares) of legacies and other applicants, the University of Virginia must consider adding

spaces in its first-year classes.

        Any future threats to legacy admissions policies—and the certain demographic

shifts on the time horizon—may lead colleges and universities to examine how

preferences for legacies contribute to the vitality and prospects of entering classes more

generally: How do legacies contribute to the value of incoming classes, and how does

favoring legacies add or subtract from the economical allocation of limited spaces in each

incoming class? These are fundamental questions of institutional self-determination in

higher education.

        The broad policy question of how the inclusion of an admissions preference for

children of alumni affects the composition of the entering class and the well being of the




                                                                                      Page 27
institution remains, however. Although the changing racial composition of the pool of

potential legacy applicants is a significant demographic transition, the increase in the

overall size of the pool of potential legacy applicants is, perhaps, the most significant

challenge faced by admissions officers trying to balance the demand for preference in

admission against broader institutional objectives. The dynamics outlined here for the

University of Virginia are, by no means, an isolated institutional transformation. Very

similar changes are inevitably facing other selective institutions in the public and private

sectors of higher education.




                                                                                      Page 28
                                        References

Adams, H. (1907). The education of Henry Adams. New York: Vintage Books.

Bowen, W. G., & Bok, D. (1998). The shape of the river: Long-term consequences of
considering race in college and university admissions. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Breland, H. M., Maxey, J., McLure, G. T., Valiga, M. J., Boatwright, M. A., Ganley, V.
L., & Jenkins, L. M. (1995). Challenges in college admissions: A report of a survey of
undergraduate admissions policies, practices, and procedures. Sponsored by American
Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers, American College Testing,
The College Board, Educational Testing Service, and National Association of College
Admission Counselors.

Brittingham, B. E., & Pezzullo, T. R. (1990). The campus green: Fund raising in higher
education. Washington, DC: ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education.

Bromley, S. G. (2000, April 27). Fifteen minutes: The Harvard mafia: Siblings kill to
join the family in Cambridge. In Harvard Crimson [On-line]. Available:
http://www.thecrimson.com/article.aspx?ref=100721

Cross, T. (1994, Spring). Suppose there was no affirmative action at the most
prestigious colleges and graduate schools. Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 0(3),
44-51.

Cross, T., & Slater, R. B. (1994-1995, Winter). Alumni children admissions preferences
at risk: The strange irony of how the academic achievements of asians may rescue
affirmative action for blacks. Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 0(6), 87-90.

Crystal, C. (2001, December 14). African-American Affairs office has charted
successful, 25-year course. Inside UVA, 31(40), pp. 4-5.

Dabney, V. (1981). Mr. Jefferson’s university: A history. Charlottesville: University of
Virginia Press.

Duffy, E. A., & Goldberg, I. (1998). Crafting a class: College admissions and financial
aid, 1955-1994. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Farnum, R. (1990). Patterns of upper class education. In P. W. Kingston & L. S. Lewis
(Eds.), The high status track: Studies of elite schools and stratification. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.




                                                                                     Page 29
Fetter, J. H. (1995). Questions and admissions: reflections on 100,000 admissions
decisions at Stanford. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

Gose, B. (1997, October 10). Who gets in and why: A former admissions officer tells
all. In Chronicle of Higher Education, A45.

Guinier, L. (2001, December 14). Colleges should take “confirmative action” in
admissions. Chronicle Review, B10-B12.

Han, Sinae. (1996, October 17). Legacies take Yale traditions in stride. In Yale Daily
News Online [On-line]. Available:
http://www.yale.edu/ydn/paper/10.17.96/10.17.96storyno.DB.html

Hibino, T. J. (1990, October 4). Letter to Harvard President Derek Bok RE: Compliance
Review No. 01-88-6009.

Hitchcock, S. T. (1999). The University of Virginia: A pictorial history. Charlottesville:
University of Virginia Press.

Hoover, E. (2002, January 11). New attacks on early decision. Chronicle of Higher
Education, A46.

Hopwood v. State of Texas, 78 F.3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996), cert. denied, 116 S.Ct. 2582
(1996).

Hoxby, C. M. (2002). The effect of geographic integration and increasing competition in
the market for college education [On-line]. Available:
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/hoxby/papers.html

Karabel, J., & Karen, D. (1990, December 8). Go to Harvard, give your kid a break.
New York Times, p. A25.

Lamb, J. D. (1993). The real affirmative action babies: Legacy preferences at Harvard
and Yale. Columbia Journal of Law and Social Problems, 26, 491-521.

Larew, J. (1991, June). Why are droves of unqualified, unprepared kids getting into our
top colleges? Because their dads are alumni. Washington Monthly 23(6), pp. 10-14.

Lederman, D. (1995, April 28). The special preferences are not limited to blacks. In
Chronicle of Higher Education [On-line]. Available: http://chronicle.com/che-
data/articles.dir/articles-41.dir/issue-33.dir/33a01601.htm

Lemann, N. (1999). The big test: The secret history of the American meritocracy. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.



                                                                                  Page 30
Megalli, M. (1995, Spring). So your Dad went to Harvard: Now what about the lower
board scores of white legacies? Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 0(7), 71-73.

Naked hypocrisy: The nationwide system of affirmative action for whites. (1997-1998,
Winter). Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 0(18), 40-43.

National Center for Health Statistics. (2002, March 21). National vital statistics report,
50(6), p. 7-8 [On-line]. Available:
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr50/50_06_01.pdf

[Princeton University] Undergraduate Admission Study Group. (1998, October 5).
Report of the Undergraduate Admission Study Group [On-line]. Available:
http://www.princeton.edu/pr/reports/admission_study/adm-report.html

Rosenstock v. The Board of Governors of the University of North Carolina, 423 F. Supp.
1321 (M.D. N.C. 1976).

Shulman, J. L. & Bowen, W. G. (2000). The game of life: College sports and
educational values. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Slater, R. B. (1994). The blacks who first entered the world of white higher education.
Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 4, 47-56.

Slater, R. B. (1996). The first black graduates of the nation’s 50 flagship state
universities. Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 13, 72-85.

Steinberg, J. (2001, December 7). U.S. appeals court hears debate on race-based
admissions. New York Times, p. A27.

Synnott, M. G. (1979). The half-opened door: Discrimination and admissions at
Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, 1900-1970. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.

United States v. Fordice, 112 S. Ct. 2727 (1992).

University of California Regents v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265 (1978).

University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies. (2000). University of
Virginia Common Data Set. Available: http://www.virginia.edu/~iaas/cds/cds.htm

U.S. Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights. (1990). Statement of findings.
Compliance Review: 01-88-6009.




                                                                                    Page 31
Virginia Employment Commission. (2000). Census 2000 Demographic Profiles: State
of Virginia SF1 Profile [On-line]. Available:
http://www.velma.vec.state.va.us/vecweb/sf1pdffiles/vasf1.pdf

Wilson, J. K. (1995-1996, Winter). The myth of reverse discrimination in higher
education. Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, 0(10), 88-93.

Woo, E. (1995, April 30). Belief in meritocracy an equal-opportunity myth; Preferences:
It appeals to notion of fairness, but distorts realities of social mobility, historians say.
Los Angeles Times, p. A1.

Young, Jeffrey R. (2002, October 11). Group will study practice of rejecting good
applicants who might not enroll. Chronicle of Higher Education, A40.




                                                                                    Page 32
Table 1: Admissions Statistics for All Applicants and Children of Alumni, University of
Virginia, 1991-2002
                               All Applicants
Year          Applied Admitted % Admitted Enrolled Yield (%)
       1991    17,087    5,534          32%   2,983      54%
       1992    15,078    5,482          36%   2,930      53%
       1993    15,848    5,588          35%   2,928      52%
       1994    14,921    5,429          36%   2,908      54%
       1995    15,577    5,755          37%   2,909      51%
       1996    17,338    5,650          33%   2,834      50%
       1997    16,728    5,712          34%   2,882      50%
       1998    16,557    5,713          35%   2,764      48%
       1999    17,090    5,383          31%   2,678      50%
       2000    14,472    5,282          36%   2,804      53%
       2001    15,052    4,860          32%   2,540      52%

                              Children of Alumni
Year          Applied Admitted % Admitted Enrolled Yield (%)
       1991       689      378            55%    262     69%
       1992       690      402            58%    273     68%
       1993       737      436            59%    294     67%
       1994       767      435            57%    261     60%
       1995       854      499            58%    329     66%
       1996       925      517            56%    332     64%
       1997       971      499            51%    336     67%
       1998       972      493            51%    330     67%
       1999       957      474            50%    320     68%
       2000       949      503            53%    346     69%
       2001     1,005      569            57%    378     66%



Source: University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies




                                                                                 Page 33
Table 2: All Degrees Conferred by Race, University of Virginia, 1980-2001

                                                                 Foreign
                    White    African  Asian Hispanic Native       (Non-      Not
  Year    Total    American American American American American resident) Classified
   1980   4,337       3,990       198      39        2        3        74         31
   1981   4,460       4,137       185      38        6        0        85          9
   1982   4,454       4,089       187      48        7        1        84         38
   1983   4,633       4,218       219      51       13        3        96         33
   1984   4,526       4,050       242      61       15        5        98         55
   1985   4,489       3,949       309      74       24        3        93         37
   1986   4,734       4,173       281      66       23        2       116         73
   1987   4,830       4,160       313     101       24        2       145         85
   1988   4,828       4,159       271     134       20        2       148         94
   1989   4,843       4,155       270     138       31        3       160         86
   1990   4,930       4,119       310     183       37        5       165        111
   1991   5,073       4,184       342     208       38        2       182        117
   1992   5,281       4,307       402     240       42        1       180        109
   1993   5,261       4,102       438     309       54        3       219        136
   1994   5,040       3,918       394     317       76       12       162        161
   1995   5,158       3,887       459     362       67        6       204        173
   1996   5,203       3,832       401     403       66        7       211        283
   1997   5,267       3,798       449     376       77        6       222        339
   1998   5,172       3,735       411     400       76       12       185        353
   1999   5,426       3,795       421     443      108        6       278        375
   2000   5,309       3,641       453     414      111       18       295        377
   2001    5,468      3,844       417     403      107       10       334        353
Source: University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies




                                                                                   Page 34
Table 3: Baccalaureate Degrees Conferred by Race, University of Virginia, 1980-2001

                                                                 Foreign
                    White    African  Asian Hispanic Native       (Non-      Not
  Year    Total    American American American American American resident) Classified
   1980    2,492      2,324       112      28        1        1        15         11
   1981    2,599      2,431       121      28        2        0        15          2
   1982    2,583      2,394       116      37        2        1        13         20
   1983    2,734      2,505       149      33       11        1        19         16
   1984    2,708      2,438       181      48        9        4        20          8
   1985    2,658      2,326       231      62       16        2          9        12
   1986    2,772      2,458       207      49       15        0        24         19
   1987    2,809      2,429       227      79       10        2        21         41
   1988    2,839      2,495       170     102       12        1        28         31
   1989    2,799      2,416       172     117       19        1        31         43
   1990    2,812      2,374       201     149       19        3        29         37
   1991    2,815      2,315       221     166       21        1        43         48
   1992    2,989      2,404       297     187       29        1        36         35
   1993    2,949      2,222       318     241       35        2        54         77
   1994    2,808      2,113       291     230       51        8        34         81
   1995    2,857      2,078       334     269       38        2        54         82
   1996    3,055      2,268       287     295       51        4        62         88
   1997    2,921      2,135       284     280       44        3        58        117
   1998    3,044      2,250       276     304       54       10        50        100
   1999    3,210      2,325       299     344       70        3        70         99
   2000    3,132      2,223       327     311       76        8        81        106
  2001    3,221       2,341       291     293       63        5       114       114
Source: University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies




                                                                                   Page 35
Table 4: Recent Applicant Behavior by Legacy Status, University of Virginia, 1991 and
2002
                             1991 Entering Class                   2002 Entering Class
                      Legacy                       %        Legacy                        %
                    No         Yes      Total   Legacy    No         Yes      Total  Legacy
African American     1,190         10    1,200    0.83%      952         29      981 2.96%
Asian American       1,232          7    1,239 0.56%       1,568         19    1,587 1.20%
Hispanic American      243          1      244    0.41%      490         19      509 3.73%
Native American         17          1        18   5.56%       57          5        62 8.06%
Non-resident           259          1      260    0.38%      687          1      688 0.15%
Unclassified           397         10      407    2.46%      759         56      815 6.87%
White American      10,382        583   10,965 5.32%       8,820        855    9,675 8.84%
Total               13,720        613   14,333 4.28%      13,333        984   14,317 6.87%
Source: University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies




                                                                                         Page 36
Table 5: Acceptance Rate and Yield by Race and Legacy Status, University of Virginia,
2002
                  Offered                   Acceptance
                Admission                      Rate                          Yield
              Legacy                      Legacy                        Legacy
            No     Yes    Total         No     Yes     Total          No     Yes        Total
African
American      598       20     618      62.8%   69.0%    63.0%        47.2%   60.0%     47.6%
White       2,994      497   3,491      33.9%   58.1%    36.1%        56.9%   70.8%     58.9%

Total       5,014      574   5,588      37.6%   58.3%    39.0%        52.4%   69.5%     54.2%
Source: University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies




                                                                                     Page 37
Figure 1. Degrees conferred at the University of Virginia, 1900-2000.

                     6,000

                               All Degrees
                               BA Degrees
                     5,000




                     4,000
 Number of Degrees




                     3,000




                     2,000




                     1,000




                        0
                        1900          1920   1940             1960      1980   2000
                                               Year of Degree Receipt




Source: Data from University of Virginia Recipients of Degrees, Volume II, 1900-1919
(Accession # RG-14/6/1.782), Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library,
University of Virginia; University of Virginia Catalogue and University of Virginia
Record (1920-1956); University of Virginia Office of Assessment and Studies.




                                                                                      Page 38
Figure 2. Share of bachelors degrees awarded to women at the University of Virginia.

                               0.60


                                          Fraction Women
                               0.50
 Share of BA Degrees Awarded




                               0.40




                               0.30




                               0.20




                               0.10




                               0.00
                                  1965   1970       1975   1980         1985           1990   1995   2000     2005
                                                                  Year of Graduation



Source: Data from University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies.




                                                                                                            Page 39
Figure 3: Share of bachelors degrees awarded to African Americans at the University of

Virginia.

                               0.14


                                         Fraction African American
                               0.12



                               0.10
 Share of BA degrees Awarded




                               0.08



                               0.06



                               0.04



                               0.02



                               0.00
                                  1960   1965       1970        1975   1980        1985     1990   1995   2000     2005
                                                                       Year of Graduation


Source: Data from University of Virginia Institutional Assessment and Studies.




                                                                                                                 Page 40
Figure 4. Predicted size of the University of Virginia’s potential legacy pool under

various assumptions about alumni unions.

                                                              4,500


                                                              4,000      No alumni unions
                                                                         25% alumni unions
 Size of Potential Legacy Applicant Pool (BA Legacies Only)




                                                                         50% alumni unions
                                                              3,500      75% alumni unions


                                                              3,000


                                                              2,500


                                                              2,000


                                                              1,500


                                                              1,000


                                                               500


                                                                 0
                                                                 1980   1985     1990        1995      2000       2005         2010   2015   2020
                                                                                        Year of Potential Legacy Application




                                                                                                                                                    Page 41
                                                                            Figure 5. Predicted share of African Americans in the University of Virginia’s pool of

                                                                            potential legacy applicants.



                                                                      0.1
Predicted Share African American Among Potential Legacy Applicants




                                                                     0.09


                                                                     0.08


                                                                     0.07


                                                                     0.06


                                                                     0.05


                                                                     0.04


                                                                     0.03

                                                                                                                                                       2002 Observed share
                                                                     0.02


                                                                                           1991
                                                                     0.01                  Observed share


                                                                       0
                                                                       1975         1980      1985          1990   1995          2000           2005          2010           2015   2020    2025
                                                                                                                          Year of Application




                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 42
