NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LETTING STATES DO THE DIRTY WORK:
STATE RESPONSIBILITY FOR
FEDERAL ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
Hilary Sigman
Working Paper 9451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9451
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

I am grateful to Rosanne Altshuler for comments and to George Joseph for research assistance. This research
is supported in part by grant number SES–9876498 from the National Science Foundation.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Hilary Sigman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.

Letting States do the Dirty Work: State Responsibility for Federal Environmental Regulation
Hilary Sigman
NBER Working Paper No. 9451
January 2003
JEL No. Q28, H77
ABSTRACT

Under most U.S. environmental regulations, the federal government shares responsibility
with the states by authorizing them to implement and enforce federal policies. Authorization
provides states with considerable discretion over the effects of regulation and is perhaps the most
significant decentralization in U.S. environmental policy. However, few studies address its role. To
fill this gap, this paper explores the empirical determinants of authorization for water pollution and
hazardous waste regulation. Although no single hypothesis strongly explains authorization, I find
some evidence that states authorize to increase the stringency of regulation, which suggests that
environmental decentralization would be beneficial.

Hilary Sigman
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
sigman@economics.rutgers.edu

Although major environmental regulation in the United States derives from
federal statutes, states conduct most of the day-to-day business of implementing,
monitoring, and enforcing regulation. The federal government explicitly delegates these
functions to states by granting them a status known as “authorization” or “primacy.”
This delegation occurs under water pollution regulations (the Clean Water Act, CWA),
hazardous waste regulations (the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, RCRA) and
regulations for drinking water, toxic substances, and pesticides.1 When the state has not
received authorization, the federal government implements and enforces policies through
one of ten regional EPA offices.
This paper explores the empirical determinants and effects of state authorization.
Assessments of environmental policy often mention the state role, yet go on to ignore it
and treat federal programs as uniform. Although authorization sounds like a bureaucratic
abstraction, it is a meaningful policy distinction and deserves study for a few reasons.
First, authorization may be important in its own right. If states differ from the
federal government and each other in their implementation and enforcement, state
authorization could have a major effect on the outcomes of environmental policy. For
example, some observers blame authorization for poor enforcement of environmental
law, although the states disagree (Flatt, 1997; Farber, 1997; ECOS, 2001).
Second, authorization offers a rare window into the decentralized alternative to
current environmental policy-making. If we determine why states want to receive
authorization and what they do with this responsibility, we may infer the implications of
expanding their influence. For example, evidence that states authorize to free ride on
their neighbors would suggest a bleaker picture for decentralization than evidence that
they authorize to provide stronger environmental controls than the federal government.
Thus, understanding environmental authorization may provide insight into the desirability
of decentralization of public policies in practice.

1

For the status of state programs under all federal environmental statutes, see the Environmental Council of
the State website (www.sso.org/ecos). For studies of authorization for policies not studied here, see
Grossman (1995), who discusses the institutional arrangements for regulation of pesticides, and U.S. GAO
(1995), which finds that authorized states lack the resources to implement drinking water requirements.

1

This paper examines authorization under CWA and RCRA, the two most
important environmental regulations under which states receive authorization.2 The next
section describes the meaning of authorization under CWA and RCRA and the
authorization process. The second section presents data on current authorization status.
The third section advances hypotheses about the determinants of authorization, drawing
from previous literature on federalism. It examines the patterns in the extent and timing
of authorization for evidence to support these hypotheses. The fourth section discusses
previous empirical work on the effects of authorization. The final section summarizes the
implications for environmental federalism and directions for future research.

The role of authorization
Pollution control regulation involves three parts: the setting of standards,
implementation of standards, and monitoring and enforcement. Authorized states have
primary control over the latter two functions. Despite apparent strictures from federal
standards, I argue in this section that control over these functions gives states
considerable latitude and is therefore an important aspect of environmental regulation in
practice.
First, implementation often involves translating federal standards into permits for
allowable pollution issued to major sources. For water pollution, permit writing confers
substantial discretion. Major industrial and municipal water polluters receive permits that
set numerical discharge limits for the facility (Freeman, 2000). The regulator establishes
these numerical limits based on a federal standard for the pollution abatement
technology, with tighter limits required if the abatement technology would not assure
sufficient water quality. Applying the technology standard and, especially, the water
quality standard to specific plants allows the state discretion. Permits are subject to
negotiation between polluter and regulator and to public comment periods (which would
be unnecessary were permit levels mechanically derived from federal rules).
2

The third major pollution control statute, the Clean Air Act, also delegates responsibility to the states, but
in a different manner. It requires states to file and obtain federal approval for State Implementation Plans
(SIPs), giving them responsibility by default, unlike the authorization under CWA and RCRA for which
federal responsibility is the default. Whether the difference between these two approaches has a
meaningful effect on the results of the policy is an open question.

2

There is significant variation in permit discharge limits. For example, the GAO
studied permit limits for metals (U.S. GAO, 1996). It examined municipal facilities
discharging between 1.4 and 2.5 million gallons per day into freshwater. Table 1 reports
the GAO’s summary data. As the table reports, the allowable pollution varies by more
than one order of magnitude for most metals, despite the similar size of the facilities. The
table also reports the states that are responsible for the highest and lowest standards; West
Virginia appears to have high variability for unexplained reasons.
Hazardous waste facilities also require permits, but regulators have much less
discretion in writing hazardous waste permits than water pollution permits. RCRA
permits mostly rely directly on federal technology standards, rather than translating this
standard into an emission limit. The permits are based on technology or performance
rules that do not depend on the resulting pollution concentrations in the environment,
unlike CWA in-stream water quality standards.
In addition to discretion in permit writing, authorization also gives states control
over monitoring and enforcement. Authorized states may set the monitoring frequency
and other dimensions of the intensity of monitoring, such as whether visits are announced
in advance and whether plants once out of compliance receive more attention.
Authorized states also have the first opportunity to bring enforcement actions when
noncompliance is detected, including notices of violation and fines. The federal
government also may bring enforcement actions after some delay, if the state does not,
but uses this privilege infrequently (Helland, 1998). Thus, authorization provides states
significant influence over the rules that facilities face and the enforcement threat behind
those rules.
This discretion does have costs. Authorized states must find the resources to
manage the programs in place of the federal government, which may shift resources away
from state priorities. For example, in a GAO survey of state RCRA program managers,
75 percent reported that they would like more resources to monitor small quantity
generators, who may be responsible for most illegal dumping, but are thwarted by a
federal requirement that large quantity generators receive annual inspection (U.S. GAO,
1995). Under RCRA, authorized states may receive program funding from the federal
government, but must provide a minimum of 25 percent of their administrative costs.

3

To receive authorization under CWA and RCRA, the state must submit
paperwork requesting authorization, demonstrating both the ability and legal authority to
conduct its own program. The program must be consistent with and at least as stringent
and broad in scope as the federal rules.

If the EPA Administrator approves the

application, the state program supplants the federal permit program. The federal
government may suspend state authorization if the state program fails to meet the federal
requirements; however, it has never done so in practice. It is politically difficult and
legally complex for EPA to rescind these privileges (Flatt, 1997). In addition, federal
officials dread the expense of resuming responsibility (U.S. GAO, 1995).

Authorization status
Authorization is not a simple binary matter. Under the Clean Water Act, states
receive authority for five different parts of the program. Figure 1 shows a count of the
number of the five programs for which the state has received authorization. All but six
states currently have authorization for the basic permit program (National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System, or NPDES) for industrial and municipal sources. The
remaining components of the program for which states may receive authorization are
general permitting, the NPDES program for federal facilities, pretreatment program, and
the biosolids (sewage sludge) program. Table 2 reports the frequency of various
combinations of authorized programs. The dates of authorization differ across the
various programs, although there appears to be some economy of scale in authorization
because states often authorize for several programs at once.
Authorization status under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
is more complicated. States must separately apply for authorization of regulations as
revised regulations are issued. To summarize this information, the EPA reports an
authorization percentage, representing the share of the rules (202 in March 2002) that the
state has adopted. This percentage does not weight the rules by importance, but is the

4

best summary available.3 Figure 2 reports each state’s quartile in the distribution of
RCRA authorization percentages.
The correlation between RCRA authorization percentage and the number of CWA
programs authorized is surprisingly low, .16, although one state, Alaska, is not authorized
for either program. The low correlation suggests that the determinants of authorization
are idiosyncratic to particular programs and may make it difficult to draw general
conclusions about the role of authorization.

Determinants of state authorization
States may wish to be authorized for many reasons.4 I categorize states’ possible
motivations into three groups, acknowledging significant overlap among the groups. The
rationales are: (i) desiring a different stringency, either weaker or stronger than federal
regulations; (ii) desiring a different targeting of controls because of different objectives or
information; and/or (iii) desiring authorization for reasons related to the regulatory
bureaucracy rather than the effects on pollution control. This section discusses the
relationship of each rationale to the federalism literature and considers the empirical
evidence to support the rationale.
A. Differences in desired stringency
Authorization is useful to states that desire both more and less stringency. A state
that desires to increase stringency will find authorization attractive to streamline
regulation. By authorizing, the state avoids the administrative costs of implementing
more stringent requirements outside the auspices of the federal program.
States may also use authorization to relax the effects of the regulation. They may use
subtle means, such as writing relatively lax permits or providing warning before
inspections. But no subtly may be necessary: authorization is a one-way street, almost
3

Alaska and Iowa are not yet authorized at all, although the EPA does document that Alaska has rules that
match some of the federal regulations. New Mexico’s authorization exceeds 100%, presumably because the
numerator includes some “optional” rules (rules that reduced the stringency or breadth of RCRA) that are
excluded from the denominator.
4
Unless the EPA is capricious in its standards for authorization, states should know the necessary threshold
and, thus, their desire to authorize should be the principal determining factor. See below for some evidence
on the intertemporal consistency of EPA’s decisions.

5

impossible to rescind. For example, GAO (1996) reports that Arkansas refuses to impose
federal discharge limits and monitoring requirements for municipal water pollution
sources because they are “too strict” and would subject the state to litigation. The
regional EPA office says its “only recourse would be to take back responsibility for the
program --- an unrealistic option (U.S. GAO, 1996, pp. 6).” Thus, once authorized, states
have quite a free hand to conduct (or ignore) the program.
The previous literature suggests several reasons for a state to desire different
stringency than the federal government chooses for it. These reasons have different
empirical implications and thus should be distinguished.
One set of explanations results from the tendency for federal regulations, including
CWA and RCRA, to rely on nationally uniform standards. In principle, uniformity is not
a necessary feature of centralization.5 In practice, however, political factors seem to limit
the differentiation in federal standards, resulting in costly uniformity (Dinan et al., 1999).
With such uniformity in standards, simple heterogeneity among states will motivate
states to authorize (and justify allowing them to do so).6 If environmental policies are
chosen for the median state, states on both ends of the desired stringency distribution will
wish greater discretion (a “U-shaped” hypothesis). Alternatively, some authors argue
that environmental policies are chosen by states desiring stringent regulations. Legislators
from these states use federal minimum standards to reduce economic competition from
states that would otherwise impose lower compliance costs (Crandall, 1983; Pashigian,
1985). Under this hypothesis, states wishing low stringency are least satisfied with
federal control. As a result, we would not expect a U-shape in authorization, but rather
concentration of authorization among states with the lowest desired stringency. To test
these hypotheses, I examine the association between authorization and the greenness of a
state’s preferences (as a measure of desired stringency).
However, the previous literature also suggests that states may desire a different
stringency, even in the absence of uniform federal standard. First, if states compete
against one another in attracting economic activity, the destructive competition familiar
5

Besley and Coate (1999) present a model that does not require uniformity in centralized policy (or local
informational advantages), but still find advantages of decentralization because decisions by the federal
legislature do not conform to the state’s own preferences.

6

from the fiscal competition literature may arise (see for example, Oates (1999) and
Wilson (1999) for fiscal competition and Oates (2001) and Levinson (2003) for
environmental competition). Second, the political processes in the states may differ
from the federal government in ways that cause them to choose different stringencies. A
few authors suggest that industry groups experience a relative advantage in state
decision-making compared to federal decision-making.7 Unlike the hypotheses above,
these hypotheses would not associate authorization with preferences that predict the
desired stringency. Instead, we need to look at the outcome of authorization to determine
if competition or these political imbalances appear to enter states’ actions.
Authorization and green preferences.
To explore the hypothesis that desired stringency affects authorization, I use two
measures of the greenness of preferences: the League of Conservation Voters (LCV)
score for the state’s House delegation in 2000 and membership in three major national
environmental organizations in the late 1980s (Hall and Kerr, 1990).8 Because it reflects
the outcome of political decision-making in the state, the LCV may measure the
greenness of the state’s median voter and thus may be the best measure for the current
purpose. The correlation between LCV score and conservation group membership is .6,
but notably (unauthorized) Alaska has high environmental membership and very low
LCV scores.
Table 3 examines the evidence for a U-shape in authorization using the LCV scores
and several measures of authorization. The first measure of CWA authorization is
whether the state had received authorization for the base CWA permit program for
industrial and municipal sources (NPDES) by 2002. This program is the core of the
federal water pollution control and may be the most meaningful component of
authorization. In Table 3, states without authorization are concentrated in the lowest

6

Strumpf and Oberholzer-Gee (2002) find empirical evidence to support the positive claim that
heterogeneity encourages decentralization in the institutions for control of liquor sales.
7
This view does not seem to have been formalized, but for informal discussions see Esty (1996) and a
critical examination by Revesz (2001).
8
The LCV score is the proportion of the time that the member of Congress voted with the LCV’s position
on legislation with environmental consequences.

7

quartile of LCV scores. There is no evidence of a U-shaped pattern, so the principal
question is whether there is a statistically significant positive association.
Table 4 contains a test to answer this question. The table presents differences in
means for LCV scores (and other state characteristics studied below) for states authorized
for the base NPDES program, compared with the 6 states that do not have authorization.
A t-test does not reject the hypothesis that the mean scores are the same at conventional
significance levels. There is also no statistically significant difference in conservation
group membership between the groups.
A second measure of authorization is the year of authorization for the base CWA
program. States with greater benefits from authorization would likely have applied for
and received it earlier. The first states received authorization in 1973 and most states had
authorized by 1976. States with low LCV scores authorized much later on average than
the remaining states, but the correlation between LCV score and date of authorization is
not statistically significant (Table 5). There is, however, a negative and statistically
significant correlation between conservation group membership and time of
authorization. This negative correlation would suggest authorization to increase
stringency.
The third measure of CWA authorization is the total number of programs authorized
for the state, ranging from zero to five. No association is evident in Table 3, nor is there
a correlation with LCV scores in Table 5. However, conservation group membership is
negatively correlated with the extent of authorization. Although this result seems
inconsistent with earlier authorization by greener states above, it may be part of the same
phenomenon. States often apply for authorization of several programs at once. Because
more programs have become available for authorization over time, later authorizers tend
to be more completely authorized. This correlation makes the number of programs
authorized an imperfect measure of desire for authorization.
Two measures of authorization are shown for RCRA in Tables 3 and 5: the date of
authorization for permitting under the base RCRA permitting program and the total
percentage of RCRA for which the state is authorized. RCRA too shows no sign of the
hypothesized U-shaped relationship between authorization and LCV scores. The only
statistically significant association is with conservation group membership: there is a

8

negative and statistically significant correlation between membership and year of
authorization. As with CWA authorization, greener states get RCRA authorization
earlier.
Authorization and federal stringency.
An alternative test of the hypothesis that desired stringency determines authorization
uses variation in federal stringency. If changes in the federal administration change the
expected federal stringency, they might also change the likelihood that states seek to
authorize.
Table 6 tests for this effect by examining authorizations by administration. The table
reports the total number of states authorizing and the average annual hazard rate (the
share of the remaining states to authorize during each year) in each administration. After
an initial flurry of authorization, the rates seem to stabilize, except that no states
authorized under the first President Bush.9
The most interesting column in Table 6 is the final column, which reports the
greenness of authorizing states relative to the pool of states remaining eligible. States
that authorized during the Reagan years have considerably higher average LCV scores
than states that did not to authorize at that time, whereas states that authorized during the
Clinton years have considerably lower average scores. This pattern would be consistent
with states authorizing to increase the stringency of their programs when federal efforts
were likely to be relatively lax and authorizing to relax their programs when federal
efforts were expected to be more stringent. The means are based on small numbers of
states in both the numerator and denominator so do not offer proof, but are suggestive.
In addition, the final column in Table 6 also suggests that federal regulators do not
impose their preferences on who gets to authorize. The patterns are the reverse of what
one might expect if stringent administrations only authorized stringent states.

9

The small number of states authorizing annually and relatively brief period may mean that the lull during
the first Bush Administration is simply the result of chance.

9

B. Differences in desired targeting
Another motivation for a state to seek authorization is to target the program
differently than the federal government would. Although there is not a clean distinction
between targeting and overall stringency of the program, some motivations for
authorization seem distinct from an overall desire for greater or less environmental
quality than the federal government would provide. The previous literature suggests two
factors that may drive states to desire a different targeting — differences in objectives
because of interstate spillovers and the informational advantages of the states.10
Interstate spillovers.
The objective function of state governments may encompass only the welfare of
their residents, whereas the federal government’s objective is the welfare of the entire
country. This difference in objective functions plays an important role in the fiscal and
environmental federalism literatures. Inefficient competition, mentioned above in the
context of stringency, may be one consequence of this difference in objective functions.
Another possible consequence is the underprovision of public goods for which there are
substantial spillovers across jurisdictions. 11 The magnitude of these spillovers is a
central question in the literature on the problem of assigning functions to different levels
of government (Oates, 1972; McKinnon and Nechyba, 1997). Unlike education and
public safety, where the spillovers may be vague, environmental spillovers are tangible:
physical transportation of pollution across state lines.
The effect of these interstate pollution spillovers on regulation and environmental
quality is an active area of recent research. Several papers have found evidence that states
free ride on their neighbors with transboundary pollution. Gray and Shadbegian (2002)
examine several measures of pollution and regulatory activity from pulp and paper plants.
They find evidence of higher air pollution (sulfur dioxide) and water pollution (total

10

Both of these differences presume that the objective function optimized by state regulators is similar to
the federal objective function. However, different political pressures at state and federal levels might result
in different desired targeting of regulations. Given the large number of possible hypotheses about political
differences, it is difficult to tackle this possibility empirically.
11
Although the presence of a spillover is often a justification for assigning controls to a higher level of
government, Dinan and Tawil (2003) investigate the success of creating regional institutions to maintain
some of the benefits of decentralization.

10

suspended solids) when the plant is near a state border or more benefits accrue to out-ofstate residents. For regulatory activity, they expect the reverse effects, indicating less
attention to plants with large spillovers, but do not find them. Helland and Whitford
(2002) examine releases of toxic chemicals reported by industrial facilities. They find
that plants in border counties have 18 percent higher releases into air and 10 percent
higher into water, consistent with a model in which states maximize the within-state
welfare. Sigman (2002) examines in-stream water quality and finds evidence of free
riding in pollutants regulated under the CWA. There is also evidence that authorization
may allow free riding: pollution is elevated in rivers upstream of state borders in
authorized states, but not in unauthorized states. Thus, these studies suggest that state use
their discretion to free ride.
A desire to free ride could motivate authorization. In particular, states may wish
to impose laxer controls near state borders. Thus, we would expect states with extensive
spillovers to desire to authorize preferentially.
To test this hypothesis, we need a measure of the extent of spillovers faced by
different states. Tables 4 and 5 present two measures of the extent of the spillover. The
first measure is the area of the state. Larger states likely internalize more of the
environmental benefits of pollution control than smaller states because it is farther to the
border for the typical location in a large state. Thus, large states’ objectives deviate less
from federal objectives, giving large state less incentive to authorize.
States with CWA authorization are statistically significantly smaller than
unauthorized states (Table 4) and the number of CWA program is negatively related to
state area. These results are both consistent with the hypothesis that state authorize to free
ride. However, removing unauthorized Alaska from the calculation reverses the results
and makes the difference not statistically significant.
There is no evidence of an effect of state area on RCRA authorization levels. The
principal benefits of RCRA are from reduced groundwater pollution and may be quite
localized to the immediate area of management facilities. Thus, environmental spillovers
may be small even for small states under this program, with the result that they do not
motivate authorization under RCRA.

11

A second measure of the extent of spillovers under CWA is the location of the
state relative to the coast. Spillovers in the benefits of water pollution control are likely to
be greatest for interior states, where rivers almost always flow through other states. Thus,
interior states would authorize earlier under the CWA if free riding is a motivation. Table
4 presents the frequency with which authorized and unauthorized states are on the coast.
There is no difference between the two groups and thus a failure to support spillovers as a
cause of decentralization.
Informational advantages.
A central justification for decentralization of any public policy is that state or
local decision-makers have better information than federal authorities and thus will create
more efficient policy. In environmental policy, better information could lead state
regulators to wish for higher or lower stringency than the federal government and thus
may simply be a reason for the differences in overall desired stringency discussed above.
However, better information may also lead to differences in how regulations are
implemented and enforced for a given average stringency.
Direct measurements of differences in information are impossible to construct
because the researcher can never hope for better data than state and federal authorities.
However, heterogeneity in the costs of complying with a regulation may increase the
value of a state’s informational advantage. Because RCRA and CWA rely on standards
rather than economic incentive instruments, regulators must allocate pollution control
responsibilities across polluting facilities. If states have an informational advantage, they
will be able to allocate reductions more cost effectively than federal regulators. The
savings they can achieve is likely to be greater when polluters have very disparate control
costs. Thus, the incentives to take control of the assignment of pollution control
responsibilities may be strongest in diverse states.
Although there is also no direct information on cost heterogeneity within states,
industrial diversity in a state might raise the heterogeneity in compliance costs. To
measure diversity, I created Herfindahl indices of manufacturing income in the state,
using the shares of state income from each two-digit SIC industry. A higher value of this
index indicates a less diverse state. As might be expected, the index has negative

12

correlations (not shown) with state area and population, although neither correlation is
statistically significant at 5 percent.
Table 4 reports the difference in this measure for states that are currently
authorized under the base CWA program and those that are not. The means suggest less
diversity in authorized states, which is inconsistent with the hypothesis, but the difference
is not statistically significant. The correlations in Table 5 also do not provide much
support the hypothesis. The Herfindahl is not statistically significantly correlated with
any of the authorization measures, except RCRA authorization date: states with less
diversity (higher Herfindahls) do have later authorization years, consistent with the
hypothesis.
Failure to find a strong effect here may reflect the weakness of using industrial
diversity as a proxy for variability in pollution control costs. For example, hazardous
waste regulation under RCRA focuses on activities undertaken by waste management
facilities rather than activities at the industrial facilities that generate hazardous waste
(Sigman, 2000). Many waste management facilities are separate from production
facilities and may import much of their waste from out of state. Thus, the relevant RCRA
heterogeneity may be the diversity of management facilities and the wastes they manage.

C. Regulatory considerations
Two final determinants of authorization may result from the goals and constraints
facing the state regulatory agency.
Bureaucratic priorities.
The desire for authorization may arise from goals that do not depend on altering
the program. It could simply be a matter of the state environmental bureaucracy’s desire
to expand its functions.12 States with better-organized environmental agencies may have
greater means and desire to expand functions by authorizing.

12

In most states, the relevant bureaucracy is called the Department of Environmental Quality or the
Department of Environmental Protection. A few states combine these functions with a public health or
natural resource department.

13

Although it is possible to obtain data on employees and funding of the state
departments responsible for environmental regulation, larger bureaucracies would
naturally result from authorization. As a result, we have no direct measures of
bureaucratic impetus. However, states with greener preferences are likely to have betterorganized bureaucracies. Thus, the ability of these bureaucracies to expand may partly
explain the association (discussed above) between green preferences and early
authorization.
Economies of scale in regulation.
Economies of scale in regulation may be an additional bureaucratic determinant
of authorization. If implementation and enforcement involve substantial fixed costs (in
staffing offices, for example), states that expect to undertake more extensive programs
may find authorization more attractive. Scale economies themselves do not justify
authorization because the federal government enjoys the greatest economies, but they
might explain which otherwise-motivated states authorize.
To test scale economies, we would like a measure of the size of the program in
the states. The workload in permitting, monitoring, and enforcement depends on the
number of regulated entities. For the number of regulated entities, I use the number of
NPDES permits under CWA and the number of hazardous waste management facilities
under RCRA. Table 4 reports that authorized CWA states have about twice as many
water polluters on average as unauthorized states, but the difference is not statistically
significant. Table 5 also contains some evidence of scale economies: there is a positive
correlation between the number of regulated entities under each program and the extent
of authorization, which is statistically significant at 10 percent. However, there is no
correlation with year of authorization under either program.

Authorization outcomes
To understand the empirical consequences of decentralization of environmental
policies, we need to know not only what drives states to authorize, but what they do with
this authority when they have it. What are the results of authorization? Although no

14

previous study concentrates on the role of authorization, a few studies that explore other
questions have relevant results because they include authorization status as a control
variable. All the studies focus on water pollution.
DeShazo (2002) examines the permit levels written for pulp and paper plants under
CWA and finds little evidence of an effect of authorization on this measure of stringency
in implementation. Permits written by states contain higher allowable pollution, but the
result is only statistically significant in one of eight models he estimates.
Whereas DeShazo studies permit writing, Helland (1998) studies inspections. He
finds generally positive but statistically insignificant effects of state authorization on the
frequency of inspections and on the intensity of inspections when they occur.
Sigman (2002) estimates an equation that predicts water quality in rivers. Water
quality summarizes the combined effects of permits and inspections, but may also be
sensitive to state policies not under CWA (such as land use policies). CWA authorization
in the state is associated with overall lower levels of pollution: authorization raises the
number of monitoring stations with swimmable water (the best water quality) by more
than 60 percent. The direction of causality is unclear. Authorized states may be more
stringent than the federal government or the federal government may preferentially grant
authorization requests when the state achieves good water quality.
Thus, the literature is mixed about the implications of authorization. Although some
observers have asserted that authorization reduces environmental quality, empirical
studies find either no association with authorization or possibly an improvement.
However, a final judgment on this question remains for further study. In particular, it
will be necessary to disentangle the direction of causality between authorization status
and the operation of state environmental programs.

Conclusion
Authorization is perhaps the most important decentralization of environmental
regulations in the United States. Federal statutes cover most major forms of pollution, so
the remaining room for state decision-making is largely as implementers and enforcers of
federal standards. This paper has explored the determinants of authorization --- as an

15

indicator of what states intend to do with discretion over environmental policy --- and the
limited empirical evidence on the effects of authorization.
The results do not suggest any simple pattern for authorization. None of the
hypotheses advanced provide such a compelling explanation that they have strong and
consistent influences on all of the measures of authorization status under CWA or RCRA.
However, there is evidence about some effects of authorization that states
anticipate. States may authorize to increase the stringency of their programs: states with
more conservation group members authorized earlier under both programs. Green states
also appear to authorize during less green administrations and vice versa. These results
suggest that decentralization allows states to break away from federally uniform
standards. In addition, they suggest that this delegation is desirable because it allows
welfare-based heterogeneity in stringency. More research is needed to complete the story
by exploring whether increased stringency is an outcome of authorization. However,
identifying the effects of authorization will be a difficult task because of the endogeneity
of authorization status.
I do not find much evidence that states authorize to capitalize on informational
advantages that they have relative to the federal government. Authorization is neither
more extensive nor earlier authorization in states with greater industrial diversity, which I
take as an indicator of the state’s informational advantage. However, this result should
be tested with measures of diversity more closely linked to the regulations, such as
diversity in the hazardous waste managed by the state.
Finally, there is little evidence here that states seek authorization to free ride.
Authorization is not concentrated in geographically small states or inland states. This
conclusion is at odds with recent research that points to free riding in transboundary
pollution. Additional research is desirable to identify the mechanisms through which
states free ride and its implications for decentralization of policies, including
decentralization through authorization.

16

References
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. “Centralized vs. Decentralized Provision of Local
Public Good: A Political Economy Analysis.” NBER Working Paper No. 7084.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1999.
Crandall, Robert W. Manufacturing on the Move. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution, 1993.
DeShazo, J.R. “A Positive Theory of Standard-Setting Behavior with an Application to
the Clean Water Act.” Mimeo, 2002.
Dinan, Terry M., Maureen L. Cropper, and Paul R. Portney. “Environmental
Federalism: Welfare Losses from Uniform National Drinking Water Standards.”
In Environmental and Public Economics: Essays in Honor of Wallace E. Oates,
edited by Arvind Panagariya et al., 13–31. Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar,
1999.
Dinan, Terry and Natalie Tawil. “Resolving Environmental Externalities with Regional
Decisionmaking: Controlling Ground-Level Ozone.” National Tax Journal 2003
forthcoming.
Esty, Daniel C. “Revitalizing Environmental Federalism.” Michigan Law Review 95 No.
3 (December 1996): 570-653.
Farber, Daniel. “Taking Slippage Seriously: Noncompliance and Creative Compliance
in Environmental Law.” Harvard Environmental Law Review 23 No. 2 (1999):
297–325.
Flatt, Victor B. “A Dirty River Runs Through It (The Failure of Enforcement in the
Clean Water Act).”Boston College Environmental Affairs Law Review 25 (1997):
1–45.
Freeman, A. Myrick. “Water Pollution Policy.” In Public Policies for Environmental
Protection, Second Edition, edited by Paul R. Portney and Robert N. Stavins,
169–213. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2000.
Gray, Wayne and Ronald J. Shadbegian. “‘Optimal’ Pollution Abatement — Whose
Benefits Matter, and How Much?” NBER Working Paper No. 9125. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002.
Margaret Rosso Grossman. “Environmental Federalism in Agriculture: The Case of
Pesticide Regulation in the United States.” In Environmental Policy with Political
Integration: The European Union and the United States, edited by John B.
Braden, Henk Folmer and Thomas Ulen, 274–304. Cheltenham,UK: Edward
Elgar, 1996.

17

Hall, Bob and Mary Lee Kerr. The 1991-92 Green Index. Washington, DC: Island
Press, 1991.
Helland, Eric. “The Revealed Preferences of State EPAs: Stringency, Enforcement, and
Substitution.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 35 No.3
(May 1998): 242–261.
Helland, Eric and Andrew B. Whitford. “Pollution Incidence and Political Jurisdiction:
Evidence from the TRI.” Mimeo, 2002.
Levinson, Arik. “Environmental Federalism: A Status Report and Some New Evidence.”
National Tax Journal 2003 (forthcoming).
McKinnon, Ronald and Thomas Nechyba. “Competition in Federal Systems: The Role
of Political and Financial Constraints.” In The New Federalism: Can the States be
Trusted? edited by John A. Ferejohn and Barry R. Weingast, 3–61. Stanford, CA:
Hoover Institution Press, 1997.
Oates, Wallace E. “An Essay on Fiscal Federalism.” Journal of Economic Literature 37
No. 3 (September 1999): 1120–1149.
Oates, Wallace E. “A Reconsideration of Environmental Federalism.” RFF Discussion
Paper 01–54, Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2001.
Pashigian, B. Peter. “Environmental Regulation: Whose Self-Interests Are Being
Protected?” Economic Inquiry 23 (July 1995): 551-584.
Revesz, Richard. “Federalism and Environmental Regulation: A Public Choice
Analysis.” Harvard Law Review 115 No. 2 (December 2001): 553-642.
Sigman, Hilary. “Federalism and Transboundary Spillovers: Water Quality in U.S.
Rivers.” Mimeo, 2002.
Sigman, Hilary. “Hazardous Waste and Toxic Substance Policies.” In Public Policies for
Environmental Protection, Second Edition, edited by Paul R. Portney and Robert
N. Stavins, 215–259. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2000.
Strumpf, Koleman S. and Felix Oberholzer–Gee. “Endogenous Policy
Decentralization: Testing the Central Tenet of Economic Federalism.” Journal of
Political Economy 110 No. 1 (February 2002): 1–36.
Wilson, John Douglas. “Theories of Tax Competition.” National Tax Journal. 52 No. 2
(June 1999): 269–304.

18

U.S. General Accounting Office. EPA and the States: Environmental Challenges
Require a Better Working Relationship. Washington, DC: U.S. General
Accounting Office, 1995.
U.S. General Accounting Office. Water Pollution: Differences among the States in
Issuing Permits Limiting the Discharge of Pollutants. Washington, DC: U.S.
General Accounting Office, 1996.

19

Table 1. Variability in NPDES discharge limits for municipal wastewater facilities
Pollutant
Cadmium
Copper
Lead
Mercury
Zinc

Minimum Maximum
limit
limit
(lbs/day)
(lbs/day)
0.321
1.334
0.184
6.963
0.025
7.800
0.00016
0.126
0.834
60.04

Ratio of
max to
min
4
38
312
750
71

State with
minimum limit
W. Virginia
Massachusetts
W. Virginia
N. Carolina
W. Virginia

State with
maximum
limit
Arizona
W. Virginia
Ohio
W. Virginia
W. Virginia

Source: U.S. GAO, 1996.
Note: For facilities with discharge range between 1.4 and 2.5 million gallons/day.
Table 2. Authorization status for different programs under CWA
Number
of states

Programs authorized
None
NPDES base, General permits
NPDES base, General permits, Federal facility NPDES
NPDES base, General permits, Pretreatment
NPDES base, General permits, Federal facility NPDES, Pretreatment
NPDES base, General permits, Federal facility NPDES, Pretreatment, Biosolids

6
2
9
3
25
5

Table 3. Relationship between CWA and RCRA authorization status and League of
Conservation Voters (LCV) scores

Authorization status measure

League of Conservation Voter Score for
House Delegation, 2000
Lowest
Second
Third
Highest
quartile
quartile
quartile
quartile

Clean Water Act
Base programs authorized

75%

91%

92%

92%

Mean year of authorization

1984

1978

1977

1978

Mean number of programs authorized

3.08

3.58

3.08

3.46

Mean year base program authorized

1986

1984

1986

1987

Mean percentage authorization

77%

70%

71%

54%

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

20

Table 4. Means of selected state characteristics by CWA authorization status in 2002
Authorized
44.75

Not
authorized
32.5

p-value of
difference
.29

Conservation group membership per thousand

8.2

10.8

.10

State area (million square miles)

61

152

.01

Coastal state

.46

.5

.84

Manufacturing income Herfindahl index

13.1

10.8

.45

Number of CWA permitted facilities

141

73

.16

League of Conservation Voters score for House delegation

Table 5. Correlations between authorization status and state characteristics
CWA
State characteristic
LCV score for House delegation
Conservation group membership
State area
Manufacturing Herfindahl
Number of water polluters
Number of hazardous waste
management facilities

Base program
authorization
year
-.232
-.317**
.167
-.034
.245

RCRA

Number of
programs
authorized
.047
-.370**
-.273*
.100
.238*

Base program
authorization
year
-.137
-.285**
-.209
.248*

Percent
authorization
.185
.203
-.087
-.068

-.041

.234*

Notes: ** and * indicate statistically significant at 5% and 10% respectively.
Authorization year only for authorized states.
Table 6. CWA authorization by Administration

27

.184

LCV scores
relative to
remaining
states
1.14

Carter

5

.061

.96

Reagan

6

.050

1.45

Bush

0

.000

–

Clinton

5

.065

.48

Administration
Ford

Number of
states
authorizing

Annual
hazard rate

21

Not authorized
Number of programs
2
3
4
5

Alaska: Not authorized
Hawaii: 4 programs authorized

Figure 1: Number of CWA programs authorized in 2002

22

Authorization status
Not authorized
Bottom quartile (< 50% authorized)
Second quartile
Third quartile
Top quartile (> 90% authorized)

Alaska: Not authorized
Hawaii: Second quartile (58% authorized)

Figure 2: RCRA percentage authorization in 2002, by quartile

23

