                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING AS A
                                 HEDGE AGAINST RENT RISK

                                              Todd Sinai
                                          Nicholas S. Souleles

                                          Working Paper 9462
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9462


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




We are grateful to Ed Glaeser, Joe Gyourko, Matt Kahn, Chris Mayer, Robert Shiller, Jonathan Skinner, and
participants in seminars at the AEA/AREUEA 2001 annual meetings, NBER, Syracuse University, University
of Wisconsin, University of British Columbia, UC Berkeley, and Wharton for their helpful comments and
suggestions. James Knight-Dominick provided excellent research assistance. Sinai acknowledges financial
support from the Ballard Scholars Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton. Souleles
acknowledges financial support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Todd Sinai and Nicholas Souleles. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.
Owner-Occupied Housing as a Hedge Against Rent Risk
Todd Sinai and Nicholas Souleles
NBER Working Paper No. 9462
January 2003
JEL No. R21, E21, G11, G12, J14

                                            ABSTRACT

       Many people assume that the most significant risk in the housing market is that
homeowners are exposed to fluctuations in house values. However, homeownership also
provides a hedge against fluctuations in future rent payments. This paper finds that, even though
house price risk endogenously increases with rent risk, the latter empirically dominates for most
households – so housing market risk actually increases homeownership rates and house prices.
Further, the net effect of rent risk on the demand for homeownership increases with a
household’s expected length of stay in its home, as the cumulative rent volatility rises and the
discounted house price risk falls. Using CPS data, the difference in the probability of
homeownership between households with long and short expected lengths of stay is 2.9 to 5.4
percentage points greater in high rent variance places than low rent variance places. The
sensitivity to rent risk is greatest for households that devote a larger share of their budgets to
housing, and thus face a bigger gamble. Similarly, the elderly who live in high rent variance
places are more likely to own their own homes, and their probability of homeownership falls
faster with age (as their horizon shortens). This aversion to rent risk might help explain why
older households do not consume much of their housing wealth. Finally, we find that house
prices capitalize not only expected future rents, but also the associated rent risk premia. At the
MSA level, a one standard deviation increase in rent variance increases the house price-to-rent
ratio by 2 to 4 percent.

Todd Sinai                                                     Nicholas S. Souleles
Wharton School                                                 Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                                     University of Pennsylvania
308 Lauder-Fischer Hall                                        2300 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
256 South 37th Street                                          Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330                                    and NBER
and NBER                                                       souleles@wharton.upenn.edu
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu
        According to the 2000 Decennial Census, 68 percent of U.S. households own the house

they live in. Those households commit a substantial portion of their net worth to their house, 27

percent on average [Poterba and Samwick (1997)]. For households with heads aged 65 and over,

housing wealth comprises 45 percent of their non-Social Security wealth. Conventional wisdom

holds that this substantial, undiversified exposure to real estate assets makes home owning quite

risky, since fluctuations in house prices can have a sizeable effect on households’ net worth.

        However, the alternative to home owning – namely, renting – is also risky. In particular, a

renter is subject to periodic rent adjustments whereas a homeowner can lock in the cost of future

housing services. In essence, bundled into the house purchase is a hedge against rent fluctuations.

Since housing costs are the largest component of most households’ budgets, representing on

average about a third of annual income, and market rents can be quite volatile with an average

standard deviation of 2.9 percentage points per year, the ability to lock in the cost of housing

services may be valuable. Nonetheless, long-term rent contracts are rare in the U.S. Genesove

(1999) reports that 97.7 percent of all residential leases are for terms of one year or less. In

addition, one cannot purchase a “rent swap” to exchange variable rents for fixed rents.1 Thus the

only way in practice to hedge against uncertain annual housing costs is to own a house instead of

renting it.

        This rent hedging benefit of owner-occupied housing must of course be compared to its

asset price risk, which itself endogenously increases with rent risk. If the rent risk on balance

dominates the asset price risk, a household should be willing to pay a premium above the value of

the service flow from a residence in order to own it rather than rent it. Depending on the elasticity


1
 We can only speculate as to why more rent-hedging contracts do not exist. One possibility is that the contracting is
quite difficult. Presumably a swap would have to terminate if one party moved. But if rents fell and the renter owed a
sufficient amount of money on his half of the swap, he would simply move and exit the contract. In addition, it may be
expensive to put such a swap in place for a long term.


                                                          1
of supply of owned housing units, this hedging demand for home owning may show up in a higher

homeownership rate, higher house prices, or both.

         After modeling the joint effect of both rent risk and house price risk on the tenure decision

and house prices, we find that rent risk empirically dominates for most households, in the sense that

an increase in rent volatility on net increases the demand for homeownership. Hence housing

market risk can actually increase homeownership rates and house prices. By contrast, the previous

literature on housing tenure choice has largely ignored the risks associated with renting. For

example, most studies compute a deterministic user cost of housing.2 On the other hand, some

recent contributions to the portfolio choice literature have modeled the demand for owning risky

real estate assets, but they generally neglect the tenure decision and instead focus on various costs

of the asset price risk from home owning, for example the resulting distortions to owners’ financial

portfolio allocations [Brueckner (1997), Goetzmann (1993), Flavin and Yamashita (1998), and

Fratantoni (1997)] or to their saving and consumption behavior [Engelhardt (1996), Skinner

(1989)]. 3 Hence this paper can be seen as extending the existing literatures to account for a central

but understudied element of household risk management.4


2
  The traditional user cost literature, e.g. Rosen (1979), Poterba (1984), and Hendershott and Slemrod (1983), estimates
housing demand as a function of just expected returns on housing.
3
  Skinner (1989) and Summers (1983) consider the asset price risk of the house, but not the value of housing as a hedge
against rent fluctuations. Davidoff (2001) measures asset price risk by how much house prices covary with labor
income but is primarily concerned with its effect on the amount of housing purchased in a portfolio context. He
assumes exogenous house prices and does not consider the tradeoff with rent risk. Only Rosen et al (1984) and
Henderson and Ioannides (1983) consider rent risk. In a time series study, Rosen et al find that one predictor of the
aggregate homeownership rate is the difference between the unforecastable volatility of the user cost of
homeownership and rents. They assume that rental housing and owner-occupied housing are independent goods, so
they do not allow for an endogenous relation between house prices and rent. In Henderson and Ioannides, the rent risk
is to the landlord, not the tenant. In their model, the tenant may not properly care for the property. This incentive
compatibility problem raises the average rent for renters but does not involve rent volatility.
4
  Other papers investigate alternative sources of household risk. Cocco (2000) and Haurin (1991) investigate the
effects of income risk on housing portfolio choice. Cocco also includes interest rate risk, in a parameterized structural
model of housing investment, but he rules out the possibility of renting. Campbell and Cocco (2001) simulate the
covariance of income, interest rates, and house prices as a way of explaining whether people finance their house with
fixed or floating rate debt. However, their financing decision does not involve the tradeoff between rent expenditures
and asset price risk. Other work emphasizes the negative effects of depressed house prices and housing equity on
household mobility [Chan (2001), Genesove and Mayer (1997), Stein (1995)].


                                                           2
        We begin with a stylized model of tenure choice in the presence of both rent risk and house

price risk when house prices endogenously capitalize the discounted value of future rents. Holding

the house price fixed, the demand for home owning increases with rent risk. However, more rent

risk also leads to greater house price risk. We find that the impact of rent risk on a household

increases with its expected length of stay in its residence, and that for a household that expects to

stay in its residence beyond a few years the risk of renting can dominate the asset price risk of

owning. This result occurs because rent fluctuations affect renters every year whereas the asset

price risk for owners is realized only at the end of their stay in their house, when they sell. If the

realization of the house price is sufficiently discounted, either because the homeowner expects to

remain in the house for a long enough time or her discount rate is sufficiently high, the rent risks

dominate the discounted house price risk, increasing demand for home owning relative to renting.

In that case, households with longer expected lengths of stay that live in markets with larger rent

variances should have higher probabilities of homeownership, and houses in those markets should

exhibit higher prices relative to rents.

        We test these implications using both Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level and

household level data from the Current Population Survey matched to MSA level rent data. Overall,

we find that the rent hedging benefit of homeownership substantially increases the demand for

owner-occupied housing, for the population as a whole and especially for the elderly, above and

beyond other factors influencing homeownership. To isolate the effect of rent risk from the many

other reasons why people might own their houses, we control for both MSA and individual

heterogeneity, and examine how the probability of homeownership differs for households with

varying expected lengths of stay in markets with different rent variances.5 For example, in the


5
 For example, homeownership can vary with income, demographics and tax benefits [Rosen (1979)], inflation
[Summers (1981)], and the agency costs of renting [Henderson and Ioannides (1983)].


                                                       3
household level data, we separately control for the rent variance in households’ MSAs and for their

expected length of stay in their residences (which also controls for transactions costs in buying and

selling houses, among other factors), and then focus on the interaction of the rent variance with the

expected length of stay. We find that the difference in the likelihood of homeownership for a

household that is above the median in expected length of stay and a below-the-median household

is up to 5.4 percentage points greater in high rent variance MSAs than in MSAs with lower rent

variance. We also find evidence that the sensitivity to rent risk is pronounced for households that

face a large housing gamble, in that rents in their MSA comprise a large portion of their annual

income. Among such households, those with long expected lengths of stay are the most responsive

to rent variance, having a 6.1 percentage point higher probability of homeownership relative to the

other households if they live in a MSA with high rent risk.

        The rent hedging benefit of owning is particularly pronounced for the elderly. All else

equal, a household with a head who is 60 years old is 10.1 percentage points more likely to own its

home if it is in the top quartile of rent variance. Moreover, the probability of homeownership

declines most steeply with age in high rent variance markets. As the end of life approaches, the rent

hedge becomes less valuable as the number of periods for which a home owning household expects

to be insured against rent risk falls. Thus the rent hedging benefit of homeownership may provide a

partial explanation for the failure of the elderly to transit out of homeownership as early as

traditional life-cycle models predict [Venti and Wise (2000); Megbolugbe, et al (1997)].6

        In addition to homeownership rates, the extra demand for home owning due to rent risk can

be capitalized into house prices. We measure the additional value to owning rather than renting by

comparing the house price relative to the flow value of housing services, i.e. rent. We find that

6
 These findings underscore the need for viable reverse mortgage markets to enable households to avoid rent risk by
continuing to own their houses while annuitizing their housing wealth. To date, these markets have not been
particularly successful [Caplin (2001)].


                                                         4
house prices incorporate not only expected future rents, but also a premium for avoiding rent risk.

This result is consistent with asset-pricing models of other, financial assets. At the MSA level, a

one standard deviation increase in rent variance raises the average price-to-rent ratio in a market

from 15.7 to as much as 16.3. Holding rents constant, this corresponds to a 2 to 4 percent increase

in house prices.

       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In section I, we present a simplified

model of tenure choice in the presence of both rent risk and house price risk. Section II describes

our data sources and variable construction. The empirical methodology and results are reported in

section III. Section IV briefly concludes.



I.     A simple model of the hedging benefit of owner-occupied housing

       This section presents a stylized model of tenure choice in which the annual cost of securing

housing services is uncertain. The model is simplified in order to highlight the key tradeoffs

between the risks of renting versus those of home owning that we will test in our empirical work.

In particular, rent fluctuations are generated by exogenous shocks to the housing market. Renters’

leases have a one-year term, so the price renters must pay for a given quantity of housing services

can vary from year to year. On the other hand, homeowners fix the annual cost of obtaining

housing services by purchasing their houses outright. However, at the end of their stay in the

house, homeowners realize a capital gain or loss, whereas renters face no asset price risk.

       House prices endogenously capitalize the discounted value of future rents, so they fluctuate

with the housing market shocks as well. The volatility of house prices depends on the persistence

of the rent shocks, with more persistent shocks leading to larger house price volatility. The relative

importance of rent risk versus house price risk depends on this persistence as well as the




                                                  5
households’ expected length of stay (horizon) in their residence. A household that expects to stay

longer would be exposed to more rent shocks as a renter and the asset risk from home owning

would occur later and thus would be more greatly discounted. Hence the demand for

homeownership will rise, ceteris paribus, with rent risk, the household’s expected horizon, and the

interaction of horizon with the rent risk.

         To isolate the effect of rent risk we abstract from other features of housing markets that do

not directly bear on the dynamic relationship between house prices and rent risk. The previous

literature on tenure choice has focused on deterministic models of the user cost, for example

identifying the effects of taxes. The stochastic factors at issue here apply above and beyond the

previously studied features of the tenure decision.

         Consider a risk-averse household with an N-year horizon for housing services, with the

years labeled t=0, 1, …, N-1. The household has already decided on the optimal quantity of

housing space it wants to consume each year, for simplicity assumed to be constant. The

household’s goal is to maximize the expected utility of its after-housing wealth, or equivalently to

minimize the risk-adjusted cost of securing its desired housing services. For convenience we

assume that rental units and owner-occupied houses provide the same flow of housing services.7

         To begin with, suppose the household is choosing between renting for all N years, or

buying a house in year 0 and then selling it after N years.8 The current real rent r0 and house price

P0 are observable, but the future rents r1 to rN-1 and terminal house sale price PN are stochastic.


7
  Equivalently, the household can be thought of as choosing between owning and renting the same house. The
comparative statics below can be generalized to allow the services from the owner-occupied house to exceed those
from renting (perhaps due to agency problems). In practice rent risk might also reduce the desired size of rental space
(the intensive margin). While this effect is consistent with the hedging motives under investigation, it would make it
more difficult to find an effect on the rent versus own (extensive) margin analyzed empirically. Hence our results will
provide a lower bound for the full importance of the rent hedging motive.
8
  Below we show that in our context, if the household buys a house, it will generally want to buy as early as possible.
Hence other options, e.g., renting for one year and then buying, will not be relevant. For convenience below, the sale is
assumed to take place at the beginning of year N.


                                                           6
Accordingly the household’s goal is to minimize the risk-adjusted discounted value of its housing

outlays.9 For simplicity we abstract from other factors that affect homeownership and rental costs,

such as the tax treatment of homeownership. Such factors may affect the relative cost of owning

and renting, but they will not qualitatively change the comparative statics at issue here regarding

the effects of increases in the riskiness of rent.10

         The discounted cost of renting is Cr = r0 + δ r1 + … + δN-1 rN-1. The discount factor δ reflects

the opportunity cost of funds, as in the traditional definition of user cost. The risk associated with

renting can be measured by the risk premium π(Cr) that would leave the household indifferent

between Cr, which is stochastic, and its expected value. This risk premium depends on the

stochastic process for rent. Suppose rents follow a general AR(1) process with drift µ: rt = µ + ρrt−1

+ ηt, where persistence ρ∈[0,1] and η is distributed IID(0,σ2r).11 The resulting risk premium can be

approximated by


         π(Cr) ≈ ½ α σ2r [(δ+ρδ2+…+ρN-2δN-1)2 + (δ2+ ρδ3+…+ρN-3δN-1)2 + …+ (δN-1)2],                            (1)


where α measures risk aversion.12 To interpret this risk premium, note that the square brackets

include N-1 terms in parentheses that correspond to the N-1 rent innovations η1 to ηN-1, with the

later innovations discounted more heavily. For instance, if the rent shocks are IID, with ρ=0, then

9
  We have intentionally abstracted from capital market imperfections (e.g., liquidity constraints) leading households to
want to smooth their year-to-year housing expenditures. While we believe this may be an important extension,
modeling it would be unnecessarily complex and would probably only strengthen the results here.
10
   Since interest rates are nearly constant across the country and depreciation schedules are set at the federal level,
variation in them over time will not affect our empirical methodology. Property taxes are incorporated in rents and
thus do not differ between owners and renters. Maintenance costs are deferrable for owners and are incorporated into
rents for renters and thus show up in our rent variance measure. Berkovec and Fullerton (1992) argue that taxes
provide some risk sharing between homeowners and the government. We will control for tax regime changes over
time in the estimation but do not want to unduly complicate the model.
11
   We take the rent process as given, without modeling its underlying determinants, for example, shocks to demand for
housing space. Analogous to term structure models of long versus short maturity bonds, the process for one period
(short) rental rates is the input into the model.
12
   As usual the quantitative results for risk premia are in general based on local approximations, but for exponential
preferences they hold exactly.


                                                           7
the risk premium is proportional to [δ2 + δ4+…+ δ(N-1)2] σ2r. If the shocks are persistent, ρ>0, then

each innovation ηt continues to augment the risk premium in subsequent periods, in proportion to

its persistence, ρ. Thus the risk premium for renting, π(Cr), is increasing in σ2r and in the horizon

N. Since home owning avoids the N-1 rent risks, π(Cr) will appear below as part of the net benefit

of owning, which is the alternative to renting.

         The discounted cost of owning is Co = P0 − δNPN. While owning avoids the N-1 risks

associated with renting, it introduces the discounted house price risk due to PN. The associated risk

premium is denoted by π(Co). Although a full general equilibrium analysis of asset prices is

beyond the scope of this paper, the house price would generally capitalize the associated rental

payments and therefore π(Co) would also be an increasing function of the rent variance, σ2r, ceteris

paribus. π(Co) would also be a decreasing function of N, ceteris paribus, because the later the

house price risk is realized, the more heavily it will be discounted.13

         The net risk premium associated with renting, π(Cr) - π(Co), would therefore be

proportional to σ2r. The sign of this net premium determines whether renting is on balance riskier

than owning. If the sign is positive, then renting is riskier and the hedging demand for owning will

increase with σ2r, ceteris paribus. If the sign is negative, the demand for owning would decrease

with σ2r. In either case, an increase in the household’s horizon, N, would increase the demand for

owning, ceteris paribus. A longer horizon increases the number of rent risks, and more heavily

discounts the asset price risk of owning, increasing the net risk premium.




13
   In the presence of transactions costs associated with selling a house, the probability of home owning will further
increase in N. A household with a shorter horizon in a given location will be less likely to own, in order to avoid the
fixed cost. In our empirical work below, we will include a measure of expected horizon N as a separate control
variable to control for all horizon effects, including the number of rent risks incurred and any fixed costs.


                                                            8
       Importantly, the net risk premium is proportional to σ2r times an increasing function of N.

Hence the effect of increasing the horizon (higher N) rises with σ2r, the magnitude of each rent risk;

and the effect of larger rent risk (higher σ2r) increases with the horizon. Households with long

horizons are exposed to more of the rent shocks, which are each proportional to σ2r, and discount

more heavily the asset price risk, which is also proportional to σ2r. For households with a

sufficiently long horizon, the net risk premium will be positive. Greater rent variance therefore

drives them towards owning. Households with shorter horizons are exposed to fewer rent shocks

and discount the asset price risk less, so the net risk premium is smaller, in some cases negative.

       For illustration, consider an example with a horizon of N=3. Suppose that in equilibrium

house prices are endogenously determined such that households are indifferent between owning

and renting, so that both owned and rented housing units are occupied. In this case one can show

that the equilibrium price-to-rent differential


       P0 – r0 =                                                                              (2)

       (µ/(1-δ) + r0ρ)δ/(1-δρ) + ½ α σ2r [(δ+ δ2ρ)2 + δ4 - δ6 (1+ρ2+ρ4)/(1-δρ)2]/(1-δ3) .


To interpret this result consider again IID rent shocks, with ρ=0. Then (2) implies that

P0 – r0 = µδ/(1-δ) + ½ α σ2r [(δ2 + δ4 - δ6 )/(1-δ3)]. The first term is the present value of the

expected future rent payments, since E0rt = µ in the IID case. If the rent payments are deterministic

(σ2r =0) or if households are risk neutral (α=0), then the house price P0 reflects only these expected

payments, as in Poterba (1984). But if rent is stochastic and households are risk-averse, the price

also reflects the net risk premium, which is in the second term. The part of this term in brackets

includes two premia for the two rent risks (r1 and r2) avoided by owning the house, appropriately

discounted, minus one premium for the risk due to the stochastic terminal house sale price P3.


                                                   9
Because the rent shocks are IID, the house price risk is of the same magnitude as the rent risks, but

comes further in the future and so is discounted more heavily. Therefore in this case the rent risks

dominate, and the net risk premium is necessarily positive. That is, risk averse households will bid

up the house price P0 relative to r0 because of the hedging benefit that the house provides against

rent risk. In this case the price-rent differential would unambiguously rise with rent risk.14

         If instead rent shocks are fully persistent, with ρ=1, then (2) implies that P0 – r0 = (µ/(1-δ)

+ r0)δ/(1-δ) + ½ α σ2r [{(δ+ δ2)2 + δ4 - 3δ6/(1-δ)2}/(1-δ3)]. In the third term in the square brackets,

the house price risk is larger relative to the IID case, reflecting the fact that all three rent shocks are

now fully persistent and so affect the house price. The net risk premium can therefore be negative,

unlike the IID case. For example, for patient households the terminal price risk is now more likely

to outweigh the earlier rent risks.15

         In our MSA-level rent data ρ is about 0.6-0.7. In this case, using a discount factor of 0.94,16

the net risk premium is positive so long as the horizon N is greater than 3 to 4 years. However, in

this stylized model the absolute level of the net premium is not as interesting as the fact that it

increases with N. Generalizing equation (2) to an N-period horizon, the price-to-rent differential

P0–r0 increases with N. In a more realistic setting with households with different horizons, given

the supply of housing, house prices would be determined by marginal households with a particular

horizon. For households with a longer horizon than this, owning provides insurance against an even

larger number of rent risks, for the same house price. Hence the hedging benefit of housing should

still empirically rise with the household’s horizon, even with endogenous house prices.


14
   We assume a stationary equilibrium in which analogous conditions apply to the households buying the house in year
3. This is the source of the factor 1/(1-δ3). Above we assumed that P3 is determined when r3 is observed at the start of
period 3 in order to maintain this stationarity.
15
   Case and Shiller (1989) find that changes in house prices exhibit some persistence. That can be explained in our
theoretical context if rents are not IID.
16
   This is consistent with a real mortgage rate of about 6%.


                                                          10
        Another implication of the model is that the net risk premium also increases in α, the

household’s risk aversion. Thus households that are more sensitive to risk, or equivalently

households that take on larger housing gambles, should have a larger elasticity of homeownership

demand to rent risk, ceteris paribus. Since this effect is multiplicative in equation (2), this

elasticity will be largest for households with long horizons.

        The manifestation of a greater hedging demand for home owning depends on the elasticity

of supply of owner-occupied housing. If the supply is very elastic, an increase in demand for

homeownership will result in a larger supply of units to be owned without much change in price.17

The homeownership rate will rise. On the other hand, if the supply of housing units to be owned is

very inelastic, the increase in demand will be capitalized into higher house prices until households

are again indifferent between owning and renting. In this case, house prices will rise without much

change in the homeownership rate. In the intermediate case, the most likely outcome, there will be

some effect on the homeownership rate and some effect on house prices. Accordingly, we will

empirically estimate the effect of rent risk σ2r on both the probability of owning and the price-rent

differential.

        Although the model presented in this section is stylized, its implications are quite general.

Among the advantages and disadvantages of owning a home, one potentially important but

previously neglected advantage is the hedge that it provides against rent risk. The model provides

several empirical predictions. First, the net effect of rent variance σ2r on the demand for

homeownership can be either positive or negative, depending on the relative size of the resulting

cumulative rent risk and house price risk. Second, the demand for homeownership should increase

with a household’s expected horizon in its residence, N. Third, the demand for homeownership
17
  Since we hold the quantity of housing services demanded to be constant, the supply of owner-occupied houses in this
context could be quite elastic even if land is inelastically supplied. In a market where a high rent variance induces
more households to own, rental units can simply be converted into owner-occupied housing.


                                                         11
should increase in the interaction of N and σ2r. For households with a sufficiently long horizon, the

demand should increase in σ2r, and for households with very short horizon, the demand for home

owning may decrease in σ2r. Finally, the effect of rent risk on homeownership should be strongest

for households with high risk aversion α, and the demand for homeownership should increase in

the interaction of α, σ2r, and N. We empirically test these predictions in the remainder of this

paper.



II.        Data and variable construction

           To estimate the model described in section I, we need rent and house price data at the

market level and household level data on homeownership and demographic characteristics. To this

end we combine four data sets.

           We obtained an index of median apartment rents by MSA from Reis, a commercial real

estate information company.18 The index runs annually from 1981 to 1998, with 47 MSAs

observed consistently throughout the sample. Rents are converted to real dollars using the CPI

excluding shelter. For the empirical work, both rent growth and rent variance for a given year are

computed over the preceding nine years. We calculate the rent variance (σ2r) for each MSA as the

de-trended variance in its rents over the prior nine years. The growth rate of rent is defined as the

constant term from a regression of log rent on a constant over the same period. Rent variance is

computed from the residuals of this growth regression, and thus is expressed as a percentage of the

base rent. We use the log of rent to keep MSAs with high rent levels from appearing to have

artificially high rent variances.




18
     Reis collects its data from surveys of owners of “Class A,” or top-quality, apartment buildings in each MSA.


                                                            12
         House price growth is computed in a similar manner for each MSA using the Freddie Mac

repeat-sales house price index over the same time periods. To obtain the level of house prices in a

given year, we inflate the MSA’s median house price from the 1990 Census by the corresponding

growth rate from the Freddie Mac index and convert to real dollars using the CPI excluding shelter.

To estimate the effect of rent variance on house prices, we merge the rent and house price data sets

by MSA, yielding 44 MSA-level observations per year.19 Due to the lags required, we can

compute rent variance for only the 1990-1998 period, giving us a total of 396 MSA-year

observations in the pooled data.

         Table 1 presents summary statistics on MSA rents and prices. The volatility of rent is quite

substantial. Between 1990 and 1998, the mean (across and within MSAs) standard deviation of real

rent was 2.9 percent per year. This is over half of the size of the standard deviation of real house

prices, which averaged 4.6 percent over the 1990 to 1998 period. The variability in rents dwarfed

real rent growth– between 1990 and 1998 real rents grew only one-tenth of one percent on average

per year. Real house price growth, as well, was approximately zero. Homeowners typically pay

nearly 16 times the MSA’s annual median apartment rent for their houses, though this figure varies

considerably across MSAs.20

         Most of the sample means are fairly constant over time, exhibiting little difference between

the 1990-1998 averages in the first panel of table 1 and the values for 1998 alone in the second

panel. This implies that much of the variation in the data comes from the cross section of 44 MSAs

rather than from changes over time. In particular, rent risk varies significantly across MSAs, with

the standard deviation of the rent volatilities being 0.017 for 1990-98 and 0.012 for 1998. The

19
  Of the 47 MSAs with rent data, three do not have matching house price data.
20
  Part of the reason that owner-occupied housing commands such a large multiple to rent is that the median house
price reflects a greater quantity of (or, equivalently, “nicer”) housing than the median apartment rent does. As long as
the difference between the amount of housing in the median house and in the median apartment does not spuriously
vary across MSAs in a way that is correlated with rent variance, it will not affect our estimation.


                                                           13
volatility of rent ranges from 1.4 percent standard deviation in Fort Lauderdale to 7.2 percent in

Austin. In 1998 the rent risks were even larger relative to the house price risks, compared to earlier

in the decade: the average standard deviation of real rent in 1998 was 2.3 percent and that of real

house prices was 2.8 percent.

        Homeownership rates and individual level data are obtained from the 1990 and 1999

Current Population Survey (CPS) March Annual Demographic Supplements.21 The CPS reports

whether households own or rent their residences as well as a number of demographic variables

such as age, race, education, occupation, number of children, marital status, and total household

income. In addition, we impute the probability of a household’s staying in the same residence

(whether rented or owned) for another year as the proportion of households in that age-occupation-

marital status cell (excluding the household in question) in that year that did not move in the

previous year.22

        The sample averages of the key CPS variables are reported in table 2. In particular, in 1990

and 1999, 60 percent of the CPS households lived in an owner-occupied house. The cross sectional

standard deviation in the probability of owning is 0.490. This represents an enormous amount of

variation, especially considering the fact that the national average homeownership rate has changed

by only 3 percentage points in the last 20 years, from 65 to 68 percent. While 81 percent of

households in Richmond own their house, only 33 percent of those in New York City and 53

percent of those in San Jose do.

        The last two columns of table 2 report the means for the top and bottom halves of the

variables’ distribution. This division corresponds to how we will group the data in our empirical

21
   1990 is our earliest available year of data and 1999 is the most recent year when we maximize the amount of time
between observations and the potential variation in rent variance. Since the rent variance for 1990 is computed over
the 1981-1989 time period and the 1999 rent variance is computed over 1990-1998, there is no overlap in this rent
variance sample when we combine 1990 and 1999.
22
   As is customary, we use the age and occupation of the household head.


                                                          14
work. For example, on average 84 percent of the CPS households did not move in the last year.

However, 25 percent (= 1−0.749) of the “movers” households – those below the median in the

imputed probability of not moving – moved in the last year while only 6.4 percent (= 1–0.936) of

the “stayer” households – those above the median – moved. In the next row, the market-level rent

data is matched to each CPS observation based on its MSA of residence. Households who live in

“high” rent variance markets have a standard deviation of real rent of 4 percent, twice that of those

in “low” rent variance markets.



III.   Empirical methodology and results

       This section empirically examines the hypothesis that the demand for home owning varies

significantly with rent risk, as outlined in section I. If owner-occupied residences were perfectly

elastically supplied, households who live in markets with higher rent variance would simply be

more likely to be owners and the homeownership rate would be higher in those MSAs. On the

other hand, if owner-occupied houses are at all inelastically supplied, at least some of the increase

in demand for ownership will show up as a higher price of housing rather than a higher

homeownership rate. This section presents four tests of this hypothesis, three concerning

homeownership rates and one concerning house prices.

       Starting with tenure choice, we will test whether “stayers,” households who are less likely

to move and so have a longer expected horizon in their residences, are more sensitive to rent

variance than are “movers.” If so, the difference in homeownership rates between stayers and

movers should increase with rent variance. Similarly, we will examine whether the difference in

the probability of homeownership between elderly households in high and low rent variance

markets decreases as the households get older and thus the expected remaining time in the




                                                  15
residence declines. Lastly, we investigate whether households which may be more sensitive to rent

risk because local housing costs comprise a larger share of their budget are more likely to be

homeowners in high rent risk markets than in low rent risk markets.

        For house prices, we examine the effect of rent variance on the price-to-rent multiple at the

MSA level. In markets where rent variance is greater or has increased we would expect to see a

larger price-to-rent multiple, reflecting the additional value due to the rent hedging aspect of

homeownership.



III.1   The effect of rent risk on homeownership

        We begin by estimating probit models of the following form, on household level data from

the 1990 and 1999 CPS:

        OWN i ,k ,t = β 0 + β1 f (σ r ) k ,t + β 2 g ( P ( STAYS )) i ,t + β 3 f (σ r ) × g ( P ( STAYS )) i ,k ,t
                                                                                                                     (3)
                                     + θX i + ψZ k ,t + ωi + η k ,t + δ t + ε i ,k ,t

where i indexes the household, k the MSA it lives in, and t the year. OWN is an indicator variable

that takes the value one if the household owns its house and zero otherwise. Consistent with the

model in section I, equation (3) separately controls for both the volatility of rent and the

household’s expected horizon, as well as the interaction of these two variables. The standard

deviation of rent in market k is denoted by σr,k and is computed over the 1980-1989 period for the

1990 observations and 1990-1998 for the 1999 observations. P(STAYS)i,t is the imputed

probability that household i does not move during year t, which corresponds to the horizon N in

section I. Since a homeowner with a large probability of staying would face the house price risk

further in the future, and would avoid a greater number of rent risks, the probability of owning

should rise with P(STAYS), ceteris paribus. As already noted, transactions costs of buying and




                                                                16
selling a house will reinforce this effect. Thus β2 should be positive. Xi is a vector of household

level controls from the CPS including log income and dummy variables for race, education,

occupation, 10-year age categories, and marital status.23 MSA-level controls in the vector Zk,t

include the average apartment rent and median house price in the preceding year, and the average

real rent growth and house price growth rates over the preceding nine years. Unobserved

household characteristics are denoted by ωi and unobserved MSA-level factors that might change

over time by ηk,t. A dummy for 1999 is included to control for the unobserved year-specific factors

δt. For robustness we will consider various functional-form transformations of the standard

deviation of rent, denoted by f(⋅), and of the probability of staying, denoted by g(⋅). Since a number

of variables, including the standard deviation of rent, vary only across markets within a given year,

we correct the standard errors to account for the correlated shocks within MSA x year cells.

         To begin, we estimate the average effect of rent risk on the probability of home owning by

restricting β3 to be zero and estimating β1. The most straightforward method is to compare the

probability of home owning for households in “high” rent variance locations versus that for

households in “low” rent variance locations. Thus in the first panel of table 3, f(σr)k,t is an indicator

variable that is equal to one when σr,k,t is greater than the median standard deviation of rents, which

is about 0.027.

         Overall, the average household in a high rent variance MSA is only slightly more likely to

be a homeowner than one that lives in a low rent variance MSA, by 2.8 percentage points. However

this effect is not statistically significant (the standard error is 2.4 percentage points). Thus, the




23
  We can separately identify marital status, age, and occupation, even while controlling for the probability of staying,
since the latter is imputed using the interaction of marital status, age, and occupation rather than the individual
variables’ levels.


                                                           17
tradeoff between rent risk and house price risk appears to be a statistical wash for a household with

the average expected length of stay in our sample, which is just over 6 years (1/(1–0.843)).

        Households with long expected lengths of stay are also more likely to be homeowners. In

column 1, g(P(STAY)) equals one for households above the median imputed probability of staying

and zero otherwise. The estimated coefficient implies that households with the longest horizons, or

“stayers”, are 3.6 percentage points more likely to own their homes than are “movers.”

        A more compelling test of the rent hedging benefit of home owning focuses on the

interaction of rent risk and expected horizon, f(σr) * g(P(STAY))i,k,t in equation (3). According to

the model of section I, the difference in the probability of home owning between longer and shorter

expected horizon households should increase with the rent variance. Thus a significantly positive

value for β3 will confirm the importance of the rent hedging hypothesis. In addition, while

unobserved MSA level characteristics could potentially bias the estimated coefficient β1 on the

standard deviation of rent, the estimated β3 should still be consistent since it depends only on the

interaction of household level characteristics with the MSA-level rent variance. Since we are in

effect comparing the homeownership probabilities of high- and low-mobility households within an

MSA, in order to affect our results any MSA-level unobservable characteristics would need to

influence the homeownership decision for high- and low-mobility households differentially in each

MSA, and that differential impact would have to vary across MSAs in a way that happened to be

correlated with the rent variance. We believe this to be unlikely. Similarly, β1 could be affected by

unobserved household level characteristics that happen to be correlated with rent variance and the

homeownership decision. However, as long as those characteristics do not systematically vary

within mobility groups across MSAs, the interaction of mobility and rent variance will be cleanly

identified.



                                                  18
         Column 2 of table 3 reports the results from estimating the full equation (3). The

interaction term is set to one if the household lives in an MSA with a standard deviation of rent

above the median and is above the median in expected length of stay in the house. The resulting

estimate of β3 is 0.042 (0.014), and is statistically significant. Thus, relative to the difference

between “movers” and “stayers” in low rent variance MSAs, “stayers” in high rent variance MSAs

are 4.2 percentage points more likely to own their house than “movers” in the same places. Based

on the estimate of β1, the lower expected horizon households (who have an average imputed

probability of staying of about 75 percent, or a horizon of about four years) are less than one

percentage point more likely to own their houses if they live in a high rent variance location. These

results support the hypothesis that the rent hedging aspect of home owning significantly increases

the demand for homeownership so long as the homeowners’ horizons are long enough for the rent

risk to outweigh the house price risk.

         Since the mobility/rent-risk interaction term is a combination household/MSA-level effect,

we can control for all unobserved MSA characteristics and still identify β3. For that purpose, in

column 3 we include dummies for each MSA in each year at the expense of not identifying purely

MSA-level characteristics, including the standard deviation of rent. Unlike the previous column

which made use of the cross sectional variation in rent risk and homeownership rates between

MSAs, this strategy uses only the variation from differences in homeownership between movers

and stayers within MSAs. Although the estimated coefficient β3 on the interaction term declines to

2.9 (1.1) percentage points, it remains significant.24




24
   These and subsequent conclusions persist when we include house price risk; i.e., the standard deviation of house
prices computed analogously to rent risk. However, as section I highlights, house price risk is just an endogenous
transformation of rent risk. Our analysis, motivated by equation (2), appropriately captures the net effect of both risks.


                                                            19
       The second panel of table 3, columns 4 to 6, imposes a different functional form restriction

on the standard deviation of rent and the probability of staying. Instead of using an indicator

variable for whether the values are above some threshold, we include each variable linearly. The

interaction term is simply the product σr * P(STAY). In the third row of column 5, the estimated

coefficient β3 on this interaction term is 8.08 (2.77) and is statistically significant. The second-to-

last row of table 3 translates the coefficient into an economically more meaningful number by

multiplying it by the standard deviation of the interaction term, 0.011 (table 2). This value can be

interpreted as a measure of the exposure to rent risk. The rent hedging benefit of home owning has

a large effect on the homeownership rate: a one standard deviation increase in the interaction term,

starting at its mean, would increase the probability of homeownership by 9.2 percentage points.

Relative to a baseline value of 65 percent, this represents an economically significant effect. When

we substitute MSA dummies for the MSA-level covariates, in column 6, the estimated coefficient

β3 declines slightly to 6.10 (1.77), but remains significant.

       The estimated coefficients β1 on the standard deviation of rent σr are consistent with the

predictions of the model. In the first row of column 4, β1 is positive but insignificant, suggesting

again that for the average household the probability of homeownership does not increase much

with rent risk. In column 5, β1 is negative and significant at -6.29 (2.17), indicating that for the

shortest horizon households, the asset price risk outweighs the rent risk. However, given the

positive coefficient β3 on the interaction term, if the expected horizon in the residence is greater

than 4.5 years (1/(1–6.29/8.08)), the rent risk dominates the asset price risk. This is the case for




                                                   20
almost 75 percent of our sample. In sum, the results of this subsection indicate that rent risk

significantly increases the demand for owner-occupied housing.25



III.2 Rent risk and housing demand by the elderly

         The value of homeownership as a rent hedge may provide a partial explanation for why

homeownership rates are so high among the elderly. If older or retired households are more risk

averse, as is often assumed, they will value more highly the hedging benefit of owning and will be

more likely to own. Counteracting that effect, however, is the fact that the closer a homeowner is

to the end of her life, the less hedging value she receives from home owning. In other words, for

the elderly the expected remaining lifespan is a reasonable proxy for the expected length of stay in

the house (N). Thus we would expect to find that older people should generally be more likely to

own, but the probability of owning should decline as they approach the end of their lifetime.

         While one could attribute a rising-then-falling life-cycle pattern of homeownership to the

rent hedging benefit of owning, there are many other possible explanations. For example, low

mobility among the elderly may explain their higher homeownership rates and declining health that

requires nursing home care may cause them to be more likely to move out as they age further.

However, the rent hedging hypothesis further predicts that homeownership rates among the elderly

should be highest in high rent variance places since the value of the rent hedge would likely be the

largest there. In addition, the decline in the probability of homeownership with age should be


25
   Davidoff (2001) points out that the covariance of income and house prices can affect households’ portfolio
allocations to housing. In our context the corresponding exogenous measure of risk would be the covariance of income
and rent. In the presence of liquidity constraints, for example, a positive covariance might tilt a household towards
renting. We have computed the covariance of household income with MSA level rent using industry, occupation, and
wage data from repeated CPS cross sections and matched them to our 1999 sample. When we include them in the
regressions in table 3 (although with only one year’s worth of data), our results for the effect of rent risk are
qualitatively the same and remain statistically significant. The estimated coefficients on the covariance terms are
usually positive: a larger covariance of rent with income leads to increased homeownership. This effect is statistically
significant, but only if we do not control for MSA fixed effects.


                                                          21
steepest in high rent variance locations since the hedging benefit, which increases with the

interaction term σ2r × N, is more sensitive there to the expected horizon. The life-cycle pattern of

homeownership that is driven by other causes should not be affected by rent variance.

         This difference in life-cycle patterns of homeownership can be seen in the unconditional

homeownership rates by age. Using the pooled the 1990 and 1999 CPS cross-sections, we divided

our 44 MSAs into high- and low-variance markets depending upon whether they were in the top

quartile of rent variance or below the median, and used a kernel regression to compute the

unconditional homeownership rate by age in each type of market.26 The result is presented in

figure 1. By age 40, homeownership rates are about 3 percentage points greater in high rent

variance MSAs than in low rent variance MSAs. The difference grows with age and peaks for

people in their early 60s, with 60-year-olds exhibiting homeownership rates of 76 percent in high

rent variance places and 72 percent in low rent variance places. While the unconditional probability

of homeownership declines with age starting in the late 60s, it falls fastest for people in high rent

variance MSAs, consistent with the more rapid decline in the value of the rent hedge. By the time

people are in their late 70s, with presumably short expected remaining lifetimes, the probabilities of

homeownership in high- and low-rent variance MSAs have converged to approximately the same

level.

         While figure 1 presents unconditional homeownership rates by age, we would like to

control for other observable factors that may vary systematically by age or with rent variance. We

test these hypotheses with a more parametric specification by estimating the following spline

equation using a probit model:




26
  Given the relatively small number of elderly in the data, this section emphasizes the top quartile of rent variance in
order to make its points more starkly. The results are qualitatively similar using the top 50 percent.


                                                           22
 OWN i ,k ,t = γ 0 + γ 1 AGE × UNDER60i + γ 2OVER60i + γ 3 AGE × OVER60i + γ 4 f (σ r ) k ,t +
γ 5 AGE × UNDER60 × f (σ r ) i ,k ,t + γ 6OVER60 × f (σ r ) i ,k ,t + γ 7 AGE × OVER60 × f (σ r ) i ,k ,t +   (4)
                                  θX i + ψZ k ,t + ω i + η k ,t + δ t + ε i ,k ,t

where AGE is the age in years of the head of household i, UNDER60 is an indicator variable that

takes the value of one if the person is 60 years old or younger, OVER60 is an indicator variable

that takes the value of one if the person is more than 60 years old. In some specifications, f(σr)k,t is

a dummy variable that equals one if MSA k in year t is in the top quartile of rent variance (high) or

zero for the bottom three quartiles (low). Alternatively, it is the standard deviation of rent entered

linearly. The terms that are not interacted with f(σr)k,t (i.e., γ0 to γ3) correspond to the dashed line in

figure 1 (low rent variance). The terms that are interacted (γ4 to γ7) measure the differences in level

and slope between the solid line in figure 1 (high rent variance) and the dashed line. The hypothesis

that older households are in general more risk averse concerning rent variance implies that γ6

should be positive. But if the age-ownership profile is more steeply declining in high variance

places, γ7 should be negative. Once again, the specification includes detailed household controls for

income, year, race, education, occupation, expected mobility, and marital status, as well as MSA x

year dummies.

        The most direct test of the model focuses just on the elderly and thus the first column of

table 4 uses only those households where the respondent is over the age of 60. By including MSA

x year effects, we are comparing the slopes of the post-60 homeownership age profile in high and

low rent variance places but are controlling for differing levels of homeownership. The results bear

out the predictions of the rent hedging hypothesis. Most notably, γ7 is significantly negative,

implying that homeownership declines more rapidly with age in high rent variance places. Relative

to people over 60 in low rent variance places, the probability of homeownership for people over 60

in high rent variance MSAs falls by 0.29 (0.14) percentage points more per year of age. This is a


                                                              23
considerable difference because, controlling for other covariates, the probability of homeownership

for people over 60 in low rent variance places is nearly constant over their remaining lifetimes.

         In column 2, we include in the sample households of all ages and constrain the coefficients

on the covariates to be the same for the entire sample. Again, by including fixed effects to control

for unobserved MSA x year differences, we also absorb cross sectional and across time differences

in the average homeownership rate and use the curvature of the age profile within MSA/year cells

to identify our effect. As a baseline, based on γ1, households aged 60 or below with rent variance

in the bottom three quartiles have a probability of homeownership that increases at a rate of 1.4

percentage points per year. In top-quartile rent variance MSAs, the probability of homeownership

rises 0.16 percentage points (0.07) faster per year, until at age 60 households are 10.4 (3.3)

percentage points more likely to be homeowners than people of the same age in low rent variance

places. Thus homeownership among older households rises with rent variance. We find virtually

the same relative effect for over-60 households as we did before: the probability of homeownership

declines more rapidly for households in high rent variance areas, since γ7 is significantly negative.27

         These results are generally robust to specification changes. The second panel in table 4

parameterizes rent variance with a continuous linear function. We obtain similar qualitative effects

as in the first panel, although the interaction of rent variance with age-over-60 is no longer

statistically significant. We have also estimated a quadratic age profile of homeownership, and

allowed this profile to be different in high- and low-variance places. Again, older people in high

variance places have a higher overall probability of homeownership but a steeper decline with age,


27
  The only notable difference between columns (1) and (2) is that in column (2) households over age 60 in low rent
variance places have homeownership rates that increase with age. This result is an artifact of not allowing an
MSA/year-specific over-60 intercept, as we did in column (1), and constraining the effects of the covariates to be the
same for young and old households. This is why we place our emphasis on the difference in slopes between high and
low rent variance places, which is better identified than the slopes themselves.



                                                          24
with the differences being statistically significant. We have also replaced the “over 60” indicator

with an indicator variable for the household’s head being retired, with similar qualitative results.



III.3 Rent risk and budget shares for housing

         Households for whom housing is a larger portion of their budgets or wealth might be more

sensitive to rent risk since they are effectively taking a larger gamble. We test this hypothesis by

dividing the sample based on the ratio of the average rent in the MSA to actual household income.

We use MSA-level rent instead of the household’s own rent since the former is exogenous to the

household and is defined even for homeowners. Households that live in markets where rents are

high relative to their own incomes would generally need to spend more of their budget on housing

to obtain the same housing service flow relative to someone who lives in a low rent market. The

direct effect of the rent-to-income ratio on the probability of homeownership is uncertain since it

depends on whether rent risk or house price risk dominates for the average household. However,

one might expect to find that as expected horizon increases, households with higher rent-to-income

ratios might be increasingly more likely to own than other households. Finally, homeownership

rates would be highest among those with high rent-to-income ratios, long expected lengths of stay,

and high rent risk. As before, we estimate a probit model on household level data from the 1990

and 1999 CPS:

OWN i ,k ,t = ρ0 + ρ1 f (σ r ) k ,t + ρ 2 h ( R Y ) i ,k ,t + ρ 3 f (σ r ) × h ( R Y ) i ,k ,t + ρ 4 g ( P ( STAYS ))i ,t
                  + ρ 5 g ( P ( STAYS )) × h ( R Y ) i ,k ,t + ρ 6 f (σ r ) × g ( P ( STAYS )) i ,k ,t                      (5)
         + ρ 7 f (σ r ) × g ( P ( STAYS )) × h ( R Y ) i ,k ,t + θX i + ψZ k ,t + ω i + η k ,t + δ t + ε i ,k ,t

where R/Y is the rent-to-income ratio. The other variables and household level controls are defined

as in the previous subsections. As before, we will estimate two specifications. First, we estimate a

discretized version where high rent variance and “stayer” households are each above the median


                                                                  25
and high rent-to-income households are in the top quartile.28 Second, we let each of the variables

enter linearly. For these regressions we symmetrically trim the top and bottom one percent of the

rent-to-income distribution since households with zero or very low values for income appear to

have very high rent-to-income ratios and so could potentially skew the results. This sampling

reduces our number of observations to 39,468 from 40,274 households.29 All regressions include

the usual household controls, and MSA x year dummies which again subsume the uninteracted rent

variance terms.

         The results are reported in table 5. In the first column, we estimate the differential effect of

rent variance and length of stay on high and low rent-to-income households. The results are

consistent with the budget-share hypothesis. First, according to the estimate for ρ5, stayers who are

in the high rent-to-income group are 4.4 percentage points more likely to be homeowners than

movers in that group, relative to the difference in probability of homeownership between movers

and stayers with low rent-to-income ratios. Second, ρ6 implies the same result as in table 3:

households with longer expected lengths of stay are more sensitive to rent risk. Stayers in high rent

variance areas are 3.2 percentage points more likely to be homeowners than are movers, relative to

stayers and movers in low rent variance areas. Both of these estimated effects are statistically

significant. Also, households who live in markets where rent-to-income ratios are in the top

quartile are 3.5 percentage points less likely to own their homes than households with low ratios.

         In the second column of table 5, we test the triple-interaction effect (N x σr × R/Y): Are the

highest homeownership rates exhibited by households in high rent variance MSAs, with long


28
   This cutoff roughly corresponds to households for whom average rents equal a third of their annual incomes. That is
the budget allocation to housing typically recommended by financial planners.
29
   Predictably, this sampling has virtually no effect on any of the estimated coefficients in the discretized specification
in columns 1 and 2. It also has little effect on the triple-interaction term in columns 4 and 6, but reduces the magnitude
of the rent-to-income level and single-interaction terms.



                                                            26
expected lengths of stay, and with high rent-to-income ratios? Indeed, that is what we find. Such

households are 5.4 percentage points more likely to be homeowners, a statistically significant

effect. This triple-interaction specification controls for unobserved differences between movers and

stayers, high rent variance MSAs and low variance ones, and high rent-to-income and low rent-to-

income households. It even allows for unobserved differences within the main sets of interactions:

moving/staying and rent variance, rent variance and rent-to-income, and moving/staying and rent-

to-income. The MSA x year effects control for unobserved MSA level characteristics that change

over time.

         In columns 3 through 6, we use different functional forms of the key variables to

demonstrate the robustness of the results. In columns 3 and 4, we continue to use an indicator

variable for high and low rent-to-income households but let the standard deviation of rent and the

probability of staying enter linearly. Since rent/income can be quite high for households with very

low income, using a dummy for R/Y reduces the impact of the measurement error. In column 3,

the significant results are that homeownership increases with expected horizon (N), as does the

sensitivity to rent risk (N*σr). These results are consistent with those in table 3. In column 4, we

still find that rent risk increases the likelihood of homeownership most for households who expect

to be in their houses longer (N*σr), but the effect is increasingly pronounced as the rent-to-income

ratio increases. In the last row, the estimated coefficient on the triple-interaction term is 9.433

(4.381).30 Columns 5 and 6, which also enter rent-to-income linearly, produce qualitatively similar

results, though the statistical significance of the triple interaction term in column 6 is diminished.



III.4 The effect of rent risk on house prices

30
  The negative and significant coefficient on σr x R/Y interaction term suggests again that price risk dominates for
households with short horizons.


                                                          27
        In the previous subsections, we found evidence that some of the hedging demand for

homeownership was met by increasing the supply of owner-occupied housing and thus increasing

the homeownership rate. In this subsection we look for effects of the hedging demand on house

prices. We estimate the following equation in MSA level data using OLS:

                    P
                             =κ +κ σ       + ψZ + δ + µ ,                          (6)
                    R k, t     0  1 r,k ,t     k ,t t  k ,t

where (P/R)k,t is the price-to-rent multiple in MSA k in year t, σr,k,t is the standard deviation of rent,

and Zk,t is a vector of observable MSA characteristics, including the growth rate of real rent. Just

as a price-earnings multiple for stocks should be higher for firms with higher expected future

earnings growth, P/R should be higher for MSAs with higher expected future rent growth. Since

Rk,t controls for the overall demand for living space, the rent hedging value of ownership should

show up as a larger price-to-rent multiple (assuming the supply of owner-occupied housing is not

fully elastic). That is, using the ratio of prices to rents controls for shocks to the overall housing

market, which impact both owner-occupied housing and rental housing. Controlling for the growth

rate of rent, the price-rent multiple will then capture the net risk premium associated with rent risk,

as in section I. Differences over time that are common to all MSAs are controlled for using year

dummies, δt.

        We estimate this model on a panel of 44 MSAs observed over the 1990-1998 time period.

For each year t=1990-1998, we calculate real rent variance and growth over the prior (rolling) nine-

year period. For example, for 1990, σr,k and rent growth (in Zk,t) are calculated over 1981-1989,

and for 1998 they are calculated over 1990-1997.

        Table 6 reports the results. We find consistent evidence that the rent hedging benefit of

owner-occupied housing is capitalized into larger price-to-rent multiples. The first column of table

6 presents the results from the pooled cross section, without controls for MSA fixed effects. MSAs


                                                   28
with a greater standard deviation of rent have a significantly greater price-to-rent multiple, with the

estimated coefficient κ1 being 34.5 (11.9). The last row of table 6 helps to gauge the economic

significance of this result. A one standard deviation increase in σr,k,t (i.e., of about 0.018) is

estimated to increase the price-to-rent ratio by 0.62. Since the mean price-to-rent ratio is 15.7, this

amounts to a 3.9 percent rise in house prices, holding rents constant, which is a sizable effect.

Further, real rent growth is capitalized into the price-to-rent multiple, as expected, with an

estimated coefficient of 69.0. Thus, house prices appear to incorporate both expected future rents

and the associated risk premia, consistent with the model underlying equation (2), and more

generally with asset-pricing models of other, financial assets.

        We next incorporate MSA fixed effects to control for MSA level observable and

unobservable characteristics that do not change over time. Since the specification also includes

year dummies, we are using the within-MSA relative variation in rent variance, rent growth, and

the price-to-rent ratio over time to identify the rent hedging effect. (Recall that the rent variance

σr,k,t and rent growthk,t within an MSA changes over time as the rolling window over which we

compute them moves.) However, the MSA dummies remove a potentially powerful source of

variation in rent variance, differences across MSAs.31

        Even controlling for MSA and year fixed effects, in column 2 we find that when rent

variance in a given MSA is higher, the price-to-rent ratio is higher. The estimated coefficient κ1 on

the standard deviation of rent, 11.0 (5.6), implies that a one standard deviation increase in σr,k,t

leads to a 0.20 increase in the price-to-rent multiple. Although smaller than in the previous

column, it still implies a 1.3 percent increase in house prices (from the base P/R multiple of 15.7)

31
  Note that one would not find much by looking at changes in the probability of home owning within MSAs over time
since homeownership and housing construction are slow to respond to changes in rent variance. However, since prices
adjust more readily, changes in expected rent variance should be more quickly incorporated into prices and thus be
more easily detectable in the data on price-to-rent ratios.


                                                        29
for a given rent level, and is statistically significant. The smaller magnitude is not surprising

considering that only within MSA variation is being used for identification. Rent growth also

continues to have the expected positive effect, with an estimated coefficient of 16.7 (4.7). In

column 3, we account for MSA level heterogeneity by estimating equation (4) in first differences.

This specification emphasizes the additional information that arrives over time, since the difference

in the computed rent variance between one year and the previous year is due to adding the most

recent year of data and discarding the oldest year. The results are almost identical to those in

column 2, although more precisely measured, with the estimated coefficient κ1 being 10.1 (3.8).

       Overall, the results consistently show that the rent hedging benefits of home owning are

partly capitalized into house prices, in addition to increasing the probability of home owning.



IV.     Conclusion

       One frequently overlooked but potentially important benefit to homeownership is the hedge

that it provides against the risk of fluctuations in future rent payments. Home owning provides a

predictable way of paying for housing services. With renting, the future cost of obtaining housing

services is uncertain. On the other hand, homeowners face asset price risk while renters do not.

Thus while homeownership provides a hedge against rent risk, its value is tempered by the

associated asset price risk.

       We presented a simple model of tenure choice in the presence of both rent risk and house

price risk. The demand for homeownership increases with rent variance, given house price risk.

Even with endogenous house prices, such that house price risk increases with the rent risk, demand

still increases with rent risk for people who expect to stay in their residences for a sufficiently long

time. These people avoid a greater number of rent risks by owning, and their future asset price risk




                                                   30
is more heavily discounted. Thus the model implies that the hedging demand for homeownership

increases with households’ expected horizon in their residence, and with the interaction of horizon

with rent risk. To the degree that the resulting hedging demand is capitalized into house prices, the

price-to-rent multiple should be higher in places with higher rent variance and, to the degree that

the supply of owned housing is elastic, the probability of home owning should rise with the

variance of rent.

        We used these results to motivate an empirical investigation into the effect of rent risk on

the probability of home owning and on house prices. We controlled for MSA-level heterogeneity

and other factors by comparing households that should be differentially affected by rent variance

only because of different expected horizons in their residences. This isolated the effect of rent risk

from other factors that influence homeownership. Notably, the effect of rent risk was found to be

significantly greater for households with longer horizons. A one standard deviation increase in the

exposure to rent variance (expected horizon interacted with the standard deviation of rent) would

lead to a 7 to 9 percentage point increase in the homeownership rate. Also consistent with the

model, older households are particularly sensitive to rent risk, with people aged 60 residing in

MSAs with a top-quartile rent variance being over 10 percentage points more likely to be

homeowners than people of the same age in low rent variance MSAs (conditional on household

demographic characteristics and MSA fixed effects). Confirming that this effect is due to rent risk,

the probability of homeownership drops most rapidly with age for elderly who live in high rent

variance places, consistent with the rent hedging benefit declining with their expected lengths of

stay. Also, households for whom market rents are high relative to their incomes respond the most

to rent risk, especially if their expected horizon is large.




                                                    31
       We also found evidence that some of the hedging demand of home owning shows up in the

multiple of rents people are willing to pay for houses. Even controlling for MSA-level fixed

effects, we found that when MSAs have higher rent variance their house prices increase relative to

the rental value of the housing stock. That is, house prices reflect not only expected future rents,

but also the associated rent-risk premia, consistent with asset-pricing models of financial assets.

       These results have a number of implications for housing markets and other decisions for

which housing wealth is important. The rent hedging benefit of homeownership appears to be a

significant factor in the demand for homeownership. For comparison, a typical cross-sectional

estimate of the user cost elasticity of home owning implies that a one standard deviation increase in

user cost would lead to about a 2.5 percentage point rise in the homeownership rate. The estimated

effect in table 3 of a one standard deviation increase in the effective rent variance is about three

times larger.

       Another way to gauge the economic significance of the results is to calculate how much

rent risk contributes to homeownership rates and house prices overall. Using our estimates from

the fifth column of table 3, we computed the difference between the predicted probability of

homeownership and the predicted probability assuming rent variance was equal to zero. For nearly

75 percent of our sample households, the likelihood of homeownership would increase, on average

by 3.3 percent. For some households, the probability of homeownership would increase by as

much as 10 percent if rent risk were eliminated. The effect of rent risk on house prices, computed

from our estimates in table 6, also is large. Using the smaller estimates from the second column, if

there were no rent risk then house prices relative to rents would decline by 2.3 percent on average

and by as much as 7 percent in some MSAs.




                                                  32
        For older households, the rent insurance aspect of home owning may help explain why the

elderly do not usually become renters and why, when they do, they usually do so very late in life.

Because they value highly the hedge against rent risk, it is more costly for them to become renters

than previous analyses have assumed. This effect also implies that one should not simply assume

that all housing wealth of the elderly is available for consumption. In the absence of viable reverse

mortgage markets that let the elderly consume their housing wealth, the insurance benefit of home

owning may keep many elderly from selling their homes.32




32
  We presume that the transactions costs involved in moving to a smaller owned unit would further discourage such
sales.


                                                        33
                                          References:

Berkovec, James and Don Fullerton. “A General Equilibrium Model of Housing, Taxes, and
      Portfolio Choice.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 100 (2), April 1992, pp. 390-429.

Brueckner, Jan. "Consumption and Investment Motives and the Portfolio Choices of
      Homeowners." Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, vol. 15, September 1997,
      pp. 159-180.

Campbell, John, and Joao Cocco. “Household Risk Management and Optimal Mortgage Choice.”
     Mimeo, Harvard University, January 2002.

Caplin, Andrew. “The Reverse Mortgage Market: Problems and Prospects.” Innovations in
       Housing Finance for the Elderly, Olivia Mitchell, ed. Pension Research Council (2001).

Case, Karl, and Robert Shiller. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes.”
       American Economic Review, vol. 79 (1), March 1989, pp. 125-137.

Chan, Sewin. “Spatial Lock-In: Do Falling House Prices Constrain Residential Mobility?” Journal
       of Urban Economics, vol. 49 (3), May 2001, pp. 567-586.

Cocco, Joao. “Hedging House Price Risk with Incomplete Markets.” Mimeo, London Business
       School, September 2000.

Davidoff, Thomas. “Labor Income, Housing Prices, and Homeownership.” Mimeo, Massachusetts
      Institute of Technology, November 2001.

Engelhardt, Gary. “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints.” Journal of Money,
      Credit, and Banking, 28:2 (May) 1996: 255-271.

Flavin, Marjorie and Takashi Yamashita. “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Composition of the
        Household Portfolio Over the Life Cycle.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Fratantoni, Michael. "Housing Wealth, Precautionary Saving, and the Equity Premium." Mimeo,
       Fannie Mae, July 1997.

Genesove, David. “The Nominal Rigidity of Apartment Rents.” NBER Working Paper #7137,
      May 1999.

Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer. “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate Market.”
      American Economic Review, vol. 87 (3), June 1997, pp. 255-269.

Goetzmann, William. "The Single Family Home in the Investment Portfolio." Journal of Real
      Estate Finance and Economics, Vol. 6 (3) p. 201-22. May 1993.




                                               34
Haurin, Donald. “Income Variability, Homeownership, and Housing Demand.” Journal of Housing
       Economics, March 1991, 1 (1), 60-74.

Hendershott, Patric and Joel Slemrod. “Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for Owner-Occupied
      Housing.” AREUEA Journal, Winter 1983, 10 (4), 375-393.

Henderson, J.V. and Ioannides, Y.M. “A Model of Housing Tenure Choice.” American Economic
      Review, Vol. 73 (1), p. 98-113, March 1983.

Megbolugbe, Sa-Aadu, and James Shilling. "Oh, Yes, the Elderly Will Reduce Housing Equity
      under the Right Circumstances." Journal of Housing Research, vol. 8 (1) p.53-74, 1997.

Poterba, James. “Tax Subsidies to Owner-Occupied Housing: An Asset Market Approach.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1984, 99 (4), 729-752.

Poterba, James and Andrew Samwick. “Household Portfolio Allocation Over the Life Cycle,”
       NBER Working Paper #6185, September 1997.

Rosen, Harvey. “Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax.” Journal of Public Economics,
       February 1979, 11 (1), 1-23.

Rosen, Harvey, Kenneth Rosen, and Douglas Holtz-Eakin. “Housing Tenure, Uncertainty, and
       Taxation.” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 66, no. 3 (August 1984), pp.405-416.

Skinner, Jonathan. "Housing and Saving in the United States," in Noguchi and Poterba, eds,
       Housing Markets in the United States and Japan, NBER, University of Chicago Press, 1994
       (pp191-213)

Skinner, Jonathan. "Housing Wealth and Aggregate Saving," Regional Science and Urban
       Economics, Vol. 19 (2), p.305-24, May 1989.

Skinner, Jonathan. "Is Housing Wealth a Sideshow?" in David Wise, ed, Advances in the
       Economics of Aging, NBER, University of Chicago Press, 1996 (pp241-68)

Stein, Jeremy. “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with Downpayment
        Constraints.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (2), May 1995, pp.379-406.

Summers, Lawrence. “Inflation, the Stock Market, and Owner-Occupied Housing.” American
     Economic Review, vol. 71 (2), May 1981, pp. 429-434.

Venti, Steven and David Wise. “Aging and Housing Equity.” NBER Working Paper #7882,
       September 2000.

Venti, Steven and David Wise. "Aging and the Income Value of Housing Wealth." Journal of
       Public Economics. Vol 44 (3) p.371-97, April 1991




                                               35
Venti, Steven and David Wise. “Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth.” In David Wise, ed., The
       Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Venti, Steven and David Wise. “But They Don’t Want to Reduce Housing Equity.” In David
       Wise, ed., Issues in the Economics of Aging, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.




                                               36
                         Table 1: Summary statistics for MSA-level data

                                         1990-1998                      1998 only
              Variable               Mean       Std. Dev.           Mean       Std. Dev.
   Standard deviation
                                     0.029           0.017          0.023           0.012
   of real rent
   Standard deviation of real
                                     0.046           0.031          0.028           0.016
   house price

   Real rent growth                  0.001           0.019          0.002           0.013

   Real house price growth           0.006           0.031          -0.001          0.021

   Average real rent                 6,331           1,505          6,748           1,607

   Median real house
                                    102,773         49,841         107,527         48,415
   price

   Price-to-rent ratio               15.72           4.08           15.52            3.57

   Number of observations                     396                             44


Notes: The first panel reports the average for all MSAs over the 1990-1998 time period. The
second panel reports the average across the 44 MSAs in 1998 only. The standard deviations of rent
and house prices, rent growth, and house price growth are all computed over the preceding nine
years. The rent data are obtained from Reis. House price growth is computed from the Freddie
Mac repeat sales house price index. To compute the level of house prices, the MSA median house
price from the 1990 Census is inflated to the current year using the Freddie Mac index. All dollar
values are in real (1990) dollars, deflated by the CPI less shelter.




                                               37
                                   Table 2: Summary statistics for CPS data (1990 and 1999)


                                                                                         Mean if below the    Mean if above the
                                                   Mean             Standard Deviation       median               median
Proportion owning                                  0.600                  0.490

Proportion not moving (actual)                     0.843                  0.363

Proportion not moving (imputed)                    0.843                  0.116               0.749                 0.936

Standard deviation of real rent                    0.031                  0.013               0.021                 0.040

Probability of not moving x standard
                                                   0.026                  0.011
deviation of real rent


Notes: Number of household-level observations is 40,274 from the 1990 and 1999 CPS. Rent variances are computed over the 1980-
1989 and 1990-1998 time periods. The rent data are obtained from Reis. Not moving is defined as having not moved in the preceding
year.




                                                               38
              Table 3: The effect of rent risk on the probability of homeownership


                            (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)            (6)
                               Indicator variables for
                               high rent variance and                    Continuous variables
                             high probability of staying
Standard deviation of      0.028        0.008                     0.339        -6.285
real rent (σr) [β1]       (0.024)      (0.022)                   (0.686)       (2.174)
Probability of staying     0.036        0.015          0.020      0.652         0.395       0.448
(N) [β2]                  (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.011)    (0.070)       (0.095)     (0.081)
Pr(Staying) x s.d. of                   0.042          0.029                    8.081       6.100
real rent (N × σr) [β3]                (0.014)        (0.011)                  (2.771)     (1.772)

MSA controls                Yes          Yes            No         Yes           Yes            No

MSA x year dummies          No           No            Yes         No            No             Yes

Household controls          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes

Pseudo R-squared          0.2352       0.2355         0.2498     0.2371        0.2375       0.2520
A one standard
                                                                                0.092       0.069
deviation in staying x
                                                                               (0.032)     (0.020)
σr leads to…

Notes: Estimated coefficients are marginal effects from probit regressions of equation (3)
estimated on 40,274 households in 44 MSAs in 1990 and 1999. The dependent variable takes the
value of one if the household is a homeowner. All specifications include year dummies. MSA
controls include median real rent, median real house price, real rent growth, and real house price
growth. Household controls include log household income and dummies for the head’s occupation,
age, race, education, and marital status. MSAs are deemed to have high rent variance if σr is above
the median household’s value of 2.8 percent. The probability of staying is high if the household is
above the median probability of 88 percent. All dollar values are in real (1990) dollars, deflated by
the CPI less shelter. For specifications that do not include MSA x year dummies, the standard
errors, in parentheses, are adjusted for correlation within MSA/year.




                                                 39
                        Table 4: Rent risk and homeownership by the elderly

                                          (1)             (2)          (3)             (4)
                                         Indicator variable for
                                           high rent variance       Continuous rent variance
                                                        0.0141                       0.0086
  Age if 60 or below [γ1]
                                                       (0.0005)                     (0.0009)
                                                        0.0016                        0.056
  Age if 60 or below × σr [γ5]
                                                       (0.0007)                      (0.025)
                                                         0.557                        0.414
  Age > 60 dummy [γ2]
                                                        (0.010)                      (0.029)
                                                         0.104                        3.598
  Age > 60 dummy × σr [γ6]
                                                        (0.033)                      (1.303)
                                        -0.0006         0.0019       -0.0006          0.002
  Age if over 60 [γ3]
                                       (0.0007)        (0.0009)      (0.0016)        (0.002)
                                        -0.0029        -0.0035       -0.0559         -0.066
  Age if over 60 × σr [γ7]
                                       (0.0014)        (0.0017)      (0.0495)        (0.059)

  MSA x year dummies:                    Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes

  Household controls:                    Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes

  Sample:                              Age >60            All        Age >60           All

  Number of observations:                9,699          40,274        9,699          40,274

  R-squared                             0.1989          0.2526       0.1992          0.2550


Notes: Estimated coefficients are marginal effects from probit regressions estimated on 40,274
households in 44 MSAs in 1990 and 1999. The coefficients in brackets correspond to equation (4).
The dependent variable takes the value of one if the household is a homeowner. All specifications
include MSA x year dummies. Household controls include log household income, probability of
not moving, and dummies for the head’s occupation, race, education, and marital status. MSAs are
deemed to have high rent variance if σr is above the 75th percentile household’s value of 4.1
percent. All dollar values are in real (1990) dollars, deflated by the CPI less shelter.




                                                  40
                                         Table 5: Rent risk and budget shares for housing


                                               (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                                             Indicator variables for        Indicator variables for
                                            high rent variance, high       high rent-to-income and
                                           probability of staying, and   continuous rent variance and
                                              high rent-to-income           probability of staying         Continuous variables
 Probability of staying                       0.011          0.018           0.436          0.503           0.498          0.562
 (N) [ρ4]                                    (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.084)        (0.090)         (0.086)        (0.099)
 Market Rent / Household Income              -0.035         -0.018          -0.034          0.202           0.217          0.377
 (R/Y) [ρ2]                                  (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.056)        (0.109)         (0.058)        (0.135)
 Standard deviation of real rent x            0.010         -0.021           0.170         -7.849           0.710         -4.565
 rent/income (σr × R/Y) [ρ3]                 (0.013)        (0.020)         (0.515)        (3.766)         (0.558)        (4.075)
 Pr(Staying) x rent/income                    0.044          0.017           0.026         -0.267          -0.154         -0.343
 (N × R/Y) [ρ5]                              (0.013)        (0.019)         (0.060)        (0.148)         (0.063)        (0.157)
 Pr(Staying) x standard deviation of          0.032          0.018           6.761          4.643           6.470          4.377
 real rent (N × σr) [ρ6]                     (0.011)        (0.013)         (1.822)        (2.064)         (1.805)        (2.408)
 Pr(Staying) x s.d. of real rent x                           0.054                          9.433                          6.264
 rent/income (N × σr × R/Y) [ρ7]                            (0.025)                        (4.381)                        (4.788)
 Pseudo R-squared                            0.2565         0.2566          0.2585         0.2586          0.2598         0.2599


Notes: Estimated coefficients are marginal effects from probit regressions of equation (5) estimated on 39,468 households in 44
MSAs in 1990 and 1999. Out of the original sample of 40,274 households, the observations with the one percent highest and lowest
values of rent/income R/Y are excluded from the regression. The dependent variable takes the value of one if the household is a
homeowner. All specifications include MSA x year dummies and a full set of household controls including log household income and
dummies for the head’s occupation, age, race, education, and marital status. MSAs are deemed to have high rent variance if σr is
above the median household’s value of 2.7 percent. The probability of staying is high if the household is above the median probability
of 88 percent. All dollar values are in real (1990) dollars, deflated by the CPI less shelter.


                                                                    41
                  Table 6: The effect of rent risk on the price-to-rent multiple

                                             (1)              (2)               (3)
           Standard deviation of            34.52            11.04            10.10
           real rent (σr)                  (11.88)           (5.55)           (3.81)
                                            68.99            16.73            18.14
           Real rent growth
                                           (14.68)           (4.67)           (5.23)
           Controls for MSA fixed                           MSA                 First
                                             No
           effects?                                        dummies          differences

           Number of observations           396               396              352


           R-squared                       0.0486           0.9471            0.1609

           A one standard deviation         0.62              0.20             0.18
           increase in σr leads to…        (0.21)            (0.10)           (0.07)

Notes: Dependent variable is the price-to-rent ratio. Estimation is by OLS, following equation (6).
Standard errors in parentheses. Number of observations equals 44 MSAs per year over the 1990-
1998 time period. All specifications include year dummies. σr and real growth rates are computed
based on the previous (rolling) nine years. A one standard deviation increase in σr is 0.018 (from a
mean of 0.031). The average price-to-rent ratio is 15.72.




                                                   42
                                                         Figure 1: Kernel-Smoothed Age Profile of Homeownership, by Rent Variance

                                              0.8


                                             0.75


                                              0.7


                                             0.65


                                              0.6


                                             0.55


                                              0.5


                                             0.45




Unconditional Probability of Homeownership
                                              0.4
                                                    40          45         50        55            60        65             70   75   80
                                                                                       Age of Household Head

                                                                                  High rent variance    Low rent variance




                                                                                              43
