                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             EFFICIENCY AND THE BEAR:
                    SHORT SALES AND MARKETS AROUND THE WORLD

                                               Arturo Bris
                                         William N. Goetzmann
                                                Ning Zhu

                                           Working Paper 9466
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9466


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




We thank Gerard Goetz for excellent research assistance, and to Frank Fabozzi for considerable help in
obtaining the data used in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Arturo Bris, William N. Goetzmann and Ning Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency and the Bear: Short Sales and Markets around the World
Arturo Bris, William N. Goetzmann, and Ning Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 9466
January 2003
JEL No. G0

                                            ABSTRACT

        We analyze cross-sectional and time series information from forty-seven equity markets
around the world, to consider whether short-sales restrictions affect the efficiency of the market, and
the distributional characteristics of returns to individual stocks and market indices. Using the
approach developed in Morck et.al. (2000) we find significantly more cross-sectional variation in
equity returns in markets where short selling is feasible and practiced, controlling for a host of other
factors. This evidence is consistent with more efficient price discovery at the individual security
level. A common conjecture by regulators is that short-selling restrictions can reduce the relative
severity of a market panic. We test this conjecture by examining the skewness of market returns. We
find that in markets where short selling is either prohibited or not practiced, returns display
significantly less negative skewness, and the frequency of extreme negative returns is lower. On the
other hand, the overall volatility of individual returns and market returns is higher.


William N. Goetzmann                                           Ning Zhu
Yale School of Management                                      Yale School of Management
International Center for Finance                               International Center for Finance
Box 208200                                                     Box 208200
135 Prospect Street                                            135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                                       New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER                                                       ning.zhu@yale.edu
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Arturo Bris
Yale School of Management
International Center for Finance
Box 208200
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
arturo.bris@yale.edu
    I.       Introduction

    In February of 1609, a group of well-connected Dutch businessmen, led by one of the

original subscribers to the Dutch East India Company, Isaac Le Maire, formed a secret

association, a “Groote Companie, ” to short the shares in the East India Company in anticipation

of the incorporation of a rival French-chartered trading firm. Le Maire and his colleagues sold

shares forward in a “blanco” transaction promising future delivery in one or two years. Over the

next twelve months, their profits mounted, as East India Company shares dropped by 12%,

angering shareholders who inevitably learned of their plan. In January of 1610, a year after the

formation of the “Groote Companie” and only three years after the official founding of the

Amsterdam Exchange, the first regulation against short selling was enacted. Share prices

rebounded, a rival French company was not formed and Isaac Le Maire never succeeded in

disentangling himself from the litigation that ensued.1

    At various times over the next four hundred years, short–sellers have been blamed for stock

market declines, and market participants have called for regulation against short sales.2

However, despite centuries of disagreement between speculators and regulators on the topic, no

one really knows whether short–sales constraints are a good or a bad thing. As the above

example indicates, short–sales restrictions are nearly as old as organized exchanges, and yet

there is little empirical evidence on whether they prevent or facilitate market crashes, or whether

they hinder or help rational price discovery.

         In this paper, we use cross-sectional and time series information from forty-seven equity

markets from around the world to examine the question of whether short–sales restrictions affect

1
  This account is taken from Montias, John Michael, 1989, Vermeer and His Milieu, Princeton Press, Princeton, p.
20. The original study of the Le Maire affair may be found in J. G. van Dillen, 1930, “Isaac Le Maire en de handle
in action der Oost-Indische Companie,” Economisch-historisch Jaarboek 16:46, 107-111. For a discussion on the
legal and ethical view of short-selling in late Sixteenth Century Holland, see De Marchi and Harrison (1994).




                                                         1
the efficiency of the market and the distributional characteristics of individual as well as market

returns. We obtain information regarding the history and current practice of short–sales

restrictions from market regulators, investment banks, and institutional investors specialized in

short sales. This dataset allows us to characterize each country in terms of the legality, as well as

the practice, of short selling for the period 1990–2001. Using the approach developed in Mørck,

Yeung and Yu (2000) [MYY] we find significantly more cross-sectional variation in equity

returns in markets where short selling is feasible and practiced, controlling for a host of other

factors. This evidence is consistent with more efficient price discovery at the individual security

level.

         A common conjecture by regulators is that short–sales restrictions can reduce the

severity of price declines. We test this conjecture by examining the skewness of market returns.

We find some evidence in favor of the conjecture. That is, we find that the lifting of short–sales

restrictions is associated with increased negative skewness in individual stock returns. Our result

is thus consistent with the regulatory views of Samuel Untermyer, legal counsel to the 1913

Pujo Committee of Congress investigating money trusts. In his devastating questioning of Frank

Stugis, president of the New York Stock Exchange from 1894 to 1898, Untermyer succinctly

articulated the public fear of short selling during a financial crisis.

         Untermyer: Under what circumstances would you regard… short selling as legitimate
         and proper?

         Stugis: I should regard it so if there was a panic raging over the country and it was
         desirable to protect interests which could not be sold. I think it would be a perfectly
         legitimate thing to do.

         Untermyer: Let us see about that. If there was a panic raging over the country and a man
         sold stocks short, would not that simply add to the panic?


2
 For an excellent review of the history of short-sales restrictions, see “A Short History of the Bear,” by Edward
Chancellor, October 29, 2001, copyright David W. Tice and Co.
http://www.prudentbear.com/press_room_short_selling_history.html


                                                          2
           Stugis: It might. Self preservation is the first law of nature.3


           This view is echoed by one of the regulators whom we contacted to obtain data for our

sample. In his words: “forbidding short selling prevents big market swings since the market size

is limited.” Our analysis sheds light on the costs and benefits of short–sales regulation at the

individual security level and at the market level. On the one hand, our data strongly support the

view that short selling facilitates efficient price discovery—at least to the extent that efficiency

is captured empirically by the lack of synchronous movement in daily returns. On the other

hand, short selling may also facilitate severe price declines in individual securities, at least as

defined in terms of negative skewness. Despite the relationship between short sales constraints

and skewness at the individual security level, we find little compelling evidence that short–sales

constraints prevent or mitigate severe price declines at the market level. In particular, we do not

find that short–sales constraints prevent market crashes. Figure 1 summarizes our findings

regarding the skewness of the market and the synchronicity of stock returns. We plot both

variables depending on whether countries allow and commonly practice short sales or not. In

this figure we do not control for a number of factors that potentially influence co-movement and

skewness, however the raw data is somewhat instructive. Countries in which short–sales are

practiced display less co-movement and modestly more negative skewness.

                                             [Insert Figure 1 here]

           Note that some countries — Hong Kong, Malaysia, Norway, Sweden, and Thailand —

appear twice on the figure. This is because they lifted short–sales constraints in the period of

our study. For example, short–sales restrictions for Sweden were eliminated in 1991. Before

that date, 93 percent of the stocks moved together, and the market skewness was –0.50. In the

3
    Untermyer, Samuel, 1915, “Speculation on the Stock Exchanges and Public Regulation of the Exchanges,”



                                                        3
period since 1991, the comovement of stocks declined to 76 percent, and the market skewness

increased to -0.04. Sweden’s positional shift in the figure is the common pattern among the

countries that relaxed short–sales constraints.4 The international evidence shown in Figure 1 at

least suggests that short–sales might play an important role in efficiency and market crash

probability. In the remainder of this paper, we investigate these potential relationships in

econometric detail.

          The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we review the current literature on

short–sales and discuss our contributions in the context of related research. In Section 3 we

summarize the range of short–sales regulations and practices in markets around the world.

Section 4 reports the results of the MYY test of relative pricing efficiency. Section 5 reports the

statistical characteristics of market and security returns associated with short–sales and tests for

differences in skewness conditional upon restrictions. Section 6 concludes.



    II.      Literature Review

    Short–sales play an important role in asset pricing models and the theory of portfolio choice.

Most neo-classical models in finance (c.f. Ross, 1976) rely upon the ability of market

participants to take off-setting positions in close economic substitutes in order to enforce a law

of one price. Considerable research in the last decade has explored the effects of short–sales and

frictions in an asset market. For example, Luttmer (1993), Chen (1995, 2001), He and Modest

(1997), Hansen and Jagannathan (1997), Jouini and Kallal (2001), Duffie, Garleanu and

Pedersen (2002) all address the effect of market frictions and seek to characterize the magnitude

of mispricing that may obtain. Diamond and Verecchia (1987) explore the effects of short–sales



American Economic Review, 5(1) Supplement, Papers and Proceedings, pages 24-68.
4
  Section VI.A in the paper shows that the difference in skewness before and after the change in regulation is not
significantly different from zero.


                                                          4
constraints on the speed of price-adjustment to private information. Recently, Hong and Stein

(2002) develop a heterogeneous agent model linking short–sales constraints to market crashes.

In their model, if some investors are constrained from selling short, their accumulated

unrevealed negative information will not be manifest until the market begins to drop, which

further aggravates market declines and leads to a crash. They motivate the model with the

observation that the U.S. market displays negative skewness.

       Most of the research cited above suggests that short–sales constraints have an adverse

effect on efficiency—the only question is how much. On the other hand, an interesting

exception is the argument of Allen and Gale (1991) who point out that the potential for financial

innovation renders short selling a destabilizing influence in the economy. This is potentially

interesting in light of our findings that short sales tend to be allowed in major markets where

financial innovations occur—particularly with respect to capital structure and new security

development -- and that these markets also tend to display relatively higher negative skewness

in returns. Bernardo and Welch (2002) develop a model describing how the fear of financial

crisis, instead of a real liquidity shock, is the true cause of financial crises. One implication of

their model is that putting constraints that hinder some market participants from front-running

other investors can effectively prevent financial crisis from happening, supporting the finding of

Allen and Gale (1991) that short sales can potentially destabilize the economy.

   Empirical evidence on short selling largely supports the theoretical view that constraining it

hinders price discovery. In a recent paper, Jones and Lamont (2002) use early 20th Century U.S

data to show that stocks which are expensive to short have high valuations and low subsequent

returns. Their finding is consistent with the hypothesis that difficult-to-short stocks are over-

priced. Using data on DotComs, Ofek and Richardson (2002) show that short–sales constraints,

in the form of stock option lock–ups, have considerable and persistent negative impact on



                                                 5
subsequent stock returns, also supporting the argument that stock prices do not fully incorporate

information under short–sales constraints. Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002) use a comprehensive

dataset of short sales, and find that short–selling restrictions have a mixed impact on the

profitability of well–known arbitrage strategies.

   Short selling requires the ability to borrow securities. As we will discuss in this study,

securities borrowing and lending can directly determine the costs of short selling and hence

should be considered in conjunction with short–sales constraints. In our empirical analysis, we

classify countries into categories according to whether short selling is practiced. Although short

selling is allowed in some countries, securities borrowing and lending is so limited that short

sales are not really feasible. D’Avolio (2002) provides empirical evidence about securities

borrowing and lending in U.S. stock markets that demonstrates considerable cross-sectional

variation in the feasibility of maintaining short positions, depending on the divergence of market

opinion.

   Short selling is an important tool used by speculators to exploit over-priced securities.

Bekaert and Harvey (2000) explore the importance of speculators in emerging market

efficiency. They find that the cost of capital, an indicator of market efficiency, decreases after a

capital market liberalization. They stress the importance of a regulatory change to a country’s

openness to speculators—this would naturally extend to short–sales restrictions and thus our

work fits naturally into the literature on the globalization of capital markets. Harvey and co-

authors have also contributed to our knowledge about skewness in returns, although their

findings are not explicitly connected to capital market regulatory changes per se. In a series of

studies, Harvey and Sidique (1999, 2000a, 200b) point out that return skewness appears to be

priced in both the U.S. and the world capital market. If regulators’ believe that short selling

regulation can indeed prevent market crises, then Harvey and Sidique’ research suggests that



                                                    6
there should be implications for expected returns and volatility in financial markets around the

world.

   There are a few key empirical studies that seek to understand the impact of short–sales

regulations on return distributions using international data. Aitken et al. (1998) offer evidence

from the Australian Stock Exchange suggesting that short sales trades reflect significant bad

news about companies. Poitras (2002) concludes that rights issues trade below the arbitrage

boundary because of short sale restrictions on the Stock Exchange of Singapore (SES). Biais et

al. (1999) use data from the Paris Bourse and show that a market with short–sales constraints

reflects good news significantly faster than bad news. Li and Fleisher (2002), using Chinese

stock market data, find that the dispersion of domestic analysts’ forecasts is negatively

correlated to stock returns in the A-share market, where short–sales restrictions are binding, and

not significantly related to the return of B-shares where short–sales restrictions are not binding.

Studying the impact of short–sales constraints in an international setting avoids potential

country specific factors and generalizes the findings on short–sales regulations.

   In sum, most theory and empirical evidence from the U.S. and non-U.S. markets suggest that

short–sales constraints are an impediment to price discovery—particularly when the news is

bad. Some theories argue that limiting short–sales may be necessary under certain conditions to

achieve equilibrium, however thus far there is no empirical test of the contrary proposition.



   III.    Short–Sales Restrictions Around the World

   Our main data source for short–sales regulation and practice is information provided by

investment banks. The Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Global Network Management Division

(GNM) has compiled information regarding short–sales regulation, impediments and practices

from their global network of sub-custodian banks for 59 countries, and they made a summary of



                                                7
this research available to us. We obtained similar information from the International Securities

Lending Division at Goldman Sachs (ISL). The ISL complements the information from GNM in

two important aspects. It provides detailed information on the tax effects of short positions, the

settlement cycle of short sales, and the registration requirements for shorting in 46 countries.

There are some countries for which the GNM and ISL data indicates that short selling is not

practiced despite the fact that a widely used guide, the Worldwide Directory of Securities

Lending and Repo (WDSLP), lists institutional investors involved in short sales in those

countries. In these cases, we contacted the listed institutions to understand the discrepancy. In

most cases we found they were not active in short sales, or else they were mostly focused on

securities lending. An exception is Singapore where it appears that, even though short selling is

not formally allowed, it is widely practiced, although short sales are typically executed off-

exchange between depository agents. We obtained additional information on securities trading,

settlement and tax laws from the International Securities Services Association (ISSA)

Handbook, however ISSA only provides current information on these issues.

       In addition to information provided by investment banks, industry publications and

market participants, we contacted the equivalent of the Securities and Exchange Commissions

of the 59 countries in the GNM dataset to learn what we could from them about regulation and

practice. Information from market regulators was particularly useful in allowing us to track the

history of short–sales regulations for each country over the last fifteen years. With their help we

are able to examine some key regulatory regime shifts in our empirical analysis. We found in

general that the information provided by practitioners was more detailed than the information

from regulators, although it should not be surprising that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley

Dean Witter know more about market practice than regulators themselves. For instance, in one

case, regulators told us that short–selling was not practiced in their market, while ISL indicated



                                                8
that most of the short–selling transactions for that market take place offshore—outside the

purview of the regulatory agency. What regulators may lack in specific knowledge about market

practice they typically make up for in interest in the current project. Many of the regulatory

agencies we contacted expressed a strong desire to learn the results of our study, because the

question of the efficacy of short–sales restrictions continue to be an issue of interest.

         Our information about short–sales regulations and practice is summarized in Table 1.

Out of the 59 countries in the GNM dataset, we exclude the countries for which we could not

find individual firm stock price data. This leaves a sample of 47 countries. In 35 of them, short

selling is currently allowed, at least as of December 2001, the final date of our sample period. In

12 of these 47, short–sales were prohibited for the entire sample period of January, 1990 to

December, 2001. In 12 of the 35 countries where short–sales are currently allowed, restrictions

existed in 1990 but were lifted at some point within the sample period. These countries are:

Chile, Hong Kong, Hungary, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Spain,

Sweden, Thailand, and Turkey. In three cases—Malaysia, Hong Kong, and Thailand—

restrictions on short selling were removed and later re-enacted gradually.5


5
  In Malaysia, the Securities Commission issued in December 1995 the Guidelines on Securities Borrowing and
Lending, and the Securities Industry Act of 1993 was amended to allow short sales. The regulatory changes came
into force on March 7, 1996, and allowed the local exchange—the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange—to enact short–
selling rules. With that, regulated short selling commenced on September 30, 1996. However, in August 28, 1997,
and in the onset of the Asian financial crises, these activities were suspended as interim measures to prevent
excessive volatility in the markets. In February, 2001 the Securities Commission launched a plan—the Capital
Market Masterplan—that recommended the re-introduction of short selling and securities lending activities.
In Hong Kong, short selling was prohibited before January 3, 1994. The SEHK then allowed 17 out of the 33
constituent stocks of the Hang Seng Index (HSI) to be sold short subject to several restrictions. These restrictions
were lifted on March 25, 1996 at the same time that 113 of the firms listed on the exchange, including all the
constituent stocks of the index, were allowed to be sold short.

 In Thailand, the Securities Exchange Commission first enforced short–sales regulations on July, 1997, suspending
them because of the currency crises. Beginning on January 1, 1998, short sales were allowed again in the Thai
capital market, through financial institutions licensed to operate securities borrowing and lending (SBL) business.
The practice of short selling has increased gradually: in 1999 there were only three securities companies licensed to
operate SBL. Although ISL and GND characterize Thailand as a country where short sales are a common practice,
market regulators were aware of only one transaction since 1997, apart from “mistaken” transactions done by
brokers.



                                                          9
           There is clearly a difference between what the law allows and what is common practice.

Although short selling is currently legal in most countries, it is only practiced in 28. In some

countries, tax rules make shorting very difficult. In Chile for instance, although short selling and

securities lending have been possible since 1999, they are rarely used because lending is

considered an immediate, taxable sale. Given that there is no sale price, the relevant price is the

highest price of the stock on the day it is lent; if it is higher than the purchase price, capital gains

tax will apply. In Turkey, stock lending is treated as a normal transaction by the tax authorities,

and as such it is liable to capital gains tax where applicable. In Finland, transfer laws also place

a serious burden on this activity. In countries like the Philippines or Turkey, short selling is

allowed, but the rules are not yet clearly defined. In Thailand, evidence of the practice is murky.

Regulators in that country believe that short selling is not practiced because the market for

borrowing stock is very narrow, especially on the supply side, due to the absence of a futures

market.

                                         [Insert Table 1 here]

           There are some other features of short–selling practices throughout the world that are

relevant for our purposes. In some markets only the largest and most liquid stocks may be

shorted. Until 1996, Hong Kong only allowed short sales in securities specifically designated by

the Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Ltd. A similar rule currently operates in Greece. More

objective criteria are found in Poland, where any security with a market capitalization of at least

250 million zloty qualifies. We adopt the convention of classifying Hong Kong as a country

where short selling is allowed only after 1996, even though it was allowed for a subset of stocks

beginning in 1994.6 For Poland and Greece, GNM reports that short selling is not practiced.



6
    See footnote 5.


                                                  10
           We also regard short selling as allowed and practiced in a country even if some investors

are prohibited from entering into these transactions. In Sweden, for example, traders can go

short without having borrowed the shares in advance,7 while individual investors must borrow

the shares before they go short. In Greece prior to 2001, short selling was only available to the

members of the Athens Derivatives Exchange.                      Some countries only impose short–sales

restrictions on foreign investors. In Brazil, for instance, a short seller must have a domestic legal

representative. In India, foreign investors are prohibited from short selling. It is fair to say that

for every country in our sample, there exist some constellation of laws, regulations, institutional

norms, variation in practice and fine print governing the ability to take and maintain a short

position in a stock. Our challenge in this paper has been to categorize them in economically

meaningful ways.

           Although the actual practice of short selling depends upon laws, regulation, frictions and

costs in markets, we are forced to reduce the complexities to a single dimension for purposes of

analysis. We classify countries in our sample into four groups, depending on whether short

selling is legal and practiced. This classification of course misses the nuances of expenses and

risks that potentially characterize differences in short selling across international markets.

Never-the-less, even this basic simplification yields interesting results. In the first group we

have the countries where short selling became legal some time before 1990, and where short

selling is currently practiced. This group includes the U.S., the U.K., Australia, Austria,

Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic,8 Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan,

Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Portugal, South Africa, and Switzerland. The second

group consists of countries in which short sales were prohibited as of December, 2001. These

7
    They must borrow the stock before the end of the day, however.




                                                         11
are: Colombia, Greece, Indonesia, Jordan, Pakistan, Peru, Singapore, the Slovak Republic,

South Korea, Taiwan, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe. The third group is comprised of countries in

which short selling is allowed but rarely practiced: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Finland, India,

Israel, New Zealand, the Philippines, Poland, Spain,9 and Turkey. Finally, the remaining five

countries—Hong Kong, Norway, Sweden, Malaysia, and Thailand—comprise a group for

which short–sales regulation and practice changed sometime between January, 1990 and

December, 2001.




    IV.      Equity Market Data and Sources

    The international return, volume and issue data for the 47 markets in our study come from

Datastream, and our U.S. data come from CRSP. Prices and returns are measured in local

currency. We construct value-weighted market indices for each country in the sample. It is

important to note that the number of firms per country varies across years, and thus the volatility

of the market index might vary with time as a consequence, since there are typically fewer

constituent firms in the indices for some countries in the earlier years of the sample.10 For this

reason we estimate a year-fixed effects model in most of our statistical analysis.

    We obtain accounting data from Worldscope for non-U.S. firms, and Compustat for U.S.

firms. We also obtain country information from the Economist Intelligence Unit database and

from the World Bank. In particular, we characterize each country in our sample by its

geographical size, the GDP per capita, and the variance of GDP growth. Finally, we construct an


8
  The Prague Stock Exchange was established on November 1992, and the automated trading system started
operations in January 1993. We include the Czech Republic in the group of countries where short selling is allowed
and practiced, although we only have data on Czech firms since 1993.
9
  Chile made short selling legal only in 2000, but there is no current practice. Spain legalized short selling in 1992,
but only securities lending facilities are common among institutions, as a way of facilitating hedging strategies.
10
   Datastream has an acceptable coverage only after 1995.


                                                          12
index of good government following MYY, as the sum of indices of corruption, risk of

government repudiation of contracts, and risk of expropriation of private property in La Porta et

al. (1997).

    V.        Short–Sales Restrictions and the Co-movement of Stock Returns

    The first question in our analysis is whether short–sales restrictions play a role in efficient

price discovery. The key implication of Diamond and Verecchia (1987) for example, is that

short–sales constraints impede the market’s ability to rapidly impound value-relevant

information. As the voluminous literature on the efficient market theory suggests, there is no

universal test for relative market efficiency, although event studies and filter rules have a long

history of application. An important recent contribution to the literature on market efficiency is

MYY’s observation that more efficient markets can be expected to have more idiosyncratic risk,

since the ratio of firm-specific information to market-level information is likely to be higher in

informational environments that allow market participants to acquire information and act

quickly and inexpensively upon it. MYY examine international differences in the degree of co-

movement in stock prices across countries around the world, and find that the ratio of

idiosyncratic risk in relatively developed markets is higher than in markets that are commonly

viewed as less developed—particularly emerging markets. In our analysis, we use the MYY

measure as a proxy for market efficiency, and then test whether cross-sectional differences in

short–sales constraints correlate well to it.




              a. Measures of Price Synchronicity

Following MYY, for each country in our sample and for every year, we calculate two aggregate

measures of individual security co-movement.



                                                13
We compute the ratio:


                                          f it =
                                                          [
                                                     max nitup , nitdown   ]                (1)
                                                              nit

where nit is the number of stocks in country i and week t, nitup is the number of stocks whose

price rise in week t, and nitdown is the number of stocks whose price fall. We then average the f’s

across countries and years, that is:

                                                                δ iT
                                                                 ∑ f it
                                                                t =1
                                                       f iT =                               (2)
                                                                 δ iT

where δiT is the number of trading weeks in country i and year T. The ratio of stocks moving

together varies between 0.5 and 1, numbers closer to 1 indicate more co-movement. MYY argue

that more co-movement implies less efficient price discovery in the market, since stock specific

information is presumably the driver of any deviation in co-movement among stocks. Thus,

cross-sectional idiosyncratic risk is another potential way to capture this intuition. We thus also

compute the R2 for regressions of the form:

                                rijt = α ij + β i rmjt + ε ijt                              (3)


That is, we regress weekly stock returns on the value-weighted market return, for every firm i

and in every year (where week t belongs to year T). We then average the R2s for each country j

and for every year T, as in MYY:


                                                 2
                                         ∑ RijT SSTijT
                                R 2jT = i                                                   (4)
                                            ∑ SSTijT
                                             i


where SST is the sum of squares in regression (3).


                                                         14
       MYY find that developing economies display significantly higher levels of co-

movement than more developed ones. In particular, they find that co-movement is explained in

the cross-section by the GDP per capita. They provide several hypotheses why this can happen,

and show that, when interacted with an index of good government, the significance of the GDP

per capital disappears.

       One potentially important explanation for such a pattern is that smaller countries have

less-diversified stock markets. To address this issue, MYY use country-level and industry-level

Herfindahl indices. The former captures the cross-industry concentration based upon sales, the

latter captures the average within-industry concentration based upon sales.       To see how this

might work, consider some extreme examples: Finland and Norway vs. the U.S. In Finland,

Nokia represents more than 50% of the market capitalization of the Helsinki Stock Exchange. In

terms of domestic sales, the telecommunications giant accounts for 5% of the total sales in the

country, and 19.6% of the sales in its industry. Indeed, Telecom Equipment accounted for

22.82% of the total sales of Finnish companies.

       The country-Herfindahl index for Finland is 12.28. This is not dramatically higher than

the a median of 11.02 for all the countries in the sample. The industry-Herfindahl index for

Finland is 8.29 (compared to a median 7.11 for the whole sample). This means that, even though

the telecom industry is highly concentrated, the other industries are not. In contrast, Norway,

has a country-Herfindahl measure of 73, and an industry-Herfindahl measure of 17.82. In this

case it is driven by the natural resources industries that represent the bulk of the industrial

production in Norway. For the U.S., the country-Herfindahl measure is 4.45 in 2001, and the

industry-Herfindahl measure is 2.25%. Thus, Norway has a low cross-sectional dispersion in

firm returns due to its industrial structure, not necessarily because of relative market efficiency,

and the Herfindahl indices appear to be a useful control.


                                                15
           In our analysis, we replicate as closely as possible the estimation and control variables

used in MYY, adding a short–sales indicator variable. We construct indices of industry

concentration (by industry and country, as described in their paper), indices of earnings

comovement,11 and calculate the number of listed firms in each country and year. The short–

sales indicator is a dummy variable that equals one whenever short selling is allowed and

practiced in a given country and year, and zero otherwise. If a country changed its regulation in

a given year, we eliminate that observation from the sample. Our final panel with complete data

includes 503 observations. The earnings co-movement index is available for only a subset of

countries. When we use it the number of observations is reduced to 268. We estimate the model

with year–fixed effects and country–fixed effects. We control for several country–and–year

specific factors, such as the GDP per capita, the country and industry Herfindahl indices and the

earnings co-movement index. Whenever country–fixed effects are not used, we additionally

control for time–invariant variables, like the geographical size of the country, the variance in

GDP growth, and the good government index. As in MYY, the dependent variable is

transformed into a continuous variable over the range [-∞,+∞]. We report the results of the

estimation in Table 2.

                                               [Insert Table 2 here]




           b. Results

           The first panel in Table 2 replicates the MYY results, although our sample is

significantly different in time and cross-section from theirs. Despite these sample differences,

we generally confirm the MYY finding that countries with higher GDP per capita display lower


11
     Since we replicate the procedure in MYY, we do not provide details on how these variables are computed.


                                                         16
stock price synchronicity.    The only exception is that in our first specification with both

country– and year–fixed effects, the coefficient on log-GDP per capita is positive and

significant. In this case, the GDP per capita must be interpreted strictly in a time–series sense:

stock price co-movement increases in a country as its GDP per capita grows. The economic

interpretation of this positive relationship is not clear, however the sign on GDP becomes

negative as we eliminate either country– or year–fixed effects in other specifications. The good

government index is also statistically significant, with two caveats: (i) the coefficient displays

different signs depending on the specification, and (ii) the GDP per capita does not become

insignificant once the good government index is introduced in the regression. We suspect these

differences are due to the larger cross-section of countries we use in our analysis, but they could

also be due to the fact that there have been secular changes in the residual risk component in

different countries. In recent years, Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001) for example, note

a dramatic downward shift in residual risk for the U.S. If other countries experienced similar

trends in residual risk, then the cross-sectional correlation to other variables could certainly

change.

       The second panel in Table 2 shows that lifting short–sales restrictions is associated with

an increase in the idiosyncratic portion of stock returns. The coefficient on the short–sales

indicator is negative and significant at the 1 percent level or more in each specification. This

result is evidently not driven by country differences. That is, the description of legal regimes in

Section III shows that, in general, more developed markets allow short selling while developing

markets restrict it. However, the short–selling indicator remains significant when we allow for

both year– and country–fixed effects. This is possible because we have inter-temporal changes

in short–sales practices for some countries in our sample. Moreover, the short–sales indicator is




                                                17
significant after controlling for differences in the GDP per capita across countries, and the

number of listed firms.

       We perform a similar analysis with the R2s of the regressions of stock returns on market

indices. These results are reported in Table 3. Following MYY, we have transformed the R2s to

map them to the set of real numbers. The short–sales indicator is significant and has a negative

coefficient in all specifications, except when country– and year–fixed effects are estimated. The

differences between Table 2 and Table 3 may be due to the non-parametric nature of the

synchronicity measure. Although it does not capture magnitude differences in residual risk, it is

presumably robust to extreme outliers. Using R2s, the GDP per capita becomes insignificant

once we include the short–sales indicator. However, the good government index is either unable

to eliminate the significance of the GDP per capita, or displays a positive coefficient, which

contradicts the findings of MYY. Only when the earnings co-movement index enters the last

regression in the bottom panel in Table 3 do both the government index and the GDP per capita

become insignificant.

                                      [Insert Table 3 here]

In economic terms, a coefficient of –0.431 for the indicator means that for the average country,

the removal of short–selling restrictions reduces the R2 of the average stock by 27%. In other

words, the idiosyncratic risk of the average stock increases by 27%. As we show, this result is

robust to country differences, different time periods, and institutional differences. An economic

rationale for our findings is provided by Campbell et al. (2001), who observe that the proportion

of idiosyncratic risk in the U.S. has increased significantly in recent years. Despite the analyst

scandals characterizing the post-Enron U.S. market, they suggest the trend towards more

residual risk may result from the increasing availability of value-relevant firm-specific

information which may in turn be impounded into stock prices in a liquid market.


                                               18
   VI.     Short–Sales Restrictions and the Distribution of Stock Returns

   In this section we examine the distribution of stock returns conditional upon short–sales

restrictions. We compute statistics for three different series’ for each country. First we construct

weekly stock returns for each firm in our sample with at least 100 daily observations available

in a given year. We also construct time series’ of weekly returns for the corresponding market

indices. Finally, we run, for every year and each firm, regressions specified in equation (3), and

save the residuals from the regression as abnormal firm returns. In a market with many

systematic shocks, firms’ raw returns may primarily reflect systematic shocks and thus the

residual may be of interest. Because equity returns are distributed approximately log-normal, we

transform the three groups of returns into their logarithmic representation, and compute the

skewness, standard deviation, and frequency of extreme returns.

   We find weak evidence that supports regulators’ view that short–selling constraints help

prevent financial panics, at least for individual securities. The distribution of individual stock

returns in our sample are less negatively skewed when short–selling is prohibited. There is also

a significantly lower chance of a negative extreme return when short–selling is prohibited. Both

findings offer some support that short–selling regulations prevent extreme negative returns.

However, we find little evidence that short–sales constraints reduce the negative skewness of

market level returns.




     A. Skewness

   Hong and Stein (2002) develop a model in which investors possess different information

about the value of a stock. Investors with negative information cannot always use it due to



                                                19
short–sale constraints. They would be willing to sell the stock to high–valuation investors, but

they do not necessarily own it. The Hong and Stein model provides a rationale for why stock

returns display negative skewness. Their paper predicts that elevated trading volume should be

associated with increased negative skewness. Indeed, in the accompanying empirical study,

Chen et al. (2002) test the proposition that abnormal turnover is a predictor of negative

skewness. They find consistent evidence on a sample of NYSE and AMEX stocks for the period

July, 1962 to December, 1998: at the firm level, changes in turnover predict future negative

skewness.

         A reasonable implication of the Hong and Stein model is that whenever short–selling

restrictions are removed, skewness should be become less negative. Our objective in this section

is to test this proposition.        Given that skewness is almost certainly affected by country– and

time–specific effects, we perform a cross-sectional analysis that controls for these factors. In

addition to the country-specific controls, we follow Chen et al. (2001), who find that the de-

trended turnover and past market returns are predictors of skewness. We construct the average

de-trended turnover for the countries in our sample as follows. We first calculate the de-trended

volume by firm, by subtracting the previous-year volume from the current volume.12 We then

calculate the sum of de-trended volumes for all firms in a given country and year, and divide by

the total number of shares outstanding for all the firms in the country with available data on

volume.13

         Results from the estimation are in Table 4. Interestingly, we find that short–sales

restrictions are associated with less negative, not more negative skewness. The short–sales

indicator explains the skewness of raw and market-adjusted individual stock returns. However


12
  Note that we lose one year of observations for every firm.
13
  We try an alternative specification that consists of calculating the market turnover first, and then de-trending it.
This methodology, similar to Chen et al. (2001), provides qualitatively similar results.


                                                           20
the evidence for the market itself in each country is insignificant once control variables like size

are added.14 We also find that, without controlling for short–sales restrictions, less developed

countries, i.e. those with lower GDP per capita, have more positively skewed returns. However,

the significance of the coefficient disappears once we control for short selling.

                                                 [Insert Table 4 here]

           In sum, for markets in which short selling is either prohibited or not practiced, there is

no evidence that returns display significantly less negative skewness at the individual stock

level. However, at the market level, where the welfare effects are greatest and where regulators

expect short–sales to reduce crashes, it makes little difference whether short sales are allowed

and practiced, once we control for macroeconomic factors.

           In addition to these results we find some evidence consistent with the theoretical model

in Hong and Stein (2002) in that differences of opinion, proxied by the lagged de-trended

turnover, predict more negative skewness. We also find weak evidence that lagged market

returns help predict negative skewness. The coefficient on lagged market returns is negative

and significant only when the dependent variable is the skewness of raw returns.




           B. Volatility of Returns

           In Table 5 we study the effect of short–sales restrictions on the volatility of individual

stock returns. We calculate the average standard deviation of individual stock returns, and use

its logarithm as endogenous variable in the regressions, hence it can take any real value. As

usual, we employ country– and time–specific variables

                                                     [Insert Table 5 here]

14
     In a specification that does not control for year and GDP effects we find a significant association between short-


                                                            21
         The coefficient for the short–sales indicator is always negative and significant at the 1

percent level—consistent with the association of short–sales restrictions and higher return

volatility—except for the case in which we use country– and year–fixed effects. Returns are

more volatile in less developed countries, but the significance of the result disappears once we

control for the good government index. In that regard, better–governed countries display lower

return volatility. Returns are also less volatile in countries with less volatile fundamentals—

measured by the variance in GDP growth and the earnings co-movement index. In general, our

analysis of the cross-sectional differences in the volatility of returns conditional upon short–

selling restrictions should be considered in light of the potential that any association uncovered

between the two might be driven by reverse causality. Riskier markets in general are more

likely to pose concerns for regulators whose goals presumably include investor protection.




         C. Crashes

         C.1. Sample of All Countries

Arguably the most important rationale for short–sales restrictions is that short selling is

responsible for recent market crashes in the world financial market—particularly the 1987

market crash and the 1997 Asian crisis. Our objective in this section is to evaluate the empirical

evidence for such a view.

         The main difficulty in estimating the probability and severity of a market crash

conditional upon the existence of short–sales restrictions is the Peso problem: we only have data

on realized crashes. One alternative is to measure the extent of market drops during crisis events

depending upon the existence of short–selling restrictions. However, this would not answer the



sales restrictions and a reduction in negative market skewness. We do not report these results in a table.


                                                         22
question of whether crashes are more likely in the presence of short–sellers. If we believe

market regulators, short selling may not trigger a crash, but simply make it more severe.

       We therefore calculate the number of days in our sample period in which stock returns

are below two standard deviations from their previous year average. We divide this number by

the total number of trading days, and then compute the frequency of extreme returns. Under the

assumption that returns are log-normally distributed, the percentage should equal 2.5 percent.

                                      [Insert Table 6 here]

       In Table 6 we regress the frequency of extreme results on a set of explanatory variables.

We do not include the number of listed firms as an explanatory variable because the

denominator in the frequency calculation is the number of trading days per year times the

number of listed firms in a given country and year. Therefore, there is an almost exact linear

relationship between a log transformation of the frequency of extreme events, and the log of the

number of listed firms.

       In Table 6, short–sales restrictions are only weakly and insignificantly associated with

more frequent extreme negative returns. None of the explanatory variables, except for the short–

sales indicator, display a positive coefficient. There is only once specification for which we

reject the null. This is the case in which we use a sub-sample of country–years for which we

have data on earnings co-movement. The evidence from this table suggests that the probability

of extreme negative returns is not likely to be a function of short-sales practices in countries,

but rather determined by other non–specified, country–specific factors.




                                               23
           C.2. Countries with Regulatory Changes

           To shed some light on the relationship between short–sales constraints and extreme

returns, and in order to eliminate a number of the potential cross-sectional differences that might

explain the results thus far, we restrict our attention to the sub-set of countries that changed

regulations over the period 1990–2001. Essentially this should allow a good hedonic control,

country by country, at least under the assumption that the regulatory change is not triggered by

shifts in other characteristics. These countries are Hong Kong, Norway, Sweden, Malaysia, and

Thailand. In the case of Hong Kong, Norway, Sweden, and Thailand, short–selling restrictions

were removed in a specific year (not the same calendar year for each country). In Malaysia—as

we detail in section III—short selling was allowed only for the period 1995–1997, and was then

prohibited again in 1997 at the onset of the Asian financial crises.

                                                 [Insert Table 8 here]

           Table 8 reports the frequency of extreme events for the five countries, around the year in

which short sales become effective. We calculate the average by year-to-event,15 and find that,

on average, the frequency of extreme returns is 3.69 percent one year after restrictions are lifted.

In some years, however, extreme returns are too frequent (7.28 percent year t+5, 7.10 percent in

year t+6). In Norway, Malaysia, and Hong Kong, extreme returns are more frequent in all but

one of the periods, compared to period t-1, in which short sales are allowed. In Sweden, the

frequency of extreme results is higher after 1991 than in 1990, one year before the lifting of

short–selling restrictions. However, in Thailand the effect of short sales is a reduction of the

percentage of extreme returns, compared to the pre-1997 period. It therefore seems that the

effect of short sales on crashes may be somewhat country–specific.



15
     Malaysia is not included in years after t+2, because short sales were prohibited again in 1997.


                                                            24
           Cross-sectional regression results using yearly information for the aforementioned five

countries are reported in Table 8. We employ the same controls in these regressions as in

previous sections. The power of the results declines substantially as expected, since we have

only 45 observations. Unlike the previous estimates, we find that the frequency of extreme

declines is marginally associated with relaxation of short–sales constraints. The coefficient on

the short–sales indicator is significant at the 10 percent level in two of the specifications when

we do not use country–fixed effects. It also has a time–series interpretation. The lifting of

short–sales restrictions results in an average increase in the frequency of extreme returns. When

we estimate the regression with country– and year– fixed effects (the first model), we find some

support for the hypothesis that short sales increase the probability of a crisis. We certainly find

no evidence in favor of a positive relationship between short–sales restrictions and severity of

market crashes.

                                                 [Insert Table 8 here]




           D. Kernel Estimation of Return Distributions

Thus far, we have looked at various statistics of conditional distributions. It is instructive,

however, to look at the return densities themselves. We perform a kernel estimation of a density

functions of stock returns with and without short–sales constraints that fits the distribution of

returns.16 The advantage of the kernel estimation is that we do not need to constrain the

distribution to be normal, or even symmetric.


16
     The general form of the kernel density estimator is:


                                                          1 n  x − xi 
                                              fˆλ ( x) =     ∑ N      
                                                         nλ i =1  λ 



                                                            25
                                              [Insert Figure 2 here]

         We estimate the kernel density for the market returns, both for the total sample and for

the sub-sample of countries with regulatory changes. Figure 2 plots the histograms of returns, as

well as the densities, depending on the existence of short–selling restrictions. Confirming the

results in Table 4, Figure 2 shows that (i) the distribution of returns is more leptokurtotic when

short sales are allowed and practiced.; and (ii) the distribution of returns is not symmetric.

Conclusions

         Restrictions on short selling of shares are nearly as old as stock markets themselves.

Critics often view short–sales as immoral—the exploitation of others’ misfortune and an

exacerbating factor in periods of market crisis. As recently as the Asian currency crisis of 1997,

short–sellers were blamed by politicians and journalists for helping to destroy the “Asian

Miracle.” In the current environment with the growth of hedge funds, concerns about the danger

of allowing speculation frequently surface. There is at least some common suspicion that short

selling can exacerbate market crashes. Most academic researchers, however, make a strong

theoretical case for allowing short–sales in markets. Their case is based upon the notion that

markets exist to facilitate the efficient pricing of assets, and that restricting short–sales reduces


where N(·) is the kernel function, that we specify to be standard normal, λ is the bandwidth parameter, n is the

sample size, and xi is the ith observation. The kernel density minimizes the mean integrated squared error ηλ:


                                          (                   )             (       )
                              η λ = ∫  E fˆλ ( x) − f ( x) dx + ∫ Var fˆλ ( x) dx
                                                            2

                                    x                             x

where λ is the one that minimizes the estimated mean integrated square error:



                                                          (       )
                                                      2
                               1                                  2
                                                                             ∫ ( N (t ) ) dt
                                                                           1
                          ηˆλ = λ4  ∫ t 2 N (t )dt  ∫ f ' ' ( x) dx +                2
                               4 t                    x                 nλ t



                                                          26
market efficiency. Recent empirical evidence by researchers, particularly Jones and Lamont

(2001) provides some support for the hypothesis that difficulty in short selling is associated with

security mispricing. In this paper, we survey short–selling regulations and practices for major

stock markets around the world. We find empirical evidence in support of both views. Using a

market efficiency measure developed by Mørck et al (2000), we find a negative association

between short–sales restrictions and the diffusion of value-relevant information into prices. Our

analysis of the statistical characteristics of markets, specifically the standard deviation and

skewness of log returns, suggests that short–sales restrictions are more common in high-

volatility countries, but that the restrictions are also weakly associated with less negative

skewness in individual stock returns.




                                                27
References


Aitken, Michael, Alex, Frino, Michael S. McCorry, and Peter L. Swan, 1998, Short Sales Are
Almost Instantaneously Bad News: Evidence from the Australian Stock Exchange, Journal of
Finance, 2205-2223


Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1991, Arbitrage, Short Sales, and Financial Innovation,
1991, Econometrica 59(4), 1041-1068


Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets, Journal of Finance, 565-613


Bernardo, Antonio, and Ivo Welch, 2002, Financial Market Runs, working paper, Yale School
of Management, New Haven, CT


Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, and Jean-Paul Decamps, 1999, Short–sales constraints,
Liquidity and Price Discovery: An Empirical Analysis on the Pris Bourse, European Financial
Management 5(3), 395-409


Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel and Yexiao Xu , 2001, “Have Individual
Stocks Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of
Finance 56(1), 1-43


Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy Stein, 2001, Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume,
Past Returns, and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices, Journal of Financial Economics 61(3),
345-381.


Chen, Zhiwu, 1995, “Financial Innovation and Arbitrage Pricing in Frictional Economies,”
Journal of Economic Theory, 65(1), February, 117-135.


Chen, Zhiwu, 2001, “Viable Costs and Equilibrium Prices in Frictional Securities Markets,”
Annals o Economics and Finance, 2(2), 297-323.


D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The Market for Borrowing Stock, Journal of Financial Economics,
66(2), pages 271-306.


De Marchi, Neil and Paul Harrison, 1994, “’Trading in the Wind’ with Guile: The Troublesome
Matter of the Short Selling of Shares in Seventeenth Century Holland,” History of Political
Economy Supplement, 26(0), pages 47-65.



                                             28
Diamond, Douglas, and Robert Verrecchia, 1987, Constraints on Short–selling and Asset Price
Adjustment to Private Information, Journal of Financial Economics 18(2) June, 277-311


Dillen, J.G. van, 1930, Isaac Le Maire en de Handle in Action der Oost-Indische Companie,”
Economisch-historisch Jaarboek.


Duffie, Darrell, Nicholae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2002, Securities Lending,
Shorting and Pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 66(2), pages 307-339.


Erzo G. J. Luttmer, 1996, Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic Discount Factor Models,
Econometrica 64(6), 1439-1467.


Geczy, Christopher C., David K. Musto, and Adam V. Reed, 2002, Stocks Are Special Too: An
Analysis of the Equity Lending Market, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 241-269.


Harvey, Campbell, and Akhtar Siddique, 1999, autoregressive Conditional Skewness, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 465-487


Harvey, Campbell, and Akhtar Siddique, 2000a, Conditional Skewness in Asset Pricing Tests,
Journal of Finance 55, 1263-1295


Harvey, Campbell, and Akhtar Siddique, 2000b, Time—Varying Conditional Skewness and the
Market Risk Premium, Research in Banking and Finance 1, 27-60


He, Hua, and David Modest, 1995, Market Frictions and Consumption-based Asset Pricing
Journal of Political Economy, 103(1), 94-117.


Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein, 2002, Differences of Opinion, Short–sales Constraints and
Market Crashes, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.


International Securities Services Association Handbook, 2002.


Jegadeesh Naramsimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1995, Overreaction, Delayed Reaction and
Contrarian Profits, Review of Financial Studies 8, 973-993.


Jouini, E and H, Kallal 2001, Efficient Trading Strategies in the Presence of Market Frictions,
Review of Financial Studies 14(2), 343-369



                                              29
Jones, Charles and Owen Lamont, 2002, Short Sale Constraints and Stock Returns, Journal of
Financial Economics, 66(2), 207-239.


La Porta R., Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997, Law and Finance, Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1112-1155.


Lars Peter Hansen and Ravi Jagannathan, 1997, Assessing Specification Errors in Stochastic
Discount Factor Model, Journal of Finance, 52(2) June, 557-590.


Li, Lianfa, and Belton M. Fleisher, 2002, Heterogeneous Expectations and Stock Prices in
Segmented Markets: Application to Chinese Firms, working paper, Ohio State University.


Montias, John Michael, 1989, Vermeer and His Milieu, Princeton Press, Princeton, NJ.


Mørck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, The Information Content of Stock
Markets: Why do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movement, Journal of
Financial Economics, 58(1), pages 215-260.


Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2002, DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock
Prices, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.


Poitras, Geoffrey, 2002, Short Sales Restrictions, Dilution and the Pricing of Rights Issues on
the Singapore Stock Exchange, Pacific Basin Finance Journal 10(2), 141-62.


Ross, Stephen A., 1976, “The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,” Journal of Economic
Theory 13, 341-360.


Untermyer, Samuel, 1915, Speculation on Stock Exchanges and Public Regulations of the
Exchanges, American Economic Review 5(1), 24-68.


World Directory of Securities Lending and Repo, International Securities Finance Magazine.




                                              30
                                                                             Whether Short
                   When was short              When was securities             Selling is
Country            selling allowed              lending allowed               Practiced                                                                                              Comments

Argentina                  1999                          1991                     No         Equity lending is rare and occurs only between brokers. Short-selling cannot last more than 360 days in a row. Only allowed for 16 stocks.

                                                                                             Securities can be borrowed from ASX and counter party. Cash and non-cash collateral are accepted at 105-110% of the underlying value of the loan
Australia             Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         securities. Collateral is marked-to-market daily.

Austria               Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes

                                                                                             There is no organized market for stock lending and borrowing. A law on securities lending was passed in March 1999 but still pending. There is no official
Belgium               Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         regulation on short selling stocks.
                                                                                             CBLC has been authorized to maintain a securities lending program. Under CVM Instruction No. 249, only entities which offer settlement, registration, and custody services in the Brazilian
Brazil                Before 1990                   Before 1990                   No         market are authorized to provide securities lending services. Accordingly, foreign investors are not authorized to engage in directed/discretionary lending activities that are outside the CBLC
                                                                                             program.


Canada                Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         The market for securities lending is large (40+ billion dollar business )and well developed.

                                                                                             Short-selling cannot last more than 360 days in a row. The entity (including individuals) who is lending the stocks maintains the beneficial ownership, except
Chile               Allowed in 1999               Allowed in 1999                 No         the right to vote.

Colombia               Not allowed                  Not allowed                   No         Securities lending is not authorized.

                                                                                             There is no regulations on short selling since Prague Stock Exchange (PSE) was opened in 1993. IT is possible to sell securities only if absent securities are
Czech Republic        Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         bought or borrowed before the settlement date.

Denmark               Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         No regulatory barriers inhibiting securities lending.


Finland             Allowed in 1998                 Before 1990                   No         The transfer tax laws place a serious burden on the activity.

                                                                                             Securities lending is permitted by law in 1987 and 1988. All establishments (domestic and foreign) are eligible for short-selling as long as they are
France                Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         recognized as counter parties.

Germany               Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         A securities lending facility was created in 1989 to improve market liquidity.


Greece                 Not allowed                  Not allowed                   No         Securities lending and borrowing have been legalized by the Greek Parliament but the operational framework has yet to be established.


Hong Kong           Allowed in 1996                 Before 1990                  Yes         Short selling is allowed for 33 stocks in 1994, and then to a wide range of stocks in 1996.


India                 Before 1990                   Before 1990                   No         Not popular among market players. Not allowed for foreign investors.


Indonesia              Not allowed                Allowed in 1996                 No         No guidelines have been provided by BAPEPAM, The Indonesian Regulatory Authority for the Indonesian Capital Market.


Ireland               Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         Securities lending volume is still limited.

                                                                                             The TASE does not offer a securities lending program to its members. TASE rules indicate that the securities account of a TASE member at clearing house
Israel                Before 1990                   Before 1990                   No         may not enter into a short position intentionally.

Italy                 Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes

Japan                 Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         Allowed for stocks listed on the first section of the exchanges.


Jordan                 Not allowed                  Not allowed                   No

Luxembourg            Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes
                                                                                             Short seling and securities lending were suspended during the regional financial crisis of 1997. With the economic recovery, improvements in report
                 Allowed in 1995, Prohibited   Allowed in 1995, Prohibited
Malaysia               again in 1997                 again in 1997
                                                                                 Yes         requirements, prudential controls and the cessation of trading of KLSE-listed securities offshore, short selling and securities lending are expected to be
                                                                                             restored restored.
                                                                                             The system is generally used as a safeguard against failing to deliver rather than securities lending as a product. Foreign investors are eligible to participate
Mexico                Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         in securities lending through a local broker. Margin is 150%.

Netherlands           Before 1990                   Before 1990                  Yes         There is a central lending facility at the ASE.


New Zealand         Allowed in 1992                 Not allowed                   No         Tax regulations prevents onshore securities lending from taking off.
                                                                Whether Short
                  When was short       When was securities        Selling is
Country           selling allowed       lending allowed          Practiced                                                                                Comments

Norway            Allowed in 1992          Allowed in 1996            Yes         Securities lending is still in the early stages of development and tax implications are being discussed at the Ministry of Finance.


Pakistan            Not allowed             Not allowed               No          There are no regulations that restrict foreign investors from lending or borrowing securities. Short selling is not allowed.

                                                                                  Off shore lending is prohibited. Lima Stock Exchange is considering allowing new activities such as securities lending, short selling and new repo trades in
Peru                Not allowed             Not allowed               No          the future.

Philippines       Allowed in 1998          Allowed in 1998            No          Although the SEC has approved the rules on SBL and short selling, the rules are not yet clearly defined in the market.


Poland            Allowed in 2000           Before 1990               No          Neither the full legal nor operational framework have been established.


Portugal            Before 1990             Before 1990               Yes         Securities lending is allowed and practiced. BVLP charges 10 b.p. annualized over the initial value (maximum days for calculation is 45 ) for this service.


Singapore           Not allowed             Before 1990               Yes         Onshore lending is limited while offshore lending is active.


Slovak Republic     Not allowed             Not allowed               No          Securities lending and borrowing is not allowed under the Securities Act.


South Africa        Before 1990             Before 1990               Yes         Short selling is always allowed in JSE.


South Korea         Not allowed             Before 1990               No          Securities lending and borrowing has not been active to date.

                                                                                  Securities lending and short selling is available since 1992. Since July 1994, SCLV has acted as principal for the lending pool formed by the daily bids from
Spain             Allowed in 1992          Allowed in 1992            No          the clearing members. The load must be reported to the SCLV within two working days of the sale date.

Sweden            Allowed in 1991          Allowed in 1991            Yes         Widely practiced.

                                                                                  Securities lending is legal in Switzerland and there are no restrictions on who may borrow or lend. There is no central lending facility and no stamp duties
Switzerland         Before 1990             Before 1990               Yes         apply to securities lending.

Taiwan              Not allowed             Not allowed               No          Foreign investors are prohibited from borrowing securities on-shore and can only lend securities on-shore to brokers to cover their fails.


Thailand          Allowed in 1997          Allowed in 1999            Yes         Short selling is very limited after being allowed in 1999.


Turkey              Before 1990            Allowed in 1996            No          Securities lending is not widely practiced.


United Kingdom      Before 1990             Before 1990               Yes         Short selling is active in UK.


United States       Before 1990             Before 1990               Yes

                                                                                  Securities lending is not specifically prohibited or provided for under current regulations. Free transfers of securities between different beneficial owners
Venezuela           Not allowed             Not allowed               No          cannot be done without executing a trade on the exchange. Off-shore lending is generally not practiced.

Zimbabwe            Not allowed             Not allowed               No


                    Table 1. Short Selling Restrictions Around the World
                    For each country in the sample, the table describes the date where short selling was allowed if this happened on or after 1990.
                    Otherwise countries are classified as ‘Allowed Before 1990’, or ‘Not Allowed’. Securities Lending refers to the ability of an
                    investor to borrow securities from another party. Short Selling refers to the ability of an investor to sell a borrowed security to a
                    third party. Short Selling is practiced when there are indications from market participants, market regulators, or institutions
                    within a country, that short selling is a common practice. Data is obtained from the Global Network Management Division at
                    Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, the International Securities Lending at Goldman Sachs, the corresponding market regulators, the
                    International Securities Services Association Handbook, and practitioners listed in the Worldwide Directory of Securities
                    Lending and Repo.
                                                                                                                 Dependent Variable : Average Fraction of Stocks Moving Together

                                                             Mean          St. Dev   Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat
Log (Number of Firms)                                         4.63          1.93        -1.379 ***    -13.05        -0.260 ***    -9.88       -0.134 ***    -4.55       -0.017           -0.51        -0.025          -0.80
Log (GDP per capita)                                          9.21          0.88         1.404 ***       5.99       -0.146 ***    -4.21       -0.180 ***    -4.87       -0.066           -1.26        -0.345    **    -2.61
Country Herfindahl Index                                      0.15          0.21                                                                                         0.991     ***    4.02         1.130    ***    4.54
Industry Herfindahl Index                                     0.25          0.27                                                                                        -0.340     *     -1.88        -0.493    **    -2.54
Log (Country Size)                                           12.05          3.63                                                                                         0.020            1.05         0.012           0.60
Variance in GDP growth                                       0.0014        0.0011                                                                                       97.137     ***    3.38       86.044     ***    2.99
Earnings Comovement Index                                     1.69          6.29                                                                                         0.063     ***    3.33         0.076    ***    3.84
Good Government Index                                        23.26          5.04                                                           -1.90E-07 ***    -4.44                                  4.63E-02     **     2.41

Dependent Variable                                             0.79         0.12
Number of Observations                                                                      503                         503                       423                       255                          255
Adjusted R-squared                                                                      84.14%                      61.02%                    62.36%                    68.29%                       68.87%
Year Fixed Effects                                                                      YES                         YES                       YES                       YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                                   YES                          NO                        NO                        NO                           NO


                                                              Mean         St. Dev   Coefficient       t-stat    Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat
Short Selling is Allowed and Practiced                        0.49          0.50        -0.194 **     -2.49         -0.198 *** -3.29          -0.214 *** -3.85          -0.266 *** -2.72             -0.264 *** -2.70
Log (Number of Firms)                                         4.63          1.93         -1.755 ***   -19.90         -0.270 ***   -8.81        -0.112 ***   -3.62        0.030            0.89         0.021           0.66
Log (GDP per capita)                                          9.21          0.88          0.592 *       1.96         -0.069 *     -1.76        -0.135 ***   -3.32       -0.023           -0.37        -0.298    **    -2.18
Country Herfindahl Index                                      0.15          0.21                                                                                         1.032 ***        4.00         1.170    ***    4.47
Industry Herfindahl Index                                     0.25          0.27                                                                                        -0.319 *         -1.97        -0.472    ***   -2.67
Log (Country Size)                                           12.05          3.63                                                                                         0.029            1.53         0.021           1.06
Variance in GDP growth                                       0.0014        0.0011                                                                                       48.716            1.43       39.172            1.17
Earnings Comovement Index                                     1.69          6.29                                                                                         0.072 ***        3.40         0.085    ***    3.91
Good Government Index                                        23.26          5.04                                                           -2.00E-07 ***    -4.70                                  4.57E-02     **     2.33

Dependent Variable                                             0.79         0.12
Number of Observations                                                                      503                         503                       448                       268                          268
Adjusted R-squared                                                                      91.11%                      62.68%                    63.34%                    69.60%                       70.15%
Year Fixed Effects                                                                      YES                         YES                       YES                       YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                                   YES                          NO                        NO                        NO                           NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively




Table 2. Comovement of Stocks: Proportion of Stocks moving together
The dependent variable is the proportion of stocks moving together in each country and year. For each day, we compute the maximum of the number of stocks with positive returns,
and the number of stocks with negative returns, relative to the total number of stocks. We then calculate the average of this ratio for each country and year. The number of firms is
the number of firms with available stock price data in Datastream, in each country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of
every firm in each country and year, relative to the corresponding country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every
industry in each country and year, relative to the corresponding country's total sales. The size of the country is the extension of a country in square kilometers, from
www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated as in Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and
Repudiation of Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The Short Selling variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given
country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from 52 countries with stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the
Economist Intelligence Unit database. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are White-heteroskedasticity consistent.
                                                                                   Dependent Variable : R-squared of regressions of Stock Returns on Market Indices

                                                            Mean         St. Dev   Coefficient        t-stat    Coefficient       t-stat    Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient        t-stat
Log (Number of Firms)                                        4.63         1.93        -1.163 ***     -12.95        -0.129 ***     -6.63        -0.129 ***      -4.05       -0.021          -0.57        -0.022         -0.60
Log (GDP per capita)                                         9.21         0.88        -0.360 **       -2.13        -0.171 ***     -4.56        -0.094 *        -1.86       -0.273 ***      -3.70        -0.312         -1.38
Country Herfindahl Index                                     0.15         0.21                                                                                             -0.351          -0.83        -0.332         -0.78
Industry Herfindahl Index                                    0.25         0.27                                                                                             -0.081          -0.48        -0.103         -0.54
Log (Country Size)                                          12.05         3.63                                                                                             -0.091 ***      -4.14        -0.092 ***     -3.98
Variance in GDP growth                                      0.0014       0.0011                                                                                            93.240 **        3.52       91.682 ***       3.11
Earnings Comovement Index                                    1.69         6.29                                                                                             -0.004          -0.18        -0.002         -0.10
Good Government Index                                       23.26         5.04                                                               1.09E-07 *        1.78                                  6.51E-03           0.22

Dependent Variable                                           0.22          0.20
Number of Observations                                                                   503                           503                         423                         255                          255
Adjusted R-squared                                                                   99.60%                        22.63%                      16.13%                      29.52%                       29.30%
Year Fixed Effects                                                                   YES                           YES                         YES                         YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                                YES                            NO                          NO                          NO                           NO


                                                            Mean         St. Dev   Coefficient        t-stat    Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient        t-stat   Coefficient        t-stat
Short Selling is Allowed and Practiced                       0.49         0.50        -0.144          -1.17        -0.395 *** -4.79             -0.367 *** -4.20            -0.431 *** -4.52            -0.431 *** -4.52
Log (Number of Firms)                                        4.63         1.93         -0.992 ***    -11.40         -0.074 ***    -3.39          -0.100 ***    -2.96         0.047          1.10          0.047         1.10
Log (GDP per capita)                                         9.21         0.88          0.597 *        1.93         -0.054        -1.20           0.007         0.12        -0.160 **      -2.29         -0.153        -0.74
Country Herfindahl Index                                     0.15         0.21                                                                                              -0.250         -0.67         -0.254        -0.67
Industry Herfindahl Index                                    0.25         0.27                                                                                              -0.016         -0.10         -0.012        -0.07
Log (Country Size)                                          12.05         3.63                                                                                              -0.072 ***     -3.26         -0.072 ***    -3.13
Variance in GDP growth                                      0.0014       0.0011                                                                                             23.107          0.78        23.341          0.74
Earnings Comovement Index                                    1.69         6.29                                                                                               0.012          0.47          0.012         0.44
Good Government Index                                       23.26         5.04                                                               1.05E-07 *        1.72                                  -1.12E-03         -0.04

Dependent Variable                                           0.22          0.20
Number of Observations                                                                   503                           503                         448                         268                          268
Adjusted R-squared                                                                   99.64%                        23.37%                      20.05%                      33.66%                       33.43%
Year Fixed Effects                                                                   YES                           YES                         YES                         YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                                YES                            NO                          NO                          NO                           NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively




Table 3. Comovement of Stocks: R-squared
The dependent variable is the average R-squared of by-firm and year regressions of weekly stock returns on the market index. The number of firms is the number of firms with available stock price data in Datastream,
in each country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every firm in each country and year, relative to the corresponding country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl
index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every industry in each country and year, relative to the corresponding country's total sales. The size of the country is the extension of a country in square
kilometers, from www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated as in Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and Repudiation of
Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The Short Selling variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes
firms from 52 countries with stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the Economist Intelligence Unit database. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors a
                                                                           Dependent Variable: Mean Skewness of Individual Stock Raw Returns

                                                     Mean       St. Dev Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat    Coeff.              t-stat   Coeff.               t-stat
Short Selling Allowed & Practiced                     0.49        0.50    -0.010         -0.10                                  0.323         0.60       -1.983 **     -2.24         -2.024 **       -2.27        -2.021 **        -2.32
Log (Number of Firms)                                 4.63        1.93     -0.049         -0.30        0.214         1.15        0.332         1.43       -0.240        -0.53         -0.076          -0.17         -0.053          -0.10
Log (GDP per capita)                                  9.21        0.88      0.092          0.15       -0.742 *      -1.90       -0.958 ***    -2.36       -1.131        -1.41          4.021   ***     3.05          3.887   ***     3.02
Country Herfindahl Index                              0.15        0.21                                                                                     1.957         0.59         -0.637          -0.19         -0.746          -0.22
Industry Herfindahl Index                             0.25        0.27                                                                                    -2.096        -0.92          0.786           0.31          0.819           0.33
Log (Country Size)                                   12.05        3.63                                                                                     0.370 *       1.77          0.518   **      2.48          0.519   **      2.57
Variance in GDP growth                                0.00        0.00                                                                                  -843.526 **     -2.23      -664.567    **     -2.01      -685.497    **     -2.01
Earnings Comovement Index                             1.69        6.29                                                                                     0.402 **      2.04          0.169           0.86          0.180           0.95
Good Government Index                                23.26        5.04                                                                                                            -8.57E-01    ***    -3.38     -8.45E-01    ***    -3.41
Lagged Turnover                                      0.073       0.406                                                                                                                                              -0.001          -0.07
Lagged Market Return                                 0.022       0.384                                                                                                                                              -0.066   **     -2.30

Dependent Variable                                   -0.095       0.484
Number of Observations                                                             503                   503                       503                       300                        300                           300
Adjusted R-squared                                                             14.78%                 2.03%                     2.53%                     6.02%                      9.29%                         3.42%
Year Fixed Effects                                                             YES                   YES                       YES                       YES                        YES                           YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                          YES                   NO                        NO                        NO                         NO                            NO


                                                                           Dependent Variable: Skewness of Market Returns

                                                     Mean       St. Dev Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat    Coeff.              t-stat   Coeff.               t-stat
Short Selling Allowed & Practiced                     0.49        0.50    -1.021         -1.37                                 -0.087        -0.63       -0.219        -1.06         -0.222          -1.07        -0.246           -1.19
Log (Number of Firms)                                 4.63        1.93      1.870 **       2.17       -0.057 *      -1.74       -0.061        -1.58        0.005         0.05          0.015           0.16          0.076           0.72
Log (GDP per capita)                                  9.21        0.88     -3.006         -0.86       -0.226 ***    -3.05       -0.204 **     -2.25       -0.235        -1.47          0.083           0.22          0.009           0.02
Country Herfindahl Index                              0.15        0.21                                                                                     0.421         0.78          0.261           0.49          0.332           0.64
Industry Herfindahl Index                             0.25        0.27                                                                                    -0.995 ***    -3.01         -0.817 **       -2.22         -0.878   **     -2.38
Log (Country Size)                                   12.05        3.63                                                                                    -0.073        -1.04         -0.064          -0.90         -0.076          -1.08
Variance in GDP growth                                0.00        0.00                                                                                  -186.803 ***    -3.50      -175.745 ***       -3.24      -199.895    ***    -3.38
Earnings Comovement Index                             1.69        6.29                                                                                    -0.124        -1.59         -0.138 *        -1.74         -0.149   *      -1.90
Good Government Index                                23.26        5.04                                                                                                            -5.30E-02           -1.14     -4.38E-02           -0.93
Lagged Turnover                                      0.073       0.406                                                                                                                                              -0.004   **     -2.46
Lagged Market Return                                 0.022       0.384                                                                                                                                              -0.002          -0.22

Dependent Variable                                   1.745        5.809
Number of Observations                                                             503                   503                       503                       300                        300                      300.000
Adjusted R-squared                                                             70.75%                 5.97%                     5.62%                     2.59%                      2.68%                         3.99%
Year Fixed Effects                                                             YES                   YES                       YES                       YES                        YES                           YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                          YES                   NO                        NO                        NO                         NO                            NO


                                                                           Dependent Variable: Mean Skewness of Individual Stock Abnormal Returns

                                                      Mean      St. Dev Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat   Coeff.           t-stat    Coeff.              t-stat   Coeff.               t-stat
Short Selling Allowed & Practiced                      0.49       0.50     0.007          0.08                                  0.277         0.55       -1.743 **     -2.47         -1.777 **       -2.54        -1.955 *** -2.87
Log (Number of Firms)                                  4.63       1.93     -0.165         -1.42        0.106         0.71        0.139         0.73       -0.262        -0.63         -0.124          -0.30          0.157           0.39
Log (GDP per capita)                                   9.21       0.88     -0.289         -0.88       -0.227        -0.75       -0.236        -0.69       -0.212        -0.41          4.128   ***     3.44          3.867   ***     3.31
Country Herfindahl Index                               0.15       0.21                                                                                     3.169         1.26          0.984           0.39          1.138           0.46
Industry Herfindahl Index                              0.25       0.27                                                                                    -2.086        -1.10          0.342           0.17          0.233           0.11
Log (Country Size)                                    12.05       3.63                                                                                     0.180         1.18          0.304   *       1.89          0.263   *       1.71
Variance in GDP growth                               0.0014     0.0011                                                                                  -717.867 ***    -2.82      -567.098    **     -2.39      -666.787    ***    -2.87
Earnings Comovement Index                              1.69       6.29                                                                                     0.362 **      2.21          0.166           1.07          0.126           0.85
Good Government Index                                 23.26       5.04                                                                                                            -7.22E-01    ***    -3.95     -6.87E-01    ***    -3.89
Lagged Turnover                                       0.073      0.406                                                                                                                                              -0.017   *      -1.69
Lagged Market Return                                  0.022      0.384                                                                                                                                               0.010           0.54

Dependent Variable                                   -0.162       0.395
Number of Observations                                                             503                   503                       503                       300                        300                      300.000
Adjusted R-squared                                                             40.43%                 1.78%                     1.83%                     6.47%                     10.81%                       11.85%
Year Fixed Effects                                                             YES                   YES                       YES                       YES                        YES                           YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                          YES                   NO                        NO                        NO                          NO                           NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively




Table 4. Short Selling Restrictions and Skewness of Stock Returns
The dependent variable is the skewness of log(1+r), where r denotes stock returns in each country and year. The skewness of raw returns is calculated as the skewness of the total sample of weekly stock
returns in each country and year. The skewness of abnormal returns is the skewness of log(1+u), where u is the residual of a regression of weekly stock returns on the market index, for each firm in every
country and year. The skewness of the market return is the skewness of the value-weighted market index return, in each country and year. The number of firms is the number of firms with available stock
price data in Datastream, in each country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every firm in each country and year, relative to the corresponding
country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every industry in each country and year, relative to the corresponding country's total sales. The
size of the country is the extension of a country in square kilometers, from www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated as in Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the
sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and Repudiation of Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The Short Selling variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed
and practiced in a given country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from 52 countries with stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the
Economist Intelligence Unit database. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are White-heteroskedasticity consistent.
                                                                                Dependent Variable : Average Standard Deviation of Individual Stock Returns

                                                          Mean          St. Dev Coefficient    t-stat   Coefficient       t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat
Short Selling is Allowed and Practiced                    0.49           0.50       0.058       1.33       -0.101 ***     -3.19       -0.103     ***   -3.14       -0.100     ***   -3.05       -0.260     ***   -7.02
Log (Number of Firms)                                     4.63           1.93       0.047       0.95        0.051 ***      4.96        0.046     ***    3.25        0.068     ***    4.60        0.097     ***    5.96
Log (GDP per capita)                                      9.21           0.88      -0.081      -0.52       -0.147 ***     -9.89       -0.112     ***   -5.97        0.020            0.44        0.028            0.54
Country Herfindahl Index                                  0.15           0.21                                                          0.156            1.59        0.324     **     2.42       -0.041           -0.48
Industry Herfindahl Index                                 0.25           0.27                                                         -0.075           -1.07       -0.170     **    -2.36       -0.018           -0.30
Log (Country Size)                                       12.05           3.63                                                          0.001            0.11       -0.002           -0.34        0.032     ***    4.82
Variance in GDP growth                                   0.0014         0.0011                                                        80.493     ***    6.03       81.662     ***    6.16       10.073            0.71
Earnings Comovement Index                                 1.69           6.29                                                                                                                    0.064     ***    4.85
Good Government Index                                    23.26           5.04                                                                                       -0.021 ***      -3.03       -0.021     ***   -2.81

Dependent Variable                                    0.046        0.016
Number of Observations                                                             503                         503                        454                          416                          264
Adjusted R-squared                                                             97.28%                      99.27%                     99.35%                       99.35%                       99.69%
Year Fixed Effects                                                             YES                         YES                        YES                          YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                          YES                          NO                         NO                           NO                           NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively


Table 5. Distribution of Stock Returns and Short-Selling Restrictions
The dependent variable is the standard deviation of individual stock returns, averaged across countries and years. The number of firms is the number of firms with available stock
price data in Datastream, in each country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every firm in each country and year, relative
to the corresponding country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every industry in each country and year, relative to the
corresponding country's total sales. The size of the country is the extension of a country in square kilometers, from www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated
as in Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and Repudiation of Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The
Short Selling variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from
52 countries with stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the Economist Intelligence Unit database. All regressions include year-
fixed effects. Standard errors are White-heteroskedasticity consistent.
                                                                            Dependent Variable : Frequency of Extreme Results (Less than 2 x St. Dev)

                                                        Mean       St. Dev Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient       t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient    t-stat
Short Selling is Allowed and Practiced                  0.49        0.50       0.135         0.65       -0.009         -0.17       -0.030        -0.49       -0.010        -0.16       -0.169 **   -2.18
Log (GDP per capita)                                    9.21        0.88       0.355         0.81       -0.038         -0.95       -0.048        -0.90        0.016         0.15        0.043       0.38
Country Herfindahl Index                                0.15        0.21                                                            0.212         1.08        0.059         0.18        0.332       0.93
Industry Herfindahl Index                               0.25        0.27                                                           -0.159        -1.37       -0.133        -0.72       -0.120      -0.67
Log (Country Size)                                      12.05       3.63                                                           -0.004        -0.29       -0.001        -0.09        0.018       1.31
Variance in GDP growth                                 0.0014      0.0011                                                         -31.398        -1.12      -14.869        -0.51      -25.764      -0.74
Earnings Comovement Index                               1.69        6.29                                                                                                                0.039       1.52
Good Government Index                                   23.26       5.04                                                                                      -0.006       -0.41       -0.006      -0.33

Dependent Variable                                     0.07         0.09
Number of Observations                                                             503                      503                        465                       426                         269
Adjusted R-squared                                                             97.84%                   96.92%                     97.29%                    97.42%                      98.42%
Year Fixed Effects                                                             YES                      YES                        YES                       YES                         YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                          YES                       NO                         NO                        NO                          NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively

Table 6. Frequency of Extreme Returns and Short-Selling Restrictions
The dependent variables is the per year number of trading days where the market return is lower than the average market return minus two standard deviations, divided by the total
number of trading days. The endogenous variable is mapped on the set of real numbers, with the transformation log(x/(1-x)). The mean and standard deviation of the market return is
calculated over the same country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every firm in each country and year, relative to the
corresponding country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every industry in each country and year, relative to the
corresponding country's total sales. The size of the country is the extension of a country in square kilometers, from www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated as in
Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and Repudiation of Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The Short Selling
variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from 52 countries with
stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the Economist Intelligence Unit database. All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard
errors are White-heteroskedasticity consistent.
 Years Relative
  to Change in           Hong
      Law                Kong     Malaysia       Norway      Sweden       Thailand     Average

       -7                                                                   4.85%        4.85%
       -6               1.63%                                               7.58%        4.60%
       -5               4.60%        3.88%                                  4.78%        4.42%
       -4               4.64%        4.61%                                  5.46%        4.90%
       -3               4.52%        4.68%                                  6.58%        5.26%
       -2               3.50%        4.07%       1.87%                      5.54%        3.74%
       -1               3.38%        5.06%       2.08%         1.57%        4.91%        3.40%
        0               4.17%        3.37%       3.59%         1.79%        3.02%        3.19%
        1               4.44%        5.93%       3.78%         1.86%        2.45%        3.69%
        2               3.18%        4.86%       3.42%         2.96%        1.69%        3.22%
        3               3.99%        2.29%       5.07%         4.00%        2.23%        3.82%
        4               6.75%        3.04%       5.27%         2.78%        2.87%        4.42%
        5               7.36%        4.50%      10.71%         3.78%                     7.28%
        6                            3.80%       5.65%         8.56%                     7.10%
        7                                        1.98%         5.02%                     3.50%
        8                                        5.05%         5.39%                     5.22%
        9                                        2.84%         5.75%                     4.29%
       10                                                      2.93%                     2.93%

Law Changed in:          1996         1995         1992         1991         1997


 Table 7. Frequency of Extreme Returns and Short-Selling Restrictions. Countries with Regulatory
 changes only
Number of trading days where the market return is lower than the average market return minus
two standard deviations, divided by the total number of trading days, around the elimination of
short selling restrictions. Only the five countries with regulatory changes between 1990 and
2001–Hong Kong, Norway, Sweden, Malaysia, and Thailand–are considered. The sample
includes firms from these countries with stock price information available from Datastream. For
each firm and year, we calculate the mean and standard deviation of returns, and calculate the
number of days where the return is below the average return, minus two standard deviation. We
aggregate this number by country and year, and divide by the total number of firm-days in the
year with available stock price information.
                                                                            Dependent Variable : Frequency of Negative Extreme Returns (Less than 2 x St. Dev)

                                                       Mean       St. Dev Coefficient          t-stat   Coefficient    t-stat   Coefficient      t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat   Coefficient         t-stat
Short Selling is Allowed and Practiced                  0.33       0.48       0.395 *           1.91        0.295       1.62        0.315 *       1.66        0.326     *      1.77        0.214            1.16
Log (GDP per capita)                                    9.44       0.73      -1.241            -1.11       -0.173 **   -2.06       -0.341 **     -2.10        2.666     **     2.61        1.821            1.59
Country Herfindahl Index                                0.09       0.09                                                             2.271         1.17        6.013     ***    3.11        0.059            0.02
Industry Herfindahl Index                               0.24       0.28                                                             0.025         0.04       -0.874           -1.46        7.520     **     2.53
Log (Country Size)                                     11.71       2.39                                                            -0.070 **     -2.08        0.295     **     2.28       18.496     ***    2.96
Variance in GDP growth                                 0.0021     0.0015                                                          -19.711        -0.40     -917.378     ***   -3.03    -5154.825     ***   -3.69
Earnings Comovement Index                               1.36       2.46                                                                                                                   17.810     ***    2.90
Good Government Index                                  25.43       3.63                                                                                       -0.843 ***      -2.97       -2.450     ***   -4.54

Dependent Variable                                     0.06        0.03
Number of Observations                                                             45                           45                     37                         37                           37
Adjusted R-squared                                                            99.23%                       98.28%                 98.39%                     98.54%                       98.71%
Year Fixed Effects                                                            YES                          YES                    YES                        YES                          YES
Country Fixed Effects                                                         YES                           NO                     NO                         NO                           NO
*, **, *** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, 1% levels or better, respectively

Table 8. Frequency of Extreme Returns and Short-Selling Restrictions. Countries with Regulatory changes only


The dependent variables is the per year number of trading days where the market return is lower than the average market return minus two standard deviations, divided by the total
number of trading days. The endogenous variable is mapped on the set of real numbers, with the transformation log(x/(1-x)). The mean and standard deviation of the market return is
calculated over the same country and year. Country Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every firm in each country and year, relative to the
corresponding country's total sales. Industry Herfindahl index is calculated as the sum of the market shares (squared) of every industry in each country and year, relative to the
corresponding country's total sales. The size of the country is the extension of a country in square kilometers, from www.yahoo.com. The earnings comovement index is calculated as in
Morck et al. (2000). The Good Government index is the sum of the Risk of Expropriation, Corruption, and Repudiation of Contract indices from La Porta et al. (1997). The Short
Selling variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given country and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from Hong
Kong, Norway, Sweden, Malaysia, and Thailand, with stock price information available from Datastream. Macroeconomic variables are from the Economist Intelligence Unit database.
All regressions include year-fixed effects. Standard errors are White-heteroskedasticity consistent.
 2.5




                                                                                    Brazil
 2.0




 1.5


                                                 Portugal                        Pakistan

                                                                          Philippines

 1.0                                                                             Peru
                                                                                                          Poland
                                                                                        Australia
                                                     Indonesia                           ChinaIndia
                                                    Chile
                                             Austria
                                                                          UK
 0.5
                                                                          Zimbabwe
                                                                       Colombia
                                        Canada                                    Greece Venezuela
                                                              Luxembourg     South Africa
                                           SpainSouth Korea Turkey Mexico
                                         Japan                                    Finland                           Norway
                                     Denmark      New   Zealand
                                                    Belgium
                                                    Italy
 0.0                                                                TaiwanIsrael
                                                                           Singapore
                                                               France Czech Republic
                                                               Sweden
                                       Thailand
                                                Malaysia
                                          Hong Kong                     Argentina
                                                          Norway Malaysia

             US                                              Thailand           Germany
                                      Netherlands
-0.5                                                              Switzerland                Hong Kong                  Sweden




-1.0
       .55        .60      .65         .70                  .75             .80                     .85       .90       .95      1.00
                                                             comovement




 Figure 1. Comovement of Stock Returns and Short Sales Restrictions
 Proportion of Stocks Comoving together agains skewness of market returns. For each day, we compute the maximum
 of the number of stocks with positive returns, and the number of stocks with negative returns, relative to the total
 number of stocks. We then calculate the average of this ratio for each country and year. Countries are classified
 depending on whether short sales are allowed and practiced (boxes), or not (crosses). The sample includes firms from
 52 countries with stock price information available from Datastream.
                           Short Selling Not Allowed / Not Practiced




                              Short Selling Allowed and Practiced




Figure 2. Kernel Density Estimation
Histogram and kernel density estimation of weekly market log-returns, depending on the existence of
short–selling restrictions. The Kernel Density is estimated as detailed in footnote 15. The Short Selling
variable is a dummy variable that equals one when short selling is allowed and practiced in a given country
and year, zero otherwise. The sample includes firms from 52 countries with stock price information
available from Datastream. Returns are pooled across years. The first two graphs corresponds to all the
countries in the sample. The last to figures consider only the countries that have changed their regulation
during the sample period–Hong Kong, Malaysia, Norway, Sweden, and Thailand.
Short Selling Not Allowed / Not Practiced. Countries with Changes in Regulation




    Short Selling Allowed and Practiced. Countries with Changes in Regulation




Figure 2. Kernel Density Estimation (cont)
