NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTOR SENTIMENT IN JAPANESE AND
U. S. DAILY MUTUAL FUND FLOWS
Stephen J. Brown
William N. Goetzmann
Takato Hiraki
Noriyoshi Shiraishi
Masahiro Watanabe
Working Paper 9470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9470
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

The authors thank Trimtabs, QUICK Corp. and Kinyu Data Services for providing data for analysis. We thank
Geert Rouwenhorst for numerous helpful discussions and Jeffrey Busse for making his factor return data
available. We benefited from discussions with the seminar participants at Rutgers University. Please address
all correspondence to Masahiro Watanabe, Yale School of Management, 135 Prospect St., Box 208200, New
Haven, CT 06520-8200. Email: masahiro.watanabe@yale.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann, Takato Hiraki, Noriyoshi Shiraishi, and Masahiro
Watanabe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.

Investor Sentiment in Japanese and U.S. Daily Mutual Fund Flows
Stephen J. Brown, William N. Goetzmann, Takato Hiraki,
Noriyoshi Shiraishi, and Masahiro Watanabe
NBER Working Paper No. 9470
January 2003
JEL No. G15
ABSTRACT
We find evidence that is consistent with the hypothesis that daily mutual fund flows may be
instruments for investor sentiment about the stock market. We use this finding to construct a new
index of investor sentiment, and validate this index using data from both the United States and
Japan. In both markets exposure to this factor is priced, and in the Japanese case, we document
evidence of negative correlations between "Bull" and "Bear" domestic funds. The flows to bear
foreign funds in Japan display some evidence of negative correlation to domestic and foreign equity
funds, suggesting that there is a foreign vs. domestic sentiment factor in Japan that does not appear
in the contemporaneous U.S. data. By contrast, U.S. mutual fund investors appear to regard domestic
and foreign equity mutual funds as economic substitutes.
Stephen J. Brown
New York University

William N. Goetzmann
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
william.goetzmann@yale.edu

Noriyoshi Shirishi
Rikkyo University

Masahiro Watanabe
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
Masahiro.watanabe@yale.edu

Takato Hiraki
International University of Japan

1 Introduction
Ever since the theoretical work of De Long, Shleifer, Summers and Waldmann (1990) [DSSW]
researchers have sought empirical evidence of a sentiment factor that reflects fluctuations in the
opinions of traders regarding the future prospects for the stock market. It is potentially valuable to
find an empirical measure of sentiment because of the suggestion that it may be priced. In
particular, it could be source of non-diversifiable risk generated by the very existence of an asset
market that simultaneously serves as a mechanism for impounding expectations and beliefs about
the future, and provides liquidity to savers. Finding an empirical instrument for the sentiment factor
would allow a test of the DSSW model and its implications, including the possibility that market
prices temporarily deviate from true economic values as a function of investor sentiment.
Shiller, Kon-Ya and Tsutsui (1996) take a direct approach to capturing market sentiment by
sending a semi-annual mail survey to institutional investors, asking their opinion about the market
in the U.S. and Japan. Lee, Shleifer and Thaler (1991) argue that the closed-end fund discount
measures small investor sentiment, although Elton, Gruber and Busse (1998) find that exposure to
this variable is not priced. Barber (1999) considers odd-lot trading as a measure of investor
sentiment and finds a relation to the small-firm effect. Froot and Dabora (1999) interpret the
shifting differential between prices of Royal Dutch and Shell as a potential sentiment factor.
Goetzmann, Massa and Rouwenhorst (1999) find evidence of a negative correlation between the
daily flows to equity mutual funds, money market funds and precious metals funds. These flows
explain part of the covariance structure of mutual fund returns. Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes
(1999) find evidence that cross-border flows reflect shifting investor sentiment regarding foreign
markets, and that this in turn affects asset prices. Using a Finish dataset, Grinblatt and Keloharju
(2000) find, among other things, that foreign investor flows have some impact on share prices.
Iihara, Kato and Tokunaga (2001) document herding behavior in various investor classes on the
Tokyo Stock Exchange. The money-flow instruments we study in this paper are particularly
valuable in the context of past research, because they allow the separation of the measurement of
sentiment from measurement of asset returns. This separation is important because if DSSW--and
more recently Barberis and Shleifer (2001)--are valid models of investor behavior, then we would
expect the sentiment-based flows to affect asset returns. Consequently, a measure distinct from
returns is useful.

2

One drawback to most empirical attempts to capture sentiment thus far is that few papers
save Shiller, Kon-Ya and Tsutsui (1996) have access to explicit sentiment measures. They are
based instead on the presumption that flows, or purchases of odd-lots, or fund discounts can be
logically interpreted as a proxy for investor sentiment. Money flows typically are not labeled as
“optimistic” or “pessimistic” as such. They can be alternatively interpreted as reflecting correlated
liquidity trades or even groups of traders following dynamic portfolio insurance strategies. It would
be nice to actually have a variable explicitly tied to expectations about the market trajectory -- a
way for investors to “vote” if you will on whether they foresee a bull or a bear market.
In this paper, we use a daily panel dataset of United States and Japanese mutual fund flows.
The Japanese dataset is particularly interesting in this context, as it contains a number of funds
explicitly named “Bull” and “Bear,” reflecting investor opportunities to effectively bet on the rise
or fall of the Japanese stock market. In a sense, we are the beneficiaries of poor market
performance in Japan. The last decade has made pessimists out of many Japanese equity investors,
and the mutual fund industry has responded to growing demand for speculative instruments that
profit on continued market decline. In our analysis, we find that the daily flows to bull and bear
funds in Japan are strongly negatively correlated. This pattern is consistent with a strong, common
sentiment factor among Japanese mutual fund investors. Our evidence suggests that this sentiment
factor is priced. These results further suggest that the structure of correlation in daily mutual fund
flows both in the U.S. and Japan is a useful measure of attitudes beyond the simple domestic equity
markets. For example, Barberis and Shleifer (2001) argue that herding may take place in subsectors of the equity universe, not simply with respect to the stock market as a whole. Our Japanese
flow data is consistent with the existence of a foreign-domestic sentiment factor as well as a
domestic equity factor. We find flows into and out of foreign mutual funds are negatively
correlated with flows to domestic equity funds.
The paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the Japanese mutual fund industry
and provides a brief introduction to derivative funds. Section 3 describes our data and methodology
used. A first quantitative look at Japanese bull and bear funds will also be given here. In Section 4,
we identify the flow factor that we argue captures investor sentiment. We then examine its
explanatory power in the cross section of fund returns and present some robustness tests.
Alternative stories such as information and liquidity are also considered here. Section 5 concludes
and discusses a future research agenda.

3

2 The Japanese Mutual Fund Industry and Derivative Funds
Since the Japanese equity market has evolved along a path that sharply contrasts the U.S.
experience, and since it offers distinctive products that are not marketed in the U.S., namely
derivative funds, in this section we briefly review the Japanese mutual fund industry and
investment opportunities it provides. While mutual funds have grown to become a dominant
vehicle for savings in the United States over the past decade, its Japanese counterpart, the
investment trust sector--a term that includes both closed-end and open-end funds--has grown more
modestly. That said, it is one of the most well-developed investment fund sectors in the world, with
hundreds of billions of dollars in savings and several thousand investment products. At the end of
April, 1999, the entire Japanese investment trust industry was 48.2 trillion yen or 403 billion dollars
at the prevailing exchange rate, with 4,296 trusts.1 Equity investment trusts held 11.8 trillion yen or
98.5 billion dollars in total net assets.2 By comparison, U.S. equity mutual funds held
approximately $4 trillion in net assets at the end of 1999--an order of magnitude difference. The
strong contrast in the growth of the U.S. and Japanese mutual fund industries over the last ten years
may in part be due to the bursting Japanese stock market bubble in the early 1990’s, and the
extended bear market that followed.
Japanese fund classification differs from its U.S. counterpart. The main differences are the
existence of derivative funds and the lack of a standard fixed-income category. Table 1 shows the
classification by the Investment Trust Association of Japan (ITAJ), an intra-industry association for
fund management firms. It officially classifies every open-end equity fund into one of the seven
broadly defined and 31 narrowly defined categories during our sample period. A distinctive
category in the table is the “derivatives” funds, which aggressively make use of derivative contracts
for non-hedging purposes. This is a relatively new category. Until the end of 1994, Japanese
mutual funds could not trade derivatives except for hedging purposes. This regulation was relaxed
1

Source for the industry total net assets and number of funds: the Investment Trust Association of Japan,
http://www.toushin.or.jp/result/getuji/2000/4/g1-1.htm, with English translation. The yen-dollar exchange rate at the
end of April 1999 is 119.59 and is taken from the Bank of Japan,
http://www2.boj.or.jp/en/dlong/stat/data/cdab1690.txt, with English translation. U.S. figures are from the Investment
Company Institute Mutual Fund Fact Book 2000. http://www.ici.org .

4

in 1995, when Yamaichi Asset Management created the first derivative fund “Power Active Open.”
Since then, the number of derivative funds has increased from zero to 191 in 2000. Defined as one
of the broad ITAJ categories, derivative funds complete the product line of every major fund
family, serving the speculative needs of investors. A typical fund family now includes bear, bull
and bull-bear derivative funds that bet on the rise or fall of domestic and foreign equity indices, and
sometimes even bet on bonds and currencies. These derivative funds have primarily attracted retail
investors who may switch at low cost among funds in the same family.3 They are two-tiered,
comprised of those serving small investors and others geared towards wealthier individuals. The
former type is sold in very small lots with one-yen increments, while the latter usually requires a
purchase of at least 10 million yen with one million increments. Both types can be conveniently
bought or sold at branch offices of banks as well as security firms. Of course, targeting retail
investors does not mean that trading on derivative funds has no pricing implication. In fact, it is
said that the significant increase in the net asset values per share of mutual funds in the bearish
1998 market was related to the deregulation that allowed banks to sell mutual funds which
consequently promoted retail investor sales. It is exactly this possibility that we wish to examine in
this paper—the possibility that small investor sentiment might be priced, as DSSW’s theory
implies.
The second distinctive feature of Japanese fund classification is the lack of a bond category.
Strictly speaking, there do exist pure bond funds (ko-sha-sai trusts) in the Japanese market, but they
are neither in the ITAJ classification system nor are included in our dataset that will be discussed in
the next section. Japanese open-end investment trusts correspond to open-end mutual funds in the
U.S., and are further classified into equity and bond (ko-sha-sai) trusts. Because of data
availability, researchers, like us, often focus on equity trusts, for which the ITAJ classification is
available.4 However, some equity investment trusts are free to hold fixed-income securities, and
thus are effectively bond funds. These funds belong to the “balanced” category in Table 1. It
includes not only funds that invest up to 70% of their total net assets in domestic and/or foreign
2

Open-end equity investment trusts. The 48.2-trillion-yen industry consists of these and open-end bond trusts as well
as their closed-end counterparts. Open-end equity and bond investment trusts together correspond to U.S. mutual funds.
We will use the words “investment trust” and “fund” interchangeably when there is no confusion.
3
Our dataset indicates that both derivative and other funds charge a front-end commission ranging between 0.0% and
3.5% and an annual management fee of 0.5% to 2.0%. Churning among sister funds in the same family costs less, with
only a one-time reserve fee of between 0.20% and 1.0% and no discrimination against derivative funds.
4
For example, Brown, Goetzmann, Hiraki, Otsuki and Shiraishi (2001) and Cai, Chan and Yamada (1997) both
concentrate on equity investment trusts in their historical performance studies.
5

equities, but also those that hold up to 100% in fixed-income securities. This mingling of equity
and effective bond funds is not a problem per se, as long as we can identify the factors driving
returns and flows. Nonetheless, we are interested in extracting pure bond funds from the balanced
category, as virtually any finance theory assumes that stocks and a bond together span the payoff
space. This is also plausible empirically. In fact, using the U.S. data, Goetzmann, Massa and
Rouwenhorst (1999) identify a possible sentiment factor as polarity between equity and bond funds.
We address this bond-isolation problem in the next section.

3 Data and Methodology
This section describes the data used and discusses how we classify funds. The data for the two
countries come from independent sources and require proper screening before use. Exactly this
independence, however, makes it credible that a factor model captures some general pricing rule
when it is indeed found working.

3.1 U.S. Data and Classification
The U.S. data is obtained from TrimTabs, which contains the net asset value per share (NAV), the
total net assets (TNA), and investment objective information for 999 U.S. funds over the period
February 2, 1998 through June 28, 1999. The average fund sizes sum up to 839 billion dollars.5
Since some authors report discrepancies in the TNAs recorded in this dataset and those filed at the
Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), we check for this possibility.6 Obviously, it is
important for us to address this potential problem as our results hinge on the accuracy of daily
flows. The discrepancies seem to arise when funds record TNAs that do not reflect the day’s
transactions. Greene and Hodges (2002) discuss a simple way to correct the TNAs of such “preflow” funds. Following them, we compare the TrimTabs figures and their corrections with SEC
filings, and identify whether a fund is pre-flow, post-flow, or indeterminate. The exact procedure is
described in Appendix A. We only save pre- or post-flow funds for the subsequent analyses, with
TNAs of pre-flow funds corrected. We do this examination for those funds for which the machinereadable N-SAR filings can be found on the SEC’s EDGAR database. We also collect N-30D
5

More details about the Trimtabs data can be found in Edelen and Warner (2001) and Greene and Hodges (2002).

6

filings manually for additional funds to ensure that each asset class contains an adequate number of
funds. Table 2 shows the number of funds used and the breakdown of pre- and post-flow funds by
asset class. In summary, we use 188 funds whose flow-timing is identified, and apply the pre-flow
TNA correction to 69.7% of them (131 funds). This ratio is comparable to Greene and Hodges
(2002), who classify 68.5% of funds as pre-flow (556 out of 812 funds).
We use the eight categories in Table 2 in aggregating U.S. fund returns and flows. These are
U.S. equity, foreign equity, precious metals, U.S. sector, U.S. bonds, cash, foreign bonds, and
municipal bonds. Since they are exactly the same categories as Goetzmann, Massa, and
Rouwenhorst (1999) use, and since they correspond to the TrimTabs investment objectives in a
fairly straightforward way, further discussion is omitted.

3.2 Japanese Data
The primary Japanese dataset is compiled and provided by QUICK Corporation, containing the
daily NAVs, TNAs and the ITAJ classifications for virtually all 2,241 equity investment trusts
during the period January 19, 1998 through January 18, 2000. The average total net assets
represented are 11.6 trillion yen or 97.0 billion dollars.7 Thus, our dataset covers about half to funds
in the whole Japanese mutual fund industry including bond investment trusts, and about a quarter of
the total net assets.8 QUICK also separately provided information about invested assets for 1,935
funds or 86% of the above sample at the beginning, the midpoint and the end point of the sample
period. This enables us to extract effective bond funds from the ITAJ balanced category. We use
the common trading days for the two countries, resulting in 329 trading days between February 2,
1998 and June 28, 1999. Finally, Kinyu Data Services (KDS) provided a third Japanese dataset,
which contains fund attributes, investment policies, and strategies for most of funds in our sample.9
This is used in interpreting the Generalized Style Classification (GSC) categories discussed in the

6

See Greene and Hodges (2002), Zitzewitz (2002), and Edelen and Warner (2001).
The cross-sectional sum of the average total net assets during the sample period. The dollar number is computed by
the exchange rate at the end of April 1999.
8
Given the flow-timing issue of the U.S. dataset, we inquired QUICK about the accuracy of its dataset, and confirmed
that there is no such known problem.
9
The KDS dataset does not contain fund codes. Therefore, the QUICK and KDS files are matched by names of both
the funds and managing firms. The matching result was satisfactory; for example, of the 188 derivative funds in the
first QUICK file, we could find 170 funds in the KDS file.
7

7

next subsection and confirming the trading strategies of bull and bear derivative funds in a later
section.
We wish to form Japanese classes similar to the U.S., but this task is not so easy because of
the lack of a fixed-income category. We address this problem by two alternative classifications, the
GSC and the augmented Investment Trust Association (ITA) classification, whose descriptions
follow in the next two subsections.

3.3 Japanese GSC Classification
The first Japanese classification is the Generalized Style Classification (GSC) used by Brown and
Goetzmann (1997). This algorithm classifies funds with similar return characteristics into a given
number of groups, by minimizing the sum of squared deviations between individual fund returns
and the group mean. A virtue of this methodology is that it can classify funds based solely on expost performance. Thus, it can potentially pick up factors driving returns that might be independent
of ex-ante characteristics such as invested assets. Previous research has applied the GSC algorithm
to both U.S. mutual funds (Brown and Goetzmann, 1997) and Japanese funds (Brown, Goetzmann,
Hiraki, Otsuki and Shiraishi, 2001) in the analysis of fund styles. Since the GSC algorithm
classifies funds based solely on the return variability and assigns no objective characteristics a
priori, we shall interpret each GSC category by known characteristics of the component funds.
Table 3 tabulates the GSC categories against the original ITAJ classification and summarizes their
interpretation. GSC1 is heavily loaded on Japanese domestic equity funds and hence is considered a
domestic equity category. Both the GSC2 and GSC3 categories include international equity funds.
However, GSC2 is tilted toward Asian funds while GSC3 is geared toward North American and
European funds. This defines them as Asian and Western equity categories, respectively.10 GSC4 is
loaded on domestic equity funds. We interpret this category as focused equity in the sense that the
component funds are dominantly managed by non-big three firms (non-Nomura, Daiwa or Nikko,
not shown in the table). These funds follow non-standard strategies as indicated by their fund titles
and policy statements in the KDS file. GSC5 can be regarded as the balanced or cash category,
because it is comprised mainly of the ITAJ balanced funds and domestic money pools. GSC6
10

Although not indicated in the table, it is interesting to note that more funds in the GSC3 category are managed by
foreign firms than are those in the GSC2 category.
8

shares a similar composition to GSC5, but a notable difference is that it contains 22 out of the 37
convertible bond funds. This is a balanced-convertibles category. GSC7 and GSC8 clearly
represent index-fund and cash categories, respectively.

3.4 Japanese ITA Classification and Bull-Bear Funds
The second Japanese classification relies on the ITAJ categories and assigns funds to approximate
asset classes, delineating the “balanced” category funds as either Japanese bond funds, foreign
bond funds or “not applicable” using the invested asset information in the second QUICK dataset.
Specifically, we use the second QUICK dataset and pick only those balanced category funds that
invest no less than 70% of their TNAs in either Japanese or foreign bonds. This resulted in 26
Japanese and 75 foreign “pure” bond funds out of the 415 ITAJ balanced category funds. Other 314
balanced funds are unclassified. The twelve asset classes we form are Japanese equity, index, cash,
Japanese bull, Japanese bear, foreign bull, foreign bear, foreign equity, Japanese sector, Japanese
bond, foreign bond, and other derivatives. Table 4 shows the cross tabulation between them and the
ITAJ categories. We call this the “ITA” classification.
We form the above five derivative categories by dividing the ITAJ derivative funds into
Japanese and foreign bull and bear funds (and others) as follows. We first classify each ITAJ equity
derivative fund into either bull, bear, or other type using its fund name. In order to be classified as
an equity derivative fund, a fund must not have the word “bond,” “yen,” or “dollar” in its name. No
other words that imply non-equity assets were found in the sample fund names. Then we construct
the potential set of bull funds by taking those whose names contain the words “bull” and/or
“double” and not “bear” or “reverse.”11 The bear funds are those whose names contain the word
“bear” or “reverse.” In our sample, no fund has the words “bull” and “bear” simultaneously in its
name. Then, we further divide the bull and bear funds into domestic and foreign. Specifically, if a
fund contains any one of the following words in its name, it is classified as a foreign bull or bear
fund: U.S., Hong Kong, U.K., France, Italy, Germany, Global, World, and their equivalents and

11

The words “bull” and “double” are synonyms because when a fund is of double-bull type, the word “bull” is often
omitted from its name. In order to reject double-bear funds, we exclude funds whose names contain the words “bear” or
”reverse.” One fund has the word “triple” implying triple-bull/bear type, but it invests in bond futures with the word
“bond” in its name, and therefore is correctly classified as other derivative type.
9

literal derivatives. Otherwise, it is classified as a domestic fund. No other word that implies a
country or region was found in the sample fund names.
Next, in order to ensure that our bull and bear funds are indeed bets on the rise and fall,
respectively, of the stock market, we check the fund characteristics information in the KDS dataset.
The specific column in the dataset often describes how a fund operates, like “This fund aims to
realize approximately twice the reverse movement of the domestic stock market by shorting the
Nikkei index futures by about twice its total net assets.” This, for example, confirms the fund is a
domestic double bear fund. In addition, we also check performance reports found on the
management firms’ web sites. These reports typically carry the positions of futures contracts.
Whenever possible, we take reports issued in the sample period or as close as possible to it. After
this process, we still have five funds that we cannot confirm to be bets on stock market movement.
For completeness, we discard these five funds and determine the final sets of domestic and foreign
bull and bear funds. 54 out of 89 finalists or 61% of them are explicitly stated or known to trade in
equity index futures.
Table 5 shows the characteristics of the bull and bear derivative funds. We see that bull
funds are relatively large sized, while bear funds are generally small. Japanese bull funds account
for 40.9% in TNA of all derivative funds, while Japanese bear funds merely 3.8%, although the
number of funds is almost equal at 27 and 28, respectively. The average TNA of Japanese bull
funds is more than ten times that of Japanese bear funds. Similarly, we see that foreign bull funds
are in general bigger in size than foreign bear funds.
The rightmost column of Table 5 shows that, in the above screening process, performance
reports are found on the Internet for 10, 9, 6, and 8 funds in the Japanese bull, bear, and foreign
bull, bear categories, respectively. The mean leverages of these funds, measured as the position of
index futures in percentage of TNA, are 178.8%, -162.8%, 200.7% and -99.2%, respectively.
Figure 1 further confirms the trading activity of bull and bear funds in index futures. In Panel (a),
the Japanese bull category return (the equally-weighted average of component fund returns) is
plotted during the first-half sample period, along with the ITA index category return for a
comparison purpose.12 The bull category return almost always fluctuates in exactly the same
direction as the index category return, and slightly less than twice in magnitude, in line with the
estimated futures position of 178.8%. In contrast, in Panel (b), the Japanese bear and index
12

The plots for the second-half sample period are similar and hence omitted.
10

category returns fluctuate exactly in the opposite ways. Panel (b) of Table 9, discussed in a later
section, indicates that the bull and bear returns are strongly positively and negatively correlated
with the index return, respectively, with the absolute values of correlations exceeding 0.95.
Finally, we confirm our bull and bear designations by applying the GSC procedure to the
universe of ITAJ derivative funds. Table 6 reports the results. 19 out of 27 Japanese bull funds are
clustered in the GSC I category. This GSC category thus represents funds that bet on the rise of the
Japanese stock market. Similarly, the GSC II, III and IV categories represent Japan bear, foreign
bull, and foreign bear categories, respectively. Foreign bull and bear funds that fall in GSC I and II
might be bets on Asian indices that are strongly correlated to Japanese ones. GSC V will be a nonequity derivative category, such as bond or currency derivatives.13 This confirms that the labeling
of our domestic and foreign bull and bear funds corresponds to a genuine difference in the returngenerating processes.

3.5 Measurement of Flows and Returns
We compute the return for category g on day t, RETg,t, as the equally weighted average of returns
on component funds:

RETg ,t =

1
N g ,t

∑R
n∈g

n ,t

,

where Rn,t ≡ NAVn,t / NAVn,t-1 – 1 and NAVn,t are the return and net asset value per share,
respectively, of fund n on day t, and Ng,t is the number of funds in category g on day t. Following
standard practice in the literature, we compute the flow to fund n on day t by14
Fn,t = TNAn,t – TNAn,t-1(1 + Rn,t),

13

The fact that a nontrivial number of “other derivatives” funds fall in GSC I and III suggests that our classification
method based on fund names is not picking up all of the Japanese and foreign bull funds.
14
The Japanese dataset includes dividend information. We also computed the fund flows with dividends using the
formula Fn,t = TNAn,t – TNAn,t-1⋅(NAVn,t + DIVn,t) / NAVn,t-1 for Japan, where DIVn,t is the dividends for fund n on day t.
Since the results are qualitatively similar, we omit them.
11

where TNAn,t is the total net assets of fund n on day t. Since net purchases and sales are recognized
at the end of the day, the issue of the potential timing effects of intra-day flows is not material for
this study, although for analysis of longer-horizon fund flows it can be a worry. The total net flow
(TNF) for category g, TNFg,t, is the sum of component fund flows:

TNFg ,t = ∑ Fn ,t .
n∈g

The average percentage flow (APF) for category g on day t, APFg,t, is the equally weighted average
of normalized flows over component funds, where the normalization is by each fund’s total net
assets on the previous day:15

APFg ,t =

1
N g ,t

Fn ,t

∑ TNA
n∈g

.

n ,t −1

With these aggregate measures in hand, we are now ready to address the asset pricing problem.

4 A Sentiment Factor From Mutual Fund Flows
We start our search for a priced sentiment factor by first examining the correlation structure of fund
flows. First and foremost, a sentiment factor should be based on investor behavior. The rationale
behind this is that if sentiment affects prices, it should appear in demand changes of investors. We
thus estimate a sentiment factor as a linear combination of category flows. Next we show some
evidence that it may be priced, using a version of Fama-MacBeth (1973) framework. We then

15

The accounting practice of international funds managed in Japan is worth mentioning. Because of the time lag, the
total net assets and the net asset values per share of international funds are not determined within day t. At 10a.m. on
day t+1, they are calculated by the day-t local closing stock prices in the foreign markets (which are known) and the
prevailing exchange rates (i.e., those prevailing at 10a.m. on day t+1). These are customarily called the total net assets
and the net asset values on day t+1 and are recorded as such in our datasets. Consequently, a purchase or sales order of
international fund n submitted on day t is not executed at NAVn,t, but at NAVn,t+1. We correct for this by using the oneday lead TNA and NAV in computing flows and returns of international funds in Japan.
12

confirm that it is highly correlated to logical instruments for sentiment. The section concludes
robustness tests.

4.1 U.S. Flow Correlations
Table 7 shows correlations between U.S. category flows (measured by APF) and returns. Panel (a)
indicates that flows into and out of domestic equity funds are strongly positively correlated with
flows to foreign equity funds at 0.45. This is consistent with the hypothesis that U.S. investors
regard domestic and foreign equity funds as economic complements. A similar positive correlation
obtains for flows to U.S. sector funds, which represent nontrivial equity investments. They are
significantly negatively correlated with cash and precious metal funds at -0.18 and -0.15,
respectively.
Goetzmann, Massa and Rouwenhorst (1999) consider three possible explanations for
negative correlations between equity and cash/bond fund flows. First, they may simply be the result
of investors using cash funds as checking accounts, preliminary to investing in other assets.
Second, investors may be following common portfolio insurance strategies. Last, the negative
correlations may be caused by negative investor sentiment about future equity returns. Using U.S.
data, they find evidence supporting the last explanation; a negative correlation between flows to
equity funds vs. precious metal funds. Since precious metals have been traditionally considered a
hedge during times of uncertainty, the negative correlation is consistent with negative investor
sentiment causing money to shift from equity to precious metals during such periods. However, like
our negative correlations, this is only suggestive and certainly not conclusive. This is exactly why
we turn to Japanese data in the next subsection.
Panel (b) shows cross-correlations between flows and returns. We see a much stronger
correlation structure here. A clear message is that money tends to flow into equity funds on days
when returns are positive, both domestically and internationally. Flows into and out of domestic
and foreign equity funds are correlated with contemporaneous U.S. equity fund returns at 0.53 and
0.57, and foreign returns at 0.24 and 0.40, respectively. Other findings relate to cash and metal
funds. First, flows to metal funds are strongly positively correlated with returns on themselves at
0.60. Second, flows to cash and metal funds tend to decrease when equity and sector returns are

13

positive, as indicated by negative correlations. Overall, the strong association with returns suggests
that it is worthwhile looking for a priced factor in flows.

4.2 Japanese Derivative Funds and Sentiment
Panel (a) of Table 8 shows the correlations between Japanese GSC category flows. Japanese equity
fund flows are positively correlated with flows to index funds and Asian equity funds, and are
negatively correlated with flows to Western equity funds. A notable difference from the U.S.
results is the strongly negative correlations associated with cash and balanced/cash categories—
their correlations with the index fund flows are –0.71 and –0.48, respectively. These two categories
also stand out prominently in Panel (b), where their returns exhibit extreme negative correlations to
equity and index returns. In particular, the cash category returns are negatively correlated to equity
and index returns at startling –0.90 and –0.96, respectively. Thus, the Japanese market seems to
contain instruments that are fundamentally different, or more precisely opposite, from equity
investment in terms of payoff. Moreover, they are perceived by investors as such, as the negative
flow correlations imply. The likely culprit of these extreme negative correlations is bear funds. In a
sense, the two GSC categories may be mislabeled: they contain not only cash funds, but very likely
derivative funds that bet on the fall of equity indices. Table 3 indeed shows that a nontrivial number
of ITAJ derivative funds fall in these categories.
We can confirm the above hypothesis by examining the ITA category correlations in Table
9. Since the matrix is already voluminous, only selected columns are shown. Panel (a) demonstrates
that the bear fund flows are negatively correlated with equity, index, and bull fund flows at -0.22, 0.38, and –0.69, respectively. Flows to cash funds are similarly negatively correlated with flows to
equity, index, bull, and sector funds at -0.25, -0.31, -0.65, and -0.26, respectively. In Panel (b),
returns on bear funds are negatively correlated with those on equity, index, and bull funds at -0.90,
-0.96, and –0.99, respectively. In contrast, returns on the mirror instruments, bull funds, are
extremely positively correlated with returns on equity and index funds at 0.90 and 0.96.
The magnitudes of negative flow correlations are impressive. In fact, there is no a priori
reason to anticipate that the bull and bear flows should be correlated at all in either direction. If
Japanese retail investors had diverse opinions about future market trends, some might be optimistic
and others pessimistic on the same day. Goetzmann and Massa (2000a&b), for example, find

14

evidence of index fund purchases and sales by investors on the same day, and further that these
events are correlated with other measures of the dispersion of opinions among investors. The strong
negative correlations in flows suggest that Japanese investors have a fairly homogeneous outlook
about the future stock market over the period of our sample. In fact, Iihara, Kato and Tokunaga
(2001) document herding behavior in various investor classes in the Japanese market. We argue
that the above negative flow correlations provide direct evidence of investor sentiment, because it
is unlikely that bear funds are used as either a checking account or a device to provide portfolio
insurance.
There is some evidence that the sentiment of Japanese investors extends to foreign markets,
albeit in a different fashion. In Panel (a) of Table 9, we find that flows to foreign bull and bear
funds are negatively correlated at –0.20. They are also positive and negative correlates,
respectively, to flows to foreign equity funds at 0.25 and –0.14. However, they appear to be
generally independent of Japanese bull and bear fund flows. This is consistent with the hypothesis
that Japanese investors might have independent sentiments about domestic vs. foreign markets that
are independent of each other. So far we have argued that mutual fund flows may be a useful proxy
for investor sentiment. We are now ready to address our main problem, whether or not they are
priced, and if so, by how much.

4.3 Estimating a Sentiment Flow Factor
A necessary condition for flows to capture a priced factor is that loadings on flows spread asset
returns. In this subsection, we construct what we call a sentiment flow factor and examine how well
it explains the cross-section of fund returns. If flows are a sufficient statistic for priced investor
sentiment, there should be a unified flow-based approach for both countries, even though they
experienced sharply contrasting markets over our sample period. In addition, it will validate the
inconclusive U.S. evidence that precious metal fund flows may represent investor sentiment.
For each country, we first find the linear combination of category flows that is maximally
correlated to a linear combination of category returns. This procedure is known as canonical
correlation analysis. Mathematically,

15

(α * , γ * ) = argmax Corr ( F g α , R g γ )
α ,γ

s.t. 1'α = 1'γ = 1,

where Fg and Rg are the T×G matrices of category flows (APFs) and returns (RETs), respectively, α
and γ are the G×1 vectors of weights on them, and 1 is the vector of ones. T and G denote the
number of days and categories, respectively. The weights are constrained to sum to 1. We call the
optimum combination of flows, f* ≡ Fgα*, the sentiment flow factor for a reason that will become
clear shortly. The optimal linear combination of returns, r* ≡ Rgγ*, in turn can be interpreted as the
return on a sentiment-flow-factor mimicking portfolio. We use the eight asset classes for the U.S.
and the twelve ITA categories for Japan.16
Table 10 shows the correlations of f* with category flows and returns. It is positively
correlated to equity fund flows in both countries. This correlation is 0.698 for U.S. (with equity
funds) and 0.658 for Japan (with index funds). The key features are the strong (negative)
correlations with the suspects of investor sentiment, justifying labeling it as a sentiment flow
factor.17 The U.S. sentiment flow factor is negatively correlated to metal and cash fund flows at –
0.577 and –0.112, respectively. The Japanese counterpart is correlated to bear, cash, and bull fund
flows at –0.839, –0.349, and 0.658, respectively. Qualitatively similar statements hold for TNFs, so
these correlations are not driven by either a few big or small funds.
The correlation between the sentiment flow factor and the factor mimicking portfolio return
(the maximum canonical correlation) is a measure of how well our sentiment factor explains the
cross-section of fund returns. This correlation is strong for the U.S. at 0.702. This is because there
is a rich correlation structure between U.S. flows and returns, as we saw in Panel (b) of Table 7. In
fact, the third column of Table 10 shows that the U.S. sentiment flow factor is correlated
significantly to key category returns, equity (0.572) and metal funds (–0.272). The maximal
correlation is a decent 0.461 for Japan, despite the lack of strong contemporaneous flow-return
correlations.18 Readers might wonder whether this is coming from the relatively active correlations
16

In constructing the U.S. sentiment flow factor, the cash and foreign bond categories are excluded because none of
their component funds existed in the first 40 days of the sample period. Alternatively, we tried throwing away the
period and constructed the sentiment factor using all eight categories. The results were qualitatively unchanged, which
are available upon request.
17
A more detailed discussion of this point is provided in the robustness section.
18
Although not shown, we do find a strong cross-autocorrelation between flows and lagged returns. Bull fund flows are
strongly negatively correlated to lagged equity and index returns. Similarly, a strong positive correlation is observed
16

to foreign bull or bear fund returns, and consequently whether this has implications for explaining
the cross-section of domestic fund returns. The answer to this will be made clear in the next
subsection.

4.4 Estimation of Factor Risk Premia
This subsection presents our main pricing results. The estimation of factor premia is based on a
version of the Fama-MacBeth (1973) framework. Before starting, we orthogonalize the sentiment
flow factor against all the category returns and their one-day lags. That is, for a given country, we
run
f* = Qb + e,
where Q ≡ [1 Rg Rg-1] is the T×(2G+1) matrix of a constant, category returns, and their one-day
lags and b is the (2G+1)×1 vector of coefficients. We call the residuals from this regression, eˆ ≡ f ,
the orthogonalized sentiment flow factor, and use them in the subsequent analyses. This ensures
that the explanatory power of our sentiment flow factor is purely incremental to return factors.
Regressing on the previous-day returns is meant to negate any explanatory power due to passive
investor behavior known as positive or negative feedback trading.
In the first step, we estimate factor loadings by regressing each fund return on a constant,
the category returns, and the orthogonalized sentiment flow factor using even days:
Rn = Zβn + ηn,
where Rn is the T1×1 vector of returns on fund n, Z = [1 Rg f] is the T1×(G+2) matrix of factors, βn
is the (G+2)×1 vector of factor loadings for fund n, and T1 is the number of even days. In the
second step, using odd days, we regress the cross-section of fund returns on the factor loadings with
the constraint that coefficients are constant over time:

between bear fund flows and lagged equity returns. The magnitudes of these correlations exceed 0.50. It is possible to
extend our analysis to incorporate these lead-lag patterns. We will return to this point in the final section.
17

R•,t = Xλ + εt,

∀t,

(1)

where R•,t = [R1,t R2,t … RN,t]’ is the N×1 vector of cross-sectional returns on day t,
X = [ βˆ1* βˆ 2* L βˆ N* ]' is the N×(G+2) matrix of estimated factor loadings, βˆ n* is the (G+2)×1 vector

of estimated factor loadings of fund n from the previous step with its constant term replaced by one,
and λ is the (G+2)×1 vector of factor risk premia. Use of alternate days for factor-loading and
factor-risk-premium estimations alleviates the sample dependency between the two estimation
processes. Roll and Ross (1980) also used different observation days between the two phases, in
developing a Fama-MacBeth (1973) framework suitably modified for factor models.
Jones (2001) shows that failure to correct for temporal changes in residual variance can lead
to significant reduction in the power of asset pricing tests. We control for the documented shifts in
residual variance that occurred over the time period of our study. We implement this as a
groupwise heteroskedastic model and estimate it by two-step feasible generalized least squares that
account for both intertemporal and cross-sectional heteroskedasticity. The details are shown in
Appendix B.
Table 11 summarizes the estimation results. The estimated (orthogonalized) sentiment flow
factor risk premium is significantly positive and economically large for both countries. The U.S.
estimate implies that a unit increase in the factor loading rewards an investor by 7.74 basis points
daily or 21.5% annual, which is comparable to the estimate of annual domestic equity risk premium
at 27.0%. These numbers are reasonable given the bullish U.S. market during our sample period.
For example, Ibbotson Associates (2001) estimates the annual returns on large company stocks at
28.58% for 1998 and 21.04% for 1999.
The Japanese sentiment factor risk premium is 23.6 basis points daily or 81.3% annual. This
is not ridiculously high, given that the sentiment factor is highly loaded on the bull and bear flows
(see Table 10, Panel (b)), whose associated returns have high premia at 45.1% and –26.5% annual,
respectively. These numbers can also be justified if we consider the high leverage of bull and bear
funds on index futures (see Table 5). However, the equity return premium of 29.8% itself might be
too high, given the bearish Japanese market during our sample period. We also observe that the
foreign bull and bear return premia are significant and carry the expected signs. The premium on
foreign bull category return is 63.8%, which is higher than the domestic bull return premium even
after adjusting for the leverage. This is consistent with the fact that major foreign markets
18

outperformed the Japanese equity market during the sample period, and with the hypothesis that
pessimistic Japanese investors might have been expecting more from the foreign markets.
Before leaving this subsection, it is interesting to examine whether our sentiment flow
factors for the two countries are correlated, because evidence in Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes
(2001) implies the potential existence of structural relationships in cross-border equity flows.
However, we do not find a significant correlation between the two sentiment flow factors; the
correlation is virtually zero after the return orthogonalization (not shown).19 Nor do we find
evidence of structural cross-border relations in category flows. This is consistent with the results of
Lin and Ito (1994), who find no volume spillovers between the U.S. and Japan. This suggests that
our flow factors may represent autonomous country-specific sentiment in the U.S. and Japan.

4.5 Robustness Tests
This subsection presents two robustness tests of our sentiment factor. The first test examines the
generality of our flow-based approach. If flows to cash funds as well as U.S. metal and Japanese
bull and bear funds indeed capture investor sentiment as we claim, the sentiment flow factor may
be readily constructed from them without optimization. The second test asks the qualitative nature
of our factor, whether it represents indeed investor sentiment or something correlated to known
priced factors, in particular size, book-to-market, and momentum. Alternative explanations such as
information and liquidity will also be discussed.

4.5.1 Does a Simple Construction Work?
One potential criticism of our canonical correlation approach is that it maximizes the explanatory
power of fund flows by construction. To address this issue, we examine a rotation of flows based
on the simple heuristic that a sentiment factor should load positively on equity and bull funds and
negatively on cash, bear, and metal funds. Using average percentage flows, we construct a “simple”
sentiment factor for each country as follows:

19

Since Japanese Standard Time is 14 hours ahead of the U.S. Eastern Standard Time (13 hours ahead in summer
time), a contemporaneous correlation may suggest a spillover from Japan to the U.S. The opposite direction may be
examined by using a lag for the U.S.
19

U.S.: Equity – 0.5 * (Cash + Metal)
Japan: Index – 0.5 * (Cash + Bear)
The category weights add up to zero, so these are zero-investment arbitrage portfolios, although in
practice funds may be shorted. The use of the index category in Japan, instead of the domestic
equity category, is due to the higher correlation to the sentiment flow factor. It has the additional
advantage of capturing bull fund flows, whose basis assets are indices, rather than individual
stocks. Indeed, Panel (a) of Table 9 demonstrates that bull fund flows are correlated more to index
fund flows than to equity fund flows. We repeat the same procedure as in the previous section,
including the orthogonalization against category returns, with these simple sentiment flow factors.
The results are summarized in Table 12. The simple sentiment flow factors carry premia of
similar magnitude as before, 35.4% for the U.S. and 99.6% for Japan. However, t-statistics for
these estimates have decreased. Although the U.S. premium is still significant by any standard, the
Japanese premium is now significant only at the 10% level. The magnitudes and significance of
return factor premia are almost unchanged for all categories in both countries. Thus, this heuristic
method apparently captures at least some portion of the investor sentiment variable. However, the
decreased statistical significance suggests that it is missing some structure. Natural candidates for
the missing structure are the foreign funds, since the correlation analysis suggested that foreign
fund flows were related to foreign fund returns. The canonical correlation approach makes full use
of the entire flow and return correlation matrices.

4.5.2 Is It Subsumed in Passive Known Factors?
It is important that our sentiment flow factor be orthogonal to known factors, in particular size,
value/growth and momentum in the U.S. market, because other work in the literature has clearly
shown that mutual fund styles orient to them. If our flow factor really captures investor sentiment
that is not driven by these passive styles, it should survive their inclusion.
We repeat our Fama-MacBeth exercise using the three passive factors as well as the excess
market return and our sentiment flow factor (from the original canonical correlation method,
orthogonalized). The excess market factor (EXMKT) is the return on the CRSP
NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-weighted return less the 30-day T-bill return. The size factor

20

(SMB) is the return on a zero investment portfolio in which small and large capitalization firms are
held long and short, respectively. Similarly, the book-to-market (B/M) factor (HML) is the returns
on high B/M stocks less low B/M stocks. The momentum factor (UMD) is the returns on past
winners less losers. All these daily return factors are downloaded from Jeffrey Busse’s web site for
our sample period.20 Effectively, like Carhart (1997), we are adding our sentiment flow factor into
investigation using Fama-French (1993) factors plus the Jegadeesh-Titman (1993, 2001)
momentum factor.
Table 13 presents the results. Because of data availability, this exercise is possible only for
the U.S. Our sentiment flow factor is robust to the inclusion of passive Fama-French and
Jegadeesh-Titman factors. The estimated premium is significant at the 1% level and is as
significant as the momentum factor, albeit its magnitude is halved at 11.6% annual. The excess
market return factor has a 24.1% premium, which is close to the 27.0% equity fund premium less
the virtually zero premium of cash or bond funds in Panel (a) of Table 11. This partially endorses
the accuracy of our U.S. data set, as the equity return factor is now coming from an independent
source. The size factor has a positive but small and insignificant premium, consistent with the wellknown fact that 1998 was a year of disaster for small stocks. Ibbotson Associates (2001) reports
that the return on the NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ smallest decile portfolio was –11.32% for 1998,
while the largest decile earned 35.31%.21 The B/M factor has a significantly negative premium.
This is in line with the fact that it is the blue-chip firms with large market capitalization that
performed well in our sample period. Again, according to Ibbotson Associates, returns on value
stocks were 12.07% and 5.40% in 1998 and 1999, respectively, while growth stocks marked
33.11% and 29.81%. Finally, the momentum factor is strong, as expected in a bullish market.
Overall, our sentiment flow factor survives the inclusion of factors which themselves may reflect
behavioral patterns and sentiment. This suggests that our flow factor captures something new that is
priced, and perhaps most importantly, it is based entirely on investor behavior, whether or not you
wish to label it sentiment.22
20

http://www.bus.emory.edu/jbusse/daily.htm. The construction specifically is EXMKT = Busse’s VWRETD T30RETDY. Our SMB, HML, and UMD factors are simply Busse’s SMBDAY, HMLDAY, and UMDDAY series,
respectively.
21
The 1999 figures were 28.36% and 24.82% for the smallest and largest decile portfolios, respectively.
22
Although we are unable to test the robustness of a Japanese sentiment factor, we believe that it is not driven by a
momentum or contrarian strategy for two reasons. First, our sentiment flow factor is orthogonalized against one-day
lagged category returns. This will preclude daily return predictability from affecting our results. Indeed, although not
shown, we find significant daily autocorrelations for U.S. equity fund returns, but not for Japan. Second, at longer
21

4.5.3 Sentiment versus Information, Liquidity, etc.
This subsection discusses alternative interpretations to sentiment. Edelen and Warner (2001) and
Warther (1995, 1998) consider several reasons why flows and returns might be positively
correlated. The most traditional account is perhaps information about future cash flows. In fact,
Brennan and Cao’s (1996, 1997) models imply that, when investors have differential information
precision, less-informed investors behave like trend-followers. That is, their trade flows are
positively correlated with returns. Their motives are rational—they increase their demand upon
good public information release, because they update their beliefs more than the better-informed.
By way of market clearing, better-informed investors follow a contrarian strategy. If mutual fund
investors are relatively less-informed, then it is possible that we are capturing their informationbased trades.
A second popular explanation relates to liquidity needs. Investors might simply need to rebalance their portfolios in a timely manner. Daily rebalancing by investors to fixed portfolio
allocation weights, for example, could induce a negative correlation with lagged returns. The role
of liquidity traders in the market has important pricing implications, because their trades must be
absorbed by those whose marginal valuation affects prices. For example, in Brennan and Cao’s
models, the supply of noise traders must be met by the demand of rational agents. When there are
multiple assets, the cross-sectional relationship between flows to one asset and returns of another
can be complicated, as pointed out by Brennan and Cao (1997) and Admati (1985). Of course,
when noise or liquidity traders have discretion over the timing of re-balancing, pricing implications
can differ.
Given the recent evidence of premium associated with idiosyncratic volatility, a third
legitimate question asks whether sensitivity to sentiment is just a proxy for it otherwise not
horizons, it is known that the momentum effect does not obtain in Japan (Chui, Titman and Wei [2000]). This contrasts
sharply with the evidence in the U.S. and Europe (Jegadeesh and Titman [1993, 2001], Rouwenhorst [1998]). This
might be due to differences in investor composition. In the U.S., equity has been a very popular investment vehicle for
decades, attracting rather unsophisticated investors. In contrast, less than ten percent of Japanese household savings are
invested in stocks, even in recent years. According to the Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and
Telecommunications, the fraction is only 9.8% (1.68/17.16 million yen) as of the end of March 2002, even including
investments in bond equity trusts (http://www.stat.go.jp/data/sav/2002qn/zuhyou/a801.xls, in Japanese). This suggests
that households actively participating in equity markets may be relatively sophisticated, if gathering information about
the future stock market is costly for unsophisticated investors. If this is indeed the case, investors’ under- or over-

22

modeled by our factor model. If idiosyncrasy is really diversifiable, this of course contradicts the
APT framework. One might answer this by inverting the question: securities unduly sensitive to
sentiment may also be most volatile “glamour” stocks. Sentiment as discussed by DSSW is
certainly not diversifiable, and previous measures of volatility might have been capturing it.
Finally, it is worth noting that other causes, such as correlated investor position shifts
caused by common changes in risk aversion (perhaps due to news), demographic changes,
employment changes, or shocks to the family finances might affect demand, and hence prices.
Some of these may even be subject to daily fluctuations. These are potential matters for
macroeconomic research, and should be maintained as reasonable alternative hypotheses to
sentiment.

5 Conclusion
While theory suggests that a pervasive sentiment factor might well be priced, the quest for a
concrete measure of that factor has been somewhat illusive. The Japanese mutual fund data we use
in this paper allows us to directly observe flows of small, retail investors in the Japanese market
into funds that explicitly speculate on the direction of the stock market. Our study reveals a number
of results that are of potential interest to both asset pricing and behavioral research. First, the
structure of flow correlations across funds representing major asset classes is strong and significant.
Investors make correlated rebalancing decisions on a daily basis. In the U.S., where mutual funds
are a major factor in the securities markets, these choices appear to be simultaneously correlated to
asset class returns. In Japan, the negative correlation of bull and bear fund flows is strongly
suggestive of speculative herding by retail investors in the Japanese market. DSSW suggest that
exposure to this sentiment factor may be priced. We identify a potential candidate for this factor as
a linear combination of flows that is maximally correlated to a linear combination of returns. We
apply a version of the Fama-MacBeth (1973) two-stage procedure to fund returns, using returnbased factors and flow factors. We find that in the period of our analysis, the flow factor--that is the
sentiment factor--adds significant incremental explanatory power beyond that of return factors.
Robustness tests show that the sentiment flow factor can be recovered in a simple intuitive way, but
reaction may be limited in Japan. Although out of the scope of the current paper, this is potentially an interesting
hypothesis to test that is related to investor sentiment.
23

that our canonical correlation method is superior, because it makes full use of information in
correlation matrices. Our flow factor results are incremental to other potentially behavioral-based
factors such as size, value or momentum effect.
A comparison of the sentiment structure in the U.S. and Japan is itself instructive. Attitudes
towards different asset classes differ across countries. U.S. investors regard domestic and foreign
equities as economic complements. By contrast, Japanese investors appear to have independent
sentiments about domestic and foreign markets.
There are several extensions that might be pursued in future research. First, in constructing
the sentiment flow factor, we could incorporate information in cross-autocorrelations. This can be
easily implemented by including lagged returns in the canonical correlation analysis. In fact, we
find that flows to bull and bear funds are strongly negatively and positively correlated to lagged
equity returns, respectively. It is possible that sentiment is driving investors’ positive or negative
feedback trading behavior.
Next, although we do not find evidence of correlated sentiment between the two countries,
this investigation can be extended to the second moments. Consistent with Hamao, Masulis, and Ng
(1990), we find asymmetric return volatility spillover from the U.S. to Japan, but not in the other
direction (not reported).23 Given the strong U.S. contemporaneous flow-return correlations and the
Japanese lead-lag flow-return relationships, it is plausible that we find a link somewhere as we
examine higher moments and different lags. Needless to say, it would be useful to quantify the
variability of sentiment and its implications for cross-boarder spillovers and pricing.
Finally, as discussed in the previous section, it would be interesting to examine whether
securities unduly sensitive to our measure of sentiment are in fact “glamour” and volatile. Since
value/glamour investing is already a well-established strategy in the industry, such a finding would
be of great practitioner interest as well. It is also useful to confirm our results using weekly flow
data in this respect. While results using lower frequency data are in general subject to a variety of
interpretations, it is worth pursuing given the better availability of a longer-period data.

23

Following Hamao, Masulis, and Ng (1990), we conducted a two-step test of return volatility spillover. In the first
step, a GARCH(1,1)-MA(1)-in-mean model is estimated for each country. In the second step, as a measure of
information generation, the square of the previous foreign market’s residuals from the first step is added in the
conditional variance equation of each country’s GARCH(1,1)-MA(1)-in-mean model. The coefficient on the squared
foreign residuals is significant for Japan, but not for the U.S. Interestingly, for Japan, the coefficient on the lagged
domestic squared residual becomes insignificant upon inclusion of the U.S. squared residuals.
24

Appendix
A. Flow Timing Correction of the U.S. TrimTabs Data
This appendix describes the way we identify and correct the timing of the U.S. TrimTabs data. We
adopt a similar methodology to Greene and Hodges (2002). They note that if a fund reports preflow total net assets (TNA) for day t that do not reflect the day’s transactions, the correct TNA can
be recovered by
TNAct = TNAt+1 ⋅ NAVt / NAVt+1,
where TNAct is the corrected post-flow TNA on day t, TNAt+1 is the recorded pre-flow TNA on day
t+1, and NAVt is the net asset value per share on day t. We compare TNAct and TNAt to the GAAPconsistent figures in SEC filings (N-SARs or N-30Ds). The GAAP requires that the TNAs reflect
all transactions as of the end of the conformed period (i.e., post-flow TNAs). Since SEC filings are
semiannual, it is possible to find at most three filings for a given fund during our 17-month sample
period. If both TNAct and TNAt are away from the GAAP figure by 2%, we classify the observation
as “indeterminate.” We proceed to the subsequent classification if either TNAct or TNAt falls within
the 2% tolerance. If TNAct is closer to the SEC figure than TNAt, we regard the observation as “preflow.” If the opposite is true, it is categorized as “post-flow.” If TNAct is exactly as far away from
the SEC figure as TNAt, it is classified as “indeterminate.” Next, we follow a majority rule to
classify a fund as either pre-flow, post-flow, or indeterminate. Those funds with more pre-flow
observations than post-flow ones are classified as pre-flow. If more post-flow observations are
found, the fund is classified as post-flow. There can be a tie—such funds, as well as those with no
pre- or post-flow observation, are classified as indeterminate and thrown away from the analyses.
We match TrimTabs and the SEC filings by fund names. Since our TrimTabs data do not
include fund names, we do this by first matching TrimTabs to the CRSP Mutual Fund File by ticker
symbols and then matching CRSP to the SEC filings by fund names. Since SEC’s N-SARs are
machine-readable, we start the above screening with those funds for which N-SARs are found on
the SEC’s EDGAR database.24 This identifies the timing of 152 funds of which 108 funds (71.1%)

24

http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
25

are pre-flow. Since this yielded only several funds in the precious metal, cash, and foreign bond
categories, N-30Ds are manually collected for additional funds in each of the three categories. We
chose these funds by first sorting the funds in each category by TNAs and then picking a dozen top
rankers, so that they may be considered representative of the category. Table 2 summarizes the
final set of funds used in the analyses of this paper. The relatively small number of funds used in
the precious metal category is due to the fact that the entire TrimTabs dataset contains only eight
precious metal funds. 181 funds are used, 131 (69.7%) of which are identified as pre-flow. This
demonstrates the importance of checking and correcting for the timing of flows.

B. Estimation of Factor Risk Premia
This appendix presents the details of factor premium estimation. We wish to estimate Equation (1)
by allowing for intertemporal heteroskedasticity. At first, we assume that

σ 12 I
0 


σ 22 I

,
Var (ε ) ≡ Ω =


O


σ T22 I 
 0
where ε ≡ [ε 1' ε 2' Lε T' 2 ]' is the NT2×1 vector of stacked residual vectors in (1) and T2 is the number
of odd days. The block-diagonal design of Ω is in line with Fama and MacBeth (1973), who
assumed the serial independency of residuals over time. In addition, the most naïve implementation
of Fama-MacBeth regression typically assumes homoskedasticity, that σ 12 = σ 22 = L = σ T22 ≡ σ 2 .
We can also deal with cross-sectional heteroskedasticity once we form a panel regression, as
discussed later. Equation (1) coupled with the above error variance structure is typically termed a
groupwise heteroskedastic model (in which the groups are observation days) and can be found in
any standard econometrics textbook (see, for example, Greene [1997], Examples 11.2 and 12.9).
Exploiting the common-X structure over groups, the generalized least squares (GLS) estimator is
given by

26

−1


 

1
1
λˆ = ∑ 2 X ' X  ∑ 2 X ' R•,t 
 t σt
  t σt

= ∑ wt bt ,
t

1 / σ t2
where wt ≡
and bt ≡ (X’X)-1X’R•,t is the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimator for day
2
∑1 / σ t
t

(group) t. Thus, the GLS estimator in this model is simply the weighted average of OLS estimators
over days. Following the common practice, we implement this as a two-step feasible GLS. In the
first step, the OLS is used to obtain a consistent estimate of Ω. That is, set σ t2 ≡ σ 2 or wt = 1/T2 to
obtain the OLS estimator λ =

1
T2

∑ b . The OLS residuals, εˆ
t

t

= R•,t − Xλ , are used to estimate

t

σˆ t2 = εˆt' εˆt / N for every t. In the second step, the estimates of residual variances are fed back into
the above equation for λ̂ . It can be shown that this is equivalent with a panel regression. t-statistics
for estimates of factor risk premia in Tables 11-13 are based on White’s (1980) heteroskedasticityconsistent standard errors from the panel regression and are corrected also for cross-sectional
heteroskedasticity in this sense.

27

References
Admati, Anat R., 1985, “A Noisy Rational Expectations Equilibrium For Multi-Asset Securities
Markets,” Econometrica, 53 (3), 629-657.
Barber, Brad, 1999, “Noise Trader Risk, Odd-Lot Trading, and Security Returns,” Working Paper,
University of California at Davis.
Barberis, Nicholas and Andrei Shleifer, 2001, “Style Investing,” Working Paper, University of
Chicago and Harvard University.
Brennan, Michael J. and H. Henry Cao, 1996, “Information, Trade, and Derivative Securities,”
Review of Financial Studies, 9 (1), 163-208.
Brennan, Michael J. and H. Henry Cao, 1997, “International Portfolio Investment Flows,” Journal
of Finance, 52 (5), 1851-1880.
Brown, Stephen J. and William N. Goetzmann, 1997, “Mutual Fund Styles,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 43, 373-399.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, Takato Hiraki, Toshiyuki Otsuki, and Noriyoshi
Shiraishi, 2001, “The Japanese Open-End Fund Puzzle,” Journal of Business, 74 (1), 59-77.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, “On persistence in mutual fund performance,” Journal of Finance, 52 (1),
57-82.
Chui, Andy, Sheridan Titman, and K. C. John Wei, 2000, “Momentum, Ownership Structure, and
Financial Crises: An Analysis of Asian Stock Markets,” Working paper, University of
Texas at Austin.
De Long, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer, 1992, “Closed-end Fund Discounts,” Journal of
Portfolio Management, 18 (2), 46-53.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann, 1990,
“Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 98 (4), 703-738.
Edelen, Roger M. and Jerold B. Warner, 2001, “Aggregate Price Effects of Institutional Trading: A
Study of Mutual Fund Flow and Market Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59,
195-220.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey A. Busse, 1998, “Do Investors Care about
Sentiment?,” Journal of Business, 71 (4), 477-500.

28

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in The Returns on Bonds
and Stocks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.
Fama, Eugene F. and James D. MacBeth, 1973, “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,”
Journal of Political Economy, 81 (3), 607-636.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Emil M. Dabora, 1999, “How Are Stock Prices Affected by the Location of
Trade?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 53, 189-216.
Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G. J. O’Connell, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2001, “The Portfolio Flows of
International Investors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 151-193.
Goetzmann, William N. and Massimo Massa, 2000a, “Index Funds and Stock Market Growth,”
forthcoming, The Journal of Business.
Goetzmann, William N. and Massimo Massa, 2000b, “Daily Momentum and Contrarian Behavior
of Index Fund Investors” forthcoming, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis.
Goetzmann, William N., Massimo Massa, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 1999, “Behavioral Factors in
Mutual Fund Flows,” Working Paper, Yale School of Management.
Greene, William H., 1997, Econometric Analysis, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall; New Jersey.
Greene, Jason T. and Charles W. Hodges, 2002, “The Dilution Impact of Daily Fund Flows on
Open-end Mutual Funds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 65 (1), forthcoming.
Grinblatt, Mark and Matti Keloharju, 2000, “The Investment Behavior and Performance of Various
Investor Types: A Study of Finland’s Unique Data Set,” Journal of Financial Economics,
55 (1), 43-67.
Hamao, Yasushi, Ronald W. Masulis and Victor Ng, 1990, “Correlations in Price Changes and
Volatility across International Stock Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 3 (2), 281-307.
Ibbotson Associates, 2001, Stock, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation 2001 Yearbook, Ibbotson Associates;
Chicago, Illinois.
Iihara, Yoshio, Hideaki Kiyoshi Kato and Toshifumi Tokunaga, 2001, “Investors’ Herding on the
Tokyo Stock Exchange,” International Review of Finance, 2:1/2, 71-98.
Jegadeesh, Narashimhan and Sheridan Titman, 1993, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48 (1), March, 6591.
Jegadeesh, Narashimhan and Sheridan Titman, 2001, “Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” Journal of Finance, 56 (2), 699-720.

29

Jones, Christopher S., 2001, “Extracting Factors from Heteroskedastic Asset Returns,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 62, 293-325.
Kamesaka, Akiko Murase, John R. Nofsinger, and Hidetaka Kawakita, 2002, “Investment Patterns
and Performance of Investor Groups in Japan,” Working Paper, Washington State
University.
Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, “Investor Sentiment and The
Closed-End Fund Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 46 (1), 75-109.
Lin, Wen-Ling, Robert F. Engle, and Takatoshi Ito, 1994, “Do Bulls and Bears Move across
Borders? International Transmission of Stock Returns and Volatility,” Review of Financial
Studies, 7 (3), 507-538.
Lin, Wen-Ling and Takatoshi Ito, 1994, “Price Volatility and Volume Spillovers between the
Tokyo and New York Stock Markets,” in Frankel, Jeffrey A., ed., The Internationalization
of Equity Markets, 309-343.
Roll, Richard and Stephen A. Ross, 1980, “An Empirical Investigation of the Arbitrage Pricing
Theory,” Journal of Finance, 35 (5), 1073-1103.
Rouwenhorst, K. Geert, 1998, “International Momentum Strategies,” Journal of Finance, 53 (1),
267-284.
Shiller, Robert J., 1999, “Measuring Bubble Expectations and Investor Confidence,” Cowles
Foundation Discussion Paper, #1212, Yale University.
Shiller, Robert J., Fumiko Kon-Ya and Yoshiro Tsutsui, 1996, “Why Did the Nikkei Crash?
Expanding the Scope of Expectations Data Collection,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
78 (1), 156-64.
Warther, Vincent A., 1995, “Aggregate Mutual Fund Flows and Security Returns,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 39, 209-235.
Warther, Vincent A., 1998, “Has the Rise of Mutual Funds Increased Market Instability?”
Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, 239-62.
White, Halbert, 1980, “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica, 48 (4), 817-38.
Zitzewitz, Eric, 2002, “Who Cares about Shareholders? Arbitrage-Proofing Mutual Funds,”
Working Paper, Stanford University.

30

Table 1
Definition of ITAJ Classification
This table shows the definition of seven broad and 31 narrow categories used by the Investment Trust Association of
Japan.

Category:
Broad
Narrow
1. Domestic Equity
Big Cap
General
OTC
Middle-Small Cap
Million (periodic
contribution)
Sectors

Assets Invested / Characteristics
Over 70% in big-cap stocks (#shares listed > 200million)
Over 70% in domestic stocks
Over 70% in over-the-counter stocks
Over 70% in middle-small cap's
Purchased automatically by monthly deduction from investors'
payroll
Over 70% in domestic stocks. Investors can switch among several
industry sectors.

2. International Equity
Asia-Pacific

Over 70% in Asian and Pacific region stocks, excluding Japan.

Europe
General
Latin America
North America

Over 70% in European stocks
Over 70% in foreign stocks
Over 70% in Latin American stocks
Over 70% in North American stocks
Balanced between domestic and/or foreign bonds and stocks
(<=70%), or focused on bonds.
Mainly in convertible bonds, no more than 30% in stocks, domestic
or foreign.

3. Balanced Funds
4. Convertible Bonds
5. Domestic Index Linked
Nikkei225 linked
Nikkei300 linked
Other Indices linked
TOPIX linked

Stocks, designed to track Nikkei 225 index
Stocks, designed to track Nikkei 300 index
Stocks, designed to track indices other than Nikkei 225, 300 or
TOPIX
Stocks, designed to track TOPIX index

6. Domestic Industry Sector
Automobile-Machinery
Chemical-Textile-Pulp
Commerce
Construction-Real Estate

Over 70% in automobile and/or machinery industry stocks
Over 70% in chemical, textile and/or pulp industry stocks
Over 70% in commerce industry stocks
Over 70% in construction and/or real estate industry stocks

Electric-Precision
Machinery
Financial
Oil-Nonferrous
Pharmaceutical-Food
Steel-Shipbuilding
Utility

Over 70% in electric and/or precision machinery industry stocks

7. Derivatives
8. Others Limited
Savings (Domestic Zaikei)
Domestic Money Pool

Over 70% in financial industry stocks
Over 70% in oil and/or nonferrous industry stocks
Over 70% in pharmaceutical and/or food industry stocks
Over 70% in steel and/or shipbuilding industry stocks
Over 70% in utility industry stocks
Aggressively uses derivative contracts for non-hedging purposes

Table 2
U.S. Asset-class Categories
This table shows U.S. categories and number of funds used in each category.
We classify the TrimTabs funds into eight asset classes. The identification of preand post-flow funds is based on a method similar to Greene and Hodges (2002)
and is described in Appendix A.

US Equity
Foreign Equity
Metal
US Sector
US Bond
Cash
Foreign Bond
Muni Bond
Total

# Category
Funds Used
80
20
6
14
22
12
12
22
188

(# Pre-flow
Funds)
(57)
(11)
(6)
(8)
(15)
(9)
(6)
(19)
(131)

(# Post-flow
Funds)
(23)
(9)
(0)
(6)
(7)
(3)
(6)
(3)
(57)

Table 3
Japanese GSC Categories
This table shows the Japanese Generalized Style Classification (GSC) categories and their interpretations. It also shows the cross-tabulation with the
Investment Trust Association of Japan (ITAJ) categories. The primary dataset comes from QUICK corporation. The Japanese funds are classified into eight
return-based categories (and "not applicable") by Brown and Goetzmann's (1997) GSC algorithm.

GSC Category and Interpretation
ITAJ Category
Broad

Narrow

1. Domestic Equity

Big Cap
General
OTC
Middle-Small Cap
Million
Sectors
Asia-Pacific
Europe
General
Latin America
North America

2. International
Equity

3. Balanced Funds
4. Convertible Bonds
5. Domestic Index
Linked

6. Domestic Industry
Sector

7. Derivatives
8. Others

Nikkei225 linked
Nikkei300 linked
Other Indices linked
TOPIX linked
Automobile-Machinery
Chemical-Textile-Pulp
Commerce
Construction-Real Estate
Electric-Precision Machinery
Financial
Oil-Nonferrous
Pharmaceutical-Food
Steel-Shipbuilding
Utility
Limited
Savings (Domestic Zaikei)
Domestic Money Pool
Total

GSC1
Dom.
Equity

GSC2
Int'l
Asian

GSC3
Int'l
West.

GSC4
Foc'd
Equity

GSC5
Bal'd /
Cash

GSC6
Bal'd /
CB

GSC7

GSC8

Index

Cash

13
214
32
24
2
54
7
0
6
1
0
1
0
0
31
5
26
6
1
13
4
3
14
0
0
5
5
12
23
0
0
502

0
47
0
1
10
35
77
12
28
2
7
30
5
0
0
0
0
10
19
1
12
0
0
7
19
3
4
7
97
11
0
444

0
0
0
0
0
0
8
48
82
0
29
128
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
15
0
0
1
314

4
86
4
15
0
24
6
4
13
5
6
14
4
0
0
0
0
2
0
6
0
13
0
0
0
0
3
12
28
0
0
249

0
2
0
1
0
2
3
0
5
0
0
164
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
40
0
0
23
240

0
0
0
0
0
3
7
6
7
0
2
61
24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
30
28
4
40
212

0
31
0
1
12
7
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45
0
1
0
0
2
0
5
0
0
6
0
3
1
49
0
0
0
163

0
0
0
0
1
0
0
3
1
0
0
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
24
1
0
50
92

N/A

0
12
0
1
0
0
1
0
2
0
2
5
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
25

Total

17
392
36
43
25
125
109
73
144
8
46
415
37
45
31
7
26
18
22
20
21
16
14
13
19
11
13
189
177
15
114
2241

Table 4
Japanese ITA Categories
This table shows the Japanese ITA categories and the cross-tabulation with the Investment Trust Association of Japan (ITAJ) categories. Funds in the primary QUICK dataset
are classified into twelve asset classes. The ITAJ derivatives funds are further grouped into domestic and foreign bull and bear funds by fund name. The ITAJ balanced
category funds are further broken into domestic and foreign bond funds using invested asset information in a second QUICK dataset. For unambiguous classification, we
exclude the following ITAJ categories: million, convertible bonds, limited, and savings.

ITAJ Category

ITA Category

Broad

Narrow

1. Domestic Equity

Big Cap
General
OTC
Middle-Small Cap
Million
Sectors
Asia-Pacific
Europe
General
Latin America
North America

2. International
Equity

3. Balanced Funds
4. Convertible Bonds
5. Domestic Index
Nikkei225 linked
Linked
Nikkei300 linked
Other Indices linked
TOPIX linked
6. Domestic Industry Automobile-Machinery
Sector
Chemical-Textile-Pulp
Commerce
Construction-Real Estate
Electric-Precision Machinery
Financial
Oil-Nonferrous
Pharmaceutical-Food
Steel-Shipbuilding
Utility
7. Derivatives
8. Others
Limited
Savings (Domestic Zaikei)
Domestic Money Pool
Total

Japan
Equity

Index

Cash

17
392
36
43
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
488

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
45
31
7
26
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
109

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
114
114

Japan Japan
Bull
Bear

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
27
0
0
0
27

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
28
0
0
0
28

For'n
Bull

For'n
Bear

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
16
0
0
0
16

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
0
0
0
18

For'n Japan Japan
Equity Sector Bond

0
0
0
0
0
0
109
73
144
8
46
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
380

0
0
0
0
0
125
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
22
20
21
16
14
13
19
11
13
0
0
0
0
292

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
26

For'n
Bond

Other
Deriv.

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
75

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
100

N/A

Total

0
0
0
0
25
0
0
0
0
0
0
314
37
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
177
15
0
568

17
392
36
43
25
125
109
73
144
8
46
415
37
45
31
7
26
18
22
20
21
16
14
13
19
11
13
189
177
15
114
2241

Table 5
Characteristics of Japanese Bull and Bear Funds
This table shows the characteristics of bull and bear funds in the Japanese dataset. We first classify each ITAJ
equity derivative fund into either bull, bear, or other type using fund name. In order to be classified as an equity
derivative fund, a fund must not have the word “bond,” “yen,” or “dollar” in their names. No other words that imply
non-equity assets were found in the sample fund names. Then we construct the potential set of bull funds by
taking those whose names contain the words “bull” and/or “double” and not “bear” or “reverse.” The bear funds
are those whose names contain the word ”bear” or “reverse.” In our sample, no fund has the words “bull” and
“bear” simultaneously in its name. Then, we further divide the bull and bear funds into domestic and foreign. If a
fund contains any one of the following words in its name, it is classified as a foreign bull or bear fund: U.S., Hong
Kong, Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Global, World, and their equivalents and literal derivatives. Otherwise, it is
classified as a domestic fund. No other word that implies a country or region was found in the sample fund
names. Finally, we determine the final set of bull and bear funds by checking the fund characteristics as
described in the text. The total net assets (TNA) are in hundreds of millions of yen. The average leverage is the
percentage of TNA shorted in the futures contracts and is estimated from the performance reports found on
management firms' web sites.

Average
(%
of
total)
(%
of
total)
Leverage # Reports
Sum TNA
Mean TNA # Funds

Japan Bull

4,745.8 (40.9%)

175.8

27 (14.3%)

178.8%

10

Japan Bear

435.8 (3.8%)

15.6

28 (14.8%)

-162.8%

9

Foreign Bull

590.5 (5.1%)

36.9

16 (8.5%)

200.7%

6

Foreign Bear

222.7 (1.9%)

12.4

18 (9.5%)

-99.2%

8

5,603.8 (48.3%)

56.6

100 (52.9%)

11,598.7 (100.0%)

61.7

189 (100.0%)

Other Derivatives
Total

Table 6
GSC Clustering Results of Japanese Derivative Funds
This table shows the number of Japanese derivative funds classified into five return-based clusters by
Brown and Goetzmann's (1997) Generalized Style Classification (GSC) algorithm.

Japan Bull
Japan Bear
Foreign Bull
Foreign Bear
Other Derivatives
Total

GSC I
19
0
5
0
23
47

GSC II GSC III GSC IV
0
0
0
19
0
0
0
11
0
6
0
12
0
44
3
25
55
15

GSC V
0
1
0
0
21
22

N/A
8
8
0
0
9
25

Total
27
28
16
18
100
189

Table 7
Flow and Return Correlations between U.S. Categories
This table shows the flow and return correlations between U.S. categories. The category flow is measured by the
average percentage flow (APF), the equally weighted average of normalized flows over component funds, where the
normalization is by each fund’s total net assets on the previous day. The category return (RET) is the equally
weighted average of returns on the component funds. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels,
respectively.

(a) Flow Correlations
US
Foreign
Equity
Equity
Foreign Equity
0.45***
Metal
-0.02
-0.10*
US Sector
0.22*** 0.21***
US Bond
0.04
0.03
Cash
-0.07
-0.13**
Foreign Bond
0.02
0.00
Muni Bond
0.04
-0.10*

Metal

US
Sector

-0.15***
-0.04
0.03
0.08
-0.01

0.04
-0.18***
-0.06
-0.02

US Bond

Cash

Foreign
Bond

0.12**
0.02
0.14**

-0.01
0.02

0.07

(b) Cross Correlations between Flows and Returns
US
Foreign
US
APF \ RET
Equity
Equity
Metal
Sector US Bond
US Equity
0.53*** 0.24*** 0.03
0.47*** 0.10*
Foreign Equity
0.57*** 0.40*** 0.05
0.58*** 0.11**
Metal
-0.08
0.08
0.60*** -0.10*
-0.04
US Sector
0.24*** 0.11** -0.01
0.20*** 0.16***
US Bond
0.01
-0.01
-0.04
0.00
0.05
Cash
-0.14** -0.11*
-0.01
-0.15** -0.16***
For. Bond
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.08
Muni Bond
-0.06
-0.05
-0.05
-0.02
0.16***

Foreign
Muni
Cash
Bond
Bond
-0.04
0.12** -0.03
-0.09
0.19*** -0.07
-0.03
0.08
-0.11*
-0.01
0.08
0.06
0.02
-0.02
0.04
-0.03
-0.11*
-0.04
0.03
0.09
0.03
0.23*** 0.11*
0.18***

Table 8
Flow and Return Correlations between Japanese GSC Categories
This table shows the flow and return correlations between Japanese GSC categories. The category flow is
measured by the average percentage flow (APF), the equally weighted average of normalized flows over
component funds, where the normalization is by each fund’s total net assets on the previous day. The category
return (RET) is the equally weighted average of returns on the component funds. *, **, and *** denote significance
at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

(a) Flow Correlations
Japan
Equity
Asian Equity
0.41***
Western Equity
-0.12**
Focused Equity
0.43***
Balanced/Cash
-0.08
Balanced/CB
-0.07
Index
0.44***
Cash
-0.27***
(b) Return Correlations
Japan
Equity
Asian Equity
0.92***
Western Equity
0.20***
Focused Equity
0.95***
Balanced/Cash
-0.48***
Balanced/CB
0.60***
Index
0.93***
Cash
-0.90***

Asian
Equity
0.19***
0.43***
-0.09
-0.07
0.29***
-0.15***

Asian
Equity
0.25***
0.87***
-0.38***
0.59***
0.91***
-0.88***

Western
Equity

0.15***
0.08
0.08
-0.13**
0.22***

Western
Equity

0.36***
-0.38***
0.19***
0.17***
-0.13**

Focused Balanced Balanced
Equity
/ Cash
/ CB

-0.05
-0.02
0.30***
-0.13**

0.28***
-0.48***
0.53***

-0.33***
0.38***

Focused Balanced Balanced
Equity
/ Cash
/ CB

-0.57***
0.63***
0.84***
-0.82***

-0.52***
-0.38***
0.40***

0.55***
-0.54***

Index

-0.71***

Index

-0.96***

Table 9
Flow and Return Correlations between Japanese ITA Categories
This table shows the flow and return correlations between Japanese ITA categories. The category flow is measured
by the average percentage flow (APF), the equally weighted average of normalized flows over component funds,
where the normalization is by each fund’s total net assets on the previous day. The category return (RET) is the
equally weighted average of returns on the component funds. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1%
levels, respectively.

(a) Flow Correlations
Japan
Equity
Index
0.48***
Cash
-0.25***
Japan Bull
0.39***
Japan Bear
-0.22***
Foreign Bull
-0.02
Foreign Bear
-0.05
Foreign Equity
0.12**
Japan Sector
0.43***
Japan Bond
0.06
Foreign Bond
-0.06
Other Derivatives
-0.02
(b) Return Correlations
Japan
Equity
Index
0.96***
Cash
0.00
Japan Bull
0.90***
Japan Bear
-0.90***
Foreign Bull
0.33***
Foreign Bear
-0.34***
Foreign Equity
0.41***
Japan Sector
0.98***
Japan Bond
-0.03
Foreign Bond
-0.03
Other Derivatives
0.90***

Index

Cash

Japan
Bull

Japan
Bear

-0.31***
0.52***
-0.38***
0.03
-0.09*
0.15***
0.38***
0.02
0.02
-0.07

-0.65***
0.48***
-0.08
0.16***
0.03
-0.26***
0.04
-0.01
0.19***

-0.69***
-0.05
-0.06
-0.03
0.25***
-0.02
-0.01
-0.19***

0.00
0.09*
0.06
-0.15***
0.09*
0.02
0.26***

Index

Cash

Japan
Bull

Japan
Bear

-0.05
0.96***
-0.96***
0.26***
-0.26***
0.40***
0.98***
-0.01
-0.08
0.92***

-0.04
0.04
0.06
0.08
-0.04
-0.06
0.22***
0.94***
-0.07

-0.99***
0.21***
-0.21***
0.41***
0.93***
0.00
-0.07
0.92***

-0.20***
0.21***
-0.39***
-0.93***
-0.03
0.07
-0.91***

Foreign
Bull

-0.20***
0.25***
-0.06
0.09
0.07
0.06

Foreign
Bull

-0.98***
0.25***
0.28***
-0.03
0.02
0.30***

Foreign
Bear

-0.14**
0.01
-0.05
0.04
0.14**

Foreign
Bear

-0.28***
-0.29***
0.07
0.11**
-0.31***

Table 10
Correlations between Sentiment Flow Factor and
Category Flows/Returns
This table shows the correlations between the sentiment flow factor and category
flows/returns. The average percentage flow (APF) is the equally weighted average of
normalized flows over component funds, where the normalization is by each fund’s
total net assets on the previous day. The total net flow (TNF) is the sum of component
fund flows. The category return (RET) is the equally weighted average of returns on
the component funds. The sentiment flow factor is the linear combination of category
flows (APFs) that is maximally correlated to a linear combination of category returns
(RETs) and is found by the canonical correlation analysis. The factor mimicking
portfolio return is the resulting optimal combination of category returns. *, **, and ***
denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

(a) US

Correlation with Category
APF
TNF
US Equity
0.698***
0.599***
Foreign Equity
0.756***
0.643***
Metal
-0.577***
-0.561***
US Sector
0.279***
0.205***
US Bond
0.019
-0.039
Cash
-0.112**
-0.048
Foreign Bond
-0.028
-0.037
Muni Bond
-0.025
-0.032
Correlation between Sentiment Flow Factor and
Factor-Mimicking Portfolio Return

Correlation with Category
APF
TNF
Japan Equity
0.204***
0.081*
Index
0.658***
0.490***
Cash
-0.349***
-0.434***
Japan Bull
0.658***
0.647***
Japan Bear
-0.839***
-0.653***
Foreign Bull
0.114**
0.025
Foreign Bear
0.158***
0.124**
Foreign Equity
0.039
0.137***
Japan Sector
0.256***
0.290***
Japan Bond
-0.056
-0.041
Foreign Bond
0.186***
0.152***
Other Derivatives
-0.200***
0.092**
Correlation between Sentiment Flow Factor and
Factor-Mimicking Portfolio Return

RET
0.572***
0.273***
-0.272***
0.556***
0.121**
-0.047
0.108**
0.005
0.702***

(b) Japan

RET
-0.018
0.078*
-0.081*
0.078*
-0.067
-0.295***
0.263***
0.041
0.045
-0.005
-0.102**
0.024
0.461***

Table 11
Estimated Sentiment Flow Factor Premium
This table shows the estimates of U.S. and Japanese sentiment factor risk premia. The estimation is by a version of Fama-MacBeth (1973)
regression that controls for intertemporal heteroskedasticity. We first orthogonalize the sentiment flow factor against all the category returns and
their one-day lags. Then, we estimate factor loadings by regressing each fund return on a constant, the category returns, and the orthogonalized
sentiment flow factor using even days. Finally, using odd days, we regress the cross-section of fund returns on the factor loadings with the
constraint that coefficients are constant over time. We implement this as a groupwise heteroskedastic model and estimate it by two-step feasible
generalized least squares. The details are shown in Appendix B. Reported are the estimated coefficients or factor risk premia (multiplied by 1,000)
and in brackets below, the corresponding t-values based on White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

(a) US

(b) Japan
Factor
Premium

Sentiment Flow
Factor

0.7742***

t-stat
(7.09)

Annualized
Premium
21.5%

Return Factors:
US Equity
Foreign Equity
Metal
US Sector
US Bond
Cash
Foreign Bond
Muni Bond

0.9483***
0.7621***
-0.4264
0.5210***
-0.0298
-0.0246
-0.3417***
-0.1951***

(14.58)
(5.83)
(-1.05)
(5.28)
(-0.49)
(-0.76)
(-3.77)
(-3.45)

27.0%
21.2%
-10.2%
14.0%
-0.7%
-0.6%
-8.3%
-4.8%

Constant

-0.0729*

(-1.36)

-1.8%

Factor
Premium
Sentiment Flow
Factor

t-stat

Annualized
Premium

2.3647***

(4.78)

81.3%

Return Factors:
Japan Equity
Index
Cash
Japan Bull
Japan Bear
Foreign Bull
Foreign Bear
Foreign Equity
Japan Sector
Japan Bond
Foreign Bond
Other Derivatives

1.0362***
0.9793***
-0.0001
1.4792***
-1.2215***
1.9599***
-1.3110***
0.9330***
0.7070***
-0.1637***
0.0941
0.2285***

(21.63)
(18.08)
(-0.11)
(9.66)
(-9.21)
(4.49)
(-5.08)
(11.83)
(14.61)
(-4.39)
(0.89)
(4.08)

29.8%
28.0%
0.0%
45.1%
-26.5%
63.8%
-28.1%
26.5%
19.5%
-4.0%
2.4%
5.9%

Constant

-0.0002

(-0.01)

0.0%

Table 12
Estimated Simple Sentiment Flow Factor Premium
This table shows the estimates of U.S. and Japanese "simple" sentiment factor risk premia. The simple sentiment flow factor is constructed from
category average percentage flows as follows, U.S.: Equity - 0.5*(Cash + Metal), Japan: Index - 0.5*(Cash + Bear). The estimation is by a version
of Fama-MacBeth (1973) regression that controls for intertemporal heteroskedasticity. We first orthogonalize the simple sentiment flow factor
against all the category returns and their one-day lags. Then, we estimate factor loadings by regressing each fund return on a constant, the
category returns, and the orthogonalized simple sentiment flow factor using even days. Finally, using odd days, we regress the cross-section of
fund returns on the factor loadings with the constraint that coefficients are constant over time. We implement this as a groupwise heteroskedastic
model and estimate it by two-step feasible generalized least squares. The details are shown in Appendix B. Reported are the estimated coefficients
or factor risk premia (multiplied by 1,000) and in brackets below, the corresponding t-values based on White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

(a) US

(b) Japan
Factor
Premium

Simple Sentiment
Flow Factor

1.2041***

t-stat
(4.11)

Annualized
Premium
35.4%

Return Factors:
US Equity
Foreign Equity
Metal
US Sector
US Bond
Cash
Foreign Bond
Muni Bond

0.9677***
0.7910***
-0.3617
0.5700***
-0.1027**
-0.0441*
-0.3722***
-0.1949***

(14.76)
(5.94)
(-0.86)
(5.82)
(-1.65)
(-1.32)
(-3.89)
(-3.42)

27.6%
22.0%
-8.7%
15.4%
-2.6%
-1.1%
-9.0%
-4.8%

Constant

-0.0628

(-1.16)

-1.6%

Factor
Premium
Simple Sentiment
Flow Factor
Return Factors:
Japan Equity
Index
Cash
Japan Bull
Japan Bear
Foreign Bull
Foreign Bear
Foreign Equity
Japan Sector
Japan Bond
Foreign Bond
Other Derivatives
Constant

t-stat

Annualized
Premium

2.7465*

(1.38)

99.6%

1.0036***
0.9971***
0.0007
1.4829***
-1.3496***
1.8484***
-1.2640***
0.9229***
0.6815***
-0.2349***
0.1004
0.2419***

(20.77)
(18.48)
(0.63)
(9.67)
(-9.86)
(4.20)
(-4.88)
(11.69)
(13.85)
(-6.13)
(0.95)
(4.30)

28.8%
28.6%
0.0%
45.3%
-28.8%
59.3%
-27.3%
26.2%
18.7%
-5.7%
2.6%
6.3%

(0.28)

0.2%

0.0097

Table 13
Estimated U.S. Sentiment Flow Factor Premium in a
Fama-French Three Factor + Momentum Regression
This table shows the estimated U.S. sentiment factor risk premium in a Fama-French (FF, 1993) three factor and momentum regression. The
estimation is by a version of Fama-MacBeth (1973) regression that controls for intertemporal heteroskedasticity. We first orthogonalize the
sentiment flow factor from the canonical correlation analysis against all the category returns and their one-day lags. Then, we estimate factor
loadings by regressing each fund return on a constant, the excess market (EXMKT), size (SMB), book-to-market (HML), and momentum (UMD)
return factors, and the orthogonalized sentiment flow factor using even days. The daily FF three and momentum factors are downloaded from
Jeffrey Busse's web site. Finally, using odd days, we regress the cross-section of fund returns on the factor loadings with the constraint that
coefficients are constant over time. We implement this as a groupwise heteroskedastic model and estimate it by two-step feasible generalized least
squares. The details are shown in Appendix B. Reported are the estimated coefficients or factor risk premia (multiplied by 1,000) and in brackets
below, the corresponding t-values based on White's (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10,
5, and 1% levels, respectively.

Factor
Premium
Sentiment Flow
Factor

t-stat

Annualized
Premium

0.4359***

(3.85)

11.6%

Return Factors:
EXMKT
SMB
HML
UMD

0.8557***
0.1202
-0.9842***
0.6827***

(15.68)
(1.21)
(-10.01)
(3.79)

24.1%
3.1%
-22.0%
18.8%

Constant

-0.0584***

(-2.50)

-1.5%

0.1
Bull
Index
0.05

0

-0.05

-0.1
02/03/98

03/19/98

05/06/98

06/18/98
(a) Bull Funds

08/03/98

09/16/98

0.06
Bear
Index

0.04
0.02
0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
02/03/98

03/19/98

05/06/98

06/18/98
(b) Bear Funds

08/03/98

09/16/98

Figure 1: Time-series plots of the daily Japanese bull and bear category returns during the first-half
sample period, February 3, 1998 through October 6, 1998. The dashed line is the index category
return.

