                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          UNIONIZATION AND WAGE INEQUALITY:
                               A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF
                             THE U.S., THE U.K., AND CANADA

                                              David Card
                                            Thomas Lemieux
                                            W. Craig Riddell

                                          Working Paper 9473
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9473


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




Some parts of this paper are taken from our forthcoming chapter in the International Handbook of Trade
Unions, edited by John Addison and Claus Schnabel. We are grateful to John Addison for comments.
Funding for Card’s research was provided by the Center for Labor Economics at UC Berkeley, while that of
Lemieux and Riddell was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by David Card, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
notice, is given to the source.
Unionization and Wage Inequality: A Comparative Study of the U.S., the U.K., and Canada
David Card, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell
NBER Working Paper No. 9473
January 2003
JEL No. J3, J5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper presents a comparative analysis of the link between unionization and wage inequality in
the U.S., the U.K., and Canada. Our main motivation is to see whether unionization can account for
differences and trends in wage inequality in industrialized countries. We focus on the U.S., the
U.K., and Canada because the institutional arrangements governing unionization and collective
bargaining are relatively similar in these three countries. The three countries also share large non-
union sectors that can be used as a comparison group for the union sector. Using comparable micro
data for the last two decades, we find that unions have remarkably similar qualitative impacts in all
three countries. In particular, unions tend to systematically reduce wage inequality among men, but
have little impact on wage inequality for women. We conclude that unionization helps explain a
sizable share of cross-country differences in male wage inequality among the three countries. We
also conclude that de-unionization explains a substantial part of the growth in male wage inequality
in the U.K. and the U.S. since the early 1980s.



David Card                                    Thomas Lemieux
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley            University of British Columbia
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                       Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
and NBER                                      and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                        tlemieux@interchange.ubc.ca


W. Craig Riddell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
criddell@interchange.ubc.ca
       This paper presents a comparative analysis of the link between unionization and wage

inequality in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada. Our investigation is motivated

by several factors. One is to understand better trends in income inequality. Several previous

studies have concluded that falling unionization contributed to the steep increase in wage

inequality in the U.S. and the U.K. that occurred in the 1980s. Wage inequality did not rise as

quickly in these countries in the 1990s. This raises the question of whether the evolution of

union coverage and union wage impacts can account for some of the changing trend in wage

inequality. More generally, differences across these countries in the timing of changes in

unionization and in wage inequality provide an opportunity for further assessing the contribution

of institutional change to trends in income inequality. With the addition of questions on union

status and wages to the U.K. Labour Force Survey (LFS) in 1993 and the Canadian LFS in 1997,

it is now possible to use comparable large-scale micro data sets to examine the impact of unions

on wages in the three countries. Estimates of the role of unionization in cross-country

differences in wage inequality are no longer significantly affected by survey differences or by

the limitations of small sample sizes.

       Our study is also motivated by the fact that in these three countries the institutional

arrangements governing unionization and collective bargaining provide an environment that is

suitable for estimating the impacts of unions on wage inequality. As with other aspects of the

economy, collective bargaining institutions in these countries are broadly similar. In particular,

negotiations are conducted at the enterprise level, and there is no general mechanism to extend

union wage floors beyond the organized sector. The fraction of workers covered by collective

agreements in the three countries is also relatively modest – currently under one-third of wage

and salary workers. Thus it is possible to compare the structure of wages for workers whose
                                                 2

wages are set by union contracts, and those wages are not, and potentially infer the effect of

unions on overall wage inequality. A similar task is far more difficult in other countries

(including the major European countries and Australia) because there is no clear distinction

between the union and nonunion sectors. Collective bargaining in these countries is conducted

at the industry or sectoral level, and the provisions are formally or informally extended to most

of the labor force. Moreover, in many countries, unions exert considerable influence on political

decisions (such as minimum wages) that directly effect labor market outcomes.

        We also seek to assess whether there are common patterns in the impact of unions on the

wage structure in countries with economies and industrial relations systems that are broadly

similar. Of particular interest are patterns in union coverage and union wage impacts by gender

and skill.

        After briefly reviewing trends in union membership in the three countries, we begin by

developing a simple framework for measuring the effect of unions on wage inequality, based on

the potential outcomes framework that is now widely used in program evaluation. Our

framework emphasizes three key aspects of collective bargaining coverage: How does the

probability of union coverage vary for workers who would earn more or less in the nonunion

sector? How much do unions raise average wages for workers in different skill groups? How

do unions affect the dispersion of wages within narrow skill groups?

        We then use micro data samples to compare the incidence and average wage effect of

unions by skill level on male and female workers in the three countries, and measure recent

trends in union coverage by skill level. Despite some differences in the institutional systems

that govern the determination of union status across workplaces in the three countries, we find

remarkable similarity in the overall patterns of union coverage and in the degree to which unions
                                                   3

affect average wages of different skill groups. Within narrowly defined skill groups, wage

inequality is always lower for union workers than nonunion workers. For male workers, union

coverage tends to be concentrated at the middle of the skill distribution, and union wages tend to

be “flattened” relative to nonunion wages. As a result, unions have an equalizing effect on the

dispersion of male wages across different skill groups in the three countries, complementing the

effect on within-group inequality. For female workers, however, union coverage is concentrated

near the top of the skill distribution, and there is no tendency for unions to flatten skill

differentials across groups. Thus, unions tend to raise inequality between more and less skilled

women in the three countries, offsetting their effect on within-group inequality.

        As a final step, we use data from the past 25 years to compute the changing effect of

unionization on wage inequality. During the 1980s and 1990s, unionization rates fell in all three

countries, with the most rapid decline in the U.K. and the slowest fall in Canada. These trends

contributed to rising male wage inequality, particularly in Britain. Indeed, we estimate that the

precipitous fall in unionization in the U.K. can explain up to two thirds of the difference in the

trend in male wage inequality between Britain and the U.S.



I. Union Membership and Collective Bargaining Coverage

        Table 1 presents data on union membership rates as a fraction of paid (wage and salary)

employment in the U.S., Britain, and Canada over the past 40 years. As has been noted in many

previous studies (e.g., Freeman, 1998; Farber and Western, 2000) union membership rates have

been declining in the U.S. since the mid-1950s, and are currently under 15 percent. In the U.S. a

relatively small fraction of workers who are covered by collective bargaining agreements are not
                                                 4

union members (10-15 percent), so the trend in coverage by collective agreements is similar.1 In

contrast to the U.S., union membership rates in Canada rose between 1960 and 1980, but in the

1990s have begun to decline.2 In Canada, as in the U.S., the fraction of workers covered by

collective bargaining agreements is only slightly above the union membership rate, so trends in

union membership and coverage are similar.

       In 1960 the union membership rate was higher in Britain than in the U.S. or Canada, and

over the 1960s and 1970s membership expanded, peaking at over 50 percent in 1979. During the

past two decades, however, union membership has fallen rapidly, losing about 10 percentage

points in the 1980s and another 10 points in the 1990s.3 Recent data from the labor force survey

suggest that in the U.K. in the late 1990s, the fraction of workers whose pay is set by collective

bargaining agreements is about 5 percentage points higher than union membership (Bland, 1999,

Table 6). There are no comparable data from earlier periods. Nevertheless, crude estimates of

union coverage rates suggest that collective bargaining coverage has declined at least as fast as

union membership (OECD, 1997).

       The relative similarity of collective bargaining institutions but very different levels and

trends in union membership in the U.S., Canada, and Britain suggest that comparisons between

these countries may be particularly informative in understanding the role of unionization in the


1
  See Budd and Na (2000) for a discussion of the institutional setting and a comparison between
members and covered non-members. Hirsch and MacPherson (2002) present separate data and
membership and coverage rates: both declined about 10 percentage points between 1980 and
2000.
2
  Different data sources show somewhat faster or slower rates of decline in union membership in
Canada in the 1980s and 1990s. Traditionally, union membership rates have been constructed
from trade union membership tallies. These rates show a very modest fall since the mid-1980s,
while estimates from micro surveys show a much sharper decline.
3
  See Pencavel (2003) for a discussion of alternative explanations for the rapid decline in U.K.
unionization.
                                                   5

evolution of wage inequality. To the extent that other confounding factors, such as

technological change and rising globalization, are common across the three countries, we may be

able to quantify the effects of changing unionization by comparing relative trends in inequality

to relative trends in unionization.



II. Unions and Wage Inequality

A. Conceptual Framework

       A convenient framework for analyzing the effect of unions on wage inequality is the

potential outcomes model now widely used in program evaluation (see Angrist and Krueger,

1999). Assume for the moment that each worker faces two potential wages: a log wage in the

union sector, WiU, and a log wage in the nonunion sector WiN. Ignoring dual job holders, a given

individual is either in one sector or the other at any point in time, so one of the potential

outcomes is observed and the other is not. Letting Ui denote an indicator for union status, the

observed wage of individual i is

       Wi = Ui WiU + (1- Ui) WiN.

Let WU and WN represent the means of the potential wage outcomes in the two sectors, and let

VU and VN represent the corresponding variances. Finally, let W and V represent the mean and

variance of observed wages. In this setting, a natural measure of the effect of unions on wage

inequality is V!VN: the difference between the observed variance of wages and the variance

that would prevail if everyone was paid his or her nonunion potential wage.

       There are two problems with this measure. The first is purely practical: how do we

estimate VN? The second is conceptual. Arguably, any given individual in the union sector has a

well-defined potential wage in the nonunion sector. But if the union sector disappeared, the
                                                  6

equilibrium set of wage offers in the nonunion sector could change.4 Thus VN is really a

function of the size of the union sector, VN(u), where 0#u#1 indexes the fraction of workers in

the union sector. In the absence of unionization, the variance of observed wages would be

VN(0). This means that the effect of unionization on wage inequality, taking account of the

general equilibrium impact of the presence of the union sector, is:

       V ! VN(0) .

Despite its theoretical appeal, it is difficult to imagine developing a credible estimate of VN(0).

Under strong assumptions, however, it may be possible to estimate VN(U), where U is the current

fraction of unionized workers. The obvious advantage of this measure is that potential nonunion

wage outcomes under the current level of unionism are at least partially observed (for all current

nonunion workers). Since

       V ! VN(U) = V ! VN(0) + { VN(0) ! VN(U) } ,

the difference V!VN(U) overstates or understates the “true” effect of unions by a term reflecting

how much the variance of nonunion wage outcomes would change if the union sector was

eliminated. While acknowledging this potential bias, in the rest of the paper we focus on

comparisons between V, the observed variance of wages, and VN(U), the variance that would

prevail if everyone were paid according to the current nonunion wage structure.



B. Estimating the Variance of Potential Nonunion Wages

       In order to estimate VN we have to make an assumption about how current union workers


4
  This possibility was emphasized by Lewis (1963). The presence of unionized employers may
lead to higher wages in the nonunion sector (if nonunion employers raise wages to deter
unionization efforts) or to lower wages (if unionization reduces employment in the union sector,
increasing labour supply in the nonunion sector).
                                                  7

would be paid if they worked in the nonunion sector. One starting point is the assumption that

union status is “as good as randomly assigned”, conditional on observed skill characteristics. In

this case, the counterfactual variance VN can be estimated as the variance of wages for a suitably

reweighted sample of nonunion workers. In this section we show how the resulting calculations

are related to three key factors: the variation in the union coverage rate by wage level in the

absence of unions, the size of the union wage effect for different skill groups, and the union-

nonunion difference in the variance of wages within skill categories. We then show how the

assumption that union status is independent of unobserved productivity factors can be relaxed.

       Let WiN(c) represent the log wage that individual i in skill group c would earn in the

nonunion sector, and let WiU(c) denote the log wage for the same individual if employed in a

union job. Assume that

       WiN(c) = WN(c) + eiN

       WiU(c) = WU(c) + eiU

where WN(c) and WU(c) are the mean nonunion and union log wages for individuals in skill

group c, respectively, and the random terms eiN and eiU are independent of actual

union status (conditional on the observed skill level c). Let VU(c) and VN(c) denote the variances

of potential wage outcomes for individuals in skill group c in the union and nonunion sectors,

respectively. The union-nonunion gap in average wages for workers in skill group c is

       ∆w(c)= WU(c) ! WN(c)

while the corresponding variance gap is

       ∆v(c) = VU(c) ! VN(c) .

       Under the independence assumption, WN(c) and VN(c) provide unbiased estimates of the
                                                  8

mean and variance of nonunion wage outcomes for all workers in skill group c, not just those

who are actually working in the nonunion sector. The variance of wages in the nonunion sector

will not necessarily equal VN, however, if the distribution of nonunion workers across skill

groups differs from the distribution of the overall workforce. A simple way to estimate VN is to

reweight individual observations from the nonunion workforce to account for this difference.

Letting U(c) denote the fraction of workers in skill group c in union jobs, the appropriate weight

for nonunion workers in group c is 1/(1!U(c)).

       While reweighting provides a convenient way to calculate VN, it is nevertheless

instructive to develop an analytical expression for V!VN under the conditional independence

assumption. First, note that the average wage in skill group c is

       W(c) = WN(c) + U(c)∆w(c),                                                             (1)

while the variance of log wage outcomes for all workers in skill group c is

       V(c) = VN(c) + U(c)∆v(c) + U(c)(1-U(c))∆w(c)2.                                        (2)

The second term in this expression reflects the “within-sector” effect for skill group c that arises

if wages are more or less disperse under collective bargaining than in the absence of collective

bargaining. The third term is a “between sector” effect that is necessarily positive whenever

∆w(c) … 0, reflecting the wedge between the average wage of otherwise identical union and

nonunion workers. The variance of log wages across all skill groups is the sum of the between-

group and within-group variances:

       V = Var[W(c)] + E[V(c)] .

where expectations (denoted by E[ ]), and variances (denoted by Var[ ]) are taken across the skill

categories. Using equations (1) and (2), this expression be rewritten as:
                                                  9

       V = Var[WN(c) + U(c)∆w(c)] + E[VN(c) + U(c)∆v(c) + U(c)(1!U(c))∆w(c)2]

          = Var[WN(c)] + Var[U(c)∆w(c)] + 2Cov[WN(c), U(c)∆w(c)]

               + E[VN(c)] + E[U(c)∆v(c)] + E[U(c)(1!U(c))∆w(c)2]                             (3)

where Cov[ , ] denotes the covariance across skill groups. In contrast to equation (3), if all

workers were paid according to the wage structure in the nonunion sector, the variance of wage

outcomes would be

       VN = Var[WN(c)] + E[VN(c)] .

The effect of unions on the variance of wage outcomes, relative to what would be observed if all

workers were paid according to the current wage structure in the nonunion sector, is therefore

       V - VN = Var[U(c)∆w(c)] + 2Cov[WN(c), U(c)∆w(c)]

               + E[U(c)∆v(c)] + E[U(c)(1!U(c))∆w(c)2]                                 (4)

Substituting observed values for WN(c), U(c), ∆w(c), and ∆w(c) into equation (4) leads to an

expression that is numerically equal to the difference between the observed variance of wages V

and the “reweighting” estimate of VN, derived by reweighting each nonunion worker by

1/(1!U(c)).

       To understand the implications of equation (4) it is helpful to begin by considering a case

where the union coverage rate, the union wage effect ∆w(c), and the union variance gap are all

constant across skill groups. In this case, the first two terms of equation (4) are zero and the

effect of unions on the economy-wide variance of wages is just an average of the “within-sector”

and “between-sector” effects across skill groups. The two additional terms in equation (4)

reflect differences in the union coverage rate U(c) and/or the union wage effect ∆w(c) across skill

groups. The first term in (4) is a positive component that arises whenever the union wage gain
                                                  10

U(c)∆w(c) varies across groups. The second is a covariance term that may be positive or

negative, depending on how the union wage gain varies across the wage distribution. If union

coverage is higher for less-skilled workers, or if the union wage impact is higher for such

workers, then the covariance term will be negative, enhancing the equalizing effect of unions on

wage dispersion.



C. Allowing for Unobserved Heterogeneity

       The assumption that union status is “as good as random” conditional on observed skills is

convenient but arguably too strong. In this section we show how the presence of unobserved

productivity differences between union and nonunion workers biases the calculation that ignores

these differences. As before, assume that workers are classified into skill categories on the basis

of observed characteristics, and suppose that potential nonunion and union wages are given by:

       WiN(c) = WN(c) + ai + eiN                                                              (5a)

       WiU(c) = WU(c) + ai + eiU ,                                                            (5b)

where ai represents an unobserved skill component that is equally rewarded in the union and

nonunion sectors. Continue to assume that eiN and eiU are independent of union status, and let

       θ(c) = E[ai | Ui=1, c] ! E[ai | Ui=0, c]

represent the difference in the mean of the unobserved skill component between union and

nonunion workers in group c. If union workers in group c tend to have higher unobserved skills

than their nonunion counterparts, for example, then θ (c) > 0.

       The observed wage gap between union and nonunion workers in group c includes the

true union wage premium and the difference attributable to unobserved skills:
                                                11

       Dw(c) = ∆w(c) + θ(c) .

Similarly, assuming that eiN and eiU are independent of ai, the observed difference in the variance

of wages between union and nonunion workers in group c is:

       Dv(c) = ∆v(c) + Var[ai | Ui=1, c] !Var[ai | Ui=0, c] ,

which is a combination of the true union effect on within-group inequality and any difference in

the variance of the unobserved productivity effects between union and nonunion workers. If

union workers tend to have a narrower distribution of unobserved skills, for example, the

observed variance gap Dv(c) will be biased downward relative to the “true” union effect ∆v(c).

       Assuming that potential wage outcomes are generated by equations (5a, 5b), it can be

shown that the difference in the variance of wages in the presence of unions and in the

counterfactual situation in which all workers are paid according to the nonunion wage structure

is

       V - VN = Var[U(c)∆w(c)] + 2Cov[WN(c), U(c)∆w(c)]

               + E[U(c)∆v(c)] + E[U(c)(1!U(c)){ (θ(c)+∆w(c))2 !θ(c)2 }] .                   (6)

Only the last term of this equation differs from equation (4), the expression that applies when

θ(c)=0 for all groups.5 In the presence of unobserved heterogeneity, however, ∆w(c) and ∆v(c)

can no longer be estimated consistently from the observed differences in the means and

variances of union and nonunion workers in skill group c. By the same token, it is no longer

possible to use a reweighting procedure based on the fraction of union members in different


5
 Equation (6) is only correct if unobserved skills are rewarded equally in the union and nonunion
sectors, although it may provide a good first approximation if the rewards for unobserved ability
in the union sector are not too much lower than in the nonunion sector. Lemieux (1998) presents
a model in which unobserved attributes are rewarded differently in the union and nonunion
sectors.
                                                 12

observed skill groups to estimate VN.

       It is instructive to compare the estimated effect of unions under the “as good as random”

assumption to the true effect, when potential wages are generated by equations (5a,5b). The

estimated effect is given by equation (4), using the observed within-skill group union differences

Dw(c) and Dv(c) as estimates of ∆w(c) and ∆v(c). The true effect is given by equation (6). The

difference is

       Bias =     Var[U(c)Dw(c)] ! Var[U(c)∆w(c)]

                + 2Cov[WN(c), U(c)( Dw(c) !∆w(c) ) ]

                + E[ U(c)( Dv(c) !∆v(c) ) ]

                + E[ U(c)(1-U(c)) { Dw(c)2 !∆w(c)2 !2 θ(c) ∆w(c) } ] .

There are various competing factors here. For example, if Dw(c) varies more across skill groups

than ∆w(c), the sum of the first two terms is likely to be positive. On the other hand, if Dw(c) is

more strongly negatively correlated with nonunion wages across skill groups than ∆w(c) (as

argued in Card, 1996), then the third (covariance) term will be negative, leading to an

overstatement of the equalizing effect of unions. We return to this issue below.



III. Estimating the Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality

A. Data Sources

       We use a variety of micro data files to compare the effects of unions on wage outcomes

in the U.S., the U.K., and Canada over the past thirty years. Our U.S. samples are the most

straightforward, since the Current Population Survey (CPS) has been collecting data on wages

and union status on an annual basis since 1973. We use the pooled May 1973 and May 1974
                                                13

CPS samples as our first U.S. observation. For later years, we use the monthly earnings

supplement files (the so-called “outgoing rotation group” files) for 1984, 1993, and 2001. The

earnings and union status information all pertain to an individual’s main job as of the CPS

survey week.

       Starting in 1993 the U.K.’s Labour Force Survey (UKLFS) began asking questions on

union status and earnings that are comparable to the questions in the CPS. Strictly comparable

data are unavailable for earlier years. The 1983 General Household Survey (GHS) is the only

large scale micro data set that contains information on union status and wages in the U.K. prior

to the 1990s. While this data source has several limitations, we elected to combine the 1983

GHS with the 1993 and 2001 UKLFS samples for our U.K. analysis.

       The Canadian Labour Force Survey (CLFS) added questions on earnings and union status

in 1997. To supplement these data, we combine two smaller surveys – the 1991 and 1995

Surveys on Work Arrangements (SWA) -- as a source of information for the early 1990s, and

use the 1984 Survey of Union Membership as a source of information for the early 1980s. All

three of these surveys were conducted as supplements to the regular CLFS.

       In addition to the usual problems that arise in comparing survey responses over time and

across countries, a significant issue for our analysis is the measurement of union status. The

1984 and later CPS files include questions on both union membership and union coverage. The

1973 and 1974 May CPS files, however, only ask about union membership. For comparability

reasons, we therefore focus on union membership as our measure of union status in the U.S. Our

U.K. data sets include data on union membership as well as responses to a question about

whether there is a “union presence” at the individual’s place of employment. As noted in Bland

(1999, Table 6), however, the latter question significantly overstates coverage under collective
                                                 14

bargaining agreements. As in our U.S. analysis, we therefore use union membership as our

measure of unionization in the U.K. With respect to Canada, consistent information on union

membership cannot be recovered from the 1991 and 1995 SWA’s, so we use union coverage as

our measure of unionization in Canada. We believe that this choice has little effect on the

results, since only about two percent of Canadian employees are covered by collective

agreements but are not union members.6

       In the data appendix we explain in detail how we process the various data sets to arrive at

our final estimation samples. Generally speaking, our samples include only wage and salary

workers age 16 to 64 (15 to 64 in Canada) with non-allocated wages and earnings (except in

1984 and 2001 in Canada). We use hourly wages for workers who are paid by the hour and

compute average hourly earnings for the other workers by dividing weekly earnings by weekly

hours (or earnings for a longer time period divided by the corresponding measure of hours). We

also exclude workers with very low or very high hourly wage values. Sample weights are used

throughout except in the 1983 GHS for which sample weights are not available.

       To implement the methods developed in Section II, we divide workers in each sample

into skill groups, based on age and educational attainment. The number of skill groups used

varies by country, reflecting differences in the sample sizes and the age and education codes

reported in the raw data files. In the earlier Canadian data sets age is only reported in 10-year

categories (a total of 5 categories for workers age 15 to 64), and education can only be

consistently coded into 5 categories. Thus we only use 25 skill groups for Canada. Given the


6
 In the 2001 CLFS, 2.4 percent of male workers and 1.9 of female workers are covered by
collective bargaining but not members of a union. The two different measures of unionization
lead to nearly identical estimates of the union wage premium in a conventional linear regression
of wages on union status, education, and experience.
                                                 15

small sample sizes available in the 1983 GHS and the 1993 UKLFS, we use the same number of

skill groups for the U.K. (five age and five education groups). In our U.S. samples, we are able

to use a much larger number of skill categories because of the larger sample sizes and detailed

age and education information in the CPS. We have re-analyzed the U.S. data using about the

same number of skill groups as in Canada and the U.K., however, and found that this has little

impact on our results.



B. Patterns of Union Coverage and Union Wage Effects

       To set the stage for our analysis it is helpful to begin by looking at how union coverage

and the size of the union wage gap vary by skill level. Figures 1-3 show the unionization rates of

men and women in the U.S., the U.K. and Canada, by the level of real hourly wages. These

graphs are constructed by calculating union membership/coverage rates for workers in narrow

wage bins, and smoothing across bins.7 In all three countries, unionization rates of men tend to

follow a hump-shaped pattern, peaking for workers near the middle or upper middle of the wage

distribution. By comparison, unionization rates of women in the U.S. and Canada are about the

same for highly paid workers as for those in the middle. This pattern is driven in part by

relatively high rates of unionization for teachers, nurses, and other public sector workers, who

are near the top of the female wage distribution. In the U.K. there is more of a fall-off in union

membership among the highest-paid women, especially in the more recent data. Comparisons of

the unionization rates in different years reveal the rapid decline in union membership among

U.S. and U.K. men. Declines are also evident for Canadian men and for women in all three


7
 In the U.S., for example, we use bins for the log hourly wage of width 0.05. We use smaller
bins for our U.K. and Canadian samples.
                                                16

countries.

       The framework developed in Section II suggests that the effect of unions on wage

inequality depends in part on how the union wage gap varies by skill. Figures 4-6 provide some

simple evidence on this variation, using data from the early 1990s for the three countries. These

figures plot mean wages for unionized workers in a given age-education group (i.e., WU(c) in the

notation of Section II) against the corresponding mean for non-union workers with the same skill

level (i.e., WN(c)) for 25 age-education groups in Canada and the U.K., and about 150 groups in

the U.S. In interpreting these figures, note that if union and nonunion workers in a given skill

group have the same average wages, then the points in these graphs will lie on the 45-degree

line. On the other hand, if the union wage gap ∆w(c) is positive, then the points will lie above the

45-degree line. Moreover, if ∆w(c) is larger for lower wage workers, then the points will tend to

be further above the 45 degree line for low-wage skill groups (on the left side of the graph) than

for high-wage groups (on the right). This is in fact the case for U.S. men. The best-fitting line

relating WU(c) to WN(c) is also shown in the figure, and lies above the 45 degree line but with a

slope of less than 1.

       Interestingly, the same pattern is true for men in Canada and the U.K., as shown in

Figures 5a and 6a. For skill groups with low average wages (e.g., less educated and relatively

young men) the mean union wage tends to be substantially higher than the mean nonunion wage,

while for groups with high average wages (e.g., middle age college or university graduates) the

mean union wage is not too much above the mean nonunion wage. Thus, in all three countries

∆w(c) is larger for low-wage men than high-wage men, implying that unions tend to “flatten”

wage differentials across skill groups. As we discuss in the next section, one caveat to this
                                                 17

conclusion is that there may be unobserved skill differences between union and nonunion

workers in different age-education groups that tend to exaggerate the apparent negative

correlation between wages in the non-union sector and the union wage gap.

       For women, the patterns of union wages relative to nonunion wages are also remarkably

similar in the three countries. Unlike the patterns for men, however, the union wage gaps for

women are roughly constant. Coupled with the tendency for unionization rates of women to rise

across the wage distribution, the absence of a “flattening” effect of unions on female wages

implies that covariance between the nonunion wage WN(c) and the union wage gain U(c))w(c) is

either zero or positive, limiting the potential equalizing effect of unions on female inequality.

       Although the data in Figures 4-6 pertain to the early 1990s, similar plots from other years

show that the basic patterns have been very stable in all three countries over the past 20-30

years. In all our sample years, the union-nonunion wage gap for men tends to be highest for the

least skilled workers, and to be relatively small (or even negative) for highly skilled men. The

union gap for women, on the other hand, tends to be stable or only slightly declining with skill

level. The consistency of these patterns over time and across the three countries is remarkable.



C. The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality

       With this background, we turn to our analysis of the effect of unions on wage inequality

in the three countries. Tables 2, 3, and 4 summarize a variety of facts about unionization and

the structure of wages for the U.S., Canada, and the U.K., respectively. Reading across the

columns of Table 2, a comparison of the entries in the first row confirms the steep decline in

U.S. unionization rates documented in Table 1. As illustrated in Figures 1a and 1b, however,

these aggregate figures hide a sharp difference between men and women. Between 1973 and
                                                 18

2001, the unionization rate of women declined only about 2 points, from 14 to 12 percent, while

for men it fell by 50 percent, from 31 to 15 percent. This sharp male-female difference has

much to do with the gradual shift of unionization from the private to the public sector. For

instance, Card (2001) shows that for both men and women, unionization rates declined by about

50 percent in the private sector between 1973 and 1993. During the same period, however,

unionization rates increased sharply in the public sector. Women in general, and unionized

women in particular, are much more concentrated in the public sector than their male

counterparts. As a result, the rise in public sector unionism has largely offset the decline in

private sector unionization among women.

       The trends in unionization in Canada between 1984 and 2001 (Table 3) are similar to

those in the U.S. The male unionization rate declined by 14 percentage points, even more than

the 9 percentage point decline in the U.S. over the same period. As in the U.S., the decline for

women was more modest (4 percentage points). The drop in unionization in our Canadian

samples is much steeper than the decline registered in membership tallies obtained from union

reports, but is consistent with the trends reported by Riddell and Riddell (2001) based on similar

micro data sources.

       The data in Table 4 show that unionization rates have also fallen sharply in the U.K. in

the past two decades: by 27 percentage points for men and by 14 percentage points for women.

As in the U.S. and Canada, the faster decline in male unionization is linked to the relative shift of

unionization from the private to the public sector (Gosling and Lemieux, 2001). In the U.K., this

shift was compounded by privatization of many nationalized industries (e.g., steel, coal, and

public utilities), which transferred sizeable numbers of mainly male workers from the unionized

public sector to the much less organized private sector (Gosling and Lemieux, 2001).
                                                 19

Interestingly, the relatively faster decline of male unionization in the three countries meant that

by 2001, male and female unionization rates were not too different in the U.S., Canada, or the

U.K. This near equality marks a sharp departure from the historical pattern of greater

unionization among men.

       The next set of rows in Tables 2-4 show the evolution of mean wages of nonunion and

union workers, and the trend in the corresponding union wage gap. We also report an adjusted

wage gap, calculated from a regression that includes a full set of dummies for each of the skill

categories. As in the case for the unionization rates, the estimated wage gaps show a remarkably

similar pattern across the three countries. The unadjusted wage gaps tend to be larger for women

than for men. The adjusted wage gaps are uniformly smaller than the unadjusted gaps, and in all

three countries the divergence has increased over time, implying that union membership rates

have fallen more for relatively unskilled workers (as is apparent in Figures 1-3).

       Like the unadjusted union wage gap, the adjusted wage gap is typically larger for women

than for men. Nevertheless, male-female differences in the adjusted gaps are less pronounced

than the corresponding differences in the unadjusted gaps, especially in more recent years. For

example, the unadjusted wage gaps in the U.S. in 2001 were 0.233 for men and 0.305 for

women, versus adjusted wage gaps of 0.156 and 0.149. This pattern is consistent with Figures 1

to 3, which show that unionized women are more highly concentrated in the upper end of the

skill distribution than unionized men. As a result, controlling for the skill composition of the

workforce reduces the union wage gap far more for women than for men.

       Another trend that is shared by all three countries is a gradual decline in the adjusted

union wage gap, by 5 to 10 percentage points (depending on gender and country) between the

early 1980s and 2001. Since the rate of unionization also declined sharply during this period, the
                                                 20

implied effect of unions on average wages – the union wage gain E[U(c)∆w(c)] – has declined

dramatically over the last two decades. For example, the adjusted impact of unions on male

wages in the U.K. went from 9.2 percentage points in 1983 (unionization rate of 0.57 times an

adjusted gap of 0.162) to 1.7 percentage points in 2001 (0.307 times 0.045). In the U.S., the

effect on average wages of men fell from 5.7 percentage points (unionization rate of 0.307 times

an adjusted gap of 0.185) to 2.3 percent in 2001 (0.149 times 0.156).

       The next rows in Tables 2-4 report measures of wage dispersion within the union and

nonunion sectors. Once again, the results are remarkably consistent across countries. As first

documented in Freeman (1980), the standard deviation of wages is always smaller in the union

than in the nonunion sector. Moreover, the gap between the standard deviation in the union and

nonunion sector is always larger for men than for women. These observations are confirmed by

Figures 7 to 12, which show kernel density estimates of the densities of log hourly wages in the

union and nonunion sectors, and for the two sectors pooled together, by gender and time period.8

For example, Figure 7 displays the wage distribution for U.S. males. In all four time periods,

wages are more tightly distributed in the union than the nonunion sector. In particular, while the

upper tails of the union and nonunion densities look qualitatively similar, the lower tail goes

much further to the left in the nonunion sector. By contrast, the inter-sectoral differences in

wage dispersion are much less striking for U.S. women (Figure 8). In 1984, for example, the

union and nonunion distributions show different skewness, and average wages are higher in the

union sector. However, it is not clear whether wages are more narrowly distributed in the union

or nonunion sector.


8
 The densities are estimated using a bandwidth of 0.05. See DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux
(1996) for more detail.
                                                 21

       Inspection of Figures 7 and 8 (and the corresponding figures for Canada and the U.K.)

suggests that the minimum wage is an important factor in explaining overall trends in wage

inequality, particularly for nonunion female workers.9 An interesting conjecture is that unions

appear to have a more limited effect on the dispersion of female wages in part because minimum

wages limit the amount of dispersion in the lower tail of the female wage distribution.

       The wage densities for Canadian men (Figure 9) and women (Figure 10) are qualitatively

similar to those in the U.S. In particular, it is clear that male wages are more narrowly

distributed in the union sector than the nonunion sector. Things are not as clear for women, in

part because of the minimum wage, which has a surprisingly large visual impact in the nonunion

sector, especially in 2001. Relative to the U.S. or Canada it is more difficult to see union wage

compression effects for U.K. males (Figure 11) or females (Figure 12). Comparing the reported

standard deviations of wages in the two sectors in Table 3, however, the union-nonunion gaps

are nonetheless quite similar to those in Canada or the United States.

       The bottom rows of Tables 2-4 show the various components of our analysis of the effect

of unions on wage inequality. For reference purposes, we first present a simplified analysis that

ignores any differences across skill groups. In this case, equation (4) reduces to

       V - VN = U∆v + U(1!U)∆w2                                                      (4')

where U represents the overall unionization rate, ∆v represents the difference in the variance of

log wages between union and nonunion workers, and ∆w represents the (unadjusted) difference in

mean wages between union and nonunion workers. The first term is the “within sector” effect of



9
 This is similar to DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) who show that the minimum wage has a
much larger impact on women than on men.
                                                  22

unions, and is negative since the variance of wages is lower for union workers, while the second

is the “between sector” effect, which is always positive.

        Comparing the results across countries and over time, the results from this simplified

analysis are remarkably consistent. For men, the within-sector effect is substantially larger (in

absolute value) than the between-sector effect, implying that unions reduce wage dispersion.

Relative to the overall variance, the compression effect ranges from 31 percent in the U.K. in

1984, when the unionization rate was 57 percent, to 6 percent in the U.S. in 2001 (unionization

rate of 15 percent). More generally, the compression effect of unions is highly correlated with

the overall level of unionization (4').10

        In contrast to the situation for men, the simplified analysis of equation (4') implies that

unions have either no effect on female wage inequality, or a slightly disequalizing effect. This

contrast is attributable to three complementary factors. First, the female unionization rate is

lower, reducing the size of the within-sector effect. Second, the gap in overall wage dispersion

between union and nonunion workers is much smaller for women than men. Third, the union

wage gap is systematically larger for women than men, yielding a larger (more positive)

between-sector effect U(1!U)∆w2. Indeed, in the later years of our analysis, the between-sector

effect dominates in all three countries. Consistent with findings reported in Card (2001) and

Lemieux (1993), unions thus tend to increase the variance of wages among women.

        The final set of rows in Tables 2-4 show the effect of unions on the variance of wages

when we distinguish among skill groups. Recall from equation (4) that this analysis includes



10
  The derivative of the right hand side of equation (4') with respect to the unionization rate is
∆v + (1!2U)∆w2. This is negative as long as ∆v is large relative to ∆w2.
                                                 23

three components: an average within-sector effect, E[U(c)∆v(c)], an average between-sector

effect, E[U(c)(1!U(c))∆w(c)2], and the sum of two “between-skill-group” terms,

        Var[U(c)∆w(c)] + 2Cov[WN(c), U(c)∆w(c)]

that reflect the rise in inequality between groups if the union wage gain varies by skill group, and

any tendency of unions to raise wages more or less for higher wage workers.

       Starting with men, the introduction of controls for observable skill systematically reduces

the magnitudes of both the within- and between-sector effects. It is easy to see why this happens

in the case of the between-sector effect. As we have noted, adjusting for characteristics reduces

the union wage gap, and thus decreases the size of the between-group effect. In other words,

part of the measured between-sector effect in the simple two-sector calculation is a spurious

consequence of that fact that union workers are more skilled, on average, than nonunion

workers. A similar reasoning can be used to understand why the within-group effect also

declines when differences in observed skills are taken into account. Recall from Figures 1a-3a

that unionized men are more concentrated in the middle of the wage distribution than nonunion

men. Part of the lower dispersion of wages in the union sector is thus a spurious consequence of

the fact that union workers are more homogenous.

       Interestingly, adjusting for observed skill characteristics also reduces the magnitude of

the between-sector effect for women but increases (or leaves unchanged in the U.S.) the

magnitude of the within-group effect. The latter finding means that union women are no more

homogenous (in terms of their observable skills) than their nonunion counterparts, which is

consistent with the evidence reported in Figures 1b, 2b, and 3b. Once worker characteristics are

taken into account, the within-sector effect tends to dominate the between-sector effect for both
                                                  24

men and women. Thus, the results from a simplified analysis which ignores measured skill

differences tends to overstate male-female differences in the effect of unions on wage inequality.

       The final components of the union effect are the two terms which reflect the effect of

unions on the distribution of wages across skill groups. As highlighted in our discussion of

Figures 4-6, the union wage effect ∆w(c) is systematically lower for high-wage men, inducing a

negative covariance between WN(c) and U(c)∆w(c). By contrast, the wage gap for women is not

much lower for high-wage groups, and the higher unionization rate for those groups induces a

positive covariance between WN(c) and U(c)∆w(c).

       The results in Tables 2-4 are broadly consistent with this prediction. As expected, unions

tend to reduce wage dispersion across skill groups for men (except in recent years in Canada

where the effect is essentially zero). Also as expected, unions tend to increase wage dispersion

across skill groups for women in Canada and the U.K. In the U.S., however, unions have little

effect on female wage dispersion across skill groups from 1973 and 1993, and actually reduce

wage dispersion in 2001. A natural explanation for the difference between the U.S. on one hand,

and Canada and the U.K., on the other, is that the union wage gap for U.S. women tends to

decline slightly with higher nonunion wages (see Figure 4b). This lowers the covariance

between WN(c) and U(c)∆w(c) for U.S. women relative to the other two countries.

       Once all three factors are taken into consideration, our calculations show that unions

systematically reduce the variance of wages for men. By contrast, the effects for women tend to

be small and slightly positive (i.e., unions raise inequality). This pattern of result is quite similar

to what we found with the simpler model, though the magnitude of the effects tend to be smaller

when we control for worker’s characteristics.
                                                 25

E. Biases from Unobserved Heterogeneity

       As we noted in Section II, a potential problem with estimates of the equalizing effect of

unions based on equation (4) is that union workers may be more or less productive than

otherwise similar nonunion workers. In this case, comparisons of the mean and variance of

wages for union and nonunion workers with the same observed skills confound the true union

effect and unobserved differences in productivity. Traditionally, economists have argued that

union workers are likely to have higher unobserved skills than their nonunion counterparts

(Lewis, 1986). Underlying this view is the notion that union wage structures do not fully

compensate high productivity individuals, so employers can reduce the burden of above-market

wage scales by hiring more productive workers. This line of argument suggests that the degree

of employer selectivity may be higher, the higher is the union wage premium.11 If unions really

raise wages more for lower skill groups, unionized employers may respond by hiring only the

very best workers in the lowest skill groups, inducing a pattern of selectivity bias that

accentuates the true union wage premium, and leading to an overstatement of the “between

group” equalizing effect of unions.

       Previous studies by Lemieux (1993), Card (1996), and Lemieux (1998) have attempted

to use data on job changers to measure the extent to which union and nonunion workers in

different skill groups have different unobserved productivity characteristics.12 The two Lemieux



11
   Modify equation (5b) to: WiU(c) = WU(c) + kai + eiU , where k#1, and assume that a
worker’s expected productivity (in either the union or nonunion sector) is equal to his or her
expected nonunion wage, WN(c) + ai . Then a unionized employer will be willing to hire any
worker in skill group c with ai $ ∆w(c) /(1-k). Note that the higher is ∆w(c), the more selective is
the subset of workers who are hired.
12
   Taking a more direct approach, Hirsch and Schumacher (1998) examine test score data and
find that union members with high measured skills have relatively low test scores.
                                                 26

studies analyze data for men and women in Canada, while Card examines data for men in the

U.S. All three studies find that among North American men, unions tend to raise wages more

for less skilled workers, but that simple comparisons which ignore unobserved skill components

tend to overstate the flattening effect. Lemieux’s results for Canadian women, on the other

hand, show little evidence of flattening, either in simple cross sectional comparisons or in more

sophisticated longitudinal estimators. Lemieux (1998) also uses longitudinal data to examine

the apparent effect of unions on the dispersion of wages controlling for observed and unobserved

skill components. This analysis suggests that some of the apparent reduction in variance in the

union sector may be due to selectivity, rather than to a within-sector effect. Unfortunately, this

inference is confounded by the potential selectivity of the group of union status changers, and

the fact that the variability of wages may be temporarily high just before and just after a job

change. Overall, Lemieux (1998) concludes incorporating unobserved heterogeneity effects

leads to a small reduction in the apparent effect of unions on male wage inequality. A similar

conclusion is reached in Card (1996).

       Based on these findings, we conclude that the estimates of the equalizing effect of unions

on male workers in the U.S., Canada, and the U.K. in Tables 2-4 are likely to slightly overstate

the true equalizing effects. For women, the estimated effects in Tables 2-4 are very small

anyway, and the existing longitudinal research suggests there is no important bias.



F. Unions and Differences in the Trends in Wage Inequality

       To what extent can changes in the strength of unions explain the evolution of wage

inequality over time and the differences in inequality across countries? In light of the results of

Tables 2-4, we look at this question for men only since unions appear to have little effect on
                                                27

wage inequality for women.13 Starting with the U.S., Table 2 shows that the variance of male

wages increased from 0.258 to 0.340 (a rise of 0.082) between 1973/74 and 2001. During the

same period, the effect of unions on the variance of wages computed using the simplified model

declined from –0.047 to –0.021 (a rise of 0.026). If this effect had remained constant over time,

overall wage inequality would have grown by 31 percent less (0.026/0.082) than it actually did.

The contribution of unions to the growth of inequality remains important though only about one-

half as big (14 percent) when we use the more sophisticated estimates of the union effect that

control for observable skills.

       The results for the U.K. are qualitatively similar. Between 9 and 29 percent of the 0.087

growth in the variance of log wages between 1983 and 2001 can be accounted for by the decline

in union compression effects. Furthermore, in both the U.S. and U.K. union wage compression

effects remained relatively constant between 1993 and 2001. In particular, the effects from the

analysis that controls for workers’ characteristics are essentially unchanged in the period from

1993 to 2001. This is consistent with the slowdown in the growth of inequality in both countries

in the 1990s, relative to the 1980s.

       As in the U.S. and U.K., the union wage compression effect has been steadily declining

for Canadian men since 1984. Unlike the U.S. and U.K., however, overall inequality has

remained very stable in Canada over time. This suggests that overall inequality would have

actually declined if union wage impacts had remained at their 1984 levels. Several developments

may have offset the pressures toward increased inequality associated with the decline in union



13
  DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996), Card (2001) and Gosling and Lemieux (2001) all reach
the same conclusion that de-unionization explains very little of the increase in wage inequality
among women in the U.S. or U.K.
                                                28

strength. The real minimum wage in Canada rose from the mid-1980s to the late-1990s, in

contrast to the situation in the U.S. where the real minimum wage was approximately constant

over this period (Kuhn, 2000). In addition, there is some evidence that the much more rapid

growth in educational attainment in Canada compared to the U.S. during the 1980s and 1990s

reduced the tendency for widening earnings differentials between less-educated and more-

educated workers (Murphy, Riddell and Romer, 1998).

       Turning to cross-country differences in wage inequality, first note that in 1983/84 the

variance of wages was lowest in the U.K. (0.216) followed by Canada (0.231) and the U.S.

(0.289). By contrast, union wage compression effects (from the model that controls for skill

differences) were highest in the U.K. (-0.050), followed by Canada (-0.037) and the US (-0.017).

The pattern of cross-country differences in wage inequality is thus consistent with the pattern of

union wage compression effects. For instance, differences in union wage compression effects

account for 45 percent of the U.K.-U.S. difference in the variance of wages in the early 1980s.

By 2001, the U.S.-U.K. difference in the variance of wages had fallen to 0.037, while the U.S.-

U.K. difference in the union compression effect had fallen to 0.027. This indicates that over 70

percent of the difference in wage inequality can now be explained by union wage compression

effects. In 2001, however, union wage compression effects cannot account for the much lower

variance of wages in Canada.

       In summary, union wage compression effects help explain a reasonable fraction of the

secular growth in male wage inequality and of cross-country differences in male wage

inequality. One exception is the surprising lack of growth in male wage inequality in Canada

relative to the other two countries. An assessment of the relative importance of the various

influences on wage inequality among Canadian men is a worthwhile subject for future research.
                                                  29

IV. Summary and Conclusions

          The impact of unions on the structure of wages has recently attracted renewed interest as

analysts have struggled to explain the rise in earnings inequality in several industrialized

countries. Canada, the U.K. and the U.S. provide a potentially valuable set of countries for

examining this question. All three countries now collect comparable data on wages and union

status in their regular labor force and population surveys. Several features of the collective

bargaining institutions of these countries make them suitable for studying the relationship

between unions and wage inequality. Bargaining is highly decentralized, there are no general

mechanisms for extending collective bargaining provisions beyond the “organized” sector, and

the fraction of the workforce covered by collective bargaining is relatively modest. Thus it is

possible to compare the structure of wages for workers covered by union contracts to those who

are not covered, and potentially infer the effect of unions on overall wage inequality.

          A number of previous studies, including Freeman (1980, 1993), Lemieux (1993), Card

(1996, 2001), DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996), DiNardo and Lemieux (1997), Machin

(1997) and Gosling and Lemieux (2001), have examined the relationship between unionization

and wage inequality in these countries individually or in country pairs. Most of the previous

work has focused on men and on the 1970s and 1980s. One contribution of this paper is to

provide a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of unionization and wage inequality for both

men and women in all three countries over the past two to three decades. Following the approach

developed in Card and Lemieux (1996), we also take into account variation in collective

bargaining coverage and union wage impacts across workers with different levels of observable

skills.

          In his landmark paper, Freeman (1980) concluded that, overall, unions tend to reduce
                                                 30

wage inequality among men because the inequality-increasing “between-sector” effect is smaller

than the dispersion-reducing “within-sector” effect. Our analysis indicates that this finding is

very robust across countries (U.S., U.K. and Canada) and time periods (from the early 1970s to

2001). Controlling for worker characteristics alters the magnitudes of the “within-sector” and

“between-sector” effects, and introduces additional terms that reflect differences in union

coverage and union wage effects across skill groups. For men in all three countries both the

“within” and “between” sector effects decline when we control for the skill composition of the

workforce. Because union workers are more skilled, on average, than nonunion workers,

adjusting for characteristics reduces the magnitude of the “between-sector” effect. The decline in

the within-group effect reflects the fact that unionized men are more homogeneous than their

nonunion counterparts.

       We find remarkably similar patterns in union representation and union wage impacts

across skill groups for men in all three countries. Union coverage tends to be concentrated in the

middle of the skill distribution, and union wages tend to be compressed relative to nonunion

wages. As a consequence, unions have an equalizing effect on the dispersion of wages across

skill groups in the three countries, complementing the effect on “within-group” inequality.

       Once all these factors are taken into consideration, our calculations imply that unions

systematically reduce the variance of wages for men in all three countries, though the

magnitudes of the effects are smaller when we control for the skill composition of the workforce.

       Interestingly, an equally robust finding that emerges from this paper is that unions do not

reduce wage inequality among women. In all three countries, this important male-female

difference in the impact of unionism is due to a combination of three factors. First, unionized

women are more concentrated in the upper end of the wage distribution than their male
                                                31

counterparts. Second, the union wage gap is larger for women than for men, resulting in a larger

“between-sector” effect. Third, the union wage gap is larger for lesser- than higher-skilled men,

while this is not the case for women.

       Another important conclusion is that the impacts of unions on the wage structure in the

U.S., Canada, and the U.K. have followed remarkably similar trends over the last two decades.

In all three countries, the unionization rate and the union wage differential have declined

substantially since the early 1980s. For men, this has resulted in a steady erosion of the

equalizing effect of unions that explains a significant fraction of the growth in wage inequality

in the U.S. and U.K. The decline of female unionization has been much smaller than that of

men. A a consequence, unionization rates of men and women are nearly equal now in all three

countries, marking a sharp departure from the historical pattern. However, the modest decline in

union coverage among women had little impact on female wage inequality.

       Interestingly, in both the U.S. and the U.K. our estimates of the effects of unions on wage

inequality were virtually unchanged between 1993 and 2001. This is consistent with the

slowdown in the growth of inequality in both countries during the 1990s, relative to the 1980s.

However, in Canada there was little change in wage inequality during the 1980s and 1990s,

despite a moderate drop in union coverage among men. The Canadian experience suggests that

other factors offset the pressures toward widening inequality associated with the decline in

unionization.

       Although trends in union coverage and union wage effects are very similar in the three

countries, there are substantial differences in the levels of unionization and wage inequality. The

pattern of cross-country differences in wage inequality is consistent with the pattern of wage

compression effects. Our calculations indicate that differences in union wage compression
                                                 32

effects can account for almost one-half of the U.K. - U.S. differential in the variance of wages in

the early 1990s, and over two-thirds of the differential in 2001.
                                              33

References


Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.” In Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3a. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 1999.


Bland, Paul (1999), “Trade Union Membership and Recognition, 1997-98: An Analysis of Data
from the Certification Officer and the Labour Force Survey.” Labour Market Trends (July
1999): 343-353.


Budd, John W. and In-Gang Na (2000), “The Union Membership Wage Premium for
Employees Covered by Collective Bargaining Agreements.” Journal of Labor Economics 18
(October 2000): 783-807.


Card, David (1996), 'The Effects of Unions on the Structure of Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis',
Econometrica, 64 (4), 957-979.


Card, David (2001), 'The Effect of Unions on Wage Inequality in the U.S. Labor Market'
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 54 (2), 296-315.


Card, David, and John DiNardo (2002), 'Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles' Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (4), 733-783.


Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (1996), 'Wage Dispersion, Returns to Skill, and Black-White
Wage Differentials', Journal of Econometrics, 74, 319-361.


DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux (1996), 'Labor Market Institutions and
the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semi-Parametric Approach', Econometrica 64 (5),
1001-1044.
                                              34

DiNardo, John and Thomas Lemieux (1997), 'Diverging Male Wage Inequality in the United
States and Canada, 1981-88: Do Institutions Explain the Difference?', Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 50 (4), 629-651.


Farber, Henry S. and Bruce Western (2000), “Round Up The Usual Suspects: The Decline of
Unions in The Private Sector, 1973-1998.” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section
Working Paper #437 (April).


Freeman, Richard B. (1980), 'Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages', Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 34 (1), 3-23.


Freeman, Richard B. (1993), 'How Much has Deunionization Contributed to the Rise of Male
Earnings Inequality?', in Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk (eds), Uneven Tides: Rising
Income Inequality in America, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.


Freeman, Richard B. (1998) “Spurts in Union Growth: Defining Moments and Social
Processes”, in Michael Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene White (eds), The Defining Moment:
The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for NBER.


Gosling, Amanda and Thomas Lemieux (2001), “Labor Market Reforms and Changes in Wage
Inequality in the United Kingdom and the United States”, NBER Working Paper 8413,
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.


Hicks, Stephen (2000), “Trade Union Membership 1998-99: An Analysis of Data from the
Certification Officer and the Labour Force Survey”, Labour Market Trends, 108 (7), 329-340.


Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher (1998), 'Unions, Wages, and Skills', Journal of
Human Resources, 33 (1), 201-219.
                                               35

Hirsch, Barry T. and Edward J. Schumacher (2003), 'Match Bias in Wage Gap Estimates Due to
Earnings Imputation', forthcoming in the Journal of Labor Economics.


Hirsch, Barry T, and David A. Macpherson (2003), “Union Membership and Coverage Database
from the Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 56, No.
2, January 2003, forthcoming.


Human Resources Development Canada (2002), Workplace Gazette, 5 (3). Available online
only at http://labour.hrdc-drhc.gc.ca/pdf/pdf_e/18_unions_eng.pdf.


Kuhn, Peter (2000), ‘Canada and the OECD Hypothesis: Does Labour Market Inflexibility
Explain Canada’s High Level of Unemployment?’, in W. Craig Riddell and France St-Hilaire
(eds), Adapting Public Policy to a Labour Market in Transition, Montreal: Institute for Research
on Public Policy, pp. 177-209.


Lemieux, Thomas (1993), 'Unions and Wage Inequality in Canada and the United States' in David
Card and Richard B. Freeman (eds.) Small Differences That Matter: Labor Markets and Income
Maintenance in Canada and the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Lemieux, Thomas (1998), 'Estimating the Effects of Unions on Wage Inequality in a Panel Data
Model with Comparative Advantage and Non-Random Selection', Journal of Labor Economics, 16
(2), 261-291.


Lewis, H. Gregg (1963), Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.


Lewis, H. Gregg (1986), Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.


Machin, Stephen (1997), ‘The Decline of Labour Market Institutions and the Rise in Wage
                                              36

Inequality in Britain’, European Economic Review, 41 (3-5), 647-657.


Metcalf, David (1994), “Transformation of British Industrial Relations? Institutions, Conduct,
and Outcomes,” In Ray Burrell (ed) The UK Labour Market: Comparative Aspects and
Institutional Developments. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).


Murphy, Kevin M., W. Craig Riddell and Paul M. Romer (1998), ‘Wages, Skills and Technology
in the United States and Canada’ in Elhanan Helpman (ed), General Purpose Technologies and
Economic Growth, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 283-309.


OECD, “Economic Performance and the Structure of Collective Bargaining” Employment
Outlook, Paris: OECD, July 1997.


Pencavel, John H. (2003) “The Surprising Retreat of Union Britain.” In Richard Blundell, David
Card, and Richard Freeman, editors, Seeking a Premier League Economy. University of Chicago
Press for NBER, forthcoming.


Riddell, Chris and W. Craig Riddell (2001) “Changing Patterns of Unionization: The North
American Experience” University of British Columbia, Department of Economics, Discussion
Paper 01-23, June.
                                                  37

                                         DATA APPENDIX


U.S. Data
      Since 1979, the U.S. Census Bureau has been collecting data on weekly hours, weekly
earnings, and hourly earnings (for workers paid by the hour) for all wage and salary workers in the
“outgoing rotation group” (ORG) of the Current Population Survey (CPS). Beginning in 1983, the
ORG supplement of the CPS also asks about the union status of workers (and union coverage).
Similar variables are also available in the May supplement of the CPS between 1973 and 1978,
though only union membership (and not coverage) is available for this period.
      In both the May and ORG supplements of the CPS, workers paid by the hour are asked their
hourly rate of pay. We use this variable, which is collected in a consistent fashion over time, as
our measure of the hourly wage rate for these workers. The May and ORG supplements also
provide information on usual weekly earnings for all workers. For workers not paid by the hour,
we use average hourly earnings (weekly earnings divided by weekly hours) as our measure of the
wage rate.
      Note, however, that weekly earnings are not measured in a consistent fashion over time. From
1973 to 1993, this variable was collected by asking directly individuals about their earnings on a
weekly basis. From 1994 to 2001, individuals had the option of reporting their usual earnings on
the base period of their choice (weekly, bi-weekly, monthly, or annually). Weekly earnings are
then obtained by normalized the earnings reported by workers to a weekly basis. The available
evidence does not suggest, however, that this change in the way earnings are collected had a
significant impact on the distribution of wages.14
      Another potential problem is that weekly earnings are top-coded at different values for
different years throughout the sample period. Before 1988, weekly earnings were top-coded at
999 dollars. The top-code was later increased to 1923 dollars in 1988 and 2884 dollars in 1998.
For an individual working 40 hours a week, the weekly earnings top code corresponds to an hourly
wage ranging from of $42.6 in 1984 ($2001) to $99.6 in 1973 ($2001). To keep the wage samples
relatively comparable over time, we trim observations with wages above $63 dollars ($2001). We
also trim observations with wages below $2.5 ($2001), which typically corresponds to about half
14
     See Card and DiNardo (2002) and Gosling and Lemieux (2001), for more detail.
                                               38

of the minimum wage. The wage deflator used is the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U). All the U.S.
wage statistics reported in the paper are also weighted using the CPS earnings weights.
   Questions about educational achievement were changed substantially in the early 1990s. Until
1991, the CPS used to ask about the highest grade (or years of schooling) completed. Starting in
1992, the CPS moved to questions about the highest degree. We have recoded the post-1992 data
in term of completed years of schooling to have a measure of schooling that is consistent over
time. We then use years of schooling to compute the standard measure of years of potential
experience (age-schooling-6). Only observations with potential experience larger or equal than
zero are kept in the analysis samples.
   Finally, in the 1979-2001 ORG supplements of the CPS, wages or earnings of workers who
refuse to answer the wage/earnings questions were allocated using a “hot deck” procedure. We
exclude observations with allocated wages and earnings for two reasons. First, wages and
earnings were not allocated in the May 1973-78 CPS. We thus need to exclude allocated
observations from the 1984, 1993, and 2001 ORG supplement data to maintain a consistent sample
over time. Second, union status is not one of the characteristics used to match observations with
missing earnings to observations with non-missing earnings in the imputation procedure (hot deck)
used by the U.S. Census Bureau. As a result, estimates of union wage effects obtained from a
sample with allocation observations included can be severely biased downward (see Hirsch and
Schumacher, 2003, for more details).


U.K. Data
   As mentioned in the text, for the U.K. we use data from the 1983 GHS and the 1993 and 2001
UKLFS. For the sake of consistency, we exclude observations from Northern Ireland since this
region was sampled in the UKLFS but not in the GHS. Real wages are obtained by deflating
nominal wages with the Consumer Price Index (Retail Price Index). To limit the effect of outliers,
we only keep observations with an hourly wage rate between 1.5 and 50 pounds (in 2001 pounds).


   In general, we process the U.K. samples to make them as comparable as possible to the U.S.
samples. In both the UKLFS and the GHS, we use observations for wage and salary workers with
non-missing wages and earnings. We also use the sample weights whenever available (there are
                                                 39

no sample weights in the GHS). Since education is not consistent measured over time, we recode
education into five broad categories that are consistently over time: university graduates, higher-
level vocational training and A-level qualifications, middle-level vocational training or O-level
qualifications, lower-level vocational training, and no qualifications or diploma.


Canadian Data:
     As mentioned in the text, for Canada we use the 2001 Labour Force Survey (CLFS), the 1991
and 1995 Surveys on Work Arrangements (SWA), and the 1984 Survey of Union Membership
(SUM). These data sets are all relatively comparable since both the SUM and the SWA were
conducted as supplements to the Labour Force Survey. Relative to the U.S. and U.K. data
however, there are some important limitations in the Canadian data. First, as mentioned in the
text, it is not possible to distinguish union membership from union coverage in the SWA. For the
sake of consistency over time, we thus use union coverage as our measure of unionization in
Canada.
     A second limitation is that in the 1984 SUM and the 2001 CLFS, missing wages and earnings
were allocated but no allocation flags are provided. We thus have to include observations with
allocated wages and earnings in the analysis with generates an inconsistency relative to the SWA
(where missing wages and earnings are not allocated) and the U.S. and U.K. data. This likely
understates the effect of unions on wages in 1984 and 2001, though it is not possible to quantify
the extent of the bias.15 Another limitation is that age is only provided in broad categories, unlike
in the U.S. and U.K data where age is provided in single years. In particular, it is not possible to
separate workers age 15 from those age 16. This explains why we use all wage and salary workers
age 15 to 64 in Canada, compared to workers age 16 to 64 in the two other countries.
     A further limitation is that hourly wages are top-coded at a relatively low level in the Canadian
data. The top codes are 45 dollars in the 1984 SUM, 50 dollars in the 1991 SWA, 40 dollars in the
1995 SWA, and 100 dollars in the 2001 CLFS. For the sake of consistency, we trim observations
with hourly wages above 44 dollars (in 2001 dollars). Wages are deflated using the Canadian CPI


15
  Some assumptions could be made (as in Hirsch and Schumacher, 2003) to estimate the extent
of the bias if we knew the fraction of workers with allocated wages and earnings, but this
fraction is not available in the data documentation provided by Statistics Canada.
                                                40

for all items. We also trim observations with wages below 2.5 dollars in 2001 dollars, which
represents about half of the minimum wage.
   One final limitation is that only five education categories are available on a consistent basis
over time. These categories are: 0 to 8 years of school, high school (some or completed), some
post-secondary education, post-education degree or diploma (less than university), and university
degree. As in the CPS and the UKLFS, all statistics for Canada are computed using sample
weights.
Table 1: Union Membership Rates Among Wage and Salary Workers in the U.S., the U.K. and
Canada



                 United States      United Kingdom             Canada


  1960               30.4                  41.3                 32.3

  1970               26.4                  48.2                 33.6

  1980               22.2                  52.9                 35.7

  1990               15.3                  40.0                 34.5

  1999               13.5                  29.5                 32.6


Notes: U.S. data are from Farber and Western (2000). U.K. data for 1960-1990 are from Metcalf
(1994, Table 4.1); 1999 observation is from Hicks (2000, Table 2). Canadian data are from
Human Resources Development Canada (2002).
Table 2: Effect of Unions on Wage Structure of U.S. Workers, 1973-2001

                                    1973/74             1984                 1993                 2001
                              ———————————————     ———————————————      ———————————————      ———————————————
                               male     female     male      female     male      female     male    female

Fraction Union Members        0.307    0.141      0.236     0.141      0.185     0.132      0.149    0.121

Mean Log Wages (2001$):
  Non-union Workers           2.646    2.270      2.573     2.276      2.535     2.337      2.667    2.457
  Union Workers               2.841    2.499      2.866     2.605      2.838     2.686      2.899    2.761

  Union Gap (unadjusted)      0.196    0.230      0.293     0.329      0.304     0.349      0.233    0.305
  Union Gap (adjusted)        0.185    0.220      0.208     0.228      0.210     0.210      0.156    0.149

Standard Deviation Log Wages:
  Non-union Workers           0.553    0.442      0.563     0.467      0.594     0.515      0.601    0.538
  Union Workers               0.354    0.383      0.363     0.408      0.399     0.444      0.417    0.460

  Union Gap                  -0.198   -0.059     -0.199    -0.058     -0.194    -0.071     -0.184   -0.077

Variance Decomposition:
 Overall Variance             0.258    0.195      0.289     0.223      0.331     0.270      0.340    0.289
Two sector model
  Within-sector effect       -0.055   -0.007     -0.044    -0.007     -0.036    -0.009     -0.028   -0.009
  Between-sector effect       0.008    0.006      0.015     0.013      0.014     0.014      0.007    0.010
  Total effect               -0.047    0.000     -0.028     0.006     -0.022     0.005     -0.021    0.001
Model with skill groups
  Within-sector effect       -0.022   -0.006     -0.020    -0.007     -0.018    -0.009     -0.013   -0.009
  Between-sector effect       0.007    0.004      0.010     0.008      0.012     0.011      0.004    0.008
  Dispersion across groups   -0.011    0.001     -0.007     0.000     -0.008    -0.003     -0.006   -0.005
  Total effect               -0.026    0.000     -0.017     0.001     -0.014    -0.001     -0.015   -0.007

Sample Size                  43,189   30,500     77,910    69,635     71,719    69,723     55,813   55,167
Number of Skill Groups          180      180        343       343        244       246        245      246

Note: Samples include wage and salary workers age 16-64 with non-allocated hourly or weekly pay, and hourly
wages between $2.00 and $90.00 per hour in 1989 dollars.
Table 3: Effects of Unions on Wage Structure of Canadian Workers, 1984-2001

                                   1984              1991-95               2001
                             ———————————————     ———————————————     ———————————————
                              male    female      male    female      male    female

Fraction Union Workers        0.467    0.369     0.408    0.353      0.330     0.317

Mean Log Wages (2001$)
  Non-union Workers           2.658    2.365     2.661    2.452      2.728     2.495
  Union Workers               2.987    2.793     2.972    2.851      2.964     2.853

  Union Gap (unadjusted)      0.330    0.428     0.311    0.398      0.236     0.358
  Union Gap (adjusted)        0.251    0.321     0.204    0.275      0.153     0.226

Standard Deviation Log Wages:
  Non-union Workers           0.528    0.446     0.514    0.465      0.501     0.463
  Union Workers               0.343    0.368     0.362    0.380      0.386     0.395

  Union Gap                  -0.185   -0.078    -0.152   -0.084     -0.115    -0.068

Variance Decomposition:
 Overall Variance             0.231    0.218     0.233    0.227      0.229     0.224
Two sector model
  Within-sector effect       -0.075   -0.023    -0.054   -0.025     -0.034    -0.019
  Between-sector effect       0.027    0.043     0.023    0.036      0.012     0.028
  Total effect               -0.048    0.019    -0.031    0.011     -0.021     0.009
Model with skill groups
  Within-sector effect       -0.041   -0.027    -0.033   -0.028     -0.025    -0.022
  Between-sector effect       0.017    0.022     0.010    0.017      0.006     0.012
  Dispersion across groups   -0.014    0.014    -0.002    0.014      0.001     0.013
  Total effect               -0.037    0.009    -0.025    0.002     -0.017     0.003

Sample size                  17,737   15,356    17,981   18,323     24,003    23,703
Number of skill groups           25       25        25       25         25        25

Note: Samples include wage and salary workers age 15-64 with allocated hourly or weekly pay (except in 1991-
95), and hourly wages between $2.50 and $44.00 per hour in 2001 dollars.
Table 4: Effects of Unions on Wage Structure of U.K. Workers, 1983-2001

                                   1983                1993                 2001
                             ———————————————     ———————————————      ———————————————
                              male    female      male      female     male    female

Fraction union workers        0.570    0.426     0.392     0.337      0.307    0.285

Mean log wages (2001£):
  Non-union Workers           1.843    1.416     2.036     1.705      2.170    1.873
  Union Workers               2.053    1.685     2.224     2.047      2.306    2.167

  Union Gap (unadjusted)      0.210    0.269     0.188     0.342      0.135    0.294
  Union Gap (adjusted)        0.162    0.195     0.131     0.184      0.045    0.137

Standard Deviation of Log Wages:
  Non-union Workers          0.532     0.412     0.586     0.499      0.588    0.510
  Union Workers              0.382     0.399     0.438     0.475      0.442    0.468

  Union Gap                  -0.150   -0.013    -0.148    -0.024     -0.146   -0.043

Variance Decomposition:
 Overall Variance             0.216    0.183     0.293     0.268      0.303    0.266
Two sector model
  Within-sector effect       -0.078   -0.004    -0.059    -0.008     -0.046   -0.012
  Between-sector effect       0.011    0.018     0.008     0.026      0.004    0.018
  Total effect               -0.067    0.013    -0.051     0.018     -0.042    0.006
Model with skill groups
  Within-sector effect       -0.034   -0.023    -0.031    -0.028     -0.032   -0.025
  Between-sector effect       0.009    0.011     0.006     0.008      0.002    0.005
  Dispersion across groups   -0.026    0.009    -0.016     0.012     -0.013    0.010
  Total effect               -0.050   -0.003    -0.041    -0.008     -0.042   -0.010

Sample size                   4,435    3,512     4,009     4,139      7,548    8,113
Number of skill groups           25       25        25        25         25       25

Note: Samples include wage and salary workers age 15-64 with non-missing hourly or weekly pay, and hourly
wages between £1.50 and £50.00 per hour in 2001 pounds.
 a. US Men

                          0.50
                          0.45         1973/4
  Union Membership Rate




                          0.40         1984
                          0.35         1993
                          0.30         2001
                          0.25
                          0.20
                          0.15
                          0.10
                          0.05
                          0.00
                              5.47   7.03   9.03    11.59   14.88   19.11   24.53   31.50   40.45   51.94
                                                   Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)


b. US Women

                          0.50
                          0.45
  Union Membership Rate




                                        1973/4
                          0.40
                                        1984
                          0.35
                                        1993
                          0.30
                                        2001
                          0.25
                          0.20
                          0.15
                          0.10
                          0.05
                          0.00
                              5.47   7.03   9.03    11.59   14.88   19.11   24.53   31.50   40.45   51.94
                                                   Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)


Figure 1. Unionization Rate by Wage Level, United States
a. Canadian Men


                          0.70

                          0.60             1984
    Union Coverage Rate




                          0.50             1993
                                           2001
                          0.40

                          0.30

                          0.20

                          0.10

                          0.00
                              4.71      6.05   7.77    9.97   12.81   16.44   21.12    27.11   34.81
                                                      Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)



b. Canadian Women


                          0.70

                          0.60
  Union Coverage Rate




                                           1984
                          0.50             1993
                          0.40             2001

                          0.30

                          0.20

                          0.10

                          0.00
                                 4.71   6.05   7.77    9.97   12.81   16.44   21.12    27.11   34.81
                                                      Hourly Wage (2001$, Log Scale)


Figure 2. Unionization Rate by Wage Level, Canada
 a. UK Men


                          0.80
                          0.70
  Union Membership Rate




                                           1984
                          0.60             1993
                          0.50             2001
                          0.40
                          0.30
                          0.20
                          0.10
                          0.00
                                 2.86   3.67      4.71    6.05    7.77   9.97   12.81     16.44   21.12   27.11
                                                         Hourly Wage (2001£, Log Scale)




 b. UK Women


                          0.70
  Union Membership Rate




                          0.60

                          0.50

                          0.40

                          0.30
                                                                                          1984
                          0.20
                                                                                          1993
                          0.10                                                            2001

                          0.00
                                 2.86   3.67      4.71    6.05    7.77   9.97   12.81     16.44   21.12   27.11
                                                         Hourly Wage (2001£, Log Scale)




Figure 3. Unionization Rate by Wage Level, United Kingdom
a. US Men, 1993


                    3.10
                    2.90
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.70
                    2.50
                    2.30
                    2.10
                    1.90                                             Solid line = 45 degrees
                                                                     Dotted line = linear fit
                    1.70
                    1.50
                        1.50   1.70   1.90    2.10     2.30      2.50          2.70             2.90     3.10
                                                Mean Non-union Wage


b. US Women, 1993

                    3.10
                    2.90
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.70
                    2.50
                    2.30
                    2.10
                    1.90
                                                                  Solid line = 45 degrees
                    1.70                                          Dotted line = linear fit


                    1.50
                        1.50   1.70    1.90     2.10      2.30        2.50             2.70            2.90     3.10
                                                Mean Non-union Wage


Figure 4: Union Relative Wage Structure in the United States, 1993
a. Canadian Men, 1991-95


                    3.3

                    3.1
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.9

                    2.7

                    2.5

                    2.3
                                                                     Solid line = 45 degrees
                                                                     Dotted line = linear fit
                    2.1

                    1.9
                          1.9   2.1   2.3      2.5      2.7           2.9                    3.1   3.3
                                            Mean Non-union Wage




b. Canadian Women, 1991-95

                    3.3

                    3.1
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.9

                    2.7

                    2.5

                    2.3
                                                                  Solid line = 45 degrees
                                                                  Dotted line = linear fit
                    2.1

                    1.9
                          1.9   2.1   2.3      2.5      2.7           2.9                3.1       3.3
                                            Mean Non-union Wage


Figure 5: Union Relative Wage Structure in Canada, 1991-95
a. UK Men, 1993


                    2.9
                    2.7
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.5
                    2.3
                    2.1
                    1.9
                    1.7                                           Solid line = 45 degrees
                                                                  Dotted line = linear fit
                    1.5
                    1.3
                          1.3   1.5   1.7   1.9     2.1     2.3          2.5                 2.7   2.9
                                            Mean Non-union Wage



b. UK Women, 1993

                    2.9
                    2.7
  Mean Union Wage




                    2.5
                    2.3
                    2.1
                    1.9
                    1.7                                           Solid line = 45 degrees
                                                                  Dotted line = linear fit
                    1.5
                    1.3
                          1.3   1.5   1.7   1.9     2.1     2.3          2.5                 2.7   2.9
                                            Mean Non-union Wage


Figure 6: Union Relative Wage Structure in the United Kingdom, 1993
 a. U.S. Men, 1973/74                                                     b. U.S. Men, 1984

              1.60                                                                    1.40
              1.40                                         All                                                                     All
                                                                                      1.20
                                                           Nonunion                                                                Nonunion
              1.20                                                                    1.00
                                                           Union                                                                   Union
              1.00
    Density




                                                                            Density
                                                                                      0.80
              0.80
                                                                                      0.60
              0.60
              0.40                                                                    0.40
              0.20                                                                    0.20
              0.00                                                                    0.00
                     1   2             3               4              5                      1   2             3               4                5
                             Log Hourly Wage (2001$)                                                 Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 c. U.S. Men, 1993                                                        d. U.S. Men, 2001

              1.40                                                                    1.20
              1.20                                         All                                                                       All
                                                                                      1.00
                                                           Nonunion                                                                  Nonunion
              1.00                                         Union                      0.80                                           Union
    Density




                                                                            Density
              0.80
                                                                                      0.60
              0.60
                                                                                      0.40
              0.40
              0.20                                                                    0.20
              0.00                                                                    0.00
                     1   2             3               4              5                      1   2             3               4                5
                             Log Hourly Wage (2001$)                                                 Log Hourly Wage (2001$)




Figure 7. Density of Wages, U.S. Males
 a. U.S. Women, 1973/74                                                    b. U.S. Women, 1984

              1.20                                                                     1.20
                                                           All                                                                      All
              1.00                                                                     1.00
                                                           Nonunion                                                                 Nonunion
              0.80                                         Union                       0.80                                         Union
    Density




                                                                             Density
              0.60                                                                     0.60
              0.40                                                                     0.40
              0.20                                                                     0.20
              0.00                                                                     0.00
                     1   2             3               4               5                      1   2             3               4              5
                             Log Hourly Wage (2001$)                                                  Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 c. U.S. Women, 1993                                                       d. U.S. Women, 2001

              1.00                                                                     1.00
                                                            All                                                                     All
              0.80                                          Nonunion                   0.80                                         Nonunion
                                                            Union                                                                   Union
    Density




                                                                             Density
              0.60                                                                     0.60

              0.40                                                                     0.40

              0.20                                                                     0.20

              0.00                                                                     0.00
                     1   2             3               4               5                      1   2             3               4              5
                             Log Hourly Wage (2001$)                                                  Log Hourly Wage (2001$)




Figure 8. Density of Wages, U.S. Females
 a. Canadian Men, 1984

              1.40

              1.20             All
                               Nonunion
              1.00
                               Union
    Density

              0.80

              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5           2        2.5       3          3.5   4   4.5
                                           Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 b. Canadian Men, 1991-95

              1.40

              1.20             All
                               Nonunion
              1.00
                               Union
    Density




              0.80

              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5           2        2.5       3          3.5   4   4.5
                                           Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 c. Canadian Men, 2001

              1.20
                           All
              1.00
                           Nonunion
                           Union
              0.80
    Density




              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5           2        2.5       3          3.5   4   4.5
                                           Log Hourly Wage (2001$)

Figure 9. Density of Wages, Canadian Males
 a. Canadian Women, 1984

              1.40
                                                                   All
              1.20
                                                                   Nonunion
              1.00                                                 Union
    Density
              0.80

              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5   2        2.5       3          3.5   4           4.5
                                   Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 b. Canadian Women, 1993

              1.20
                                                                    All
              1.00                                                  Nonunion
                                                                    Union
              0.80
    Density




              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5   2        2.5       3          3.5   4           4.5
                                   Log Hourly Wage (2001$)


 c. Canadian Women, 2001

              1.20
                                                                   All
              1.00
                                                                   Nonunion

              0.80                                                 Union
    Density




              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     1   1.5   2        2.5       3          3.5   4           4.5
                                   Log Hourly Wage (2001$)

Figure 10. Density of Wages, Canadian Females
  a. U.K. Men, 1984

              1.40

              1.20                                                 All
                                                                   Nonunion
              1.00
                                                                   Union
    Density
              0.80

              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)


 b. U.K. Men, 1993

              1.20
                                                                     All
              1.00
                                                                     Nonunion
                                                                     Union
              0.80
    Density




              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)


  c. U.K. Men, 2001

              1.00
                                                                     All
              0.90
                                                                     Nonunion
              0.80
              0.70                                                   Union

              0.60
    Density




              0.50
              0.40
              0.30
              0.20
              0.10
              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)

Figure 11. Density of Wages, U.K. Males
 a. U.K. Women, 1984

              1.40

              1.20                                                 All
              1.00                                                 Nonunion
    Density                                                        Union
              0.80

              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)


 b. U.K. Women, 1993

              1.20
                                                                   All
              1.00
                                                                   Nonunion
              0.80                                                 Union
    Density




              0.60

              0.40

              0.20

              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)


 c. U.K. Women, 2001

              1.00
                                                                     All
              0.90
                                                                     Nonunion
              0.80
                                                                     Union
              0.70
              0.60
    Density




              0.50
              0.40
              0.30
              0.20
              0.10
              0.00
                     0.5   1   1.5         2       2.5         3   3.5          4
                                     Log Hourly Wage (2001£)



Figure 12. Density of Wages, U.K. Females
