                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INDIVIDUAL PERCEPTIONS OF THE
                                 CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM

                                            Lance Lochner

                                         Working Paper 9474
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9474


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2003




I thank Mark Bils, Elizabeth Caucutt, Gordon Dahl, Andrew Foster, Bo Honore, Shakeeb Khan, Steve Levitt,
Jeff Smith, and seminar participants at Brown University, University of British Columbia, University of
California - San Diego, Criminal Justice Research Center at Ohio State University, University of Florida,
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, the 2001 Southern Economic Association Annual meeting, the
2002 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, and the 2002 NBER Spring Children's Group
Meeting for their comments.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Lance Lochner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.
Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System
Lance Lochner
NBER Working Paper No. 9474
January 2003, Revised June 2006
JEL No. K4, D8

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper empirically examines perceptions of the criminal justice system held by young males
using longitudinal survey data from the recent National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 Cohort
and the National Youth Survey. While beliefs about the probability of an arrest are positively
correlated with local official arrest rates, they are largely idiosyncratic and unresponsive to
information about the arrests of other random individuals and local neighborhood conditions. There
is little support, therefore, for the `broken windows' theory of Wilson and Kelling (1982). Yet,
perceptions do respond to changes in an individual's own criminal and arrest history. Young males
who engage in crime but are not arrested revise their perceived probability of arrest downward, while
those who are arrested revise their probability upwards. Beliefs respond similarly to changes in a
sibling's criminal and arrest history. The perceived probability of arrest is then linked to subsequent
criminal behavior. Cross-sectionally, youth with a lower perceived probability of arrest are
significantly more likely to engage in crime during subsequent periods. Following an arrest,
individuals commit less crime, consistent with deterrence theory and the fact that their perceived
probability of arrest increases.



Lance Lochner
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
lance@troi.cc.rochester.edu
             Individual Perceptions of the Criminal Justice System∗
                                              Lance Lochner
                                       University of Western Ontario
                                                   NBER

                                                    May, 2005



                                                     Abstract
          This paper empirically examines perceptions of the criminal justice system held by young males
      using longitudinal survey data from the recent National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 Cohort
      and the National Youth Survey. While beliefs about the probability of an arrest are positively cor-
      related with local official arrest rates, they are largely idiosyncratic and unresponsive to information
      about the arrests of other random individuals and local neighborhood conditions. There is little
      support, therefore, for the ‘broken windows’ theory of Wilson and Kelling (1982). Yet, perceptions
      do respond to changes in an individual’s own criminal and arrest history. Young males who engage
      in crime but are not arrested revise their perceived probability of arrest downward, while those who
      are arrested revise their probability upwards. The perceived probability also declines when a sibling
      engages in crime, but it does not appear to rise when that sibling is arrested. Additional estimates
      suggest that beliefs about the probability of arrest deter crime. This is true cross-sectionally (i.e.
      individuals with a higher perceived probability of arrest commit less crime) and when following an
      individual over time (accounting for unobserved individual heterogeneity).


1    Introduction

The economics literature on crime implicitly assumes that individuals are well-informed about ar-
rest and conviction rates (as well as sentencing policies) and, therefore, respond immediately to any
changes in the criminal justice system. Many criminologists have questioned this assumption based on
studies of perceived certainty and severity of punishment. Empirical studies of deterrence theory are,
therefore, based on two distinct approaches: one which estimates the effect of actual or official mea-
sures of certainty and severity of punishment (or observed measures related to certainty and severity
of punishment, e.g. the number of police in an area) on crime; and another which measures the effect
   ∗
     I thank Mark Bils, Elizabeth Caucutt, Gordon Dahl, Andrew Foster, Bo Honore, Hiro Kasahara, Shakeeb Khan,
Steve Levitt, Jeff Smith, Todd Stinebrickner, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Brown University,
University of British Columbia, University of California - San Diego, Criminal Justice Research Center at Ohio State
University, University of Florida, University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, Northwestern University, SUNY-Buffalo,
University of Toronto, University of Western Ontario, the 2001 Southern Economic Association Annual meeting, the
2002 American Economic Association Annual Meeting, and the 2002 NBER Spring Children’s Group Meeting for their
comments.




                                                         1
of perceived certainty or severity of punishment on crime. Most studies of the former type conclude
that deterrence effects are important while studies of the latter type provide mixed results.1
       It is worth noting that many of the perceptions-based studies do not necessarily measure the effects
of beliefs on actual criminal outcomes. Instead, they often measure differences in intentions to commit
crime or the likelihood that someone will engage in crime given a set of circumstances surrounding an
opportunity.2 Unfortunately, the vast differences in design across studies – studies vary substantially in
sample population, types of criminal activity examined, measures of crime (actual behavior, intentions,
or likelihood), and the nature of questions about perceptions – and the diverse findings make it difficult
to draw any strong conclusions from perceptual studies about the effect of a change in the perceived
probability of arrest on actual criminal behavior. More importantly, Nagin (1998) recently notes that
“While great effort has been committed to analyzing the links between sanction risk perceptions and
behavior, comparatively little attention has been given to examining the origins of risk perceptions
and their connection to actual sanction policy.”3
       Understanding the evolution of beliefs is important for analyzing a number of social and economic
decisions. Given our context, it is useful to focus on the role of beliefs in theories of crime. Sah
(1991) provides a theoretical analysis of crime based on a model in which individual beliefs about the
probability of punishment are determined by the number of people they observe committing crime
and their arrest rates. His theory suggests interesting dynamic responses to changes in criminal
enforcement policy as well as levels of segregation. This paper outlines a complementary framework
for analyzing how an individual’s own crime and arrest history affects his beliefs and how those beliefs
affect behavior.4 Individuals with similar tastes and initial beliefs may follow different crime paths over
their lives if they are arrested at different rates (or even arrested at different points in their criminal
careers). In Sah’s model and the framework discussed in this paper, there are delayed responses in
criminal activity when official arrest rates increase. Furthermore, even a temporary increase in arrest
rates can have long-term impacts on crime rates. The significance of these results depends on the
relevance of and information used in belief updating. While a few empirical studies5 have found that
   1
      Studies using actual police, arrest, or punishment measures include Blumestein, et al. (1978), Cameron (1988),
Ehrlich (1973,1981), Grogger (1991), Levitt (1997, 1998a, 1998b), Myers (1983), Tauchen, Witte, and Griesinger (1994),
Trumbull (1989), Waldfogel (1993), and Witte (1980). Deterrence studies using perceived measures of certainty or
severity include Tittle (1977), Paternoster, et al, (1983), Piliavin, et al., (1986), Viscusi (1986), Klepper and Nagin
(1989), Grasmick and Bursick (1990), Schneider and Ervin (1990), Bachman, Paternoster, and Ward (1992), Nagin
(1993), Paternoster and Simpson (1996), and Pogarsky and Piquero (2003).
    2
      See, e.g. Tittle (1977), Klepper and Nagin (1989), Grasmick and Bursick (1990), Bachman, Paternoster, and Ward
(1992), Nagin (1993), Paternoster and Simpson (1996), and Pogarsky and Piquero (2003).
    3
      Exceptions include Richards and Tittle (1981), Saltzman, et al. (1982), Paternoster, et al. (1983, 1985), Piliavin, et
al. (1986), and Horney and Marshall (1992).
    4
      This framework is developed more formally and fully analyzed in Lochner (2004).
    5
      Taking a VAR approach to estimating the relationship between crime, arrests, and the business cycle, Corman, Joyce,


                                                             2
time patterns in crime and arrests are consistent with information transmission and belief updating
among criminals, this paper directly examines the empirical importance of individual (and sibling)
crime and arrest histories as well as alternative sources of information in determining beliefs about
the probability of arrest.
    The ‘broken windows’ theory of Wilson and Kelling (1982) suggests that individuals are more likely
to engage in crime in neighborhoods exhibiting decay (i.e. broken windows or abandoned buildings),
because they believe they are less likely to be arrested or interfered with. Understanding the infor-
mation used in generating beliefs and how perceptions influence behavior is central to this theory. In
the empirical analysis below, we explore the relationship between neighborhood decay and perceptions
among young males.
    The economics literature has recently begun to analyze how the evolution of beliefs over time can
affect aggregate outcomes. In special environments, the information cascade literature (e.g. Baner-
jee, 1992, Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welsh, 1992) has shown that the aggregation of individual
decisions can lead to informational cascades and conformity when individuals possess idiosyncratic
information and gather information from others. Furthermore, Heavner and Lochner (2002) show
that policies like anti-gang initiatives or mentor programs will have heterogeneous impacts on neigh-
borhoods that differ in the current level of gang and criminal activity. More generally, the way in
which individuals acquire information and develop expectations is important in determining outcomes
and policy effects in any environment; yet, little is actually known about these processes.6
    This paper makes two contributions to the perceptions-based deterrence literature using self-
reported beliefs about the probability of (one’s own) arrest from two sources of longitudinal data
(the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 Cohort, NLSY97, and the National Youth Survey,
NYS). First, this paper examines which factors influence individual perceptions about the probability
of arrest. In particular, we study (i) the correlation between various demographic characteristics (e.g.
race and ethnicity) and beliefs about the probability of arrest, (ii) the correlation between local official
arrest rates and perceptions, (iii) the role of neighborhood conditions in determining beliefs, and (iv)
the role of new information and belief updating in determining perceptions about the probability of
arrest. Regarding the last point, this paper shows that individuals update their beliefs in rational
ways. Those who engage in crime while avoiding arrest reduce their perceived probability of arrest,
and Lovitch (1987) find empirical evidence for both delayed effects of an increase in arrests on crime and for long-term
effects of a temporary increase in arrests. Ayres and Levitt (1998) find evidence consistent with learning among auto
thieves when Lojack (a new technology allowing police to locate stolen vehicles equipped with the system) is introduced
to some cities.
    6
      See Manski (1992) for a clear discussion about the importance of understanding expectations formation in studying
schooling decisions. Anderson and Holt (1997) study information cascades using an experimental approach.


                                                           3
while those who are arrested increase their perceived probability.7 Beliefs also respond to changes
in the criminal histories of their siblings but not to information about the arrest outcomes of their
siblings or other random persons.
       The second main contribution of the paper is an empirical analysis of the relationship between the
perceived probability of arrest and the subsequent commission of crime. By examining the relationship
about the perceived probability of arrest for different crimes and the probability of actual commission
of those crimes in large random national samples of young males, the results can be interpreted as
actual deterrence effects that might be expected when beliefs are changed through policy intervention
on a broad scale. Consistent with deterrence theory, estimates suggest that individuals with a higher
perceived probability of arrest are less likely to commit crime in the future. Differences in behavior
across individuals are, therefore, not only due to differences in tastes for crime, criminal returns, or
opportunity costs. They may also be related to differences in beliefs about the criminal justice system.
       To account for unobserved heterogeneity in tastes for crime, we take two approaches using the
NLSY97 data. First, we consider instrumental variable estimation in a fixed effects environment using
a linear probability model. These estimates provide some evidence that beliefs about the probability
of arrest for auto theft affect subsequent engagement in theft. Second, we combine our models of
belief updating and criminal behavior to structurally estimate both problems simultaneously (along
with the true probability of arrest) in the presence of unobserved heterogeneity in tastes for crime and
in the perceived probability of arrest. Once measurement error in beliefs is specifically modelled and
taken into account, the structural estimates suggest strong deterrent effects based on the perceived
probability of arrest.
       After a brief discussion of the main issues involved in studying the evolution of beliefs about the
probability of arrest and criminal behavior in Section 2, this paper empirically examines these issues
using data from the NLSY97 and NYS. Section 3 summarizes the data on criminal participation and
perceptions in these data, exploring how beliefs vary among young males. The role of belief updating is
examined in Section 4, and the influence of beliefs about the probability of arrest on criminal activity
is discussed in Section 5. Section 6 provides a structural estimation analysis of belief updating, crime,
and arrests that is based on the model sketched in Section 2. Section 7 concludes.
   7
    Early studies by criminologists that explore the link between perceptions and crime report that individuals engaged
in crime tend to lower their perceived probability of arrest, referring to these effects as ‘experiential effects’ (Minor and
Harry, 1982, Paternoster, et al., 1983, Piliavin, et al., 1986, Saltzman, et al., 1982).       Horney and Marshall (1992)
estimate a positive correlation between arrests per crime in recent years and current beliefs, but they cannot determine
whether that correlation is due to belief updating or a strong correlation between initial (and, perhaps, stable) beliefs
and observed outcomes. Studying 300 college students, Paternoster, et al. (1985) offer some evidence that changes in
the perceived probability of arrest are negatively correlated with criminal activity and positively correlated with formal
sanctions. None of these studies take into account the endogeneity of criminal behavior.


                                                             4
2        The Evolution of Crime and Beliefs

This section outlines a framework for thinking about the interaction of beliefs about the probability
of arrest and criminal behavior. The primary goal is to provide intuition about the important issues
involved in the empirical study below rather than a rigorous theoretical treatment of the problem.8
We also discuss a few policy implications that underscore the potential importance of belief updating
in determining criminal decisions over the lifecycle.
        Suppose individuals begin with prior beliefs about the probability of arrest for different types of
crime and then decide whether or not to engage in crime based on those beliefs. Their decision to
commit crime and whether they are arrested will affect their future beliefs about the probability of
arrest. Beliefs may also respond to information from various other sources. For example, individuals
may observe crimes committed by others and whether or not they are arrested, as in Sah (1991). They
may move from one neighborhood to another or observe more police on the street. Using all of this
information, individuals continually form new beliefs and decide whether or not to engage in crime.
This process repeats itself over the lifecycle. Because ex ante identical agents will receive different
information about the probability of arrest, their beliefs and criminal behavior will likely differ at any
point in time.
        First, consider the decision to commit crime when there is uncertainty about the probability of
arrest. Following Becker (1968), assume that individuals choose to commit crime if the expected
benefits exceed the expected costs. For simplicity, assume the benefits to each individual i from
committing a crime at age t, Bit , are known beforehand. Individuals also know the punishment, Jit ≥ 0,
associated with an arrest, but they do not necessarily know their own probability of arrest. Instead,
they have some beliefs about that probability (πi ). Let F (π|Hit ) represent the cumulative distribution
function for an individual’s perceived arrest probability conditional on information available to him
at some date t, Hit . Assuming no intertemporal effects of arrest or criminal behavior (except through
beliefs), individual i will commit crime in the following period if and only if

                                                         Z1
                                             Bit > Jit        πdF (π|Hit ).
                                                         0

For simplicity, this decision rule ignores any incentive to commit crime in order to learn more about the
true probability. In this sense, individuals behave myopically each period.9 Defining the benefit-cost
    8
    For a more complete theoretical analysis, see Lochner (2004).
    9
    Incorporating this type of strategic behavior is straightforward and would create an additional incentive to engage
in crime when beliefs are uncertain.



                                                             5
ratio, Rit = Bit /Jit , yields the following decision rule for crime:

                                  commit crime if and only if                E(π|Hit ) < Rit ,                             (1)

                      R1
where E(π|Hit ) =          πdF (π|Hit ).
                      0
       Now, consider the evolution of beliefs. Assume that initial beliefs about the probability of arrest are
given by F0 (π) (where F0 (0) = 0 and F0 (1) = 1, reflecting the fact that π is itself a probability). Any
number of assumptions can be made about how individuals update their beliefs given new information
as well as what types of information are relevant for belief updating. Since the criminal decision rule
in equation (1) depends on the expectation of the probability of arrest, E(π|Hit ), we consider how this
measure of beliefs evolves.
       Beliefs about the probability of arrest are likely to depend on an individual’s own (past) criminal
behavior and arrest outcomes, the criminal and arrest outcomes of others around him, and more general
signals that may come from local arrest rates or neighborhood conditions.10 Let cit be an indicator
equal to one if individual i commits a crime between (survey) dates t − 1 and t and zero otherwise.
Similarly, let Ait be an indicator equal to one if he is arrested during that time period and zero
otherwise.11 Let c̃it and Ãit represent vectors of these indicators for individuals that person i associates
with. Finally, we denote any new information about the local environment by Zit . Information
accumulates according to Hit = (Hit−1 , ci,t , Ai,t , c̃i,t , Ãi,t , Zi,t ). A fairly general rule for updating beliefs
is given by
                                 E(π|Hit ) = g(E(π|Hit−1 ), ci,t , Ai,t , c̃i,t , Ãi,t , Zi,t ).12                        (2)

       Now, consider a number of potential assumptions for this updating equation. First, the current
perceived probability of arrest should be increasing in the previous expected probability (g1 ≥ 0).13
Second, the expected probability of arrest should be decreasing in the number of crimes already
committed (by oneself or others) holding the number of arrests constant (g2 ≤ 0 and g4 ≤ 0). Third,
the total effect of committing a crime and getting arrested for it should lead to an increase in the
  10
      By focusing only on information received from others, Sah (1991) neglects the important role that an individual’s
own criminal and arrest history plays in shaping his own beliefs and, therefore, subsequent criminal decisions. The true
probability of arrest is, most probably, quite heterogeneous across individuals. If this type of heterogeneity is substantial,
it may imply that information acquired from others plays little role in the development of an individual’s beliefs about
the probability that he himself will be arrested. Instead, his own history would be the primary determinant.
   11
      The timing implicit in this notation makes it easier to follow the empirical analysis below, since all variables with a t
subscript are collected in the same survey (i.e. crime and arrests are retrospective since the previous survey while beliefs
are recorded at the time of the survey).
   12
      A more general rule would allow E(π|Hit ) to depend on the entire distribution of prior beliefs, F (π|Hit−1 ), rather
than just E(π|Hit−1 ).
   13
      We denote the partial derivative of g(·) with respect to its kth argument by gk .




                                                                 6
expected probability of arrest (i.e. g2 +g3 ≥ 0 and g4 +g5 ≥ 0).14 Fourth, one might expect that beliefs
are increasing in actual local arrest rates. Fifth, the ‘broken windows’ theory of Wilson and Kelling
(1982) suggests that individuals are likely to think the probability of arrest is lower in communities in
which buildings are rundown, windows are broken, and lawlessness is rampant. This paper empirically
examines each of these potential assumptions.
       Before turning to the empirical analysis, it is worth discussing the implications of these assumptions
for lifecycle criminal behavior and the evolution of beliefs. To begin, consider an individual who elects
to commit a crime. If he avoids arrest, he will unambiguously lower his perceived probability of arrest
(assuming no changes in other information). This will raise the likelihood that he commits crime the
following period. On the other hand, if he is arrested, he should raise his expected probability of arrest,
making him less likely to commit crime in the future. Thus, criminal profiles will be determined, in
part, by the randomness associated with an arrest. The ‘lucky’ individual who manages to avoid an
arrest early on is more likely to continue committing crime thereafter than is the ‘unlucky’ person who
gets arrested. Following the same line of argument, individuals with ‘lucky’ older siblings who engage
in crime and get away with it are more likely to engage in crime themselves.
       Much more can be said about the evolution of beliefs and crime if we are willing to make stronger
assumptions about the structure of information and updating. For example, consider Bayesian deci-
sionmakers who only acquire information about the probability of arrest from their own criminal and
arrest histories.15 They will update their beliefs as follows:
                                 "                  #              "                              #
                               V (π|Hit−1 )                    V (π|Hit−1 )
   E(π|Hit ) = E(π|Hit−1 ) −                 c i,t−1 +                              ci,t−1 Ai,t−1 ,                  (3)
                             1 − E(π|Hit−1 )           E(π|Hit−1 )(1 − E(π|Hit−1 ))
                                        h               i2
where V (π|Hit−1 ) = E(π 2 |Hit−1 )− E(π|Hit−1 )             is the variance of beliefs about the probability of arrest
given history Hit−1 . Those not committing crime will not change their beliefs, but those choosing to
commit a crime will update their beliefs depending on whether or not they are arrested. The expected
probability of arrest increases among those who are arrested, while it decreases among those who are
not. The magnitude of the change depends on both the variance and mean of the belief distribution.
When there is a lot of uncertainty (i.e. V (π|Hit−1 ) is high), the expected probability of arrest changes a
lot in response to new information (whether that new information comes from an arrest or the lack of an
arrest). This variance is likely to be particularly high early in an individual’s life, while it should decline
  14
     Contrary to these assumptions, the “gambler’s fallacy” posits that someone who is not arrested may feel they are due
to be arrested next time (and vice versa). Pogarsky and Piquero (2003) explore this hypothesis in regards to drinking
and driving. Empirically, we find no evidence of this effect in either the NLSY97 or NYS data.
  15
     Alternatively, individuals may receive information from other sources, but it may be largely irrelevant due to the
idiosyncratic nature of criminal ability.


                                                               7
as an individual acquires more and more information. This implies that the beliefs of young criminals
should respond more to an arrest than should the beliefs of veteran criminals. Additionally, individuals
should learn quickly about the probability of arrest for crimes that are committed frequently. At any
given age, then, individuals should respond less to new information about the probability of arrest for
these crimes.16
       In this environment, beliefs need not be accurate. Criminals are likely to be optimistic in that they
will tend to believe that their probability of arrest is lower than it actually is, while non-criminals will
tend to be pessimistic about their chances of evading arrest. This is even true among those who start
their criminal careers with unbiased prior beliefs. To understand why, suppose that all individuals
begin with unbiased priors. Any change in beliefs, therefore, leads to a bias. Since individuals only
commit crime if the expected probability is low enough, those who continue to engage in crime tend
to be the lucky ones who have not been arrested for their past crimes. On average, they reduce their
perceived probability of arrest leading to a systematic downward bias. At the other extreme, those
choosing not to commit crime are likely to have started out with a very high perceived probability
of arrest or to have experienced an arrest sometime in the past causing them to revise their beliefs
upwards. The latter subgroup of current non-criminals (but former criminals) will bias the average
beliefs of all non-criminals upwards. With homogeneity in the true probability of arrest and unbiased
prior beliefs, we would expect that, on average, criminals under-estimate the official arrest rate while
non-criminals over-estimate the official arrest rate.
       When there is heterogeneity in the true probability of arrest across individuals, average beliefs
about the probability of arrest will tend to be higher than official arrest rates even if prior beliefs are
unbiased for each individual. This is because those with high true probabilities (and, therefore, high
prior beliefs about the probability) will not engage in crime. The opposite is true for those with low
true and perceived probabilities. Official arrest rates will be lower than the average true probability
across all individuals, since they only reflect the probability of arrest for those choosing to commit a
crime. The biases in beliefs discussed earlier will arise among non-criminals and criminals, but the
overall average belief about the probability of arrest will generally be higher than the official arrest
rate due to selection into criminality. The greater the heterogeneity in true probabilities, the greater
will be the difference between average beliefs and official arrest rates.
       If we continue to assume that individual beliefs only depend on policy-invariant priors and individ-
  16
    Additionally, when the expected probability, E(π|Hit−1 ), is high, individuals will show little response to an arrest
while they will substantially reduce their expected probability if they avoid an arrest. On the other hand, when the
expected probability of an arrest is low, individuals that are arrested will substantially revise their probability of arrest
upward, while those that are not will revise their expected probability downward by much less.


                                                             8
ual crime and arrest histories so g6 = 0 (e.g. individuals either do not hear about policy changes or do
not believe such announcements), then two policy implications contrast sharply with those predicted
by standard models that assume the true probability of arrest is known with certainty. First, an
increase in the true probability of arrest (e.g. an increase in the number of police or more lax rules
on police searches) will have no immediate effect on crime, but it will have lagged effects. This is
true of both permanent and temporary changes. Policy affects are lagged because they only affect
crime indirectly through beliefs, which take time to evolve. Each additional arrest that occurs as a
result of the increased true probability of arrest will cause the affected criminal to revise his perceived
probability of arrest upwards. This increases the likelihood that he refrains from committing further
crimes in the future. Even with a direct announcement effect on beliefs, the long-run effects of an
increase in the probability of arrest would be greater than the short-run effects. On the other hand,
when the probability of arrest is known with certainty, all effects on crime would be immediate and
would only continue as long as actual arrest rates remain high.17
       Second, changes in the true probability of arrest should not only affect the level of crime, but they
should also affect the age-crime profile as criminals slowly learn about any changes through experience.
To the extent that initial criminal decisions only depend on prior beliefs and tastes, there will be no
impact of an increase in the true probability of arrest on the initial crime rate of a cohort. But,
subsequent crime rates will decline as more and more individuals experience an arrest. Overall, crime
should decline more quickly (or rise more slowly) with age. With direct announcement effects on
initial beliefs, crime rates would also decline among youth, offsetting some of the learning effect. This
learning effect is entirely absent in standard models with fully-informed agents.
       Summarizing, this framework suggests that incorporating beliefs about the likelihood of arrest in a
criminal choice model can lead to interesting dynamic responses to changes in the probability of arrest
that are frequently ignored. It explains why criminals may be optimistic about their chances of evading
arrest when non-criminals are pessimistic. It also suggests that the average perceived probability of
arrest is likely to be greater than official arrest rates even when beliefs are unbiased. The importance
of these effects will depend on the information acquired by individuals as well as the process by which
they update their beliefs. In the following sections, we empirically examine these issues.
  17
     The criminal justice literature commonly refers to two distinct types of deterrence: general and specific. General
deterrence refers to the effects of criminal justice policy through general policy announcements or overall arrest proba-
bilities, while specific deterrence refers to deterrence achieved through an individual’s own interaction with the justice
system. The latter is emphasized here.




                                                            9
3         Crime and Perceptions
Crime and Beliefs in the NLSY97

The NLSY97 contains a sample of 9,022 individuals (4,621 males) ages 12-16 in 1997. This study uses
four years of panel data covering the years 1997-2000. Information relevant to this study includes
data on family background, individual achievement test scores, neighborhood characteristics, criminal
behavior, and perceptions about the probability of arrest and various punishments for auto theft.18
         The extent of criminal activity among young males in the NLSY97 is shown in Table 1. About
5.5% of young males report committing a theft of over $50 in any given year, with blacks reporting
the most involvement and whites the least. Slightly more than 1% of the sample reports committing
auto theft. Approximately 8% of all young males report an arrest for some offense in any year, and
only 1.7% report an arrest for theft.
         Unfortunately, the data do not allow us to determine what category or type of theft for which
an arrest was made. To the extent that most arrests occur for thefts of something worth more than
$50, we can approximate the arrest rate for theft by race/ethnicity. Between 0.28 (hispanics) and
0.36 (blacks) individuals report an arrest (for theft) for every individual who reports having stolen
something worth more than $50. A better measure for an arrest rate is given at the bottom of the
table, which reports the total number of arrests for theft per reported theft of more than $50. These
rates range from 0.06 for hispanics to 0.12 for blacks. According to these figures, about one out of
every ten thefts of greater than $50 results in an arrest, and there is little difference in arrest rates
between whites and minorities. A number of caveats should be noted. First, some individuals may be
arrested even though they have not committed a theft – this would bias arrest rates upward. Second,
some arrests may be for thefts of less than $50 in value, again biasing these estimates upward. Third,
both arrests and crimes are self-reported, both of which may be under-reported. To the extent that
individuals under-report crimes more than arrests, these estimates will be biased upward. Unless
arrests are substantially under-reported compared to actual thefts of greater than $50, these arrest
rates should over-estimate true arrest probabilities among those choosing to steal.
         While these rates are substantially lower than official clearance rates19 for burglary, larceny-theft,
and motor-vehicle theft, they accurately reflect official arrest rates for theft after adjusting for non-
    18
      Specifically, the survey asks: “What is the percent chance you would be arrested if you stole a car?” It also asks
three separate questions about the outcome of arrest: “Suppose you were arrested for stealing a car, what is the percent
chance that you would [be released by the police without charges or dismissed at court, pay a fine and be released, serve
time in jail]?”
   19
      An offense is ‘cleared by arrest’ when at least one person is: (1) arrested; (2) charged with the commission of the
offense; and (3) turned over to the court for prosecution.



                                                           10
reporting (to the police) by victims. Adjusted arrest rates for theft are lowest for the general larceny-
theft category (5.4%), slightly higher for burglary (7.6%), and highest for motor vehicle theft (10.0%).20
Thus, arrest rates for theft among youth surveyed by the NLSY97 closely correspond to official na-
tionwide arrest rates.
       Figure 1 shows the kernel density estimated (using a biweight kernel with a bandwidth of 5)
distribution of the perceived probability of arrest for auto theft among young males in the NLSY97.
Most youth report much higher perceived probabilities of arrest than is reflected in national arrest
rates or in the actual arrest rates for thefts committed by this sample. The figure shows strong focal
points at probabilities of 0, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9, and 1.
       Young males from all racial and ethnic backgrounds tend to report a relatively high probability of
arrest as shown in Table 2. While most previous research has shown that official arrest rates do not
vary across races (Tonry, 1995), popular discussion might cause one to think that minorities believe
they are more likely to face arrest and serious punishment. This does not appear to be the case here.21
Panel (A) of the table shows that both young black (52%) and hispanic (54%) males tend to have
significantly lower perceived probabilities of arrest for auto theft than the average young white male
(64%).
       The fact that perceived probabilities of arrest are substantially higher than true arrest rates does
not necessarily imply that individuals over-estimate their own probability of arrest. As noted earlier,
individuals that engage in crime may face substantially lower arrest probabilities than those who
do not. While this can explain some of the gap between perceptions and actual arrest rates, even
young males engaged in crime report fairly high probabilities of arrest.22 Panel (B) of Table 2 reveals
probabilities for young males who reported stealing something worth more than $50 in the previous
year; panel (C) shows perceptions for young males who committed auto theft; and panel (D) calculates
average perceived probabilities using the number of thefts of over $50 committed in the last year by
each individual to weight the observations. Panel (D) accounts for the possibility that individuals
who commit the most crime also hold the lowest perceived probabilities of arrest. If each individual’s
perceived probability is correct, the weighted average of all perceived probabilities for arrest in panel
(D) should equal the sample arrest rate.
  20
     Arrests, offenses known to the police, and clearance rates are taken from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports, while
reporting rates to the police are given by the Bureau of U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Victimization in the United
States.
  21
     From a different perspective, police may discriminate against minorities by failing to pursue perpetrators who vic-
timize them. Since most criminals victimize others like them, this would result in lower real and perceived arrest rates
among minorities.
  22
     In summarizing a number of studies on perceptions in various contexts, Viscusi (1998) reports that individuals tend
to overestimate the risk of low probability events, which is consistent with these findings.


                                                           11
       Among teenage males who have stolen something worth more than $50, whites believe that their
probability of facing arrest is about 10 percentage points higher than hispanics or blacks. Among
auto thieves, the gap between whites and the two minorities drops to around 7 percentage points.
Weighting beliefs by the number of thefts reduces the gap further by one percentage point. There is
little evidence to support the proposition that young blacks and hispanics feel discriminated against
in terms of facing higher arrest rates for auto theft.
       In general, teenage males that are more involved in crime tend to predict better chances of evading
arrest. As discussed in the previous section, these differences in beliefs can be attributed to at least two
potential factors: (1) individuals who hold optimistic views about their chances of success (perhaps,
because they have successfully avoided arrest in the past) should be more likely to commit crime,
and (2) individuals who are better at evading arrest (and truly face lower probabilities of arrest and
punishment) can be expected to commit crime at higher rates. It is also the case that individuals not
engaged in crime have little incentive to figure out the true probability while those engaged in crime
should have more accurate views since such information is crucial for their ‘work’; however, there is
little reason to expect that this should bias beliefs in one direction or the other. Given the first factor,
it is surprising that even those engaged in auto theft report an average expected arrest rate of 40-50%.
       An obvious explanation for the discrepancy in beliefs and true arrest rates is that individuals mis-
interpret the question.23 Rather than reporting an arrest rate, individuals may respond by reporting
the probability that someone who engages in auto theft (perhaps repeatedly) will ever be arrested for
that crime. Indeed, this measure for an ‘arrest rate’ (dividing the total number of individuals arrested
for theft by the number of individuals stealing something worth more than $50) is much higher (30%
for the entire sample) as seen in Table 1. Alternatively, individuals may report the probability of
arrest for stealing a representative (or random) car, while they only choose to steal cars that offer a
substantially lower probability of arrest. In this case, reported arrest probabilities would be greater
than the official arrest rate. It is impossible to know for sure how people interpret and answer these
questions. To the extent that these measures of beliefs change in response to new information and
affect behavior in economically interesting ways, it seems likely that they contain important (if noisy)
information about true beliefs. Ultimately, this is an empirical question, which we explore in detail
below.
       Beliefs about the probability of arrest depend not only on subjective perceptions about actual
enforcement variables (e.g. number of police) but also on an individual’s own perceived ability to evade
  23
   Examining responses to a variety of questions about the probability of different events occurring in the near future,
Walker (2000) finds little evidence that NLSY97 youth are unable to grasp the concept of probability.



                                                          12
detection. In studying variation in beliefs about the likelihood of arrest, it is, therefore, important to
consider individual characteristics which might be correlated with criminal abilities as well as those
which may affect opinions about the quality of law enforcement. Table 3 uses ordinary least squares
(OLS) regression to examine the importance of county-level arrest rates, individual characteristics,
family background, and geographic variables in explaining the perceived probability of arrest for auto
theft. While the reported results are based on the entire sample of NLSY97 respondents, the results are
very similar when restricted to those reporting a theft of something worth more than $50 sometime
in the previous year. Column (i) examines the relationship between county arrest rates for motor
vehicle theft24 and the perceived probability of arrest. The estimates suggest a positive correlation
with a coefficient of 0.13. Column (ii) adds demographic indicators for age and race. The coefficient
on local arrest rates drops by half, suggesting that much of the correlation between beliefs and official
arrest rates is due to locational differences in demographics that are correlated with beliefs. Column
(iii) adds an indicator for current residence in a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). The effects of
county arrest rates decline further, but MSA status is statistically important. Young males living in
an MSA believe they are less likely to be arrested, consistent with lower official arrest rates in urban
communities. To the extent that most of the true variation in arrest rates across communities depends
on metropolitan status and the demographic characteristics of a neighborhood, it is not surprising
that the correlation between beliefs and official county arrest rates, which are undoubtedly measured
with error, disappears after controlling for these factors.
       Given the theory discussed in Section 2, one might expect that older individuals are better in-
formed about the true arrest rate than are younger respondents. However, the results from including
interactions between MSA status and age as well as county arrest rates and age in the regressions
of Table 3 do not support this conclusion. Coefficient estimates for these interactions are always in-
significantly different from zero. On average, beliefs do not more accurately reflect official arrest rates
among older individuals.
       Column (iv) of Table 3 adds detailed family background measures (specifically, low current family
income, whether the respondent lived with both his natural parents in 1997, whether his mother was a
teenager at birth) and math achievement test scores.25 This has little effect on the estimates already
  24
      County arrest rates are computed from the ratio of arrests per person divided by crimes per person in each county
from the following source: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. UNIFORM CRIME REPORTING
PROGRAM DATA [UNITED STATES]: COUNTY-LEVEL DETAILED ARREST AND OFFENSE DATA, 1997-2000
[Computer file]. Inter-univerisity Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, MI.
   25
      Peabody Individual Achievement Test (PIAT) scores for math are only observed for individuals with less than 10
years of schooling–nearly everyone age 16 in 1997. To maintain the representativeness of the sample, all individuals age
16 in 1997 are dropped from regressions including PIAT scores, making the sample representative of males ages 12-15 in
1997. The large decline in sample size associated with specification (iv) is primarily due to the inclusion of PIAT scores


                                                           13
discussed. Young black and hispanic males report a lower probability of arrest than white males even
after controlling for age, local arrest rates, residence in a MSA, and other family background measures.
However, racial differences are considerably smaller than their unconditional counterparts shown in
panel (A) of Table 2. Perhaps surprisingly, family background has little affect on reported beliefs
about the probability of arrest. Other than race/ethnicity, only the effects of Peabody Individual
Achievement Test (PIAT) scores for math are statistically significant. In contrast to an ‘ability to
evade’ arrest hypothesis, a 10 percentage point higher math PIAT score implies a 1.2 percentage point
higher perceived chance of arrest.
    The considerable variation in beliefs is not well explained by these rich measures of family back-
ground, geographic location, local arrest rates, age, race, and ability – the R2 statistics for these
regressions are no greater than 0.03. Yet, perceptions are fairly stable over time for many respondents
as seen in Figure 2, which shows the distribution of changes in the perceived probability of arrest
from one year to the next (using kernel density estimation with a biweight kernel and bandwidth of
5). More than 25% of respondents do not change their beliefs about the probability of arrest between
any two years. The correlation in perceptions between years is roughly 0.32.

Crime and Beliefs in the NYS

The NYS contains a random sample of 1,725 individuals (918 males) ages 11-17 in 1976. Respondents
were surveyed annually from 1976-1980, then again in 1983 and 1986. This paper focuses on the
perceptions and criminal behavior of men as reported in the 1983 and 1986 surveys (earlier surveys
do not contain information about perceptions of the criminal justice system).26 Data regarding family
background and some neighborhood characteristics are available.
    Table 4 reports the extent of selected criminal activities and arrest records from 1984 to 1986.
Since most individuals are in their early twenties during these years, criminal participation is much
lower than for the younger sample in the NLSY97. Yet, 18% still report stealing something worth less
than $5 over this three-year period, and 9% report physically attacking someone. Substantially fewer
individuals engage in more serious forms of theft. Nearly 12% report an arrest over the three-year
span, although many of those arrests are for minor crimes. Only 1.9 percent are arrested for a property
and family income, both of which are missing for a sizeable fraction of the sample.
  26
     Surveys for 1983 and 1986 actually took place early in 1984 and 1987, respectively. Perceptions questions, therefore,
refer to beliefs at the beginning of 1984 and 1987. Criminal participation (and most other) questions explicitly ask
about the calendar years 1983 and 1986, however. Additionally, the survey taken in early 1987 also asked retrospective
questions about criminal participation in 1984 and 1985. In many cases, categorical measures rather than the actual
number of crimes committed in a year are reported (especially for 1984 and 1985). In these cases, the number of crimes
committed was imputed from the average number of crimes committed among those in that category who reported the
actual number of crimes (based on all survey years).


                                                           14
or violent crime.27
       Sample arrest rates can be calculated from the information on criminal behavior and arrests. When
dividing the number of arrests for property crimes by the total number of break-ins and thefts greater
than $50 reported in 1983 and 1986, average arrests per property crime are slightly under 5%. A
similar arrest rate is obtained for violent crime when dividing the number of arrests for violent crime
by the reported number of times individuals used force to obtain something or attacked someone.
These arrest rates are less than official arrest rates in the U.S. population adjusted for non-reporting
to the police, especially for violent crimes. (For example, 1986 arrest rates for larceny-theft were 5.5%,
burglary, 7.4%, and assault, 20.4%.) However, both the number of crimes and number of arrests in
this sample are quite small. Furthermore, the denominators are likely to be inflated due to duplication
in reporting of crimes (e.g. some break-ins may also be reported as thefts by respondents).
       Individuals were asked to report the probability (in increments of 0.1) that they would be arrested
if they were to commit various crimes.28 The distribution of reported probabilities of arrest in the
NYS is shown in Figure 3. Table 5 reports average perceived probabilities of arrest in the NYS for four
crimes: stealing something worth $5 or less, stealing something worth more than $50, breaking into a
building or vehicle, and attacking someone to hurt or kill them. As with teenage boys in the NLSY97,
perceived arrest rates are higher than official arrest rates in the U.S. But, the ranking of crimes
by perceived arrest probability from most to least likely corresponds to the ranking of actual arrest
rates across crime types. Interestingly, black and hispanic men in the NYS report higher perceived
arrest probabilities for property crimes than do white men, in sharp contrast to the NLSY97 findings.
However, the differences by race are small for all but petty theft.29
       Table 6 examines whether perceptions vary across criminals and non-criminals. Specifically, the
first column reports perceived probabilities for those who did not commit the crime in question,
while the second column reports perceived probabilities for those who did. The final column weights
perceived probabilities by the number of times an individual reported committing that type of crime.
As with the teenage boys in the NLSY97, those committing any particular crime tend to believe their
  27
      Arrests for property crimes include various forms of theft, evading payment, burglary, breaking and entering, and
dealing in stolen goods. Arrests for violent crimes include assault, robbery, and harassment. Other arrests include crimes
such as prostitution, vagrancy, panhandling, etc.
   28
      Specifically, the survey asks five distinct questions:“Suppose YOU were to [steal something worth $5 or less, steal
something worth more than $50, break into a building or vehicle to steal something or just to look around, use force
(strongarm methods) to get money or things from other people, attack someone with the idea of seriously hurting or
killing him/her]. What are the chances you would be ticketed/arrested?”
   29
      Unfortunately, it is impossible to determine whether differences across the NYS and NLSY97 sample are due to
differences in time period (mid-1980s vs. late 1990s), differences in the types of crimes studied, or differences in respon-
dents’ age (early to mid-teens vs. mid-twenties). Racial differences in beliefs do not appear to differ dramatically by age,
suggesting that the latter reason may not be too important.



                                                            15
chance of arrest for that crime is lower than those not engaging in that type of crime. Weighting
beliefs by the number of crimes lowers perceived probabilities even more for all crimes except petty
theft. Regardless of the sample, perceived probabilities of arrest are high compared to average arrest
rates in the U.S.
       The effects of age, race, family background, neighborhood conditions, and urban status on percep-
tions among young men are estimated using OLS and reported in Table 7. (Ordered probits produce
similar conclusions.) Even after controlling for other background characteristics, blacks hold a signifi-
cantly higher perceived probability of arrest than whites for petty theft, but not for other crimes. Men
who grew up in intact families and have more educated mothers or fathers think that their likelihood of
arrest is lower on average, although the differences are quite small and generally statistically insignif-
icant. Consistent with official arrest patterns, men in rural areas hold higher perceived probabilities
of arrest than those in urban communities.30
       The ‘broken windows’ theory of Kelling and Wilson (1982) assumes that local neighborhood con-
ditions affect individual perceptions about the likelihood of arrest and/or punishment and that those
perceptions, in part, determine criminal behavior. The small and insignificant coefficients on neigh-
borhood crime and disarray fail to support this theory. Instead, the estimates suggest that young men
living in neighborhoods in which crime and ‘broken windows’ are a problem do not view their chances
of arrest any differently from those living in cleaner and more orderly environments. We re-examine
this issue below.
       As in the NLSY97, the substantial heterogeneity in beliefs is not well explained by background and
neighborhood characteristics. Perceptions appear to be largely idiosyncratic and difficult to explain;
yet, they are also stable for many respondents. Figure 4 shows the distribution of changes in beliefs
from 1983 to 1986 for the sample. For each crime, about 20% of the young men do not change
their perceived probability of arrest, while about 60% change their perceived probability by twenty
percent or less over three years. We would expect many individuals with no involvement in crime to
maintain fairly stable beliefs over time. Still, we are particularly interested in those who do change
their beliefs and why they change them. Furthermore, we would like to know how changes in beliefs
affect subsequent criminal activity. The remaining sections of this paper empirically analyze these
issues.
  30
    State and county of residence are unknown in the NYS, so perceptions cannot be compared with local official arrest
rates as in the NLSY97.




                                                         16
4    Information-Based Belief Updating

This section empirically studies factors that may cause individuals to change their beliefs about the
probability of arrest. In the NLSY and NYS, we assume the reported measure of the perceived
probability of arrest, pi,t , relates to E(π|Hit ) as defined in Section 2. The simple Bayesian structure
above (see equation 3) suggests estimating the relationship between changes in perceptions and changes
in environmental factors Zi,t (e.g. local arrest rates, metropolitan status, neighborhood characteristics,
etc.), new arrests Ai,t and crimes committed ci,t (both taking place between period t − 1 and t) by the
respondent as well as his siblings, Ãi,t and c̃i,t :

                           ∆pi,t = ∆Zi,t γ + φAi,t + λci,t + φs Ãi,t + λs c̃i,t + ui,t .                    (4)

    A more general structure of updating can also be estimated as follows:

                        pi,t = Zi,t γ + θpi,t−1 + φAi,t + λci,t + φs Ãi,t + λs c̃i,t + εi,t ,               (5)

which relaxes the implicit assumption of the Bayesian model that θ = 1. In this case, some Zi,t
variables (e.g. ability, race, family background, etc.) may be time invariant. While these variables
are “differenced out” in equation (4), they can play an important role in this more general updating
equation. With |θ| < 1 and Zi,t = Zi∗ constant, beliefs would eventually converge to a steady state,

                                                                   γ
                                               p∗i (Zi∗ ) = Zi∗       ,                                      (6)
                                                                  1−θ

if the individual and his siblings stopped committing crime and were never arrested again (ignoring
changes in εi,t ). Consequently, an individual’s permanent Zi characteristics determine his baseline
(i.e. no crime/no arrest steady state) level of beliefs. Changes in time-varying Zi,t factors will affect
long-run beliefs, perhaps through information gathered from others or from observing changes in local
conditions. For example, moving to a new city or neighborhood may cause an individual to gradually
shift his beliefs toward thinking the probability of arrest is higher or lower than previously thought,
even if he does not engage in crime or face an arrest.
    Equation (5) can be re-written as

            pi,t = (1 − θ)p∗i (Zi,t−1 ) + θpi,t−1 + ∆Zi,t γ + φAi,t + λci,t + φs Ãi,t + λs c̃i,t + εi,t ,

which shows how θ determines the rate at which beliefs move toward their baseline level. A value of θ
near zero implies that beliefs quickly converge to their steady state level given any new information.
This implies that any observed changes affecting beliefs (e.g. an arrest or non-arrest) have short-lived

                                                         17
effects on beliefs. This would be the case if individuals continually receive strong signals (unobserved
by the econometrician) that their probability of arrest is p∗i . Or, it may simply imply that individuals
have short memories and quickly return to some baseline belief about their own probability of arrest.
    Let T represent the final period of observation in the data. With at least three periods of data
(i.e. T ≥ 3), we can allow for unobserved individual fixed effects: εi,t = µi + νi,t assuming that

                                E(νi,t |pt−1  T    t t        t t
                                         i , Zi , Ai , ci , Ãi , c̃i ) = 0    ∀t = 2, ..., T,                             (7)

where xti = (xi1 , xi2 , ..., xit ) represents the entire history through period t for any variable x. This
assumes that only Z variables are ‘strictly exogenous’, while all other regressors are ‘pre-determined’.
As Arellano and Honore (2001) show, the assumption of equation (7) is fairly weak in that it does not
rule out feedback effects of lagged dependent variables or disturbances on current and future values
of the ‘pre-determined’ variables. That is, by conditioning on cti and Ati (rather than cTi and ATi as
with traditional fixed or random effects strategies) in equation (7), we explicitly allow for the fact
that ci,t+1 and Ai,t+1 (as well as all future values of crime and arrests) may depend on the current
disturbance νi,t .31 This is important, because we expect that subsequent crime depends on current
beliefs about the probability of arrest – an issue we examine more closely in the following sections.
    For
                ∆νi,t = ∆pi,t − [θ∆pi,t−1 + ∆Zi,t γ + φ∆Ai,t + λ∆ci,t + φs ∆Ãi,t + ∆λs c̃i,t ],

we estimate the general model with fixed effects using GMM and the following moment conditions:

                                   E[pi,t−2 ∆νi,t ] = 0,

                                   E[∆Zi,t ∆νi,t ] = 0,

                                  E[Ai,t−1 ∆νi,t ] = 0,              E[Ãi,t−1 ∆νi,t ] = 0,

                                   E[ci,t−1 ∆νi,t ] = 0,             E[c̃i,t−1 ∆νi,t ] = 0.

These moment restrictions are applied for t equal to 1999 and 2000 in the NLSY97.32 This method
cannot be used with the NYS data, since only two periods of perceptions data are reported.
    Table 8 reports estimates related to belief updating in the NLSY97 for the following: (A) OLS
regression for the difference equation (4); (B) OLS regression for the quasi-difference equation (5);
and (C) GMM for the quasi-difference equation (5) accounting for individual fixed effects. Each panel
  31
     Equation (7) also allows for the possibility that c̃i,t+1 , Ãi,t+1 , and all future sibling criminal behavior and arrest
outcomes are affected by the disturbance term.
  32
     It is possible to use additional lags as instruments. However, conditional on using one-period lags, little is gained from
adding more (the qualitative results are unchanged when more lags are added), and concerns about weak instruments
become heightened.


                                                               18
reports two specifications. The first includes indicators for whether the individual or his male siblings
committed crime or were arrested for theft between survey dates. The second includes indicators
for the actual number of times individuals and their siblings committed crimes and were arrested.33
Measures based on sibling crimes and arrests refer to male siblings who are also in the main NLSY97
sample. As a result, their ages are always within a few years of the respondent.34 In general, all
specifications show strong evidence of belief updating in response to the respondent’s own criminal
history. Individuals who reported stealing something worth more than $50 or selling drugs were likely
to report a lower perceived probability of arrest (conditional on prior beliefs and the arrest outcome)
in the next survey year. The effect of at least one of these crimes is statistically significant at the 10%
level (most at the 5% level) in every specification. Those arrested for a theft increased their perceived
probability of arrest (significantly so in most specifications). As shown at the bottom of Table 8, joint
tests for whether the coefficients on all individual crime and arrest variables equal zero are rejected
for all but the final specification.35
       The effects of sibling crime and arrests are less precisely estimated given that only 27% of the
respondents have at least one sibling that is also in the NLSY97 sample. Still, a number of coefficient
estimates on measures of sibling crime are statistically significant and negative, as expected. The
estimated effects of a sibling’s arrest are generally not significantly different from zero and are often of
the wrong sign. Joint tests for whether the sibling crime and arrest coefficients equal zero are rejected
(at the 10% level) in all but the last two specifications. Alternatively, joint tests for whether the
coefficients on sibling crimes and arrests equal the corresponding coefficients on respondent crime and
arrests cannot be rejected for any but the final specification.
       The most noticeable difference between the OLS and GMM estimates of equation (5) is the change
in the estimated coefficient on the lagged measure of beliefs. After controlling for unobserved individual
fixed effects, the autocorrelation of the perceived probability of arrest (θ) drops from 0.3 to below
0.04, which implies that there is little persistence in the effects of new information on reported beliefs.
Instead, unobserved differences in baseline beliefs appear to explain why some individuals hold a high
  33
     Ideally, we would use measures for the crime of auto theft and arrests for auto theft in our updating specifications,
but auto thefts are rarely observed in the NLSY97 data and arrests for auto theft cannot be identified. Assuming beliefs
about the probability of arrest are positively correlated across crimes – in the NYS, correlations in beliefs about the
probability of arrest across crimes range from a low of 0.33 between attack and minor thefts to a high of 0.69 between
minor and major thefts – we should expect beliefs about the probability of arrest for auto theft to change in response to
other crimes and arrests.
  34
     Though not reported, specifications controlling for the number of siblings present in the household show nearly
identical results – there is little effect of household size on beliefs. Also, estimates are qualitatively similar when using a
restricted sample of individuals who reported a theft of greater than $50 in at least one of the previous two years.
  35
     All tests for the first differences and quasi-first difference specifications are F-tests, while tests for the GMM specifi-
cations are Wald tests.



                                                              19
perceived probability of arrest year after year, while others believe the probability of arrest is much
lower. As we see in Section 6, measurement error in reported beliefs may contribute substantially to
the low estimate of θ obtained here.36
       A more limited analysis is performed using young men in the NYS. Because the NYS only records
beliefs for two periods, we cannot estimate the quasi-difference model with fixed effects using the
GMM procedure outlined above. In Table 9, we report estimates of equation (5) using 1983 and
1986 measures of beliefs, accounting for crimes and arrests that take place between the two surveys
(estimates of the first-difference specification are quite similar).37 Again, we employ two specifications
for each type of crime studied. The first includes an indicator variable for whether the individual
committed the crime under study (e.g. in column 1, the indicator is one if the individual reported
stealing something worth less than $5 and zero otherwise) or was arrested for a violent or property
crime during the 1984-86 period. The second includes measures of the number of crimes committed
and arrests over that period.
       As in the NLSY97, these men report lower perceived probabilities of arrest for all crime categories
at the end of 1986 if they engaged in that type of crime in 1984-86 (three of the four estimates are
statistically significant). Coefficients on arrest are always positive and quantitatively large, but they
are only significantly different from zero for break-ins. Joint tests of whether the coefficients on crime
and arrests are zero are rejected in nearly all of the columns. While the model above suggests that
the net effect of a crime and arrest should be negative, the specifications with only an indicator for
committing a crime and getting arrested generally reveal a coefficient on the indicator for crime that
is larger in absolute value than the coefficient on the arrest indicator. This is because those who are
arrested commit more than one crime, on average. Looking at the specifications controlling for the
number of crimes and arrests, we always observe a larger coefficient on an arrest than on a crime.
Thus, the net effect of a crime and arrest on the perceived probability of arrest is always positive.
       It is interesting to note that using measures for any arrest rather than arrests for more serious
property and violent crimes (as in Table 9) generally produces smaller and insignificant effects on
beliefs (except for small thefts). This suggests that police attempts to crack down on vagrancy, public
intoxication, and other petty crimes are not likely to influence beliefs about the probability of arrest
for more serious crimes in any significant way.
  36
     To address concerns about measurement error in beliefs, one could substitute the moment condition E(pi,t−3 ∆νi,t ) =
0 for E(pi,t−2 ∆νi,t ) = 0. Unfortunately, this reduces the sample size by half (since we can no longer use the moments
for t = 1999) and generates extremely noisy estimates.
  37
     Specifications also control for age, race/ethnicity, whether the individual’s parents earned less than $10,000 in 1976,
and whether the individual lived with both natural parents in 1976.



                                                            20
       Table 9 also reports coefficient estimates on central city status and rural residential status. The
effects of these measures are insignificant once we control for crime and arrest histories and previous
measures of beliefs (in contrast to those in Table 7). Measures of neighborhood lawlessness and disarray
also have no significant effect on beliefs. Again, we find no evidence to support the ‘broken windows’
theory of Wilson and Kelling (1982).
       While we do not have sibling measures of beliefs or crime in the NYS, one might wonder whether
information about the arrests of other random criminals has any affect on beliefs as Sah’s (1991) theory
would suggest. To that end, we examine whether individuals who are victimized by a crime alter their
beliefs in response. The underlying assumption here is that victims are likely to learn whether or
not the perpetrator is ever arrested. In a world in which all individuals face identical probabilities of
arrest, information as a victim should be as useful as information as a perpetrator. Unfortunately,
the data do not record whether someone was arrested for the crime, but it is reasonable to assume
that no arrest was made in most cases given the low official arrest rates reported earlier. Then, we
should expect, on average, that individuals will adjust the probability of arrest downward after a
victimization.38 The estimated coefficients on victimization are small and statistically insignificant
for all crimes in Table 9. While not an ideal test of information from the arrest outcomes of others,
these estimates suggest that individuals put little weight on the information provided by the crime
and arrest outcomes of random criminals. Arrest probabilities may be too individual-specific to make
such information useful in determining one’s own arrest probability.
       Altogether, the NLSY97 and NYS estimates strongly suggest patterns consistent with belief up-
dating among respondents that is based on their own history of interaction with the criminal justice
system. When young men participate in crime, they tend to lower their perceived probability of arrest
if they evade arrest. If arrested, they raise their perceived probability. One could potentially explain
the first finding by arguing that individuals chose to commit crime between survey dates, because
they had already (for some exogenous reason) lowered their perceived probabilities (but were unable
to report those new perceptions until surveyed the second time). Or, those engaged in crime could
have gained experience at crime, lowering their true (and perceived) arrest probability. However, such
scenarios cannot explain why those arrested between sample dates maintain higher perceived probabil-
ities of arrest at the time of the second interview. Only an information-based model of belief updating
  38
    Of course, if those who observe an arrest adjust their beliefs upward much more than those who do not observe
an arrest adjust their beliefs down, this need not be the case. Given that official arrest rates range from 5-20% for the
crimes under study, those observing an arrest would have to adjust their beliefs upwards by 5 to 20 times as much as
those not observing an arrest adjust theirs downward for the effects to cancel. This is unlikely, given that the estimated
negative coefficients on (own and sibling) crime measures remain significantly negative when leaving out arrest outcomes
in updating regressions (i.e. Tables 8 and 9).


                                                           21
can readily explain both findings. The fact that sibling criminal histories affect beliefs in a similar
way to an individual’s own history strengthens this conclusion; although, the results for sibling arrest
histories do not. The importance of an individual’s own criminal and arrest history in determining
beliefs strongly supports the very simple model outlined in Section 2 and developed further in Lochner
(2004). Sah’s (1991) theory also finds some support in that the criminal history of an individual’s
siblings affects beliefs about the probability of arrest, but information about arrest outcomes from a
sibling or other random persons does not seem to be important. Taken together, these results suggest
a limited role for learning from others.


5    The Influence of Perceptions on Criminal Behavior

Given the considerable variation in perceptions about the probability of arrest, it is natural to question
whether individuals act differently based on stated beliefs. And, do they behave differently in periods
when they report a high perceived probability of arrest than when they report a low probability?
Rational choice theory suggests that (holding all else constant), individuals facing a higher probability
of arrest and/or punishment should commit less crime. We examine this relationship in both the
NLSY97 and NYS.
    In this section, we examine the relationship between beliefs and crime using a linear probability
model:
                                      cit = Wi,t A + Bpi,t−1 + vi,t ,                                 (8)

where Wi,t represents observed individual characteristics that may affect the costs of or returns to
crime and vi,t are iid shocks to current criminal returns/costs. As before, ci,t is an indicator for
whether an individual committed a crime between survey dates t − 1 and t, and pi,t reflects beliefs
about the probability of arrest as of survey date t. Since we explore the effects of elicited perceptions
in the previous survey year on retrospective crime reported in the current survey, we are left with
three years of belief-crime data in the NLSY97 and a single cross-section in the NYS.
    In the NLSY97, we can control for age, race, ethnicity, whether or not the youth lived with both
his natural parents, whether or not the youth’s mother was a teenager at birth, math PIAT scores,
and official county-level arrest rates, in addition to the perceived probability of arrest for auto theft.
Since we only observe the perceived probability of arrest for the crime of auto theft, we restrict our
attention to its estimated effects on major thefts (thefts of something worth more than $50) and on
auto theft. Assuming vi,t shocks are orthogonal to Wi,t and beliefs about the probability of arrest,
equation (8) can be estimated by OLS. These results are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 and


                                                    22
suggest that the perceived probability of arrest for auto theft significantly reduces both auto theft and
theft more generally. To put the estimates into perspective, they imply that a ten percentage point
increase in the perceived probability of arrest would reduce major thefts by nearly 4% and auto theft
by 7%.39 It is interesting that official county-level arrest rates are estimated to have no impact on
auto theft and a perverse effect on major thefts.
       A similar approach can be taken with the NYS, examining the effects of beliefs in 1983 on crime
committed over the 1984-86 period. Here, we have crime-specific beliefs, which we include in the
regressions along with controls for age, race/ethnicity, whether the respondent lived with both natural
parents in 1976, whether parental income was below $10,000 in 1976, and rural and central city
residential status. All estimated coefficients on the crime-specific perceived probability of arrest are
negative, supporting the case for deterrence. The estimates suggest that a 10 percentage point increase
in the perceived probability of arrest would reduce all four crimes studied (minor thefts of something
worth less than $5, major thefts of something worth more than $50, breaking into a building or vehicle,
and attacks) by 7-12%. Estimated effects on minor thefts and attack are statistically significant at
the 5% level.
       It is possible that perceptions of arrest probabilities are correlated with more general unobserved
preferences for risk and crime. Then, these estimated relationships would capture both the deterrent
effect of a higher perceived probability of arrest and the influence of unobserved tastes for crime that
are correlated with beliefs about the likelihood of arrest. Two sets of results suggest that this may
not be an important concern. First, estimates using NLSY97 data (and identical specifications to
those above) suggest that the effects of beliefs about the probability of arrest for auto theft are small
and statistically insignificant for minor delinquent activities like smoking and drinking.40 This is re-
assuring, since one would not expect the probability of arrest for auto theft to be very highly correlated
with the probability that these young males will be punished for smoking or drinking. Second, the
estimated effects of beliefs on crime in the NYS remain even after controlling for parental and peer
approval levels for crime as well as the individual’s own moral attitudes towards crime.41
       Still, it is worthwhile exploring whether unobserved heterogeneity affects these estimates. With
the NLSY97 data, it is possible to incorporate permanent unobserved differences, assuming vi,t =
  39
     Estimates using a logit or probit specification yield very similar results. Specifications which also include the per-
ceived conditional probability of going to jail if arrested yield similar estimates for the impact of arrest probabilities.
Specifications which control for the perceived unconditional probability of going to jail (i.e. the interaction of the prob-
ability of arrest with the probability of going to jail conditional on arrest) produce qualitatively similar results as well.
  40
     The estimates suggest that a ten percentage point increase in the perceived probability of arrest would only reduce
drinking by 0.2% and smoking by 0.8%.
  41
     Specifically, these specifications control for whether the respondent’s parents or peers would disapprove of them
stealing something and whether they themselves believe stealing is wrong.


                                                             23
ξi + ωi,t with ξi ⊥⊥ ωi,t .42 In general, we would expect ξi to be correlated with pi,t−1 , since ξi is a
determinant of past participation in crime and since past criminal behavior affects current beliefs. By
first-differencing equation (8), we can eliminate the unobserved fixed effect. However, ∆pi,t−1 will tend
to be correlated with ∆ωi,t−1 since ωi,t−1 affects ci,t−1 , which is a determinant of pi,t−1 . Assuming
that ωi,t is independent of WiT , pt−1
                                   i , and all lagged values of crime and arrests for the individual and

his siblings, we can use the following instruments for ∆pi,t−1 : pi,t−2 , the number of thefts of something
worth more than $50 by the individual and his siblings reported in survey year t − 2, and the number
of arrests for theft reported by the individual and his siblings in survey year t − 2. Consistent with the
estimates presented in the previous section, these instruments are quite strong in predicting changes in
beliefs from period t − 2 to t − 1. Results from two stage least squares regression of the first-differenced
crime equation are reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 10.43 The estimated effect of the perceived
probability of arrest for auto theft on committing any major theft and on engaging in auto theft are
quite similar to the OLS estimates. The effect on auto theft is statistically significant at the 5% level.
         Treating these fixed effect instrumental variable estimates as the deterrent effect of perceived
arrest probabilities, it is possible to study the extent to which differences in beliefs are responsible for
differences in criminal participation by race or ability. The estimated 7.8 percentage point difference
in perceived arrest probabilities between whites and blacks (Table 3, column iv) implies a 6.8% higher
participation rate in auto theft by blacks. Hispanics are predicted to have a 7.6% higher participation
rate in auto theft than whites due to differences in perceived arrest probabilities. The predicted
difference in auto theft participation rates between individuals at the 75th and 25th percentiles in
PIAT math scores is 5.2%. These simple comparisons suggest that important variation in criminal
participation rates across individuals may be due to differences in information and beliefs.


6         A Structural Estimation of Belief Updating, Crime, and Arrests

In this section, we use the NLSY97 data to estimate a structural model of belief updating, criminal
participation, and arrests (like that sketched in Section 2) accounting for permanent unobserved in-
dividual heterogeneity. While this approach adds more structure to the belief updating and criminal
participation problems described in the previous two sections (most notably, it imposes distributional
assumptions on the disturbance terms), it offers a number of important contributions over that anal-
ysis. First, it guarantees that estimates of the belief updating and criminal behavior decision are
    42
     Because we do not observe crime subsequent to both surveys with perception measures in the NYS, we are unable
to address unobserved heterogeneity in these data.
  43
     We estimate a stacked regression for changes in crime from 1998-99 and 1999-2000 for all individuals. Standard
errors are corrected for clustering at the individual level.


                                                        24
internally consistent and, more importantly, facilitates an analysis of counterfactual experiments that
fully incorporate the dynamics of belief updating, crime, and arrests. Second, it allows us to estimate
how unobserved factors that affect criminal participation (ξi ) are related to unobserved components
determining baseline beliefs about the probability of arrest (µi ). Third, the introduction of an arrest
equation allows us to analyze whether unobserved and observed factors affecting the perceived proba-
bility of arrest also determine the actual probability of arrest faced by individuals. Fourth, it enables
a more formal treatment of the criminal participation decision that avoids the well-known concerns
associated with the linear probability model. Finally, it offers a natural way to estimate the extent of
measurement error in beliefs and how that measurement error affects the estimates presented above.
More generally, the structural approach provides a form of robustness check on the estimates presented
in Sections 4 and 5.
   We draw on a simplified version of the belief updating equation (5) with unobserved fixed effects
(dropping measures of sibling crime and arrests):

                              pi,t = Zi,t γ + θpi,t−1 + φAi,t + λci,t + µi + νi,t ,                   (9)

where
                                                                                             
                   νi,t ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) iid ∀i, t,     νi,t ⊥⊥ cti , Ati , pt−1  T     T
                                                                          i , Zi , Wi , µi , ξi .

The assumptions on νi,t are quite similar to those used in Section 4 (see equation 7) with the added
assumption of normality.
   We assume that an individual uses the following decision rule for criminal participation:
                                   (
                                       1   if c∗i,t ≡ Wi,t A + Bpi,t−1 + ξi − ωi,t > 0
                          ci,t =
                                       0   otherwise,

where ωi,t is assumed to be iid standard normal and
                                                                               
                                   ωi,t ⊥⊥ ct−1  t−1 t−1   T     T
                                            i , Ai , pi , Zi , Wi , µi , ξi .


This is the probit analogue to the linear probability model estimated in Section 5, assuming that
previous crimes, arrests, and beliefs are predetermined. It is important that these assumptions do not
rule out the potential for current ωi,t shocks to impact future crimes, arrests, and beliefs, since theory
suggests that they should.
   Finally, we assume that the probability of arrest is given by

                    P r(Ai,t = 1|ci,t , Zi,t , µi ) = Φ (π0 + π1 µi + Zi,t π2 + π3 (1 − ci,t )) ,



                                                         25
where Φ(·) is the standard normal cumulative density function. The same individual and environmen-
tal characteristics that affect beliefs are assumed to affect true arrest rates, including the unobserved
characteristic, µi . This allows us to estimate whether individuals with a higher baseline perceived
probability of arrest for auto theft actually face a higher true probability of arrest for theft. Further-
more, the arrest probability explicitly depends on current criminal participation; although, it need not
be zero for those who do not engage in crime.
       Under these assumptions, it is straightforward to estimate the parameters of the belief updating
equation, crime equation, and arrest equation with panel data on beliefs, crime, and arrests as well as an
assumption about initial beliefs. Regarding the latter, one could simply specify an ad hoc distribution
for initial beliefs conditional on Zi,0 . Instead, we assume that at age 10 (prior to observation in our
data), beliefs are drawn from the stationary no crime/no arrest distribution:
                                                                         
                                          pi,0 ∼ N p∗ (Zi,0 , µi ), (σ ∗ )2 ,

                          Zi,0 γ+µi
where p∗ (Zi,0 , µi ) =               and σ ∗ =   √ σ   .   This is consistent with beliefs evolving over time
                             1−θ                   1−θ2
according to equation (9) and an assumption that individuals do not engage in theft or face an arrest
for theft prior to age 10. As discussed in the Appendix, this assumption requires that we integrate
our likelihood function over all possible crime and arrest histories leading up to the first period of
observation for each individual.
       Finally, we must specify the distribution for unobserved characteristics. We assume that there is
a finite number, J, types for Ω = (µ, ξ) and that Ω is independent of (Z T , W T ) in the population.
Given the number of types, this model can be estimated using maximum likelihood. See the Appendix
for a discussion of the likelihood function.
       Table 11 presents estimation results for the NLSY97 when J = 4, pi,t reflects the perceived prob-
ability of arrest for auto theft, ci,t is an indicator for any thefts worth more than $50, and Ai,t is an
indicator for any arrests for theft. The results presented here assume that there are two unobserved
types who never commit crime (i.e. ξi = −∞) and two types that have the potential to engage in
crime. The latter values of ξi are estimated along with the probability of each type. We assume there
are two values of µi , but do not impose any correlation between µi and ξi .44
       The left hand side of Table 11 reports estimates (and standard errors) for the model assuming
beliefs are measured without error – consistent with results previously reported in Tables 8 and 10.
Estimates of the belief updating equation are similar to those in Table 8. Focusing on the estimated
  44
    Attempts to introduce additional types did not prove fruitful. In general, either the probability of new types went
to zero or new values for µ and ξ converged to those estimated for the current types.


                                                            26
autocorrelation in beliefs (θ), we observe that our estimation procedure does a good job of capturing
the low level of persistence in beliefs with only two values for µ. The estimated values for µ suggest
that there are substantial differences across persons in their baseline beliefs about the probability of
arrest that cannot be accounted for by a rich set of personal, family, and neighborhood characteristics.
As expected, participation in crime reduces the perceived probability of arrest while an arrest raises it;
although, the latter effect is not statistically significant. Turning to the estimates of the crime equation,
we find that both living in an intact family and higher PIAT math scores reduce the propensity to
engage in theft. However, we find no effect of the perceived probability of arrest on theft, in contrast
to our previous findings in Section 5 and deterrence theory. We return to this issue below. Estimated
parameters of the arrest function imply negligible differences in the actual probability of arrest across
individuals from different backgrounds. Based on the positive estimate for π1 , the unobserved factor
affecting baseline beliefs about the probability of arrest (µ) is positively related to the true arrest
probability, but the estimate is not statistically significant. Only PIAT math scores are statistically
significant, suggesting that those with better math skills are less likely to be arrested. Interestingly,
this is in sharp contrast to the relationship between PIAT scores and the perceived probability of
arrest.
   While these estimates suggest that changes in beliefs over time do not induce changes in criminal
participation, unobserved tastes for crime (ξ) are negatively correlated with baseline beliefs about the
perceived probability of arrest (µ) among the two criminal types. To the extent that reported beliefs
are measured with error, baseline beliefs may better represent true beliefs driving criminal behavior.
Much of the variation in beliefs over time, especially for those not engaged in crime, may simply
represent random measurement error. In this case, it would not be surprising if year-to-year changes
in reported beliefs did not generate changes in criminal behavior for most respondents. (Measurement
error would also explain why reported beliefs are only weakly correlated over time after controlling
for permanent unobserved heterogeneity.) Ideally, we would like to link changes in behavior to true
changes in beliefs, like those changes that come from changes in one’s environment or engagement in
crime and the arrest outcomes associated with criminal activity.
   To address this issue, we introduce measurement error in pi,t that is additive, normally distributed
with mean zero and variance ση2 , and independent of all other variables and disturbance terms. When
we explicitly allow for measurement error in the probability of arrest for auto theft, the estimates
suggest that the variance of the structural shocks to beliefs (σ 2 ) is negligible. The right hand side of
Table 11, therefore, reports estimates assuming σ 2 = 0 while estimating the variance of measurement



                                                     27
error, ση2 . (See the Appendix for details on estimated likelihood equations.) In this case, true changes
in beliefs over time come from observable events like a change in residential location, commission of a
crime, or an arrest, and not unobserved idiosyncratic shocks, νi,t . These observable events will drive
identification of the autocorrelation in beliefs, θ, and the effect of beliefs on crime, B – two of the
more important parameters from a theoretical perspective.
   Accounting for measurement error leads to a number of changes in the estimated parameter values,
three of which are worth highlighting. First, the estimated autocorrelation in beliefs (θ) increases
dramatically from 0.07 to 0.40. This is not surprising, but it changes the dynamic implications of
any policy designed to affect individual beliefs. We discuss this further below. Second, the perceived
probability of arrest now has a significant negative effect on criminal participation. Again, this is not
surprising, since changes in measured beliefs associated with changes in residential status, a theft,
or an arrest are likely to be negatively correlated with subsequent criminal activity in a way that
changes in reported beliefs due to measurement error are not. Third, the correlation between ξ and
µ among non-criminals switches from negative (in the case ignoring measurement error) to positive
(in the measurement error specification). However, the unobserved factor affecting baseline beliefs (µ)
remains positively correlated with the true arrest probability.
   Using the estimates from the measurement error specification in Table 11, we explore the quanti-
tative importance of beliefs in determining criminal activity. In particular, we simulate how average
beliefs and criminal behavior evolve over adolescence and early adulthood under a number of different
scenarios. In addition to the baseline set of parameters, we explore the effects of (a) raising all µ
values by 5 × (1 − θ), which effectively raises the perceived probability of arrest by about 5 percentage
points each year; (b) raising initial beliefs, p0 (Zi,0 , µi ), by 5 for everyone; and (c) increasing the true
probability of arrest by about one-third (specifically, increasing π0 by 0.2). The effects of these changes
on beliefs and criminal participation are shown in Figures 5a and 5b.
   Increasing µ such that the perceived probability of arrest increases by about 5 percentage points
in every year reduces major theft rates by about 50%. The interaction of belief updating and criminal
behavior is evident in the growing effects on crime with age. A higher µ raises the perceived probability
in each period. This causes individuals to commit less crime, which affects what they learn about their
probability of arrest. Committing less crime each year, they do not revise their beliefs downward as
much, on average, as those with a lower value of µ. These two forces work together, so that the
perceived probability of arrest declines less and criminal activity increases less with age when µ is
increased. The dynamic role of belief updating is even more evident when examining the effects of



                                                     28
an increase in initial beliefs. With some persistence in beliefs (i.e. θ > 0), a one-time increase in the
perceived probability of arrest has lasting effects that fade over time, as seen in Figure 5a. With θ
estimated to be around 0.4, it takes about five years before beliefs return to where they would have
been in the absence of a five percentage point shock at age 10. This implies that any effects on crime
also take about five years to fade out (Figure 5b). Overall, these results suggest that deterrence based
on the perceived probability of arrest is quite strong.45
       Figures 5a and 5b also show how a change in the true arrest probability affects criminal behavior
through individual experiences with an arrest. Recall from Section 2, that an increase in the true
arrest probability will cause more individuals to be arrested, which will cause them to raise their
perceived probability of arrest and reduce subsequent criminal activity. Given the low baseline arrest
rate (around 15% of the persons engaging in theft experience an arrest for theft) and the modest
estimate of the effect of arrests on beliefs, even a dramatic increase in the true arrest probability
has quite small effects on beliefs and the crime rate through learning and individual experience. As
noted in Section 2, the effects are delayed and appear to grow over time, but they never become
quantitatively important. These results suggest a fairly limited role for specific deterrence achieved
through an individual’s own arrest experiences, at least for crimes like theft that have such a low arrest
rate.
       Differences in criminal behavior across races, ethnicity, or academic ability can arise, because
individuals differ in their baseline beliefs about the probability of arrest, their criminal tastes (or
costs), or the true probability of arrest. Given the results just discussed, it is not surprising that the
latter plays little role in explaining these differences. However, differences due to heterogeneous beliefs
and tastes for crime appear to be large and offsetting when comparing whites, blacks, and hispanics.
That is, simulations which compare the rates of theft if everyone in the NLSY97 is assumed to be white
imply similar crime rates if everyone is assumed to be black. But, if we take the sample of whites and
give them the belief parameter values of blacks or hispanics, we predict that these individuals would
commit about twice as much crime, with the effect growing slightly with age.46 The fact that blacks
and hispanics have a lower taste for crime (or higher costs) essentially offsets this, such that minorities
and whites commit theft at very similar rates. A similar decomposition for math PIAT scores suggests
that the effects of perceptions dominate the effects of tastes for crime. According to the estimates
  45
      It is important to note that the standard error on the estimate for B is sizeable, despite the fact that B is statistically
significant at the 5% level. Reducing B by two standard deviations (i.e. setting B at its lowest point in its 95% confidence
interval) reduces the effects of the perceived probability of arrest on crime by nearly 70%. Even this conservative estimate
leaves an important role for belief-based deterrence.
   46
      This experiment is very similar to that of changing µ by 5 × (1 − θ) = 3.0, since the estimated difference in the belief
index for whites and blacks is -3.5 (-3.7 for whites and hispanics).


                                                               29
in Table 11 (accounting for measurement error), more able individuals commit less crime on average,
because they believe they are more likely to be arrested – not because they have less taste for crime
or higher costs of engaging in crime.


7    Conclusions

Empirically, we uncover substantial heterogeneity in beliefs among young males in the National Lon-
gitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 Cohort and the National Youth Survey. On average, individual beliefs
about the probability of arrest for various crimes are substantially higher than official arrest rates, and
those beliefs are fairly stable across time for individuals. Perceived arrest rates are lower, on average,
among those actively engaged in crime, which is consistent with standard deterrence theory as well
as an information-based model of belief updating. There is little evidence that minority men believe
they are more likely to be arrested than do white men, which is consistent with studies suggesting
that there is little, if any, discrimination in official arrest rates across race (Tonry, 1995). Less than
5% of the heterogeneity in beliefs can be explained by differences in family background, neighborhood,
or cognitive abilities.
    Beliefs are correlated with county-level official arrest rates and metropolitan or urban residential
status. But, contrary to the ‘broken windows’ theory developed by Wilson and Kelling (1982), per-
ceptions are not correlated with other neighborhood conditions like general lawlessness, abandoned
buildings, or the presence of winos on the streets. Furthermore, perceptions are not significantly
affected by one’s own criminal victimization, which might provide additional information about the
likelihood of arrest. Instead, individual beliefs about one’s own probability of arrest are largely id-
iosyncratic, stable, and unrelated to the local environment. It is difficult to know whether variation in
beliefs across individuals reflects actual variation in the true probability of arrest or simple differences
in beliefs, but our structural estimates suggest negligible differences in true arrest rates based on most
observable and unobservable characteristics.
    While beliefs seem to be largely orthogonal to most outside influences, they do respond to an
individual’s own experiences with crime and police. Individuals who engage in crime while avoiding
arrest tend to reduce their perceived probability of arrest; those who are arrested raise their perceived
probability. Interestingly, beliefs respond similarly to changes in the criminal history of their siblings,
but they do not appear to adjust in response to a sibling’s arrest. Thus, individuals may share
information and learn from other family members, but the evidence on this is mixed.
    Finally, there is robust evidence in favor of deterrence theory based on an individual’s perceived


                                                    30
probability of arrest (and not actual local arrest rates). The strongest evidence in favor of deterrence
is based on a structural model that incorporates unobserved heterogeneity in criminal ability and
baseline beliefs as well as measurement error in beliefs. These estimates suggest that the effects of
differences in beliefs about the probability of arrest are at least as important as differences in tastes
for (or costs of) crime in explaining differences in criminal participation by race, ethnicity, or ability.
Furthermore, even temporary changes in beliefs can impact criminal behavior for years into the future.
   Altogether, the empirical findings support the economic model of crime and belief updating out-
lined in Section 2 of this paper. Beliefs are heterogeneous and idiosyncratic, but they respond to an
individual’s own arrest and non-arrest outcomes in predictable ways. While most of the literature on
criminal deterrence assumes that individuals know true arrest rates and that an increase in those ar-
rest rates will immediately deter crime, this paper suggests that this may not be the case. Individuals
appear to learn about the probability of arrest as they gain more experience with the criminal justice
system. As a result, responses to changes in enforcement are likely to differ across individuals with
different crime and arrest histories, and the full impacts of any enforcement policy may not be realized
for many years. Furthermore, policies that directly intervene to alter individual perceptions about the
probability of arrest are likely to be quite effective at deterring crime.


References

Anderson, L. and C. Holt, “Information Cascades in the Laboratory,” American Economic
  Review, 1997, 87 (5), 847–62.
Arellano, M. and B. Honore, “Panel Data Models: Some Recent Developments,” in J. J.
  Heckman and E. Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 5, New York: North-Holland,
  2001, chapter 53.
Ayres, I. and S. Levitt, “Measuring the Positive Externalities from Unobservable Victim
  Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Feb. 1998, 113
  (1), 43–77.
Bachman, R., R. Paternoster, and S. Ward, “The Rationality of Sexual Offending: Testing a
  Deterrence/Rational Choice Conception of Sexual Assault,” Law and Society Review, 1992, 26 (2),
  343–72.
Banerjee, A., “A Simple Model Of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107,
  797–817.
Becker, G., “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political Economy,


                                                    31
  March/April 1968, 73, 169–217.
Bikhchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
  Cultural Change as Informational Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 992–1026.
Blumstein, A., D. Nagin, and J. Cohen, Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects
  of Criminal Sanctions on Crime Rates, Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences, 1978.
Cameron, S., “The Economics of Crime Deterrence: A Survey of Theory and Evidence,” Kyklos,
  1988, 41, 301–23.
Corman, H., T. Joyce, and N. Lovitch, “Crime, Deterrence and the Business Cycle in New
  York City: A VAR Approach,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Nov. 1987, 69 (4), 695–700.
Ehrlich, I., “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation,”
  Journal of Political Economy, May/June 1973, 81 (3), 521–65.
  , “On the Usefulness of Controlling Individuals: An Economic Analysis of Rehabilitation,
  Incapacitation, and Deterrence,” American Economic Review, June 1981, 71 (3), 307–22.
Elliott, D. and S. Ageton, “Reconciling Race and Class Differences in Self-Reported and Official
  Estimates of Delinquency,” American Sociological Review, Feb. 1980, 45, 95–110.
Grasmick, H. and R. Bursik Jr., “Conscience, Significant Others, and Rational Choice:
  Extending the Deterrence Model,” Law and Society Review, 1990, 24 (3), 837–61.
Grogger, J., “Certainty vs. Severity of Punishment,” Economic Inquiry, 1991, 29, 297–301.
Heavner, D. L. and L. Lochner, “Social Networks and the Aggregation of Individual Decisions,”
  2002. NBER Working Paper No. 8979.
Horney, J. and Marshall I., “Risk Perceptions Among Serious Offenders: The Role of Crime and
  Punishment,” Criminology, 1992, 30 (4), 575–94.
Klepper, S. and D. Nagin, “Tax Compliance and Perceptions of the Risks of Detection and
  Criminal Prosecution,” Law and Society Review, 1989, 23 (2), 209–40.
Levitt, S., “Using Electoral Cycles in Police Hiring to Estimate the Effect of Police on Crime,”
  American Economic Review, June 1997, 87 (3), 270–90.
  , “Juvenile Crime and Punishment,” Journal of Political Economy, Dec. 1998, 106 (6), 1156–85.
  , “Why Do Increased Arrest Rates Appear to Reduce Crime: Deterrence, Incapacitation, or
  Measurement Error?,” Economic Inquiry, July 1998, 36, 353–72.
Lochner, L., “Belief Updating and Criminal Careers,” 2004. Working Paper.
Maguire, K. and A. Pastore, eds, Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics - 1998, Washington,
  DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Government Printing Office,



                                                 32
  1998.
Manski, C., “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to Schooling?,” in
  C. Clotfelter and M. Rothschild, eds., Studies in Supply and Demand of Higher Education,
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992, chapter 2.
Minor, W. and J. Harry, “Deterrent and Experiential Effects in Perceptual Deterrence Research:
  A Replication and Extension,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 1982, 19, 190–203.
Myers, S., “Estimating the Economic Model of Crime: Punishment vs. Deterrent Effects,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1983, 98, 157–66.
Nagin, D., “Enduring Individual Differences and Rational Choice Theories of Crime,” Law and
  Society Review, 1993, 27 (3), 467–96.
  , “Criminal Deterrence Research at the Outset of the Twenty-First Century,” Crime and Justice,
  1998, 23, 1–42.
Paternoster, R. and S. Simpson, “Sanction Threats and Appeals to Morality: Testing a
  Rational Choice Model of Corporate Crime,” Law and Society Review, 1996, 30 (3), 549–83.
  , L. Saltzman, G. Waldo, and T. Chiricos, “Estimating Perceptual Stability and Deterrent
  Effects: The Role of Perceived Legal Punishment in the Inhibition of Criminal Involvement,” The
  Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 1983, 74 (1), 270–97.
  ,   ,   , and     , “Assessments of Risk and Behavioral Experience: An Exploratory Study of
  Change,” Criminology, 1985, 23 (3), 417–36.
Piliavin, I., R. Gartner, C. Thornton, and R. Matsueda, “Crime, Deterrence, and Rational
  Choice,” American Sociological Review, 1986, 51 (1), 101–19.
Pogarsky, G. and A. Piquero, “Can Punishment Encourage Offending? Investigating the
  ‘Resetting’ Effect,” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 2003, 40 (1), 95–120.
Richards, P. and C. Tittle, “Gender and Perceived Chances of Arrest,” Social Forces, 1981, 59
  (4), 1182–99.
Sah, R., “Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (6),
  1271–1295.
Saltzman, L., R. Paternoster, G. Waldo, and T. Chiricos, “Deterrent and Experiential
  Effects:The Problem of Causal Order in Perceptual Deterrence Research,” Journal of Research in
  Crime and Delinquency, 1982, 19, 172–89.
Schneider, A. and L. Ervin, “Specific Deterrence, Rational Choice, and Decision Heuristics:
  Applications in Juvenile Justice,” Social Science Quarterly, Sept. 1990, 71 (3), 585–601.



                                                 33
Tauchen, H., A. D. Witte, and H. Griesinger, “Criminal Deterrence: Revisiting the Issue with
  a Birth Cohort,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Aug. 1994, 76 (3), 399–412.
Tittle, C., “Assessments of Risk and Behavioral Experience: An Exploratory Study of Change,”
  Social Forces, 1977, 55 (3), 579–96.
Trumbull, W., “Estimations of the Economic Model of Crime Using Aggregate and Individual
  Level Data,” Southern Economic Journal, 1989, 94, 423–39.
Viscusi, W. K., “The Risks and Rewards of Criminal Activity: A Comprehensive Test of Criminal
  Deterrence,” Journal of Labor Economics, 1986, 4 (3, pt. 1), 317–40.
  , Rational Risk Policy, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Waldfogel, J., “Criminal Sentences as Endogenous Taxes: Are they ‘Just’ or ‘Efficient’ ?,” Journal
  of Law and Economics, April 1993, 36(1) pt.1, 62–81.
Walker, J., “Adolescents’ Expectations on Birth Outcomes: A Comparison of the 1979 and 1997
  NLS Cohorts,” 2000. Working Paper.
Wilson, J. Q. and G. Kelling, “The Police and Neighborhood Safety: Broken Windows,” The
  Atlantic, March 1982, pp. 29–38.
Witte, A. D., “Estimating the Economic Model of Crime with Individual Data,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, Feb. 1980, 94 (1), 57–84.




                                                34
Appendix: The Structural Likelihood Functions

This appendix develops the likelihood for the structural model of Section 6. Define xi,t = (pi,t , ci,t , Ai,t )
and Ωi = (µi , ξi ). Denote by xti = (xi,1 , xi,2 , ..., xi,t ) the history through date t for x. We observe data
for t = 1, 2, ..., T . We also define ϕ(·) and Φ(·) as the pdf and cdf, respectively, of the standard normal
distribution. Let ϕ(·; σ) be the pdf for a normal random variable with a mean of zero and standard
deviation of σ.
       Define the following conditional probabilities:

  g(pi,t |ci,t , Ai,t , pi,t−1 , Zi,t , µi ) = ϕ (pi,t − Zi,t γ − θpi,t−1 − φAi,t − λci,t − µ; σ)

                  h(Ai,t |ci,t , Zi,t , µi ) = Φ (π0 + π1 µi + Zi,t π2 + π3 (1 − ci,t ))Ai,t

                                                  × [1 − Φ (π0 + π1 µi + Zi,t π2 + π3 (1 − ci,t ))]1−Ai,t

               κ(ci,t |pi,t−1 , Wi,t , ξi ) = Φ (Wi,t A + Bpi,t−1 + ξi )ci,t · [1 − Φ (Wi,t A + Bpi,t−1 + ξi )]1−ci,t .

Dropping i subscripts, let

              ft (xt |xt−1 , Z T , W T , Ω) = g(pt |ct , At , pt−1 , Zt , µ) · h(At |ct , Zt , µ) · κ(ct |pt−1 , Wt , ξ)

                                             = ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ω),

which reflects the fact that the probability of state xt = (pt , ct , At ) conditional on history xt−1 =
(x1 , x2 , ..., xt−1 ) only depends on pt−1 and current observables and unobservables.
       Now, consider the likelihood of observing the sequence of beliefs, crime, and arrests x1 , ..., xT
conditional on initial beliefs, observables, and unobservables:47

f (x1 , ..., xT |p0 , Z T , W T , Ω) = fT (xT |xT −1 , Z T , W T , Ω) · · · f2 (x2 |x1 , Z T , W T , Ω) · f1 (x1 |p0 , Z T , W T , Ω)
                                            T
                                            Y
                                       =          ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ω)
                                            t=1

       Since p0 and Ω are unobserved, we need to ‘integrate them out’ of the likelihood. Consider J
values for unobserved types, each denoted by Ωj = (µj , ξj ). Then, after integrating out over p0 and
unobserved types, the individual likelihood becomes
                                                                                  
                                    J  Z
f (x1 , ..., xT |Z T , W T ) =
                                    X
                                       f (x1 , ..., xT , p0 , Ωj |Z T , W T ) dp0 
                                    j=1 p0
                                                                                                                                    
                                    J             T
                                       Z                                           !
                                    X             Y
                               =                       ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ) f0 (p0 |Z T , W T , Ωj )P r(Ωj |Z T , W T ) dp0  .
                                    j=1 p0        t=1

  47
       Conditioning on initial beliefs, p0 , is equivalent to conditioning on the initial state x0 .


                                                                     35
At this point, one must specify the distribution of initial beliefs conditional on unobservables and
observables as well as the distribution of unobservables conditional on observables.
       If Ω is independent of Z T and W T , then P r(Ωj |Z T , W T ) = ρj . Furthermore, if individuals are
young enough when they are first observed, such that everyone is in a no crime/no arrest state prior
to observation, then it seems reasonable to assume that beliefs are drawn from the stationary no
crime/no arrest distribution at time 0.48
       We, therefore, make the following assumptions:
Assumption 1: Ω ⊥⊥ (Z T , W T ).
Assumption 2: p0 ∼ N p∗ (Z, µ), (σ ∗ )2 .
                                                          

       These assumptions imply that the individual likelihood is

       f (x1 , ..., xT |Z T , W T ) =
                                                        ! Z                                                          
            J
            X         T
                      Y
                           ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj )  f1 (x1 |p0 , Z1 , W1 , Ωj )ϕ (p0 − p∗ (Z0 , µ); σ ∗ ) dp0  ρj  .
            j=1       t=2                                     p0

When data on Z0 is unavailable, it is natural to assume Z0 = Z1 for most variables.

Observing individuals at later ages

Now, consider the case in which individuals are not observed until later ages k, k + 1, ..., T where k > 1
(and individuals may have committed crime prior to the sampling period). In this case, the likelihood
becomes
                                                                                                 
                                        J   Z
f (xk , ..., xT |Z T , W T ) =
                                        X
                                                    f (xk , ..., xT , pk−1 , Ωj |Z T , W T ) dpk−1 
                                                                                                 
                                          
                                       j=1 pk−1
                                                                                                                                                
                                        J             T
                                                Z                                     !
                                                            ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ) fˆk−1 (pk−1 |Z T , W T , Ωj )P r(Ωj |Z T , W T ) dpk−1  .
                                        X             Y
                                  =
                                                                                                                                                
                                            
                                       j=1 pk−1       t=k


       One could make simple but arbitrary assumptions about the density for beliefs at time k − 1,
fˆk−1 (pk−1 |·), and how it depends on observables and unobservables. However, it is more natural to
make assumptions about beliefs at time 0 (before individuals begin their criminal careers) using the
structure of the model to determine the implied distribution of beliefs at date k − 1. This is because
period k − 1 beliefs are likely to be correlated with observed and unobserved characteristics even if
period 0 beliefs are not. Under assumptions 1 and 2, P r(Ωj |Z T , W T ) = ρj and p0 are drawn from the
stationary no crime/no arrest distribution. The conditional density function, fˆk−1 (pk−1 |Z T , W T , Ωj ),
  48
       Here, we implicitly assume that Z has remained constant for some time as well.



                                                                      36
is non-trivial to calculate when we do not observe persons from the beginning of their potential criminal
lives, since entire sequences of beliefs, choices, and arrest outcomes from periods 1 to k − 1 must be
‘integrated over’ (in addition to beliefs at time 0).
                                                    Z           Z
fˆk−1 (pk−1 |Z T , W T , Ωj ) =                           ···        f (pk−1 , pk−2 , ..., p0 |Z T , W T , Ωj ) dp0 · · · dpk−2
                                                 pk−2           p0
                                                                       k−1
                                                    Z           Z                                               !
                                                                             f˜t (pt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ) ϕ (p0 − p∗ (Z0 , µ); σ ∗ ) dp0 · · · dpk−2
                                                                       Y
                                            =             ···
                                                 pk−2           p0     t=1

where
                                                          1
                                                        1 X
        f˜t (pt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ) =
                                                        X
                                                                      g(pt |ct , At , pt−1 , Zt , µj )h(At |ct , Zt , µj )κ(ct |pt−1 , Wt , ξj )
                                                        ct =0 At =0

integrates over all possible crime and arrest choices (assuming there are only one or zero possible
crimes and arrests each period).
    Combining terms, we obtain the likelihood (without measurement error) to be estimated:
                                                                                   
                                                J     T                                Z                                        Z
                    T         T
                                                X   Y
 f (xk , ..., xT |Z , W ) =                       ρj   ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj )                                    ···        fk (xk |pk−1 , Zk , Wk , Ωj )
                                                j=1              t=k+1                                            pk−1          p0
                                                        k−1
                                                                                                     !                                                           #
                                                               f˜τ (pτ |pτ −1 , Zτ , Wτ , Ωj ) ϕ (p0 − p∗ (Z0 , µ); σ ∗ ) dp0 · · · dpk−1
                                                        Y
                                                ×
                                                        τ =1

For those Zτ (∀τ < k) that are unknown, we assume Zτ = Zk .

Numerical Approximation

Consider the multiple integral
                                                                            k−1
          Z             Z                                                                                           !
                                                                                  f˜t (pt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ) ϕ (p0 − p∗ (Z0 , µ); σ ∗ ) dp0 · · · dpk−1
                                                                            Y
                  ···        fk (xk |pk−1 , Zk , Wk , Ωj )
         pk−1           p0                                                  t=1
                                                                                           
                    Z              Z                                                 k−1
                                                                                     Y         1 X
                                                                                               X 1
              =              ···            fk (xk |pk−1 , Zk , Wk , Ωj )                                  h(At |ct , Zt , µ)κ(ct |pt−1 , Wt , ξ)
                   pk−1            p0                                                t=1      ct =0 At =0

                   × ϕ (pt − Zt γ − θpt−1 − φAt − λct − µ; σ)) ϕ (p0 − p∗ (Z0 , µj ); σ ∗ ) dp0 · · · dpk−1
                                                                                                                                               n       ok−1
    This can be approximated by drawing L sequences of i.i.d. random shocks                                                                      ℓ
                                                                                                                                               ν̃i,t          for all N
                                                                                                                                                        t=0
                            ℓ , is drawn from the standard normal distribution. For an individual, the
persons where each shock, ν̃i,t
above integral is approximated by
                                   
                           L
                        1X
                                                n o                               
                               X X                    k−1
                                              ℓ     ℓ       k−1 k−1
                                     fk xk |pk−1 ν̃j     ,c ,A       , Ωj , Zk , Wk
                        L ℓ=1 k−1 k−1                 j=0
                                        c       A
                              k−1
                              Y                                                     n       ot−1                                   #
                         ×             h(At |ct , Zt , µj )κ             ct |pℓt−1     ν̃jℓ           t−1
                                                                                                     ,c      ,A t−1
                                                                                                                          , Wt , ξj        .
                                                                                               j=0
                              t=1


                                                                                      37
              n          ot                  
Here, pℓt          ν̃jℓ             , ct , At represents the perceived probability of arrest given the random shock history
                              j=0
sequence ℓ and a particular crime (ct ) and arrest (At ) history all through period t.49 Note that the
interior sums are over all potential crime and arrest histories through period k − 1 (there are 4k−1
such histories). The perceived probability for t ∈ {1, 2, ..., k − 1} can be determined recursively from:
                                                             n o                
                                                 Z γ + θpℓ         t−1
         n        ot                                            ℓ
                                                                ν̃j       t−1
                                                                        ,c ,A t−1   + φAt + λct + µj + σν̃tℓ                              if t ≥ 1
                                                   t
   pℓt      ν̃jℓ              , ct , At       =           t−1       j=0
                    j=0                                        ∗ ℓ
                                                   p (Z0 , µj ) + σ ν̃0                                                                   if t = 0.
                                                 ∗

Intuitively, this approach draws L sequences of random belief shocks for periods 0 to k − 1. For
                                               n   ok−1
each sequence of shocks, ν̃tℓ                                , we compute the implied evolution of beliefs for all possible crime
                                                       t=0
and arrest paths through period k − 1. The probability of each of those paths can be analytically
determined by rolling forward through time using ft (xt |pt−1 , Zt , Wt , Ωj ). At the end, we observe xk in
the data and compute the probability of observing that state for each of the possible crime and arrests
paths (and for each draw of the shock sequence). The overall probability of observing xk for each draw
of the shock sequence can then be determined using the probability of each crime and arrest path.
Finally, we average this probability over all L random shock sequences to get an approximation of the
multivariate integral. This method can be easily be modified to account for missing observations in
middle survey years.

Measurement Error

Assume that measurement error, ηi,t , is distributed N (0, ση2 ) and is independent of all variables and
disturbance terms. Then, observed beliefs are poi,t = pi,t + ηi,t . When there is no structural error, the
likelihood can be written (and computed directly without the need for numerical approximation) as:
                                                                     
                                                                J                          T
                                                                                       (                                                  !
               f (xok , ..., xoT |Z T , W T ) =
                                                                X          X X             Y
                                                                     ρj                          ϕ[poτ − pτ (cτ , Aτ , µj , Zτ ); ση ]
                                                               j=1         ck−1 Ak−1       τ =k
                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                     !)#
                                                                     Y
                                                                                                           t    t
                                                                ×          h(At |ct , Zt , µj )κ(ct |pt (c , A , µj , Zt ), Wt , ξj )
                                                                     t=1

where
                                                   (
                          t     t                      Zt γ + θpt−1 (ct−1 , At−1 , µj , Zt−1 ) + φAt + λct + µj                 if t ≥ 1
              pt (c , A , µj , Zt ) =
                                                       p∗ (Z0 , µj )                                                            if t = 0.

The likelihood with both measurement error and a structural error reflects a combination of features
from this likelihood and that with the structural error. This is available upon request.


  49
       The perceived probability pℓt also depends on Z t and µj .


                                                                                  38
                                        Figure 1: Distribution of Perceived Probability of Arrest for Auto Theft (NLSY97)
                         0.06




                         0.05




                         0.04
Fraction of Population




                         0.03




                         0.02




                         0.01




                           0
                                0     10        20         30         40       50           60         70     80        90         100
                                                                Perceived Probability of Arrest (in %)




                                    Figure 2: Distribution of Changes in Perceived Probability of Arrest for Auto Theft (NLSY97)
                         0.035




                          0.03




                         0.025
Fraction of Population




                          0.02




                         0.015




                          0.01




                         0.005




                            0
                           −100       −80       −60       −40         −20        0        20          40      60        80         100
                                                                            Change (in %)
                                     Figure 3: Distribution of Perceived Probability of Arrest in NYS

                         30

                         25
Percent of Population




                         20

                         15

                         10

                         5

                         0
                                 0     10      20        30       40        50       60        70       80         90        100
                                                          Perceived Probability of Arrest (in %)

                                                 Steal something worth < $5         Steal something worth > $50
                                                 Break in building or vehicle       Attack someone




                                 Figure 4: Distribution of Changes in Perceived Probability of Arrest in NYS
                         30

                         25
 Percent of Population




                         20

                         15

                         10

                          5

                          0
                              -100    -80     -60       -40       -20           0     20           40    60             80     100
                                                           Perceived Probability of Arrest (in %)

                                                 Steal something worth < $5          Steal something worth > $50
                                                 Break in building or vehicle        Attack someone
                                   Figure 5: Simulated Effects of Changes in Beliefs and True Arrest Rates

                                                          a) Average Perceived Probability of Arrest


                            68

                            67
 Percent Chance of Arrest




                            66

                            65

                            64

                            63

                            62

                            61
                                    10          11         12        13         14        15         16       17        18       19        20
                                                                                          Age



                                                                               b) Crime Rate

                            0.06



                            0.05



                            0.04
Crime Rate




                            0.03



                            0.02



                            0.01
                                      11             12         13        14         15         16         17          18        19         20
                                                                                          Age

                                     Baseline                                                   Permanent increase in perceived prob. of arrest
                                     Increase in initial perceived prob. of arrest              Increased true prob. of arrest



Notes: Permanent increase in the perceived probability of arrest reflects an increase in µ of
5*(1-θ). Increase in initial perceived probability reflects an increase in p 0 by 5. Increased
true probability of arrest reflects an increase in π 0 by 0.2.
       Table 1: Annual Self-Reported Crime and Arrests Among Males in the NLSY97

                                                            All    Blacks Hispanics Whites
Number of respondents                                      4,559   1,169    977     2,413

Percent who stole something worth > $50                    5.45     6.37    6.31     5.09
Percent who stole a vehicle                                1.20     1.31    1.77     1.06
Avg. number of thefts > $50                                0.36     0.44    0.57     0.30
Avg. number of thefts > $50 (of those who stole)           6.69     7.18    9.16     5.99

Percent arrested for any offense                           8.37    11.22    9.07     7.61
Percent arrested for theft                                 1.72     2.28    1.74     1.60
Avg. number of arrests for theft                           0.03     0.05    0.03     0.03

Persons arrested for theft / persons who stole > $50       0.32     0.36    0.28     0.31
Persons arrested for theft / persons who stole a vehicle   1.43     1.74    0.98     1.51
Arrests for theft / number of thefts > $50                 0.09     0.12    0.06     0.09

Notes:
  All measures computed using panel sample weights.
Table 2: Average Perceived Probabilities (in %) of Arrest for Auto Theft (Males in NLSY97)


                                                  All         Blacks      Hispanics    Whites

A) All Individuals                               60.53         51.79       53.67        63.74
                                                 (0.48)        (1.00)      (1.04)       (0.59)

B) Individuals who reported stealing             50.46         43.49       43.61        53.88
   something worth more than $50                 (1.67)        (3.57)      (2.81)       (2.22)

C) Individuals who reported stealing a car       44.78         40.50       39.72        47.42
                                                 (2.97)        (5.82)      (4.65)       (4.16)

D) Weighted by number of thefts worth            39.31         35.76       35.77        41.71
   more than $50                                 (3.02)        (6.50)      (5.96)       (4.09)

Notes:
Panel weights used in calculating all statistics. Standard errors, corrected for clustering
across years for each individual, are in parentheses.
Table 3: OLS Estimates of Perceived Probability (in %) of Arrest for Auto Theft (Males in NLSY97)


Variable                                           (i)             (ii)             (iii)            (iv)

county arrest rate for motor vehicle theft        0.130          0.076             0.034            0.054
                                                 (0.038)        (0.038)           (0.039)          (0.049)
age                                                              -0.602            -0.634           -0.293
                                                                (0.338)           (0.337)          (0.566)
black                                                           -11.671           -11.625           -7.821
                                                                (1.200)           (1.200)          (1.829)
hispanic                                                         -9.600            -9.100           -8.713
                                                                (1.239)           (1.250)          (1.799)
living in MSA                                                                      -4.699           -3.635
                                                                                  (1.266)          (1.625)
family income less than $10,000                                                                     2.430
                                                                                                   (2.267)
living with both natural parents in1997                                                             0.278
                                                                                                   (1.373)
PIAT score (percentile)                                                                             0.120
                                                                                                   (0.021)
mother a teenager at birth                                                                          -1.620
                                                                                                   (2.137)

R-square                                         0.002           0.019            0.020             0.030
Number of observations                           13,800          13,800           13,800            7,141

Notes:
All specifications are weighted by panel weights and include a constant. Specifications (ii)-(iv) also control
for year dummies. Standard errors, corrected for clustering across years for each individual, are in
parentheses.
Table 4: Total Self-Reported Crimes and Arrests from 1984-1986 (Males in NYS)


Percent black                                                           16.40
Percent hispanic                                                        4.25

Percent who stole something worth < $5                                  17.70
Avg. number of thefts < $5                                              2.21
Percent who stole something worth > $50                                 3.72
Avg. number of thefts > $50                                             0.23
Percent who broke into a building or vehicle                            2.29
Avg. number of breakins                                                 0.12
Percent attacking someone to hurt or kill them                           8.88
Avg. number of attacks                                                   0.25

Percent arrested                                                        11.90
Percent arrested for a property or violent offense                      1.86
Average number of arrests                                               0.17
Average number of arrests for property or violent offense               0.02

Notes:
Arrests for property offenses include various forms of theft, evading payment,
burglary, breaking and entering, and dealing in stolen goods. Arrests for violent
offenses include assault, robbery, and harassment.
        Table 5: Average Perceived Probabilities (in %) of Arrest (Males in NYS, 1983 & 1986)


Crime                                            All          Blacks         Hispanics            Whites
(i) Steal something worth $5 or less           33.84           43.55           38.37              31.86
                                               (0.90)          (2.54)          (4.60)             (0.97)

(ii) Steal something worth more than $50       57.81           63.10           58.57              56.78
                                               (0.87)          (2.25)          (4.49)             (0.97)

(iii) Break into a building or vehicle         62.49           67.22           66.33              61.54
                                               (0.88)          (2.26)          (4.71)             (0.98)

(iv) Attack someone to hurt or kill them       72.00           72.12           70.61              72.08
                                               (0.82)          (2.18)          (5.58)             (0.90)

Notes:
Standard errors, corrected for clustering across years for each individual, are in parentheses.
      Table 6: Mean Perceived Probabilities (in %) of Arrest (Males in NYS, 1983 & 1986)

                                                                            Weighted by
                                            Did not commit Commited this Number of Crimes
Crime                                      this type of crime type of crime Committed

(i) Steal something worth $5 or less             35.64              19.19               20.43
       (standard error)                          (0.97)             (1.72)              (4.97)
        [sample size]                           [1,307]             [161]               [161]

(ii) Steal something worth more than $50         57.94              53.00               46.55
       (standard error)                          (0.88)             (5.08)              (8.86)
        [sample size]                           [1,428]              [40]                [40]

(iii) Break into a building or vehicle           62.77              51.67               44.67
       (standard error)                          (0.89)             (6.12)             (16.12)
        [sample size]                           [1,432]              [36]                [36]

(iv) Attack someone to hurt or kill them         73.43              54.78               52.76
      (standard error)                           (0.81)             (3.34)              (4.05)
       [sample size]                            [1,355]             [113]               [113]

Notes:
Standard errors, corrected for clustering across years for each individual, are in parentheses.
Sample sizes in brackets.
Table 7: OLS Estimates of Perceived Probability (in %) of Arrest Among Males in NYS

                                             (i)           (ii)       (iii)             (iv)
                                           Steal          Steal    Break into
                                         something      something building or         Attack
Variable                                 worth < $5    worth > $50  vehicle          Someone
Age                                        -0.596        -1.111         -0.430         0.393
                                           (0.343)       (0.340)        (0.344)       (0.350)
Black                                       9.866         4.974          4.958        -0.721
                                           (3.559)       (3.257)        (3.260)       (3.189)
Hispanic                                    5.054         1.344          4.964        -0.042
                                           (5.596)       (5.362)        (5.267)       (5.668)
Rural                                       4.625         6.866          5.129         3.121
                                           (2.163)       (2.083)        (2.208)       (2.129)
Central city                               -1.813        -1.108          0.584         0.952
                                           (2.161)       (2.108)        (2.097)       (1.937)
Living with both parents in 1976           -1.545        -0.807         -5.109        -1.053
                                           (2.387)       (2.353)        (2.333)       (2.216)
Family income < $10,000 in1976              2.982         0.383         -1.278        -2.039
                                           (2.606)       (2.490)        (2.592)       (2.442)
Mother graduate from HS                    -4.323        -1.189         -2.032        -0.819
                                           (2.354)       (2.237)        (2.225)       (2.057)
Father graduate from HS                    -1.338        -2.554         -3.822        -0.862
                                           (2.364)       (2.258)        (2.426)       (2.247)
Neighborhood crime a problem               -1.477         0.845          0.354        -2.472
                                           (1.867)       (1.799)        (1.777)       (1.745)
Neighborhood disarray a problem             0.453         0.212         -1.737         1.444
                                           (2.223)       (2.162)        (2.181)       (2.107)

R-square                                   0.039          0.031          0.025         0.006

Notes:
All specifications also include an intercept term. Standard errors, corrected for clustering
across years for each individual, are in parentheses. Sample size is 1,272.
Table 8: Belief Updating Among Males in the NLSY97
Dependent Variable: Perceived probability of arrest (in %)



                                                              (A) OLS                       (B) OLS                         (C) GMM
                                                       (First differences)        (Quasi-first differences)   (Quasi-first diff. with fixed effects)
Variable                                               (i)               (ii)        (i)               (ii)          (i)                (ii)
County arrest rate (in percentage terms)              -0.036         -0.034         0.029          0.030           -0.058              -0.058
                                                     (0.047)        (0.047)        (0.040)        (0.040)         (0.064)             (0.064)
Perceived probability of arrest in previous year                                    0.298          0.299           0.038               0.039
  (in percentage terms)                                                            (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.025)             (0.025)
Stole something worth > $50                           -4.060                        -8.678                         -9.303
  in previous year                                   (2.421)                       (2.289)                        (3.584)
Sold drugs in previous year                           -4.515                        -5.853                         -6.387
                                                     (1.779)                       (1.756)                        (3.402)
Arrested for theft in previous year                   8.712                         9.256                         10.021
                                                     (4.106)                       (3.876)                        (6.338)
Num. times stole something worth > $50                               -0.314                        -0.361                              -0.352
  in previous year                                                  (0.130)                       (0.118)                             (0.184)
Num. times sold drugs in previous year                                0.015                        -0.110                               0.016
                                                                    (0.044)                       (0.043)                             (0.094)
Num. times arrested for theft in previous year                       2.692                         3.555                               0.562
                                                                    (1.629)                       (1.553)                             (3.024)
Sibling stole something worth > $50                    6.813                        2.346                          -3.060
  in previous year                                   (4.317)                       (4.214)                        (5.418)
Sibling sold drugs in previous year                   -7.957                       -10.594                         -3.914
                                                     (3.087)                       (3.129)                        (7.305)
Sibling arrested for theft in previous year           -3.828                        1.696                          -13.798
                                                     (7.226)                       (7.994)                        (14.318)

Num. times siblings stole something                                  -0.334                        -0.281                               0.315
  worth > $50 in previous year                                      (0.214)                       (0.260)                             (0.258)
Num. times siblings sold drugs                                       -0.086                        -0.174                              -0.085
  in previous year                                                  (0.071)                       (0.073)                             (0.249)
Num. times sibling was arrested for theft                            -1.105                        -0.846                              -5.024
  in previous year                                                  (2.043)                       (1.803)                             (2.840)

Tests (P-value):
  No effect of respondent information                 0.003             0.076       0.000             0.000        0.008               0.251
  No effect of sibling information                    0.051             0.037       0.008             0.028        0.731               0.226
  Equal respondent and sibling information            0.118             0.199       0.125             0.261        0.346               0.058

Notes:
First difference specifications regress changes in beliefs on changes in MSA status and the variables shown in the table. OLS quasi-first
difference specifications regress current beliefs on the variables shown in the table as well as controls for race, age, MSA status, year dummies,
PIAT percentile, whether the respondent lived with both natural parents at age 14, and whether the respondent's mother was a teenager when he
was born. GMM (quasi-first difference with fixed effects) specifications control for age and MSA status in addition to the variables in the
table. Tests of no effect of respondent (or sibling) information jointly test whether all coefficients on own (or sibling) crimes and arrests are
zero. Test of equal respondent and sibling information tests whether all coefficients on crimes and arrests are equal for siblings and
respondents. Tests in panels (A) and (B) are F-tests, while those in panel (C) are Wald tests. Sample weights are used. Standard errors for
coefficient estimates are in parentheses.
Table 9: Belief Updating Among Males in the NYS
Dependent Variable: Perceived Probability of Arrest (in %) in 1986



                                                       Steal something          Steal something                Break in           Attack Someone
                                                         worth < $5              worth > $50
Variable                                               (i)         (ii)         (i)         (ii)         (i)              (ii)     (i)        (ii)
Perceived probability of arrest in 1983               0.318       0.319        0.329       0.325       0.371          0.370       0.249     0.268
  (in percentage terms)                              (0.037)     (0.047)      (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.037)        (0.036)     (0.036)   (0.036)
Committed respective crime since 1984                -12.387                   -8.669                 -25.639                    -19.164
                                                     (3.283)                  (5.678)                 (7.024)                    (3.591)
Number of times committed respective crime                        -0.318                   -0.870                     -4.283                -4.642
  since 1984                                                     (0.139)                  (0.392)                    (1.708)               (0.863)
Arrested for violent or property crime                6.568                    7.103                  18.097                     12.012
  since 1984                                         (8.167)                  (8.136)                 (7.980)                    (7.672)
Number of times arrested for violent                              4.300                   10.008                     15.297                 9.349
  or property crime since 1984                                   (6.415)                  (6.729)                    (6.681)               (6.245)
Central city status                                   1.528       -1.772       0.946       0.751       2.740          2.522       1.094     1.196
                                                     (2.536)     (3.074)      (2.450)     (2.452)     (2.439)        (2.449)     (2.404)   (2.405)
Rural status                                          0.945       0.192        3.480       3.173       3.446          3.488       -0.150    -0.059
                                                     (3.056)     (4.031)      (2.944)     (2.946)     (2.931)        (2.943)     (2.903)   (2.904)
Neighborhood crime a problem                          -1.085      -0.650       1.647       0.915       2.789          1.720       -1.977    -2.475
                                                     (2.431)     (3.004)      (2.360)     (2.353)     (2.347)        (2.349)     (2.324)   (2.317)
Neighborhood disarray a problem                       1.345       6.053        -1.647      -1.111      -2.793         -2.297      -0.734    0.195
                                                     (2.777)     (3.543)      (2.691)     (2.702)     (2.676)        (2.701)     (2.642)   (2.647)
Victim of a crime since 1984                          1.878       -4.332       3.698       3.605       2.618          2.761       1.788     1.589
                                                     (2.322)     (2.855)      (2.249)     (2.243)     (2.228)        (2.240)     (2.205)   (2.208)

Tests (P-value):
  No effect of respondent information                 0.001       0.068       0.288        0.066       0.001          0.014      <.0001     <.0001
  No effect of neighborhood crime or disarray         0.852       0.217       0.725        0.889       0.396          0.628      0.573      0.536

Notes:
All specifications also control for age, race/ethnicity (black and hispanic), whether the individual's parents earned less than $10,000 in 1976, and
whether the individual lived with both natural parents in 1976. Test for no effect of respondent information is an F-test whether the coefficients on
arrests and crimes committed since 1984 are both zero. Test for no effect of neighborhood crime or disarray is an F-test whether the coefficients on
changes in neighborhood crime and disarray indicators are both zero.
Table 10: Effects of Beliefs on Criminal Activity Multiplied by 100 (Linear Probability Model, NLSY97)



                                                         OLS                        Fixed Effects 2SLS



                                             Steal something     Auto          Steal something
Variable                                       worth > $50       Theft           worth > $50   Auto Theft

percent chance of arrest for auto theft           -0.021         -0.008             -0.016           -0.010
                                                 (0.008)        (0.004)            (0.012)          (0.005)
age                                                0.153          0.083             1.959            0.274
                                                 (0.224)        (0.112)            (1.303)          (0.585)
black                                             -0.387         -0.468
                                                 (0.981)        (0.484)
hispanic                                           0.361          0.235
                                                 (0.977)        (0.506)
living in MSA                                     1.668          0.081              -5.950           -0.058
                                                 (0.842)        (0.408)            (3.846)          (0.119)
living with both natural parents in 1997          -2.895         -1.130
                                                 (0.768)        (0.352)
mother a teenager at birth                        -1.019         -0.602
                                                 (1.044)        (0.468)
PIAT score (percentile)                           -0.027         -0.015
                                                 (0.011)        (0.006)
local arrest rate                                  0.058          0.004             -0.025           -0.009
                                                 (0.028)        (0.011)            (0.040)          (0.016)


Notes: Fixed Effects 2SLS estimates use year t-2 reported number of thefts > $50 for individuals and
siblings, year t-2 reported number of arrests for theft for individuals and siblings, and the year t-2
perceived probability of arrest for auto theft as instruments for the year t-2 to t-1 change in the perceived
probability of arrest. Sample weights are used. Standard errors corrected for clustering at individual
level.
Table 11: Parameter Estimates for Structural Model of Belief Updating, Crime, and Arrests


                                                              No Measurement Error               Measurement Error
Parameters                                                   Estimates      Standard Errors   Estimates   Standard Errors

                                                      Perceptions Equation:
black                                                         -5.410            1.252          -3.489          1.333
hispanic                                                      -5.998            1.354          -3.747          1.414
living with both natural parents in 1997                       0.793            1.067          0.327           0.661
mother a teenager at birth                                    -0.601            1.527          -0.505          0.935
living in MSA                                                 -3.670            1.248          -2.448          1.056
PIAT score (percentile)                                        0.096            0.016          0.060           0.022
perceived probability of arrest at previous survey (θ)         0.075            0.016          0.400           0.190
stole something worth > $50 since previous survey (λ)         -4.519            2.004         -13.965          4.863
arrested since previous survey (φ)                            4.802             3.250          5.783          17.269
µ1                                                            29.509            2.005         19.586           6.253
µ2                                                            67.698            2.101          44.788         14.170
standard deviation of transitory belief shock (σ)             33.995            0.376
standard deviation of measurement error (ση)                                                   33.685         0.355

                                                         Crime Equation:
black                                                         -0.053            0.096          -0.444         0.160
hispanic                                                      -0.019            0.094          -0.443         0.177
living with both natural parents in 1997                      -0.325            0.072          -0.204         0.096
mother a teenager at birth                                    -0.137            0.121          -0.160         0.134
living in MSA                                                 0.093             0.091          -0.179         0.132
PIAT score (percentile)                                       -0.004            0.001          0.003          0.003
age                                                           0.020             0.021          0.003          0.020
perceived probability of arrest at previous survey (B)        0.000             0.001          -0.065         0.022
ξ1                                                            -0.822            0.360          0.654          0.836
ξ2                                                            -1.149            0.361          3.721          1.631

                                                         Arrest Equation:
intercept (π0)                                                -0.662            0.196          -0.866         0.210
coefficient on µi (π1)                                        0.001             0.003          0.007          0.005
black                                                         0.048             0.086          0.054          0.085
hispanic                                                      -0.037            0.095          -0.029         0.096
living with both natural parents in 1997                      -0.131            0.079          -0.134         0.078
mother a teenager at birth                                    -0.052            0.115          -0.045         0.116
living in MSA                                                 -0.109            0.097          -0.111         0.096
PIAT score (percentile)                                       -0.005            0.001          -0.005         0.001
no theft worth > $50 since previous survey (π3)               -1.410            0.084          -1.405         0.085

                                                  Unobserved Type Probabilities:
probability of non-criminal with µi = µ1 (ρ1)                  0.205            0.019          0.058          0.103
probability of non-criminal with µi = µ2 (ρ2)                  0.448            0.035          0.377          0.068
probability of ξi = ξ1, µi = µ1 (ρ3)                           0.109            0.016          0.257          0.104

Note: Sample size is N=2,518.
