NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO WE NOW COLLECT ANY
REVENUE FROM TAXING CAPITAL INCOME?
Roger Gordon
Laura Kalambokidis
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 9477
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9477
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2003

Presented at the International Seminar in Public Economics conference held at the University of California
at Berkeley on December 7 and 8, 2001. We are grateful to Heidi Shierholz and Steffanie Guess-Murphy for
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Roger Gordon, Laura Kalambokidis, Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
notice, is given to the source.

Do We Now Collect Any Revenue from Taxing Capital Income?
Roger Gordon, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 9477
January 2003
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
The U.S. income tax has long been recognized as a hybrid of an income and consumption
tax, with elements that do not fit naturally into either pure system. The precise nature of this
hybrid has important policy implications for, among other things, understanding the impact of
moving closer to a pure consumption tax regime.
In this paper, we examine the nature of the U.S. income tax by calculating the revenue
and distributional implications of switching from the current system to one form of consumption
tax, a modified cash flow tax. Although earlier work had suggested that in 1983 such a switch
would have cost little or no revenue at all, we calculate that in 1995 this switch would have cost
$108.1 billion in tax revenues, suggesting that the U.S. income tax does impose some positive
tax on capital income. The net gains from such a switch have a U-shaped pattern, with those in
the lowest and highest deciles of labor income receiving the largest proportional gains, although
those in the highest decile would have by far the largest absolute gains.

Roger Gordon
Department of Economics 0508
9500 Gilman Drive
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
rogordon@ucsd.edu
Joel Slemrod
Department of Economics
701 Tappan Street
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

Laura Kalambokidis
Department of Applied Economics
Room 231 Classroom Office Building
1994 Buford Avenue
University of Minnesota
St. Paul, MN 55108-1995
lkalambo@apec.umn.edu

Do We Now Collect Any Revenue from Taxing Capital Income?
Roger Gordon, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod
1. Introduction
The tax treatment of capital income is one of the most contentious aspects of existing
tax systems, both in theory and in practice. Most existing income taxes strongly reflect
the structure recommended by Haig (1921) and Simons (1938), who advocated that
individuals be taxed on their combined wage and capital income, subject to a perhaps
progressive rate structure.1 The Haig-Simons structure came to be known as a
Comprehensive Income Tax. Yet in most countries, an increasing fraction of revenue
over time has been collected through value-added taxes and payroll taxes, both of which
exempt capital income from tax. In recent years, several Scandinavian countries have
also moved away from equal tax rates on wage and capital income by maintaining a
progressive tax on wage income but imposing a flat tax at a relatively low rate on a
particular definition of capital income. Even under tax systems that maintain the
structure of a Comprehensive Income Tax, a growing fraction of savings has been in
pension plans, IRA’s, and equivalents, that in theory do not distort savings incentives.
Most countries also exempt income in kind from owner-occupied housing and consumer
durables. Together, owner-occupied housing and pensions comprise a large fraction of
household savings.
While existing income taxes still maintain many elements of a Comprehensive
Income Tax, there have been many tax reform proposals that would exempt income from
capital. Examples include the Meade Committee Report (1978), Bradford (1984), Hall
and Rabushka (1995), McLure and Zodrow (1996), presidential candidate Steve Forbes’
flat tax proposal, and Bond, et. al. (1996).
The theoretical literature in this area has largely focused on measuring the many
types of efficiency costs that arise from the current tax treatment of capital income.
Existing taxes, for example, distort overall investment incentives, the allocation of capital

1

The tax reform recommendations of the U.S. Treasury (1984), a modified version of which was enacted in
the Tax Reform Act of 1986, would have moved the U.S. tax much closer to a Comprehensive Income Tax.

across sectors and countries, corporate debt-equity ratios, overall savings incentives,
portfolio choice, realization patterns for capital gains, etc. Each of these types of
distortions appears to create nontrivial efficiency losses. In combination, the efficiency
losses would appear to be a major consideration in the design of the tax structure.
Of course, efficiency costs are only one consideration when choosing tax rates. In
spite of these high efficiency costs, taxes on capital income could still perhaps be
justified if they generate sufficient offsetting distributional gains per dollar of tax revenue
raised. At the optimal policy, the efficiency costs net of distributional gains from taxes
on capital income, per dollar of resulting tax revenue, should equal the net costs/gains
from other sources of revenue.
In an earlier paper (Gordon and Slemrod (1988)), we looked at these issues more
closely. To begin with, using U.S. tax return data from 1983, we estimated how much
tax revenue would change if the tax system were modified to exempt income from capital
in present value, while leaving tax rates and tax incentives otherwise unchanged.
Surprisingly, we found that the existing tax system in that year collected effectively
nothing in revenue from taxes on capital income. Of course, distributional gains might
still be sufficient to justify such taxes, even if they do not collect revenue on net. This
paper then looked at the distributional effects of taxing capital income, and found that
these distributional effects were largely perverse. Lower income taxpayers, who largely
invested in taxable bonds, had lower after-tax income under the existing tax structure. In
contrast, higher income taxpayers gained. In particular, personal and corporate interest
deductions saved higher income taxpayers enough in taxes to offset any other taxes due
on their capital income.
This past study has several key weaknesses, though, as a guide for current policy
discussions. For one, it examines data from before the 2001, 1993, and particularly the
1986, tax reforms which included major changes in the tax treatment of capital.2 In
addition, the data for the previous study came from 1983, which was at the tail end of a

2

For example, the 1986 tax reform made it harder to make use of interest deductions, by allowing only
home mortgage interest deductions on Schedule A and by preventing real estate losses from being
deductible on Schedule E. Depreciation schedules were also lengthened, while capital gains were taxed
more heavily.
2

deep recession. Results might have been different at other points in the business cycle.3
Third, the distributional calculations made no attempt to include the retired, even though
the retired as a group turned out to be the key beneficiaries from a repeal of existing taxes
on capital income.
The objective of this study is to address each of these weaknesses. To begin with, we
replicate our previous approach using data from 1995, so after the 1986 and 1993 tax
reforms, though before the 2001 tax changes.4 Of course, 1995 data are also affected by
business cycle effects: 1995 was in the middle of a period of dramatic growth in the U.S.
Our second objective is to examine the sensitivity of our estimates to such business cycle
effects. Finally, we develop an approach for making use of panel data that include retired
individuals to provide more comprehensive information about the distributional effects of
the existing tax treatment of capital.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we discuss the motivation and
justification for the approach we take for estimating the revenue effects of existing taxes
on capital income. Section 3 then reexamines the revenue effects of exempting capital
income in present value, based on the 1995 data. Section 4 examines the sensitivity of
these estimates to business cycle effects, while section 5 looks closely at the
distributional effects of these existing taxes on capital income. Section 6 provides a brief
summary.

2. Approach used to assess revenue effects
How much revenue is raised by existing taxes on capital income? That is, how much
revenue would be lost by shifting to an alternative tax system that no longer distorts
savings and investment decisions? This difference will be our estimate of how much
revenue is collected from current taxes on the return to capital.
3

Note, though, that similar results were reported in Shoven (1990), using 1986 data. Kalambokidis (1992)
looked at the implications for corporate tax payments by industry for each year from 1975 to 1987. When
the results of the Kalambokidis study are made consistent with the methodology in Gordon and Slemrod
(1988), the finding is that a cash flow tax collects less revenue in aggregate than existing corporate taxes in
each year from 1975 to 1981, more revenue in 1982 and 1983, less revenue in 1984 and 1985, and more
revenue in 1986 and 1987.

3

The immediate question is: Relative to which alternative tax system? There are a
wide variety of tax structures that imply no distortions at the margin to savings and
investment decisions. Even among tax systems in common use, this list would include:
payroll taxes, value added taxes, retail sales taxes, and nonlinear individual taxes on
either wage income or consumption. Existing pension provisions, as well as the existing
exemption for some forms of capital income (e.g., municipal bonds) also imply no
distortions to savings decisions. Yet these different approaches to eliminating distortions
to savings and investment decisions can have very different implications for tax revenue,
implying very different changes in tax revenue relative to existing taxes.

For example,

monopoly profits and the risk premium demanded on risky assets are both taxed under a
value added tax or a consumption tax, yet are not taxed under a payroll tax. While all of
these taxes imply no distortions to savings and investment decisions, they have different
implications, for example, for individual choices regarding forms of compensation, and
for the riskiness of government revenue. Our aim, in seeing how much tax revenue
changes when distortions to savings and investment decisions are eliminated, is to choose
a set of changes in tax provisions that eliminates distortions to savings and investment
incentives while to the extent possible leaving other incentives and the allocation of risk
unchanged compared to the existing tax structure.
To see the trade-offs more formally, consider first the tax treatment of a real
investment costing a dollar initially, that generates a rate of return (net of depreciation) t
periods later of ft’. If there are no taxes and the individual’s discount rate equals r, then
∞

investment in equilibrium continues until 1 = ∫ f t ' e − rt dt . We restrict attention to those
0

tax systems under which the individual faces constant tax rates over time.5 Assume now
that the return on this investment is subject to some tax rate, τ , i.e., the output of the
firm net of the costs of other (non-capital) inputs is taxed at rate τ . Then the investment
decision remains undistorted as long as the individual receives additional tax savings
whose present value equals τ . To see this, note that the resulting equilibrium condition
4

The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Act of 2001 changed tax rates considerably, but involved no direct
changes in the tax treatment of capital income.
5
When tax rates change over time, distortions to savings/investment decisions can arise whenever extra
savings/investment reduces taxable income in one period and raises it in another, as occurs under a VAT or
under existing pension plans.
4

∞

∞

0

0

with such a tax, 1 = (1 − τ ) ∫ f t ' e − rt dt + τ , immediately implies that 1 = ∫ f t ' e − rt dt , so that
marginal investment decisions remain undistorted: the social return to the investment is
just sufficient to cover the opportunity cost of funds.6
There remain two dimensions of flexibility in designing such a non-distorting tax on
real investments. First, the choice of tax rate τ is arbitrary: investment decisions remain
undistorted for any choice of τ . However, the choice of τ has a variety of other
implications. To begin with, if the production function has decreasing returns to scale,
then inframarginal profits are also taxed at rate τ , affecting the incentive on
entrepreneurs to discover a new technology that would generate such pure profits. In
addition, as emphasized by Gordon and Slemrod (2000), any differences between τ and
an employee’s (manager’s) personal tax rate creates incentives favoring forms of
compensation taxed at the lower rate. For example, if an employee in the United States is
paid with qualified stock options rather than wages, the firm no longer gets a tax
deduction, raising the amount of income taxed at rate τ , but the employee no longer pays
personal taxes on her compensation. Similarly, Cullen and Gordon (2002) show in detail
how any differences between τ and a potential entrepreneur’s personal tax rate distort the
incentives to become self-employed. Finally, if the return to an investment is risky, then
the choice of tax rate τ affects the allocation of risk between shareholders and the
government. With a higher τ , not only does the government bear more risk, but it
receives τ percent of the risk premium built into the expected return on the investment,
implying higher expected tax revenue.7
In shifting to a tax system that no longer distorts investment decisions, we chose to
leave unchanged the existing tax rate structure on income from any investment. By doing
so, we leave unaffected the allocation of risk (so don’t need to compensate for changing
costs of risk bearing), leave entrepreneurial incentives unaffected, and leave incomeshifting incentives unaffected. The intent is to isolate the revenue effects of distortions to
investment decisions per se, rather than to combine this with the revenue effects from
changes in other preexisting distortions.
6

While the tax does not distort marginal investment decisions, however, it can have general equilibrium
effects on the market-clearing interest rates, due to any redistribution that occurs under the tax, e.g. through
taxes on monopoly rents.

5

In addition to the flexibility in the choice of τ , there are a wide variety of ways of
providing tax savings whose present value equals τ . The simplest approach, defined by
the Meade Committee (1978) as an “R-base,” allows new investment to be immediately
expensed, resulting in an immediate tax savings of τ . Another approach, advocated in
Bond, et. al. (1996), is to make use of some arbitrary schedule of depreciation deductions
at each date, dt, but then to allow a further deduction each year equal to the interest rate
times the remaining book value of the capital for tax purposes. This additional interest
deduction precisely compensates for the postponement of the remaining depreciation
deductions, so that the present value of depreciation plus interest deductions equals the
initial dollar spent, saving taxes in present value equal to τ . From our perspective, this
latter approach opens up too many judgment calls in coming up with a measure of book
capital and choosing the appropriate interest rate.8 We therefore used an “R-base.” Note
that this need not even have much effect on the timing of the resulting taxable income. If
investment has been growing at a rate equal to the interest rate,9 then new investment
equals (r + d ) K , where d is the true depreciation rate. Expensing for new investment

then leads to the same deductions in each year as result from following the Bond, et. al.
(1996) approach, assuming economic depreciation rates.
The same flexibility exists in designing a tax on income from financial investments
that does not distort savings decisions. Again, if the amount received from a dollar’s
financial investment is taxed at some rate t, then the tax has no effect on savings
incentives if the individual receives additional tax savings with present value equal to t.10
This is exactly what occurs under a pension plan as long as the tax rate faced when initial
contributions are deducted from taxable income equals the tax rate faced on payouts from
the pension plan. Again, the choice of t is flexible.
For many of the same reasons as with the choice of τ , our hope was to leave the tax
rate on the return from the investment unchanged. To begin with, by doing so, we would
7

To calculate the certainty-equivalent revenue, this risk premium would need to be subtracted off.
One problem in constructing the book capital stock is that information on corporate vs. non-corporate
investment has been limited in the past. The appropriate interest rate is the rate that would prevail with this
tax change, so is not one observed in the data.
9
In the U.S. between 1959 and 1997, the overall average yearly growth rate in real nonresidential fixed
investment was 4.6%.
10
Taxing the amount received from financial assets, but allowing a deduction for new investments in
financial assets, is referred to as an “F-base” by the Meade Committee.
8

6

leave unchanged the allocation of risk. Also, for example, we would leave unchanged the
incentive to invest time in portfolio management, where the return to this effort (the
higher resulting portfolio return) is currently taxed at the individual’s personal tax rate.
We would also leave unchanged taxes due on labor income that has been converted into
capital gains, e.g., through the use of qualified stock options. Furthermore, we would
avoid opening up a new route for tax evasion through converting real income into
financial income, and financial deductions into real deductions.11 Consistent with this
desire, we left unchanged the current tax treatment of pensions. However, for financial
investments outside of pension plans, this approach was infeasible since we have no data
on the size of net investments or net withdrawals from savings. The only feasible
approach was to set t=0 for these investments. As a result, in order to eliminate any
distortions to savings incentives, we drop dividends, interest income, and realized capital
gains from the tax base, and eliminate any interest deductions.
The result is a (hopefully slight) overestimate of the revenue collected from current
taxes on capital income. By eliminating taxes as well on capital gains from some forms
of labor income (e.g., qualified stock options, portfolio management, and entrepreneurial
activity more generally) and eliminating taxes on the risk premium embodied in capital
gains, tax revenue under our alternative tax is artificially lower. As a result, the drop in
tax revenue is greater than it would be if only distortions to savings incentives were
eliminated.
One question we faced is what to do with financial intermediaries, a question that has
long been a problem for example under avalue added tax.12 By eliminating all financial
income from the tax base for financial corporations, this sector would not just have its tax
liabilities eliminated, but have negative taxable income.13 Part of the reason, for
example, is that banks are paid for the services they provide depositors through being
able to pay a low interest rate on deposits. Yet this payment for the services provided by
labor as well as capital would be eliminated from the tax base if our approach were
11

For example, a firm could offer to sell a good at a low price in exchange for the buyer accepting
financing at unfavorable terms, and in the process reduce its tax payments.
12
See for example Auerbach and Gordon (2002) for a recent discussion of this issue.
13
In particular, a mechanical application of the proposed tax rules to the financial sector (finance,
insurance, and real estate) would reduce their taxable income in 1995 from 146.7 billion dollars to –63.2
billion dollars.
7

mechanically applied to the financial sector.14 We saw no easy way to deal with this, so
left unchanged the tax treatment of the financial sector, so that these issues do not affect
our reported results.
To understand the differences in the tax base among the various taxes that do not
distort investment incentives, one other issue comes up. A value added tax consists not
only of an R-base, but this combined with a cash-flow tax on imports minus exports.
Given that in present value, trade should be balanced, the present value of revenues from
any tax on net trade flows should be zero. However, a tax on net trade flows does help
pick up earnings that have been hidden abroad, e.g., through transfer pricing, when they
are spent buying consumption goods. So imposing a tax on trade flows should in fact
result in extra tax revenue on a part of the return ft’ that has evaded tax. Given the wide
swings in trade flows over time, however, it is impossible to estimate the increase in the
present value of revenue using data on trade flows over a short time period, let alone in
one year. We therefore leave net trade flows out of the alternative tax base, so again
overestimate the amount of revenue currently collected from taxes on capital income.
3. Replication of GS Revenue Results
3.1 Corporate Revenue Implications

In summary, our procedure for judging how much tax revenue would change if
investment distortions were eliminated, while leaving all other incentives unchanged, is
to shift to an R-base, while leaving tax rates and the tax base otherwise unchanged. The
resulting changes in corporate taxable income would involve replacing current deductions
for depreciation, amortization, and depletion with immediate expensing for new
investment.15 In addition, we eliminate all tax consequences of income from financial
assets, so eliminate interest, dividend, and capital gains income, and also eliminate all
interest deductions. Finally, we need to shift the tax treatment of investment in
inventories, allowing an immediate deduction when goods are added to inventory rather
than a deduction when goods are withdrawn from inventory.

14
15

These payments would be captured under an F-base, but are missed under an R-base.
In 1983, to have neutral investment incentives, we also needed to eliminate the investment tax credit.
8

This is the procedure used in GS (1988), using U.S. corporate tax return data for
1983. The resulting changes to the corporate tax base are listed in column 1 of Table 1.
They found that in 1983 under an R-base tax, taxable corporate income of non-financial
corporations would increase by $26.8 billion. Replacing depreciation, depletion, and
amortization, which together totaled $228.8 billion, by expensing of new investment
amounting to $259.0 billion would reduce the tax base by $30.2 billion. Eliminating
from the tax base net capital gains and dividends would reduce the tax base another $25.0
billion, and allowing inventory expensing would reduce it another $14.6 billion. But
these reductions in the tax base totaling $69.8 billion are more than offset by the
elimination of $96.6 billion of net interest deductions, so that the cash flow base exceeds
the actual tax base by $26.8 billion. Based on an effective marginal corporate tax rate of
31.8%, GS estimated that tax payments by these companies would rise by $8.5 billion.
Elimination of the since-abolished investment tax credit would increase revenue by
another $14.1 billion, increasing the total to $22.6 billion.
In this paper, we replicate this procedure using U.S. corporate tax return data for
1995. Results appear in the second column in Table 1.16 Had the figures grown in
proportion to overall corporate tax payments, then the net increase in corporate tax
liability in 1995 from shifting to an R base should have been $95.9 billion. In striking
contrast to the 1983 calculations, we find that in 1995 tax liability under the R base was
$18.0 billion below what it was under the existing corporate income tax. Existing
corporate income taxes from these firms were $110.4 billion, suggesting that the fraction
18.0/110.4 = .163 of existing taxes would be lost through a shift to a cash-flow tax.
We can identify two important factors behind the differing results in 1983 compared
to 1995. The first is that the ratio of capital allowances (depreciation, amortization, and
depletion) to new investment is significantly lower in 1995 compared to 1983, 78.1%
compared to 88.3%. This implies that moving to the expensing of new investment would
cost more tax revenue in 1995 than it would have in 1983. Of course, any change in the
ratio of capital allowances to new investment could be due to changes either in
depreciation provisions, e.g., due to the Tax Reform Act of 1986, or in the rate of new
investment, due for example to 1995 being a boom period rather than the tail end of a
16

The details of these calculations appear in the appendix.
9

recession. In fact, the cyclical nature of investment rates in the two years we have
studied is large. For example, total fixed investment during 1983 was only 97.5% of its
average real value during the previous five years, based on NIPA statistics from the 1999
Economic Report of the President. In contrast, total fixed investment during 1995 was
118.1% of its average real value during 1990-4. If reported investment in 1995 had been
equal to the same fraction of the average investment rate during the previous five years as
was observed in 1983, putting the two years at the same point in the business cycle, then
the reported investment rate in 1995 would have been 504.5*(1-.975/1.181)=$88 billion
smaller. This cyclical fluctuation in investment rates therefore is more than sufficient to
explain the change in the ratio of depreciation deductions to new investment from 1983 to
1995.17
A second factor explaining the difference in results between the two years is a
significant change in the relative size of net interest payments that are part of the
corporate income tax base but are not part of the R base. In 1983 the corporate sector had
$96.6 billion of net interest payments, amounting to 37.3% of new investment. These
outflows have no tax consequences under an R-base tax, so that taxable income rises in
the switch from the existing corporate income tax. By 1995, though, these net interest
payments amounted to only 26.0% of new investment ($131.1 billion divided by $504.5
billion). If the 1983 ratio of 37.3% had prevailed in 1995, R-base taxable income would
have been $57 billion higher than we calculate it to be. The main explanation for the
change appears to be the drop in the level of nominal interest rates between 1983 and
1995. For example, the Baa corporate bond rate dropped from 13.55% to 8.20%. If net
interest deductions in 1995 had been larger by the proportion .1355/.082, then the net
change in taxable income would have been higher by $85.5 billion.
In sum, while the shift from the existing income tax to an R-based tax would have
caused an increase in corporate tax payments by 22.6 billion dollars in 1983, the same
policy change would have caused a decrease in corporate tax payments by 18.0 billion
dollars in 1995. This change in outcomes is of the same order of magnitude as back-ofthe-envelope calculations of the impact of the difference in the state of the business cycle

17

Depreciation allowances in 1995 could well have been more generous than in 1983, in spite of the slower
depreciation rates enacted in 1986, due to the simultaneous drop in the inflation rate.
10

in the two years, combined with the effects of the drop in inflation and so in nominal
interest rates. In section 4, we examine more closely the question of what the results in
these two years would have looked like at a “typical” point in the business cycle.
3.2 Personal Tax Revenue Implications

We next estimate the change in personal tax payments that would result from a shift
to an R-base. We simulate this by exempting from personal taxation all interest
income/payments, dividends, and capital gains, and by shifting to an “R-base” for all
non-corporate business income. Since we observe on the individual’s tax return only the
net profits/losses from each form of non-corporate business, we use aggregate data to
calculate the ratio of the aggregate “R-base”18 from each sector to its reported profits and
multiply the reported profits for each individual by this ratio. This calculation is done
separately for each type of non-corporate business, and separately for firms with profits
vs. losses.
Table 2 summarizes the results of this methodology for 1983 and 1995. Column 1
reports the resulting changes in aggregate taxable personal income reported by GS (1988)
using this approach for a representative sample of personal income tax returns from 1983.
They found that shifting to an R-base under the personal income tax would reduce
taxable income by $98.6 billion. When netted against the elimination of $4.3 billion of
investment tax credits, this would have reduced individual tax liability by $15.2 billion,
or about one percent of total taxable income.19 Given that corporate tax payments
increased by $22.6 billion dollars under an R-base, on net we estimate that the aggregate
change in net tax payments would be an increase of $7.4 billion, a very small fraction of
tax revenue in 1983. Given the assumptions and imputations needed to make these

18

To do this, we zero out net interest income/payments, dividend income, and capital gains, and replace
depreciation deductions with expensing for new investment. In principle under an R-base, any transfer or
sale of capital from one firm to another should result in the taxation of the resulting sales revenue in the
selling firm and the deduction of the purchase price in the buying firm. We had no data available to do this.
While this correction is irrelevant if both firms face the same tax rate, this would not be the case for any
transfers of capital between the corporate and the noncorporate sectors, nor for many transfers within the
noncorporate sector.
19
Note that any reduction in payouts on corporate equity, due to the forecasted $22.6 billion dollar increase
in corporate tax liabilities, has no direct impact on personal tax payments, since dividends and capital gains
are both exempt from tax under an R-base.
11

calculations, it is fair to say that GS (1988) estimated that there would be approximately
no change in tax revenue in switching to a modified cash flow (R-base) tax.
The 1995 results displayed in Column 2 are noticeably different.20 First, consider
net taxable (non-business) interest income. This was a positive $33.8 billion in 1983, so
that zeroing it out would reduce revenue. By 1995, this was negative $61.0 billion,
because interest deductions exceeded interest received. Thus, in 1995 exempting interest
flows from taxation would have increased rather than decreased tax revenue. Offsetting
this change, however, is the fact that our estimate of other capital income, which includes
dividends, net capital and non-capital gains, and the portion of non-corporate business
income that would be exempted under the R-based tax, increased from $64.7 billion in
1983 to $292.5 billion in 1995, or from 4.2% of taxable income to 10.4% of taxable
income.21 Exempting this much larger amount of capital income from taxation under the
R-base tax more than offsets the implications of the decline in net taxable interest
income. All in all, then, we estimate that in 1995 taxable income under the R base tax
would fall by $231.5 billion, resulting in a $90.1 billion loss in tax liability.22 This is
3.2% of taxable income, compared to the corresponding estimate of 1.0% in 1983.
Combining the corporate and personal tax results, we estimate that moving to an Rbase tax would in 1995 have caused a decline of $108.1 billion of revenue. In 1983, it
would have increased revenue by $7.4 billion. Of course, neither year is typical. This is
the issue we turn to next.
4. Controlling revenue figures for business cycle effects

The above figures for 1983 and 1995 for the revenue effects of shifting from the existing
tax structure to an R-base are inevitably sensitive to business-cycle effects. The cycle
will affect revenue collected under the existing income tax, what would be collected
20

The details of these calculations appear in the appendix.
Much of this change represents the growth in realized capital gains between the two years. Since 1983
was in the middle of a deep recession while 1995 was in the middle of a period of rapid growth, this may
largely reflect business cycle effects rather than permanent differences in the tax structure. See section 4
for further discussion.
22
The distribution of the changes in taxable income across tax brackets, as seen below, was very different
in 1995 than in 1983. Note for example that the average tax rate on the change in tax base in 1983 was
(15.2-4.3)/98.6=11, while in 1995 it was 90.1/231.5=.39.
21

12

under an R-base tax, and the difference between the two that is the focus of this paper.
Yet, in comparing the revenue collected from existing taxes on capital income with the
efficiency costs, we would hope to have a figure that represents a “typical” point in any
business cycle or an average over an entire business cycle.
The question is how best to do this. In the previous section we did some back-of-theenvelope calculations with respect to the corporate tax estimates. A direct way to adjust
the revenue changes for business cycle effects would be to calculate these revenue
changes over a full business cycle, under a given tax code, and then take the average of
these figures, perhaps scaled by nominal GDP to control for growth in the economy
during the period. The immediate difficulty is that the tax law changes sufficiently
frequently that we do not commonly observe the revenue effects of a given tax law over a
full business cycle. For example, even if we claim that the tax law in effect in 1995 was
largely that enacted in 1986, and so was in effect since 1988, at the time of writing of this
paper we do not have the data to proceed through a full business cycle starting from
1988. In any case, the tax law changed substantially in 2002, before this business cycle
was complete.
In what follows we pursue an alternative strategy by examining an earlier
business cycle during which the tax law itself was stable. The latest full business cycle
that satisfies this restriction is that between 1975 and 1980. According to the NBER
Business Cycle Dating Committee, a complete cycle ran from the trough of the first
quarter of 1975, through the peak in the first quarter of 1980, to the next trough of the
third quarter of 1980. Fortunately, Kalambokidis (1992) has already performed the
calculations needed to estimate the changes in taxable corporate income, when shifting to
an R-base, for each year during this period. These numbers, as a fraction of gross
domestic product, are presented in the first column of Table 3.
As expected, the results are indeed sensitive to the business cycle, with less
revenue loss from switching to an R-base tax during the recession years of 1975 and
1980. The details behind these calculations suggest that one key element of the variation
over the cycle arose from the timing of inventory investment. In particular, at the very
end of a boom period, inventory investment tends to be very high.

13

How can these figures be used to adjust our results for 1983 and 1995 for business
cycle effects? We proceed as follows. We first calculate the average of the figures in
column A in Table 3 as the “typical” figure over the business cycle, given the tax law
prevailing during this period. During other business cycles, under other tax laws, we
presume that the mean of this figure will change, but not the variance. A judgment call is
then to link 1983, the first year of rapid growth following a downturn with the data with
1976.23 Similarly, we link 1995 with 1978, a year in the middle of an upturn. We then
take the difference between the average value in column A of Table 3 and the figure in
the comparable year, and add this fraction of GDP to the figures we produced in Table 1.
The difference between the six-year average change in corporate taxable income
and the 1976 change in corporate taxable income, as a percentage of GDP, is -0.09
percent. This percentage times 1983 GDP of $3,514.5 billion gives us a business cycle
adjustment for 1983 of $3.2 billion. We then find that the change in corporate taxable
income in 1983, correcting for business cycle effects, would be reduced from $26.8
billion to $23.6 billion (as shown in Table 4). Using the average effective tax rate in
1983 of 0.318, the business-cycle-adjusted change in corporate tax liability would be
$21.6 billion, or one billion dollars less that the value in Table 1.
The difference between the six-year average change in corporate taxable income
and the 1978 change in corporate taxable income, as a percentage of GDP, is 0.68
percent. This percentage times 1995 GDP of $7,269.6 billion gives us a business cycle
adjustment for 1995 of $49.4 billion, and (using the 1995 effective tax rate of 0.351) a
corporate tax liability adjustment of $17.3 billion. For 1995, the business-cycle-adjusted
change in corporate taxable income is -$1.8 billion (as shown in Table 4). The businesscycle-adjusted change in corporate tax liability for 1995 is -$0.7 billion.
Comparable figures for changes in aggregate personal taxable income are also
reported in Table 3. In making use of these figures to adjust those reported in Table 2 for
business cycle effects, we need to make a variety of assumptions. As above, we assume
that the mean value in column B in Table 3 will change under a different tax code, but
that the size of the variation across the business cycle will remain stable. A further issue

23

For example, real GDP growth in 1983 was 4.3%, compared with a 2.0% decline in 1982. The
comparable figures for 1976 and 1975 were 5.6% and -0.4%.
14

is the distribution of these changes across tax brackets. Here we assume that the figures
in each tax bracket are simply scaled upwards or downwards with the aggregate figures,
and ignore changes in the degree of tax arbitrage over the business cycle. The cyclical
variation of personal taxable income is apparently much less than for corporate taxable
income. For 1976 (our match to 1983), the change is just 0.22 percent below the six-year
average and for 1978 (our 1995 match), the change is just 0.03 percent below the six-year
average. Under these assumptions, we find that in 1983 the change in personal taxable
income due to the switch to an R-base tax, correcting for business cycle effects, would be
increased by $7.7 billion to -$90.9 billion. Using the average tax rate applying to
changes in personal income of 0.154 (15.2/98.6) implies an adjusted change in personal
tax liability of -$14.0 billion instead of -$15.2 billion. For 1995, the business cycle
adjustment reduces the change in personal taxable income by $2.2 billion, for an adjusted
value of -$233.7 billion. This corresponds to an adjustment in personal tax liability of $0.9 billion, changing the estimated effect of moving to an R-base in 1995 from -$90.1
billion to -$91.0 billion.
In sum then, as shown in Table 4, we estimate that the shift to an R-base would
have increased total tax liability by $7.6 billion in 1983, adjusting for business cycle
effects. In 1995, the tax change would have resulted in a business-cycle-adjusted tax
decrease of $91.7 billion. As the back-of-the-envelope calculations of Section 3
suggested, the business cycle does have substantial effects on the corporate calculations.
The calculations of this section suggest further that, at a typical point in the business
cycle, moving to an R-base tax would cause tiny revenue losses, or even revenue gains.
The business cycle has a relatively small effect on our estimates of how the shift to an Rbase tax would affect personal tax collections. Our cycle-adjusted estimates of the
overall change in total tax liability are not qualitatively different from our unadjusted
estimates: a small increase in tax in 1983, and a larger decrease in 1995.
5. Distribution effects of shifting to an R-base tax
5.1 Replication of procedure used with 1983 data

15

GS also provided some estimates of the distributional impact of moving to an R-base
tax system.24 In particular, GS estimated the change in after-tax income of different types
of individuals had the 1983 tax law included the proposed modifications. They first
calculated the change in personal tax payments for each individual, resulting from this tax
change. Then they added in each individual’s share of any changes in corporate taxes,
under the assumption that corporate taxes are borne in proportion to dividend income.
In GS the measure of well being used to classify individuals was labor income.25
In principle, our preferred measure would have been the present value of lifetime
earnings. This, of course, is not observed in our data. However, labor income is
relatively stable over an individual’s lifetime, and should be highly correlated with the
present value of the individual’s lifetime income. However, because current labor
income is not an accurate measure of economic position for those who are fully or
partially retired, GS separately treated households who report a member over the age of
65. These results were reported separately, with no attempt to stratify them by ability
group.
One issue in comparing figures over time is that the net change in tax revenue was
very different in the two years. To make the figures more comparable, we include a
comparison of revenue-neutral tax changes, where any revenue effects of shifting to an
R-base are offset by a proportional tax on labor income.
The results using the 1983 data are reported in Table 5.26 Because the revenueneutral tax change is so small in this case (a 0.41% tax cut to make up for the $7.36
24

Gentry and Hubbard (1997) also try to tabulate the distributional effects of moving from the existing tax
system to one that does not distort the incentives to save and invest. Their approach and their source of
data are both very different from ours. A key difference is that they assume a flat-rate structure in
comparing these tax bases, eliminating much of the distributional effects of existing tax arbitrage. In
contrast, GS (1988) found that the losses in particular from arbitrage with debt were a dominant
consideration. Another key difference is that Gentry and Hubbard make no direct attempt to assess the
implications for corporate tax payments of this shift to a tax base exempting capital income, simply
assuming that corporate taxable income will fall by 40%. As seen in Table 1, this assumption is very
different from our findings.
25
Here, labor income is defined to equal the sum of wage and salary income, unemployment compensation,
pension income, and the labor income component of business income, minus employee business expense.
The labor income component of business income was set equal to the real cash flow from the business,
replacing depreciation with expensing of new investment but eliminating interest deductions. (The ratio of
labor to total income from a business was computed using aggregate data, separately for firms with profits
and losses, and this ratio was then applied to each individual’s business income.)
26
These results differ from those reported in Table 5 and 6 in the earlier paper because we focus here on
tax changes in the non-financial sector only.
16

billion tax increase that we estimate would happen in the switch to an R-base tax), the
results are not much different in the revenue-neutral case. One striking results is that the
elderly would gain considerably, with an increase in after-tax income of more than
14%.27 In contrast, those with labor incomes between $20,000 and $100,000 (1983
dollars) would be worse off, both because they end up paying more in personal taxes (due
to as a group having negative taxable capital income), and because they would have
lower pre-tax income when corporate taxes rise. The results for the highest income group
(more than $100,000 of labor income) are particularly intriguing. Ignoring the change in
corporate taxes, this group would gain, because of the elimination of personal tax on net
personal financial income. However, because they are significant owners of corporate
stock, they would lose due to the increased corporate level taxes, and taking both effects
into account they have a net loss. Another notable result is that those in the lowest
income group (with labor income below $20,000) come out slightly ahead. So, the two
groups that we estimate would benefit from a switch to an R-base tax are the poor nonelderly and the elderly.
For the 1995 data, we first recalculated the distributional effects of the tax reform
for the non-elderly, using the same procedure as before but with the 1995 data.28 Table 6
reports the per-return net gain or loss from the tax reform for those in each decile, based
on their estimated net labor income. For this year, the distinction between the unadjusted
and revenue-neutral results is much more significant, because in order to make up for the
revenue loss a 2.8% levy on labor income is required. Compared to 1983, some
interesting similarities and differences arise. Recall that for 1983, the elderly were net
winners and the non-elderly net losers; among the non-elderly, the lower income classes
gained and the upper-income groups lost, although the highest income group about broke
even. Without the revenue-neutral tax levy, in 1995 both the non-elderly and elderly
come out ahead, although the per-return gain for the elderly is much higher compared to
the per-return gain for the non-elderly. Within the non-elderly, the U-shaped pattern of
gain appears again. The lowest eight income groups gain on average, the ninth loses, and
27

The distributions of sources of income that underlie these calculations are presented in Tables A1 and
A2.
28
The elderly were defined a bit more broadly than before, including not only those claiming a deduction
for a household member over age 65 but also those reporting nonzero pension or Social Security income.
17

those in the highest group on average come out ahead. One key difference is that in 1983
the slight increase in corporate tax collections offset the gains on individual income tax
for the highest income group. In 1995 the corporate tax decline under the R-base tax
adds to, rather than offsets, the personal tax changes, so that the highest income group
profits from both changes.
When the 2.8% labor income tax is levied to make the switch to an R-base tax
revenue-neutral, as in 1983 the elderly (including, in this case, the recipients of retirement
income) gain and the non-elderly lose. As in 1983, though, the poor among the nonelderly come out ahead.29 Perhaps most strikingly, those in the highest decile among the
non-elderly also gain on average. All in all, the U-shaped pattern of distributional effect
as well as the tendency for the elderly to gain at the expense of the non-elderly appears in
both 1983 and 1995.30
5.2 Closer examination of the distributional effects among the elderly

GS did not attempt to include the figures for the elderly in their distributional tables,
since we saw no easy way to report these figures separately by ability group. Among the
non-elderly, individuals were classified based on their labor income. While not entirely
stable over a lifetime, annual labor income is still highly correlated with lifetime labor
income. For the retired, however, current labor income provides little or no information
about their lifetime earnings.
To provide further information about the distributional effects among the elderly,
we use the information on their tax return to forecast what their earnings were when they
were aged 55, and then look at the net gains/losses among the elderly from shifting to an
R-base as a function of their earnings at age 55.
To do this, we first put together a sample of individuals from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics in which the household head was age 55 at some point between 1967
29

As shown in Table A1, the aggregate estimated labor income of those non-elderly in the lowest decile is
negative. This occurs because our measure of labor income includes a percentage of noncorporate business
income and losses. In aggregate, the taxpayers in the first decile had significant net losses from
noncorporate businesses, as reported on Schedules C, E, and F. Therefore, the first decile combines some
genuinely poor taxpayers with taxpayers who might not be thought of as poor but happened to incur large
business losses in 1995. The methodology for estimating labor income and the percentages of Schedule C,
E, and F income and losses that were used appear in the appendix.

18

and 1976. Our basic strategy is to estimate labor income at age 55 as a function of
information available at older ages contained as well on the tax return for the retired:
wage and salary income, “passive” income (dividends, interest, rent, royalties, and
income from trusts), business income, farm income, Social Security benefits, pension
income, unemployment compensation, alimony received, and marital status.31 Our
estimation sample includes data from all subsequent years in which the household would
be classified as retired according to our definition. The resulting regression can be
denoted by
Yi = Xiβ + εi.

(1)

Results are reported in Table A3.
If we could in fact observe true income at age 55, we could then use the following
equation to characterize the distributional effects of this tax change among the elderly:
∆i = g(Yi) + ηi,

(2)

where ∆i is the net gain/loss from the tax reform, Yi again is true income at age 55, and
g(Yi) is a set of ten dummy variables indicating which decile of the earnings distribution
Yi is in. The coefficients of the ten dummy variables would then correspond to the results
reported in Table 6 for the non-elderly.
The trouble is that we do not observe Yi. Instead, we run an implicit first stage
regression equal to
g(Yi) = Eg(Xiβ + εi) + vi,

(3)

and a second-stage regression equal to
∆i = Eg(Xiβ + εi) + (ηi + vi).

(4)

To implement the first stage regression, we first assumed that εi is distributed normally,
with standard deviation that is a function of the Xi.32 Next, we calculated the breakpoint
between the earnings deciles by simulating the distribution of true labor income at age 55

30

These figures ignore transition issues, general equilibrium changes in market prices, and any welfare
gains due to the resulting changes in efficiency. See below for further discussion.
31
In addition, dummy variables were included for the year the individual was age 55 and the year of the
retirement data, to control for the effects of inflation and real income growth.
32
In particular, we regressed the absolute value of the εi on the Xi, and used the resulting forecast as the
standard deviation for each household. The estimated regression is shown in Table A3.
19

and locating the income levels that divide the distribution into ten deciles.33 Given that
g(Yi) is a set of ten dummy variables, Eg(Xiβ + εi) equals the vector of probabilities that
the true income of household i is in each of the ten deciles, given the information set Xi.
With εi distributed normally, it is easy to calculate these ten probabilities. Equation (4)
can then be estimated using these constructed probability estimates and the observed
values of ∆i.
The results of this exercise are presented in Table 7. Note first, as also shown in
Table 6, that ignoring the revenue-neutral 2.8% labor income levy the average per-return
gain among the elderly population is about three and a half times higher than it is among
the non-elderly, $2,056 versus $607. The gain among the elderly is concentrated among
the top decile, but not nearly as starkly as among the non-elderly. Ignoring the revenueneutral tax adjustment 31.2% of the total gain accrues to the top decile among the elderly
versus 74.1% among the non-elderly. With the revenue-neutral adjustment, the fraction
is 33.3%, rather than 31.2%. The U-shaped pattern of gains also appears, but not nearly
as starkly as among the non-elderly. One clear difference is that, among the elderly, the
gain does not erode among the eighth and, especially, the ninth, deciles, even after the
2.8% levy on labor income. Rather, the estimated per-return gain from moving to the Rbase tax increases monotonically from the second decile to the tenth.
A natural next step would be to use the results from Tables 6 and 7 to draw
conclusions about the lifetime incidence of the switch to an R-base tax as a function of
lifetime income. If people stayed within the same decile throughout their life, then the
combined numbers would approximate the present value of effects experienced by a
typical individual in each decile over his or her lifetime. In particular, let ∆ ict denote the
net gain/loss for individuals in cohort i in birth cohort c in year t. Then, if the discount
rate is r, the desired lifetime present value of these net gains/losses equals

∫

∞

0

∆ i ,c ,c +t e − rt dt .

Instead, we observe a cross section of individuals. Assume that incomes, and these net
gains/losses, grow proportionately with time at rate g due to overall growth in the
economy. Then the observed average gain, across all cohorts, in a given decile equals
To do this, we drew twenty-five random values of εi (with the appropriate standard deviation) for each
household, pooled data on Xiβ + εi across households, ordered these values, and located the nine
breakpoints.

33

20

∫

∞

0

∞

∆ i ,t −c ,t dc = ∫ ∆ i ,t ,t + c e − gc dc
0

If g=r, then this average gain in the cross section equals the discounted present value of
the gain for the youngest cohort in the time series. This suggests that, of the $108.1
billion in increased after-tax income, about half would accrue to those taxpayers, elderly
and not, who fall into the top decile of their income distribution, and who receive about
the same fraction of labor income. Among the rest of the population, the benefits would
disproportionately accrue to taxpayers with low labor income.
Of course, most people do not stay within a given decile of labor income
throughout their lifetime. To overcome this, one could estimate, using perhaps the PSID
data, labor income at age 55 for the non-elderly population, and use that as the measure
of permanent income for all taxpayers. We have not attempted to pursue that strategy.
5.3 Remaining omissions from distributional forecasts
a. Behavioral changes

The above calculations ignore any behavioral changes. Any changes in savings,
investment, and portfolio choice have no direct implications for tax revenue, since the tax
structure being considered collects no revenue in present value on the marginal rate of
return to savings and investment. However, behavioral changes do affect utility.
Starting from the old allocation, the benefit from a marginal change in behavior had
previously been just offset by the resulting tax cost. Under the new law, the benefit from
the same marginal change from the old equilibrium behavior equals the tax cost no longer
paid. At the new equilibrium allocation, the benefit from a marginal change in behavior
is zero. On average, the total benefits to the individual are approximated by the
Harberger triangle: 0.5 dX T, where T is the initial tax distortion affecting some decision,
and dX is the total change in this decision in response to the new law. This figure
represents gains in utility for investors that should be taken into account in a complete
distributional analysis. The types of behavior that can change in response to the tax
reform include not only savings and investment rates, but also dividend payout rates,

21

rates of capital gains realizations, portfolio composition, corporate financial policies,
extent of financial intermediation, international diversification, etc. Coming up with any
plausible estimates, by tax bracket, for these gains goes far beyond what we can do in this
paper. Given the presumption that the efficiency costs from existing taxes on capital
income are large, the correction to the figures we report in Tables 6-7 due to behavioral
changes would be large as well. These gains would go primarily to those facing the
largest tax distortions under existing law, so primarily to those in the highest tax brackets.
b. Changes in market rates of return

Another issue neglected in the above figures is the distributional implications of any
changes in the market interest rate, in the prices or future rates of return on existing
equity, or in market wage rates. The above calculations implicitly held these prices fixed.
Yet these tax changes inevitably would have some impact on market prices. For
example, at the initial interest rate, the elimination of the deductibility of interest should
cause a fall in the demand for loans, while the exemption of interest income should
increase the demand for interest-bearing assets. Together these changes in behavior will
induce a fall in interest rates, at least in a closed economy, aiding borrowers and hurting
investors in taxable bonds. Given observed borrowing and lending behavior, this aids
those in higher tax brackets, and hurts those in lower tax brackets. In addition, the shift
from depreciation to expensing should increase demand for capital, raising both wage
rates and market interest rates, with the relative changes depending on relative
elasticities. In an open economy, however, the interest rate should be largely set in the
world capital market, suggesting a rise in wage rates.
c. Transition rules

The above distributional figures ignore any transition effects of the tax change. Yet for
cohorts present at the time of any such change in the tax law, these transition effects can
be large.34 For example, the value of existing owner-occupied housing could fall, since
the effective cost rises if mortgage interest payments are no longer deductible. If the
proposed tax reform were implemented without any transition rules, then it would also
34

For further discussion of possible such transition effects, see Gentry and Hubbard (1997).
22

involve a windfall tax on existing capital, since the added investment resulting from the
now more favorable tax treatment of new investment would drive down the rate of return
on existing capital relative to what was expected when the investment occurred. What if
instead existing capital faced the same tax treatment as new capital, so that businesses
could receive an immediate deduction for the market value of existing assets? In that
case, existing assets would receive a windfall gain under the reform: investment should
rise, yet with adjustment costs the market value of existing assets will jump at the date
the reform is announced. What transition rules would likely exist in practice is unclear.
6. Conclusions

Calling a tax system an income tax or a consumption tax does not make it so. This is
certainly true of the U.S. income tax system, which has long been recognized as a hybrid
of an income and consumption tax, with elements that do not fit naturally into either pure
system. What it actually is has important policy implications for, among other things,
understanding the impact of moving closer to a pure consumption tax regime.
Gordon and Slemrod (1988) introduced a new methodology for shedding light on this
issue: calculating the revenue implications of switching to one form of consumption tax,
an R-base modified cash flow tax. Loosely speaking, the more revenue loss this would
cause, the greater the inferred tax levied on capital income under the existing tax system.
Strikingly, GS concluded that in 1983 in the U.S. this switch would cost little or no
revenue at all, suggesting that the tax burden on capital was at that time small or nonexistent. GS also concluded that the elderly would gain considerably from a shift to an
R-base, those of working age with moderate income would be worse off, while the lowest
and the highest income groups would gain slightly.
Because both the U.S. economy and tax system have changed since 1983, this paper
revisits the GS calculation and enriches the methodology for calculating the distributional
implications of the exercise. The striking finding for 1983 has indeed disappeared by
1995: a switch to an R-base tax would in 1995 cost $108.1 billion in tax revenues. One
important reason was the drop in nominal interest rates from 1983 to 1995, reducing the
tax savings arising from any tax arbitrage through use of debt, and thereby raising the

23

effective tax rate on capital income. A second reason for the change is that 1995 was at a
different point in the business cycle than 1983, with a much higher current investment
rate relative to the depreciation deductions arising from past investments.
Based on an extrapolation of the 1975-80 business cycle, we conclude that the
cyclical adjustment to our baseline estimate of the change in the 1995 corporate tax
liability from moving to an R-base tax would be of some importance, making the result
more like our 1983 estimate. The cyclical adjustments for the personal tax are minor,
leaving our 1983 and 1995 estimates still very different. If 1995 were at a more typical
point in the business cycle, we forecast that the revenue loss from a shift to an R-base
would instead have been $91.7 billion instead of $108.1 billion. The 1983 revenue gain
would be $7.6 billion instead of $7.4 billion. Thus, this approach to adjusting for the
business cycle suggests that the baseline 1983 and 1995 results are not much affected by
the business cycle. This methodology does not, though, account for the differences
between the 1975-80 cycle and the later ones that contain 1983 and 1995.
We also examine the distributional effects of a shift from the existing income tax to
an R-base tax. The net gains, as a fraction of pretax labor income, have a U-shaped
pattern, with those in the lowest and the highest deciles having the largest proportional
gains, though those in the highest tax bracket have by far the largest absolute gains.
We believe that the next step in this research agenda is to clarify the behavioral and
efficiency implications of this exercise. To be precise, we seek to be able to make a
statement like the following: the U.S. tax system of 1995 levied an effective tax rate on
capital income of (108.1/capital income tax base), where both the terms “effective” and
“capital income tax base” are rigorously defined in the context of a well-posed model of
how taxation affects saving and investment. To do so requires a careful explication of
what is and is not a tax at the margin of decisions, and an understanding of how arbitrage
opportunities and income shifting possibilities affect the average and marginal effective
tax rate. We have begun that task in Gordon, Kalambokidis, and Slemrod (2002).

24

References

Auerbach, Alan J. and Roger H. Gordon. 2002. “Taxation of Financial Services

under a VAT,” American Economic Review 92, pp. 411-416.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr. 1987. "Anticipated Tax Changes and the

Timing of Investment," in M. Feldstein, ed., The Effects of Taxation on Capital

Accumulation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press and NBER, pp. 163-196.
Bond, Stephen R. et al. 1996. “Tax Reform to Promote Investment,” Oxford Review of

Economic Policy 12, pp. 109-17.

Bradford, David F. (with U.S. Treasury tax policy staff). 1984. Blueprints for Basic

Tax Reform. 2nd ed. Arlington, Va.: Tax Analysts, (original edition published as U.S.
Treasury study, 1977).

Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith. 1998a. “Taxes and the Location of

Production: Evidence from a Panel of US Multinationals.” Journal of Public Economics.
68(3), 335-367.
Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith. 1998b. “The Taxation of Discrete

Investment Choices.” Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper 98/16.
Devereux, Michael P., Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm. 2001. “Have Taxes on

Mobile Capital Declined? Mimeo, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London, UK.

25

Gentry, William and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1997. "Distributional Implications of

Introducing a Broad-Based Consumption Tax," in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and

the Economy, volume 11, pp. 1-47.
Gordon, Roger, Laura Kalambokidis and Joel Slemrod. 2002. “If Capital Income

Taxes Are So High, Why Do We Collect So Little Revenue? A New Summary Measure
of the Effective Tax Rate on Investment” Presented at the CES-Ifo Conference on
Measuring the Effective Taxation of Capital, Venice, July 15-16.
Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. 1987. "Do We Collect Any Revenue from Taxing

Capital Income?" In L. Summers. ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2, Cambridge:
MIT Press, pp. 89-130.
Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez. Forthcoming. “The Elasticity of Taxable

Income: Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Public Economics.
Haig, Robert M. 1921. The Federal Income Tax. New York: Columbia University

Press.
Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka. 1995. The Flat Tax. Stanford, Ca.: Hoover

Institution.
Kalambokidis, Laura. 1992. What is Being Taxed? A Test for the Existence of Excess

Profit in the Corporate Income Tax Base. University of Michigan Ph.D. thesis.
McLure, Charles and George Zodrow. 1996. “A Hybrid Approach to the Direct

Taxation of Consumption,” Frontiers of Tax Reform. Stanford, Ca.: Hoover Institution.
Meade Committee Report. 1978. The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation.

Boston: Allen & Unwin.

26

Shoven, John. 1991. "Using the Corporate Cash Flow Tax to Integrate Corporate and

Personal Taxes." In Proceedings of the 83rd Annual Conference of the National Tax

Association 83, pp. 19-26.
Simons, Henry C. 1938. Personal Income Taxation. Chicago: Chicago University

Press.
Slemrod, Joel. 1997. "Deconstructing the Income Tax." American Economic Review

87(2), pp. 151-5.
Slemrod, Joel. 2001. “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation.”

International Tax and Public Finance 8(2), pp. 119-128.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Economic Research Service. 2001. Farm Sector

Gross Capital Expenditures, 1910-2000, [Online]. Available:
http://www.ers.usda.gov/data/FarmIncome/expense/capexpnd.wk1 [2001 September 21].
U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1997. Annual Capital

Expenditures: 1995. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1978. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1975. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1979. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1975. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1979. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1976. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1980. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1977. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

27

U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1981. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1976. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1981. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1977. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1981. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1978. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1981. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1978-79. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1982. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1979. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1982. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1980. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1983. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1980. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1984. Tax Reform for Fairness, Simplicity, and

Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1985. Sourcebook:

Partnership Returns, 1957-83. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1986. Sourcebook: Sole

Proprietorship Returns, 1957-84. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

28

U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1998. Corporation Income

Tax Returns, 1995. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1997. “1995, All

Partnerships: Total Assets, Trade or Business Income and Deductions, Portfolio Income,
Rental Income, and Total Net Income, by Industrial Groups.” SOI Bulletin, Fall 1997,
[Online]. Available: http://www.irs.treas.gov/tax_stats/soi/part_gen.html [January 1,
1998].
U.S. Department of Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 1997. “1995, Nonfarm

Sole Proprietorships: Income Statements, by Selected Industrial Groups.” SOI Bulletin,
Summer 1997, [Online]. Available: http://www.irs.treas.gov/tax_stats/soi/sole_non.html
[August 15, 1997].
U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. 1985. Individual Income

Tax Returns, 1983. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

29

Table 1
Corporate tax base and tax liability under current law and a simulated R-base cash flow
tax
1983 and 1995
(Dollar amounts in $billions)
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
9

Plus: net interest payments
Plus: depletion, amortization, and depreciation
Less: new capital investment
Less: net dividend income
Less: net capital and noncapital gains
Less: inventory adjustment
Equals: net change in taxable income
Times: average effective tax rate (current law)

10

Equals: net change in tax liability (before
investment tax credits)
Plus: investment tax credits net of recapture
Equals: net change in tax liability (after
investment tax credit)

11
12

30

1983
96.6
228.8
259.0
7.7
17.3
14.6
26.8

1995
131.1
393.8
504.5
3.0
48.9
19.7
-51.2

31.8%

35.1%

8.5
14.1

-18.0
0

22.6

-18.0

Table 2
Individual Tax Base Changes from Moving from Current law to a Simulated Labor
Income Tax Base: 1983 and 1995
(billions of current dollars)
1983
1995
Taxable income
1,534.8
2,812.3
Less: Schedule B interest income
155.7
153.8
Less: other capital income
64.7
292.5
Plus: Schedule A interest deductions
121.8
214.8
Net changes in taxable income (- line 2 – line 3 +
line 4 )
-98.6
-231.5
6 Investment tax credit
4.3
0
7 Implied change in tax liability (tax liability
implications of line 5 and line 6)
-15.2
-90.1
Source: 1983 figures from Gordon and Slemrod (1988), Tables 1 and 3. 1995 figures
from the Internal Revenue Service 1995 Public Use File and authors’ calculations.

1
2
3
4
5

31

Table 3
Estimated Change in Tax Revenue from Moving to an R-Base Tax, 1975-80
(percentages)
A
Change in Corporate Taxable
Income/GDP

B
Change in Personal Taxable
Income/GDP

1975

-1.16

-2.91

1976

-3.04

-3.12

1977

-3.79

-3.18

1978

-3.81

-2.87

1979

-4.40

-2.68

1980

-2.59

-2.68

1975-80 Average

-3.13

-2.90

Table 4
Estimated Change in Tax Revenue from Moving to an R-Base, Adjusted for the Business Cycle, 1983 and
1995
($billions)

Estimated
1983
Business
cycle
adjustment
for 1983
Adjusted
1983
Estimated
1995
Business
cycle
adjustment
for 1995
Adjusted
1995

Change in
corporate
taxable
income

Change in
corporate
tax liability

Change in
personal
taxable
income

Change in
personal tax
liability

Change in
total tax
liability

26.8

22.6

-98.6

-15.2

7.4

-3.2

-1.0

7.7

1.2

0.2

23.6

21.6

-90.9

-14.0

7.6

-51.2

-18.0

-231.5

-90.1

-108.1

49.4

17.3

-2.2

-0.9

16.2

-1.8

-0.7

-233.7

-91.0

-91.7

32

Table 5
Changes in Per-Return Tax, Pre-tax and After-tax Income
from Switching to a Revenue-Neutral R-base Tax, 1983
Per return
Change
in after
tax
income
due to
.41%
labor
income
tax cut

Nonelderly,
nondependent,
labor
income
group
< 20K

Number of
returns
50,105,872

20K – 40K

23,816,452

258

-81

-339

116

-223

-0.89%

40K – 70K
70K – 100K

8,114,064
1,028,676

956
1,424

-222
-788

-1,177
-2,213

202
330

-976
-1883

-2.35%
-2.96%

>100K

588,128

-1,775

-3,161

-1,386

709

-677

-0.58%

> Age 65

11,239,388

-1,965

-1,065

900

39

939

14.77%

Dependents

913,920

-360

-181

179

3

183

45.43%

Total

95,806,480

-159

-236

-77

77

0

0

Change
in
personal
tax
liability

Change in
pre-tax
income
due to
corporate
tax change

-143

-81

Change
in aftertax
income
61

33

35

Total
change
in aftertax
income
97

Total change
in after-tax
income/aftertax labor
income
1.24%

Table 6
Changes in Tax, Pre-tax, and After-tax Income from Switching to a Revenue-Neutral Rbase Tax, 1995

Per Returna

Change in
after tax
income due
to 2.8% labor
income tax
increase
4
-129
-245
-371
-514
-679
-890
-1,170
-1,594
-3,439

NonChange Change in
Change in
retired
in
pre-tax
Change
Total
after-tax
labor personal income due in afterchange in
income/afterincome
tax
to corporate
tax
after-tax
tax labor
decile liability tax change income
income
income
1
-827
172
999
1,003
-97.92%
2
-96
23
119
-11
-0.24%
3
-90
14
103
-141
-1.70%
4
-100
15
114
-256
-2.08%
5
-107
17
124
-390
-2.32%
6
-97
19
116
-562
-2.58%
7
-48
32
79
-811
-2.87%
8
-11
38
49
-1,121
-3.06%
9
194
65
-129
-1,723
-3.49%
10
-4,173
318
4,491
1,052
1.11%
Total
nonretired
-536
71
607
-903
-296
-1.09%
Total
retired
-1,603
453
2,056
-958
1,099
4.02%
Total
-762
152
914
-914
0
0
a
The per return values are based on the following numbers of returns in each category:
93,128,400 non-retired; 25,089,930 retired; 118, 218,330 total.

34

Table 7
Changes in Per-Return Tax, Pre-tax and After-tax Income
from Switching to a Revenue-Neutral R-base Tax, 1995:
Retired Individuals Only, by Estimated Labor Income at Age 55 Decile
Per returna
Labor
income
at age
55
decile
1

Change
in
personal
tax
liability
-1,082

Change in
pre-tax
income due to
corporate tax
change
332

1,415

Change in after
tax income due
to 2.8% labor
income tax
increase
-506

2

-631

283

914

3
4

-785
-935

310
342

5

-1,085

6

908

Total change
in after-tax
income/aftertax labor
income
6.28%

-482

432

2.97%

1,095
1,277

-531
-603

564
574

3.53%
3.74%

378

1,462

-687

775

3.80%

-1,230

408

1,638

-782

856

3.70%

7

-1,378

437

1,815

-897

918

3.47%

8
9

-1,578
-1,947

472
538

2,050
2,485

-1,054
-1,274

996
1,211

3.22%
3.28%

-5,351
10
1,027
6,378
-2,744
Total
-1,603
retired
453
2,056
-958
a
The per return values are based on a total of 25,089,930 returns.

3,634

5.05%

1,099

4.02%

Change in
after-tax
income

35

Total change
in after-tax
income

-1,282

42,413

80,276

121,559

168,762

222,740

291,693

384,302

522,802

1,128,925

2,962,190

846,495

3,808,685

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

All nonelderly

All
elderly

TOTAL

Est. labor
income

1

NonElderly
Labor
Income
Decile

153,771

97,755

56,016

22,939

5,083

4,398

2,772

2,241

1,775

1,826

1,493

1,573

11,916

Sch. B
interest
income

292,475

142,488

149,987

79,411

9,995

7,335

5,268

4,113

3,632

3,442

3,433

3,617

29,741

Other
capital
income

38,667

8,425

30,242

14,015

3,613

3,118

2,538

2,037

1,574

1,276

926

584

561

Adjustments

4,189,240

1,057,757

3,131,483

1,211,807

535,831

394,637

298,576

228,023

173,355

125,403

84,750

48,002

31,099

Adjusted
gross
income

214,764

44,435

170,329

78,960

36,855

22,080

13,374

7,116

4,101

2,427

1,346

869

3,201

Sched. A
interest
deduct.

526,972

143,526

383,446

186,231

78,712

45,654

27,976

15,967

8,904

5,273

3,462

2,423

8,844

Total
itemized
deductions

421,895

102,693

319,202

6,302

18,926

29,706

34,926

38,775

41,525

42,393

42,167

38,579

25,903

Total
standard
deductions

584,509

117,444

467,065

68,490

69,311

60,738

52,827

47,385

46,359

43,056

37,734

24,132

17,033

Total
exemptions

958,046

370,575

259,539

184,018

128,076

79,478

42,369

18,195

6,644

31,420

Taxable
income

2,812,321

733,961

2,078,360

Table A1: Aggregate Statistics on Income and Tax Payments by Labor Income Decile,
with Elderly and Non-Elderly Taxpayers Separated
1995 Individual Income Tax Returns
(Millions of 1995 dollars)

595,085

161,229

433,856

247,236

63,703

43,090

28,902

19,608

12,209

6,594

2,989

1,273

8,252

Tax on
taxable
income

1,301

13,063

18,111

23,912

31,363

41,223

56,154

121,157

31,807

33,738

32,217

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

All nonelderly

All
elderly

TOTAL

2

1

3,896

8,617

3

2,474

5,679

1,611

8,522

1,074

787

566

442

390

370

368

388

3,195

Other
capital
income

327

336

325

1,504

388

334

273

219

169

137

99

63

60

Adjustments

35,436

42,159

33,625

130,052

57,554

42,331

32,103

24,480

18,604

13,476

9,097

5,153

3,341

Adjusted
gross
income

6,315

5,167

6,704

9,450

5,928

5,350

4,891

4,512

4,392

4,458

4,007

4,169

8,588

Sched. A
interest
deduct.1

37

15,496

16,688

15,092

22,288

12,660

11,061

10,231

10,124

9,535

9,684

10,311

11,630

23,726

Total
itemized
deductions1

Per return amounts are averaged over returns taking itemized deductions.
Per return amounts are averaged over returns taking standard deductions.

601

2,462

546

472

298

241

190

196

160

169

4,553

2

1,280

Sched. B
interest
income

-138

Est.
labor
income

1

NonElderly
Labor
Income
Decile

5,010

6,228

4,713

6,550

6,120

5,718

5,319

5,011

4,953

4,839

4,695

4,237

2,899

Total
standard
deductions2

4,944

4,681

5,015

7,350

7,445

6,515

5,680

5,087

4,975

4,627

4,050

2,591

1,830

Total
exemptions

23,789

29,253

22,317

102,818

39,804

27,840

19,786

13,750

8,529

4,553

1,953

713

3,375

Taxable
income

Table A2: Per Return Statistics on Income and Tax Payments by Labor Income Decile,
with Elderly and Non-Elderly Taxpayers Separated
1995 Individual Income Tax Returns

5,034

6,426

4,659

26,534

6,842

4,622

3,108

2,105

1,310

709

321

137

886

Tax on
taxable
income

Table A3: Regression Equations Based on PSID Data, Predicting Labor Income at Age
55 and the Standard Error of the Estimated Labor Income35

Number of obs = 5354
R2 = 0.2937
Estimated
coefficient
t-statistic
6576.213
1.459

For equation predicting
standard error of
estimated labor income
Number of obs = 5354
R2 = 0.0901
Estimated
coefficient
t-statistic
9329.844
8.161

13062.58
.441659

5.460
3.926

6151.271
.1232194

4.185
2.067

.0021099
-2.671929
.1110275

0.539
-2.577
1.066

.0019073
-2.852709
.1346171

0.701
-10.040
1.803

.0450401
-.1496895

2.998
-2.073

.0354144
-.041459

4.176
-1.436

.4677233

0.392

-.4939948

-0.654

1.808133

7.671

.3633196

2.681

For equation predicting
labor income at Age 55

Definition of
variable
Dummy equal to 1
if married, 0
otherwise
wages and salaries
“passive” income,
equal to the sum
of dividends,
interest received,
rent from real
estate, trust funds,
and royalties
alimony received
business income
non-Social
Security
retirement income,
including
pensions,
annuities, and IRA
distributions
farm income
Unemployment
compensation
Social Security
benefits

35

Source of data: The Panel Study of Income Dynamics, available online at
http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/psid/.

Appendix

We estimate how much tax revenue would change if investment distortions were
eliminated by simulating a shift to an R-base tax, while leaving tax rates and the tax base
otherwise unchanged. The R-base tax, as described in Meade (1978), would exempt the
net return from all financial assets and tax real assets on a cash flow basis. Mechanically,
this means that to simulate the R-base tax, we need to subtract from taxable income all
financial income, add back to taxable income deductions for interest paid, and replace
current law capital recovery allowances with a deduction for new investment. Because
the U.S. income tax is levied separately on individuals and corporations, we perform
these calculations in two steps. First, we estimate the change in taxable income and tax
liability that would be generated by a shift from the current corporate income tax to an Rbase tax on corporations. We next estimate the change in personal tax payments that
would result from a shift to an R-base. We simulate this change by exempting from
personal taxation all financial income, by shifting to an R-base for noncorporate
businesses, and by attributing to noncorporate business owners their share of the
business’ R-base taxable income. Finally, we combine these effects. The details of these
calculations appear below, and the results, set by step, appear in Tables 1, 2, and 3.
Calculating R-base taxable income for corporations

Under the R-base tax, real assets are taxed on their cash flow, but cash flow from
financial assets is made tax exempt. To calculate the difference between this tax base and
the actual 1995 tax base for nonfinancial Subchapter C corporations, we used aggregate
corporate income tax data published by the Statistics of Income Division of the Internal
Revenue Service (SOI).36 The calculations appear in Table 1, and the procedure is
described below.
First, we eliminated net interest payments, net capital gains, and net gains from
noncapital assets from taxable income. Here, capital gains are measured by capital gains
taxed at ordinary rates plus 28/35 of capital gains taxable at the alternative rate of 28
percent. In addition, we eliminated net dividend income from taxable income, where net
dividend income is defined to equal 80 percent of domestic dividends received.37 These
changes produce a net $79.2 billion increase in taxable income, relative to current law.
Next, we replaced depletion, depreciation, and amortization deductions with a deduction
for investment expenditures. Under the R-base tax, when used capital is sold from one
firm to another, the purchasing firm would deduct the purchase cost of the acquired
36

U.S. Department of Treasury (1998).
Under the R-base tax, either dividend income is tax-exempt, or it is taxable and the company paying the
dividend gets to deduct the payment. We adopted the first approach. Because our simulation did not
change the tax treatment of foreign dividends received, we did not exclude those from the R-base. In the
absence of complete information about the portion of the dividends received deduction that was generated
by domestic dividends, we assumed that, on average, domestic dividends qualified for the 80 percent
deduction.

37

39

capital, and the selling firm would be taxed on the entire proceeds from the sale. As long
as both firms faced the same tax rate, the net tax effects would exactly offset. Therefore,
R-base taxable income can be measured either by deducting expenditures on new capital
and exempting all capital and noncapital gains or by deducting all investment
expenditures, but adding the entire proceeds from the sale of used assets into the tax base.
We adopted the first approach.
Our measure of new investment expenditures was based on the figure for capital
expenditures for new structures and equipment made by all businesses in 1995, reported
in the U.S. Bureau of Commerce publication, Annual Capital Expenditures: 1995.38
Because we were estimating the change in the tax base for nonfinancial C-corporations,
and the Bureau of Commerce measure included all nonfarm businesses, we made several
adjustments to the Bureau of Commerce data. First, we subtracted the Bureau of
Commerce’s figure for investment by financial businesses from their total for all
businesses. Next, we added to the total a U.S. Department of Agriculture estimate of
investment in new plant and equipment made by agricultural businesses.39 We then
allocated total capital expenditures made by nonfinancial businesses among the four
organizational forms (C-corporations, Subchapter S corporations, partnerships, and sole
proprietorships) in proportion to each form’s share of total depreciation deductions, as
reported in Internal Revenue Service publications.40
Our final step in estimating the difference between the R-base and current tax base dealt
with the treatment of inventories. Under the R-base tax, expenditures on inventories
would be deductible, but under the existing tax, some valuation of withdrawals from
inventories is deductible. These two differ on average because withdrawals from
inventory are priced using older prices, and because of any growth in the size of
inventories, due to purchases exceeding withdrawals. The difference between
expenditures on inventories and accounting withdrawals in a year equals the change in
the inventory balance sheet during that year. We therefore reduced taxable income by the
difference between the balance sheet inventory in 1994 and 1995.
Simulating a labor income tax

Calculating a labor income tax base:
Under the simulated labor income tax, income from interest, dividends, and capital gains
would be tax exempt, interest deductions would be disallowed, and noncorporate
business owners would be taxed on their share of the business’ R-base taxable income.
38

U.S. Department of Commerce (April 1997). Gordon and Slemrod (1987) obtained their investment
figures from the “New Plant and Equipment Expenditures” data series appearing in the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) publication, Survey of Current Business. In 1988, responsibility for producing
investment figures was transferred from BEA to the Bureau of the Census, and the “New Plant and
Equipment” series was replaced with the “Annual Capital Expenditures Survey.”
39
U.S. Department of Agriculture (September 21, 2001). To estimate farm purchases of new equipment
and structures, we reduced by half the published figure of $13.8 billion spent on new and used capital, as
recommended by Economic Research Service staff.
40
U.S. Department of Treasury (1997, 1998a, 1998b).
40

In other words, under the labor income tax, individuals would be taxed on the
compensation they receive from their employers plus the portion their self-employment
income that is a return to labor.
Using individual tax return data from SOI’s “1995 Public Use File,” we first subtracted
Schedule B taxable interest income from, and added Schedule A interest deductions to,
the tax base. Next, we subtracted from taxable income all “other capital income,” which
included dividends, net capital gains, and the capital portion of noncorporate business
income—that portion that would have been tax-exempt under a R-base tax.
Estimating R-base taxable income from noncorporate businesses:
Individual income tax returns do not include enough detail about the taxpayer’s
noncorporate business income to estimate the portion of that income that would have
been taxable under a R-base tax. We, therefore, estimated those amounts from aggregate
tax return data for partnerships, Subchapter S corporations, and sole proprietorships.41
Using the same procedure as for C-corporations, we zeroed out net interest
income/payments, dividend income, and capital gains, and replaced depreciation,
amortization, and depletion deductions with estimates for new investment expenditures.
Because partnerships report some net income and losses from other partnerships and
fiduciaries, we made an additional correction to taxable income for partnerships. We
assumed that the ratio of R-base taxable income to net income was the same for income
from other partnerships as for ordinary partnership income, and we solved algebraically
for the portion of this income that would taxable under the R-base tax. Next, we
calculated the ratio of R-base taxable income to current law net income for each type of
organizational form, and for profit and loss firms separately. Those ratios appear below.
Rent (Schedule E)
Net income
Net loss

78%
59%

Partnership
(Schedule E)
78%
59%

S-corp
(Schedule E)
94%
92%

Sole prop.
(Schedule C)
87%
89%

Farm (Schedule F)
87%
89%

Returning to the 1995 Public Use File, we applied these ratios to the income from
noncorporate business reported on individual tax returns to obtain the estimated portion
of noncorporate business income to be taxed under the R-base tax. The remainder of
noncorporate business income was then included in “other capital income” and was
subtracted from the individual income tax base. For example, if a taxpayer reported net
partnership income, we estimated that 78 percent of that income was labor income and
included it in R-base taxable income. The remaining 22 percent was included in “other
capital income” and was exempted from R-base taxable income. The same procedure,
with different percentages, was applied to those tax returns that reported noncorporate
business losses. Consequently, a substantial portion of business losses were included in
our estimate of labor income.

41

U.S. Department of Treasury (1997, 1998a, 1998b).

41

Calculating tax on the labor income base:
To estimate the amount of individual tax liability that would have been generated by a
labor income tax, we developed a microsimulation computer program. Using individual
tax return data from the 1995 Public Use File as input, the program calculated income tax
liability for each taxpayer as if the base had been labor income, as defined above, with
all tax parameters (rates, standard deductions, exempt amounts, phaseout levels, etc.) held
at their 1995 levels. We held all itemized deductions (except interest paid) the same,
though if the simulation for a taxpayer yielded an itemized deduction amount that was
below the taxpayer’s standard deduction, we applied the standard deduction in the
taxpayer’s tax calculation

42

