                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE EMERGENCE OF STRONG PROPERTY RIGHTS:
                            SPECULATIONS FROM HISTORY

                                           Raghuram G. Rajan
                                             Luigi Zingales

                                           Working Paper 9478
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9478


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2003




This paper has benefited tremendously from comments by Candice Prendergast. It is partly based on work
with Abhijit Banerjee. Much of this working paper is forthcoming as chapter 6 of Saving Capitalism from
the Capitalists (Crown Business, Random House). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given
to the source.
The Emergence of Strong Property Rights: Speculations from History
Raghuram G. Rajan and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 9478
January 2003
JEL No. D23, D72

                                           ABSTRACT

How did citizens acquire rights protecting their property from the depredations of the government?

In this paper, we argue that one important factor strengthening respect for property is how it is

distributed. When there is some specificity associated with property, and property is held by those

who are most productive, the distribution of property becomes relatively easy to defend. By contrast,

when property is owned by those who get rents simply by virtue of ownership, the distribution of

property becomes much harder to defend. We speculate on why some countries have been able to

develop a climate of respect for property rights while others have not.



Raghuram G. Rajan                                     Luigi Zingales
Graduate School of Business                           Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                                 University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street                                 1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                                     Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                              and NBER
raghuram.rajan@gsb.uchicago.edu                       luigi.zingales@gsb.uchicago.edu
       A sine qua non for almost any institution of capitalism to work is that the property of

each citizen be respected. This means more than simply allowing and enforcing each individual’s

right to own private property: It also means respecting the rule of law more broadly by

facilitating and enforcing private contracts, preventing arbitrary coercion, and preventing

arbitrary taxation.

       The critical element in ensuring security of property in most countries today is not how

covetous other citizens are – a strong government can always beat down the greedy. It is not

even how rapacious foreign invaders are – warfare in recent times has not typically been

conducted for the express purpose of pillaging the property of enemy citizens. The critical

element in ensuring security of property has been the commitment of a country’s government to

respect the property rights of its own citizens.

       Some countries have come a long way. The United States or the United Kingdom, models

of rectitude in their respect for property today, routinely expropriated wealthy creditors in the

past. Others are less respectful today than in the past, suggesting that governments do not have

permanent sinecures on their ability to commit to respect their citizens’ property. Despite Rome

being the cradle of law, and Venice the source of much innovation historically in business

contracting, Italy today lags considerably behind some of its northern neighbors in measures of

respect for the rule of law and respect for property. So if it is not something immutable in a

people’s culture or psyche that causes them collectively to agree to respect property, what is it?

Should citizens in developed countries be worried about whether their governments will continue

to respect property? We seek an answer in this paper.




                                                   2
The Main Argument

        A property right is a form of monopoly. It gives the owner of an asset the exclusive right

to use the asset and exclude others from its use. But what gives the owner this right? We might

be tempted to answer: “The Law”. While it is true that in modern developed societies, property

rights are enforced by the legal system, this answer begs the question of what gives the law

force. Why in certain countries is the law respected and enforced, even against the might of the

government, while in others it is not?

        One possible explanation is the nature of the government. Some have argued that by

constitutionally enhancing the “countervailing” power of parliament and the judiciary, a

government can offer a credible commitment to not expropriate its citizens.i There is, however,

something incomplete in the argument that the government can show its commitment to respect

property by setting up a more democratic political process, which keeps the arbitrary powers of

the government in check. At the national level, most rules can be changed. The government can

dispense with the democratic political process. Political power is therefore not easily conferred

by legislative fiat or a change in the constitution. It is more fruitful to think of the devolution of

political power and the security of property not as a political or legal phenomenon alone, but

partly as an economic phenomenon. This is the approach we take.

        To do so we need to go back in time, when legal enforcement was doubtful even in

countries where property is now well respected, and understand, step by step, how basic respect

for property emerged. To root ourselves firmly in facts, we will examine how England moved in

little over a hundred years from being a state under an arbitrary despot to being ruled by a

constitutional monarchy. Before we do so, however, it is useful to preview the logic of our

argument.




                                                   3
       A property right is much more defensible when the owner manages the property much

better than anyone else. There is a substantial cost to taking the property away, for the owner’s

skills would no longer be available – certainly to the extent it was earlier -- for generating value

with the property. Thus property that is owned by those who can manage it best is property that

not only has the law to support it, but also has economic value backing it. To the extent that the

government respects economic value, either because of the power it can purchase, or the taxes it

can pay, an economically efficient distribution of ownership is much more secure than a

distribution based on the accident of history or on the whims of the king. ii

       A political institution like parliament is not irrelevant here. To the extent that owners are

dispersed, parliament can help them gather and coordinate their actions. But democratic

institutions are an instrument, not the source, of their power. This is not just a matter of

semantics. With the “wrong” distribution of property, a country will find it very hard to achieve

the right balance between the power of the government and the power of the people, no matter

how many democratic institutions it has.

       At this point all this may seem just conjecture, but we will now substantiate it. We will

examine why respect for property rights emerged when it did in England and why it took so long

for other countries to follow England’s footsteps. While mainly historical, our analysis is

relevant today, not just for countries like Russia that are attempting to establish secure property

rights for their citizens, but also for countries where property is secure today, so that its

continued security can be assured.

The Rapacious Government

       Security of property started with protection from foreign invaders. The generalized

improvement in standards of living, which occurred in Western Europe from the beginning of the




                                                   4
second millennium, is attributable, at least in part, to the security of its Eastern borders, which

lead to the end of the Barbarian invasions. Thus, military security is an important element of

economic and financial development. But it is not sufficient. Nor is it true that more military

security is always better for finance. In fact, within Western Europe, the cities that emerged as

the most important financial centers (first Florence, Genoa, and Venice, then Hamburg and the

cities of the Hanseatic League) were not the political capitals of the then military superpowers,

but independent political entities, very much exposed, with the possible exception of Venice, to

the risk of foreign invasions. Why did they succeed where Paris, Vienna and Madrid did not?

       A nation’s military might does not necessarily translate into a sense of economic security

for the citizens. In fact, through much of history it has been quite the opposite. The stronger is a

government’s military power, the greater is its need for funds to feed and pay its soldiers, and the

stronger is its temptation to simply take from its own citizens (especially if even-more-tempting-

alien-citizens are not at hand). History is rife with examples of how the rich attracted the

unwanted attentions of their own powerful monarch. The fate of the Templars in the early

fourteenth century offers a salutary warning of what happened when a needy king went up

against his citizens, no matter how morally and physically powerful they might be.

       The Military Order of the Knights of the Temple of Solomon, better known as the

Knights Templars were the first significant international bankers. They were recruited largely

from the younger sons of nobility who stood no chance of inheriting titles or wealth. They

devoted themselves to the Church, and initially lived near the ruins of the Temple of Solomon in

Jerusalem, from which they took their name. They took upon themselves the duty of policing the

highways used by pilgrims going to Jerusalem. Their lives were chaste and austere, and they




                                                  5
reserved their passion for warfare. Because they apparently did not fear death, they were among

the most feared warriors on earth.iii

       As a result of gifts from the grateful and the faithful, they grew in wealth. They came to

own some of the strongest castles in the world. Given their military prowess, these served as

ideal repositories for valuables in those troubled times. King John of England used the London

Temple as a repository for the crown jewels, and in 1261, his son Henry III, who was in trouble

with his nobles, felt they would be safer if transferred to the Templar fortress in Paris.iv

        These castles formed a network of “branch offices” which meant they could make cash

available at both ends of the Mediterranean, as well as in Paris or London, when needed and in

the form that was locally accepted.v A knight could deposit money in Paris and receive it in the

appropriate currency in Jerusalem. Crusading knights used this network, the American Express

of the Crusades, to keep themselves in funds as they traveled. Of course, the Templars charged a

fee both for the exchange and the transfer. Local banking functions were also performed. A

number of surviving parchments suggest that the Temple in Paris operated what looks like a

modern bank’s cash desk, open at pre-specified times, and allowing clients to deposit and

withdraw money. Clients appeared to be a Who is Who of the time, and included the Royal

family, important Church officials, nobles, and rich merchants.vi

       The Templars’ financial functions soon rivaled or exceeded their military functions. They

were trustees for Crusaders and administered their wills, they acted as revenue agents for various

monarchs and popes, and they served as financial advisers for the rich and powerful.

       Substantial amounts of money were in Templar vaults at any point in time.

Unfortunately, while their castles were strong, they were no match for a determined sovereign. In

1263, during the conflict with Simon of Montfort, Prince Edward of England overcame Templar




                                                  6
opposition to enter its treasury. He broke into strong boxes, and seized money belonging to a

number of barons and merchants. His son, Edward II, did a similar thing on his father’s death.

Peter III of Aragon broke into the Templar treasury in Perpignan. In fact, the surprising fact is

not that monarchs violated the Templar strongholds, but that the violations were so few in

number given the temptations and the impecunious state of royal treasuries. The restraint

exercised by monarchs over the century and a half of Templar ascendancy must be attributed to

the moral force exerted by the Templars, as also the concern that a raid demonstrating naked

greed would undermine their own standing with the church.

        In 1307, Philip IV of France, motivated by the terrible financial state of his economy, and

having already raised all the money he could through the traditional mediaeval sources of

debasing the currency and seizing the property of the Lombards or the Jews, turned on the

Templars. Philip began a propaganda campaign that aimed to strip the Templars of their moral

standing. Templar leaders were arrested in a surprise raid and were accused of heresy, apostasy,

devil worship, sexual perversion and a number of other sins against the mediaeval code of

morality.vii The Templar leaders confessed under torture, and even though they later recanted,

they were found guilty and many were burnt at the stake.

        The properties of the Templars were carefully inventoried, lands rented out, and the

treasury taken over by royal officials. The Church, with no hope of expressing moral outrage,

decided to join the predators. Pope Clement V abolished the order in 1312 and devoted his

energies to securing some of its properties for other orders in the Church. Thus Philip succeeded

in his aim of reducing the moral standing of the Templars, and seizing its assets. But despite his

protestations otherwise, the act in more commercially minded countries such as Italy was seen as

one of pure avarice.viii




                                                 7
       The lesson from the demise of the Templars, which was repeated time and again, was that

no agent, however powerful or sacrosanct, could protect wealth against a determined

government. Interestingly, an important outcome of Philip IV’s depredations was that the Church

realized the threat monarchs represented to its own property. For this reason, it turned from

accepting property as a necessary evil (after all, Jesus inveighed against riches) to stoutly

defending it as an inalienable right. Clerical scholars started to argue that the state did not have

rights over the property of its subjects, and secular scholars soon took this theme up, finding

support for it in Roman Law.ix Perhaps as a result, outright expropriation became more rare in

Western Europe, and was generally targeted at infidels, such as Arabs or Jews.

       Greed was not the only, nor even the most important, reason why governments coveted

the wealth of their citizens. They were lead to expropriate their own citizens by their desperate

needs for funds to finance their military efforts. In the long run, states could fund expenditure

through taxes. But war brooked no delay. The alternative to confiscating citizens’ wealth was to

borrow -- an alternative a modern government knows all too well. But this led to a paradox. It is

both costly and unpopular to levy taxes on the wider population so as to pay a few creditors. One

reason a government would repay its debt even in the face of these costs is to keep the spigot of

future financing open. But if it had the ability to persuade a few citizens to put up more when it

was in need (what in mediaeval times was euphemistically called a forced loan), then it had little

incentive to repay old loans. Since creditors, as a result, had no punitive power over the

government, they had no reason to trust the government to repay. This then made it all the more

certain that the government would renege on any debt contracted in good faith, and resort

periodically to expropriation, disguised as forced loans or defaults.




                                                  8
       The easy targets (after the usual suspects like the Jews had been shaken down) were, of

course, the rich, especially financiers. The manifest usurer was anathema to the Church, and

hence accepted prey. Financiers were also likely to keep their wealth in a liquid, and

conveniently removable form. This is an aspect that makes, even in modern days, financiers the

likely target of government taxation or expropriation. In this the governments’ logic essentially

parallels that of the bank robber, Willy Sutton, who when asked why he robbed banks answered,

“Because that is where the money is”. In an atmosphere of forced loans and repeated defaults,

finance, not surprisingly, did not flourish.

       The resolution to this paradox was simple. The government had to find a way to make it

more credible that it would repay. This would then make the route of borrowing and repayment

via steady taxation more credible. The conventional wisdom is that the Venetian Republic, the

Netherlands, and in the late seventeenth century, England, managed to devolve power to

investors -- government in these countries was more representative of the rich investor than were

the absolute monarchies that prevailed elsewhere.x This then made it hard for the government to

default. The process by which the devolution of power took place is much more controversial.

To understand why, consider England.

The Transformation Of the English Monarchy

       The early Tudors, Henry VII and Henry VIII, were among the most rapacious and

arbitrary monarchs. They had their way with all the institutions of governance that were meant to

check their power – the aristocracy, the church, the parliament, and even the judiciary. Henry VII

steadily expropriated the great lords whom he feared as threats to the throne. Henry VIII not only

continued along his father’s path but in one of the greatest land grabs in history, he dissolved the

monasteries in England and took over their land, amounting by some estimates to over 30




                                                 9
percent of the land holdings in England at that time. This, however, was not enough. In addition,

the Tudors resorted to repeated “voluntary” loans from rich citizens. Consider the plight of one

Richard Reed who did not contribute to one of Henry VIII’s leviesxi:

“The English army was then in the field on the Scots border. Reed was sent down to serve as a
soldier on his own charge; and the general…received intimations to employ him on the hardest
and most perilous duty, and subject him, when in garrison, to the greatest privations, that he
might feel the smart of his folly and sturdy disobedience.”

The Stuarts continued the practice of expropriation. As late as 1672, in the infamous Stop on the

Exchequer, Charles II suspended debt payments to bankers amounting to about $ 1.3 million

pounds, at a time when annual Crown income was less than 2 million pounds.xii

       Yet soon after, England had a constitutional monarchy. In the Glorious Revolution of

1688, the Stuart King, James II, was overthrown and replaced by William and Mary. The new

monarchs agreed to a Declaration of Rights. The Crown recognized the legislative supremacy of

Parliament and also the need for parliamentary consent for a standing army in peacetime.

Furthermore, judges were protected from arbitrary dismissal, strengthening individual liberties

and the property rights of the citizens against the Crown.

       The consequences for the English government’s ability to borrow were extraordinary. In

1688, government debt was about 1 million pounds, about 2 or 3 percent of GDP. Much of the

debt was short term (recall that creditors lend only short term if uncertain of the motives of the

debtor) requiring between 6 and 30 percent a year in interest, at a time when the Dutch

government was able to borrow long term at 4 percent per year.xiii By 1697, government debt had

multiplied 17 times to about 40 percent of GDP, a significant portion of which was long term.

The proximate cause of the increase in government debt was war with France, but it also

reflected the greater willingness of investors to supply the government with debt. Even while




                                                 10
government debt mounted, interest rates came down, from 14 percent soon after the revolution to

about 6 percent in 1697.

       The now conventional explanation is that by constitutionally enhancing the

“countervailing” power of Parliament and the judiciary, the Crown offered investors the credible

commitment that it would not attempt to expropriate them.xiv Parliament represented both the

moneyed interests of merchants and financiers (the Whigs) and the landed gentry (the Tories).

Given its composition, the increase in its power as a result of the curbs on the power of the king

made property and financial contracts much more secure. In turn, investors obtained the

confidence to invest. Thus, the argument goes, the internal constitutional limitations on the

English Crown’s powers allowed it to raise large sums at short notice, giving it external strength

and transforming England into an European nation of the first rank.xv

       There is, however, something incomplete in the argument that the government could

show its commitment to respect property by setting up a more democratic political process,

which kept the arbitrary powers of the government in check. If it were so easy to offer a credible

commitment, why did other governments, especially those of other nation states like France and

Spain that were perpetually in financial need, not do so?

       One possibility is that their situations were different. For instance, it could be argued

England’s government could be tamed more easily because it had no standing army to carry out

its arbitrary orders, and finance for raising an army had to be approved by Parliament. Since

many members of Parliament were also property owners, Parliament was unlikely to approve the

raising of an army that could be used to expropriate the citizenry. By contrast, the French and

Spanish kings had standing armies -- external threats were more proximate, and they did not

have the luxury of time provided by a Channel separating them from their enemies. Thus, the




                                                11
argument must go, these monarchs could not set up credible internal constraints on the power of

their governments, even though they too desperately lacked for finance.

       Too much, however, could be made of these differences in geography. It is difficult to

believe that the absence of a standing army in England was the primary reason for the English

king to be better able to curb his own powers. After all, even if England, surrounded by seas, was

not as exposed to sudden foreign attack as France or Spain, the English king did have a smaller

standing police force to keep internal peace, and did use it to expropriate the citizenry. Or to see

it another way, even if the constitution mandated that the king needed Parliament’s permission to

raise an army, he could simply have ignored constitutional niceties once he was allocated the

funds and turned the army against Parliament. The loyalty of the army would then have

depended on who could give it a better deal in the long run (After all, Ancient Rome too tried to

keep popular generals and their armies far from the center of power, but eventually the

Praetorian Guard chose many of the later Emperors). That the king did not, or could not, attempt

to turn the army suggests other factors were at work

       Put yet another way, the great lords who surrounded the feudal monarch had powerful

armies. Yet constitutionally bound government, and respect for property, emerged only after the

demise of feudalism. Why only then and not before? There seems something missing in the

argument that governments became better able to borrow by setting up the checks and balances

on themselves that would curb their own baser instincts. What was the power that bound them?

       Perhaps it is more fruitful to question whether it is possible for any government to set up

countervailing power, especially the kind set up through constitutions: An alternative view is that

the interactions between powerful national players are rarely governed by constitutional rules

since, at the national level, most rules can be changed. Political power is not easily conferred by




                                                 12
legislative fiat or a change in the constitution. Instead, it has much deeper roots, some lying in

the ownership of property itself. It is more fruitful to think of the devolution of political power

and the security of property as intertwined processes in which secure property eventually became

the fount of political power.

       Pursuing this line of argument, Parliament did not become powerful in England as a

result of constitutional changes brought about in the Glorious Revolution of 1688, it was already

powerful as evidenced by its ability to depose two Stuart kings (Charles I and James II) in quick

order. This then means that the constitutional changes largely reflected the power relationship

that pre-existed these changes, while the conflict between the Stuarts and Parliament was only a

last ditch stand by the king against an inevitable passing of the balance of power. Of course,

constitutional change made the devolution more secure against reversal. Our point is that it was

the culmination rather than the source of the transfer of power. Let us now explain.

The Decline of the Aristocracy and the Rise of the Market

       A constitution is simply words on a piece of paper, and sometimes not even that.

Parliament commanded no armies directly. How did it gain more power over the monarchy than

did the power feudal lords with their loyal retinues who surrounded the mediaeval monarch? To

see why, we have to delve deeper into history. The first piece of the answer is the decline of the

great lords.

       Henry VII, the Lancaster pretender to the throne, defeated Richard III unexpectedly at

Bosworth Field in 1485, thus ending the War of the Roses between the House of York and the

House of Lancaster. Given Henry’s questionable claim to the throne, he set about eliminating

serious threats to it. One way was to directly attack the most powerful of the lords – and since

power stemmed from land holdings, confiscate their land and sell it off in pieces so that no




                                                 13
successor would pose a similar threat. Henry VIII continued this policy, executing among many

others, the Duke of Buckingham, who was the highest and richest amongst the nobility. The

Tudors also took care not to create any new concentrations of power: They created no new dukes

during their reign.xvi

        While some of the most powerful lords were dealt with on trumped up charges, not all

could be eliminated in this way. The source of a lord’s coercive power came from his band of

armed dependents. Since there was not much of a market for food or land, the surplus produced

by a lord was used to feed a retinue of servants and marginal tenants.xvii He offered them

protection against other roaming bandits (or equivalently in those times, other lords), and rented

out land to them at low rates. In return, they offered their loyalty and arms to the lord, wearing

his livery as a sign of their allegiance. The lord used his armed band to intimidate courts, rivals,

and even the King.

        To deal with these armed bands, Henry VII passed a series of Acts asserting that the

prime loyalty of every subject was to him, the king, and not to the subject’s local lord. He

forbade the employment of royal officials by others. And he started enforcing an old law

restricting the use of livery to household servants, making examples of those lords who

continued to maintain a personal militia.

        In the meantime, there was another equally compelling reason for the lords to disband

their militias. As the market for food expanded, the surpluses generated by the land could be sold

instead of given to servants and tenants. Feeding the retinue was no longer free. And as rents for

land increased, and a market for land sales started flourishing (more on this shortly), lords started

feeling the true cost of maintaining inefficient but loyal tenants. The more efficient tenants also

felt the cost of spending time in the service of the lord, rather than in the more profitable




                                                 14
occupation of tilling their fields. They much preferred to pay a market rent in cash rather than

paying a below-market rent and having further feudal obligations. Thus as markets expanded,

non-market obligations like military service came under pressure, a phenomenon we will see

again and again under many guises.

       Moreover, long years of peace under the Tudors left the lord unable to use his militia to

even fulfill his traditional feudal obligations to the king. As the costs of maintaining militias

became more apparent and the benefits declined, some lords disbanded their militias. The

process became self-reinforcing. Since one of the benefits of a militia was protection against the

militia of other lords, fewer militias meant even fewer benefits. Thus, over time, lords lost their

coercive power due to pressure from the monarchy and from economic forces. A `Duke of

Buckingham in the early sixteenth century, with his castles, his armories, and his hundreds of

armed retainers’, gave way to ‘a Duke of Newcastle in the mid-eighteenth century, with his

Palladian houses’ and his political connections.xviii The Tudors and the market they helped

create had effectively crushed the coercive power of the aristocracy.

The Rise of the Squirearchy

       What took the place of the aristocracy? The great confiscations by the early Tudors

culminating in the dissolution of the monasteries brought a huge amount of land on the market.

Some of this land was granted away, but much of it was sold, with great benefit to the Crown’s

coffers. Because they had a direct interest in the market value of the land, the English monarchs

amended the law to give buyers better title to the land, allowing them to sell it further if

necessary. The flourishing market for land had a number of effects in addition to what we noted

earlier. First, the more prosperous farmers, the ones who generated substantial profits from their

land, could buy more, while those who did poorly sold their land, or had it seized and sold by




                                                 15
creditors. Second, farmers who had scattered strips could consolidate their land holdings and

manage the consolidated land better.xix Third, prosperous professional men like lawyers and

merchants could buy land, the age-old symbol of status, and bring modern management

techniques to it.xx Land moved into the hands of more able farmers and more competent

managers.

       The consequence was the emergence of an intermediate class between the lord and the

peasant, the squirearchy (or alternatively, the gentry), which was more intimately involved with

the land than the former and more apt to take risk with new techniques than the latter. The

archetypical memberxxi

“was not tempted by great possessions into the somnolence of the rentier; was less loaded than
most noble landowners with heavy overhead charges in the shape of great establishments; did his
work for himself, instead of relying on a cumbrous machine to do it for him; owned, in short, his
property, instead of being owned by it.”


       He was thus much more able to exploit the land he farmed, and much more closely linked

to it, than either peasant or lord. When landholdings were vast, the skills required to manage that

land and generate revenues were supervisory skills – the feudal lord employed overseers who

supervised a steep hierarchy at the bottom of which was the peasant. While the peasant had the

capacity to get to know the land well and get the most productive value from it, without

ownership he had little incentive or ability to do so. In fact, in the early Middle Ages in England,

and till quite late in other countries, serfs were not allowed to own property, had to pass on their

earnings to their master, and were bought and sold with the land they tilled.xxii Moreover, to

reduce the need for management, the individual peasant often had “no choice of date or of crop;

he must plough and reap with the rest, and sow the same seed as they.”xxiii




                                                 16
        While the great lord probably was tutored since early childhood to drive overseers and

supervise his estate, he did not have an intimate relationship with the land – it was too vast for

any one man to get to know well. Management was often simply the maintenance of tradition,

which few lords transcended. As a result, the revenues generated from the land did not really

depend on whether this particular lord owned it, or whether some other person, who was equally

capable of driving overseers and sticking with custom, owned it. In economic parlance, the

income from the land to the lord was a pure rent – it derived simply from his ownership of the

land, and there was little other economic link between the property and the owner.

       Not only was property loosely linked to the lord, the extent of security of property would

have made little difference to the size of the revenues generated. Since the peasant exerting the

effort did not own the land, and farmed it at the pleasure of the lord, greater security for the

lord’s ownership did little for the peasant. Of course, the lord may have had some additional

incentive to make improvements to the land if he knew his tenure was secure, but given the kind

of extensive agriculture he practiced, these would not have added substantially to revenues.

       Given all this, the lord owned his extensive holdings only because he had a sufficient

armed force to bloody the monarch’s nose. If the monarch did not fear questions about his own

legitimacy when he expropriated other inherited land, if he did not fear that other lords would

band together against him, and if the resistance this lord could pose to an assault was limited

because his band had withered away, property could, and would, change hands whenever the

monarch desired it. The inefficient structure of ownership was itself the cause for the insecurity

of property. From the perspective of the monarch, one lord was just as good as another, because

each one’s supervisory skills allowed them to generate approximately the same surplus for




                                                 17
taxation. The only security to property was then the favor of the sovereign. Property could

simply not be secure when the owner was so replaceable.

       The gentleman farmer, owning smaller (but not economically unviable) plots was

different. First, the very origins of his land, typically acquired through purchase using his own

accumulated wealth rather than through inheritance or custom, indicated he had a competency

that was required neither of lord nor of peasant. Second, on land he farmed himself, he was likely

to make the decisions on what to plant and where, experiment with different crop rotation and

irrigation techniques, understand how the weather mattered every season and which clump of

trees provided beneficial shade and so on. Both because he was competent and because he was

closely involved in managing his land, the gentleman farmer was very effective in exploiting the

land he farmed. In addition, he would also be more able to rent land out well, since his intimate

knowledge of the land’s possibilities would allow him to pick appropriate tenants.

       In short, the burgeoning market for land moved land to the highest value user, the

competent gentleman farmer. And as he became more familiar with it, his ability to generate

value only increased so that he was, given the circumstances of the times, far and away the most

economically efficient owner of the land. Unlike the great lord, the intrinsic value of the land he

owned would be far less if the gentleman farmer were expropriated for his skills would then be

unavailable to manage it. It would be better for a far-sighted government to negotiate a steady

tax from each of these farmers than to expropriate any one of them. In addition, security of

property would enhance the taxes the gentleman farmer would pay because he would then have a

greater incentive to invest in the land and create value.

       While these economic concerns may not have been foremost in the Tudor monarch’s

mind, the great lords were. In a further attempt to undercut the power of the lords, the monarchy




                                                 18
devolved more and more of the duties of tax collection and dispensing local justice to the

gentry.xxiv But this then made the gentry indispensable to the monarchxxv:

“The plain truth was the law, as they [the gentry] practiced and understood it, and the local
administration of England, had made the ordinary life of the country depend at every point on
them, and hardly at all upon the Crown. The entire machine – law courts, parishes, poor law, city
and country – could run very well without the king; but it could not run without the gentry. In
other words, the gentry was essential to the power of the king, but he was not essential to theirs.”


In short, even while the gentry were becoming economically more powerful, they were also

becoming critical to land administration. From the perspective of the overall productivity of the

agricultural sector, this was probably a good thing for their administrative indispensability

enhanced their sense of security in their property, which undoubtedly made them more

productive, and further reinforced the security of their property.

        The rise of the squirearchy was a steady process. By one count, there were 1,000 esquires

in Henry VIII’s time, and this number had expanded to 16,000 by Elizabeth’s time (though there

is a certain latitude in who precisely qualifies as an esquire). There is no doubting the fact that

the steady rise in productivity of English agriculture dates from the time of the emergence of the

gentry. Early historians thought it uncontroversial that the emerging gentry were much more

productive than the lords and peasants they displaced.xxvi Since then, ideology has embroiled the

debate on who exactly was responsible for the increase in productivity, though there have been

recent attempts to use large sample data to extricate the facts from controversy.xxvii The data

suggest the emerging gentry in the 16th and 17th century did contribute substantially to the

productivity revolution.xxviii The wealth of the gentry expanded in tandem. By 1600, it was

rumored that the gentry were three times richer than the church, nobility and rich peasantry put

together.xxix




                                                 19
          So the decline of the aristocracy was accompanied by the rise of the squirearchy. We will

argue that the squirearchy was more able to curb the power of the monarchy than were the great

lords. How did this happen? After all, the squires were individually less powerful, and

collectively more dispersed than the great lords. What bound them together against the king?

Parliament and the Origins of Property

          Large, dispersed, groups have a harder time coordinating actions than narrow focused

ones, a point we will come back to in later chapters. Despite being numerous and dispersed,

significant portions of the gentry could come together. The origins of their property gave the

gentry a common interest in defending it, while Parliament provided the common meeting

ground where their actions could be coordinated. The gentry were thus able to overcome the

impediments to collective action that typically plague large groups. Let us explain in greater

detail.

          In dissolving the monasteries, Henry VIII was taking on the might of Rome. Opposing

forces could well question the legitimacy of his reign, and could threaten it if given the

appropriate backing of the Holy Church. He needed allies, and he found them by distributing

church lands to the gentry so that “being bound by the same ties of private interest, they might

always oppose any return to the dominion of Rome.”xxx In the words of a British historian,xxxi

“the participation of so many persons in the spoils of ecclesiastical property…was of no slight
advantage to our civil constitution, strengthening, and, as it were, infusing new blood into the
territorial aristocracy, who were to withstand the enormous prerogative of the crown. For if it be
true, as surely it is, that wealth is power, the distribution of so large a portion of the
kingdom…must have sensibly affected their weight in the balance. Those families…which are
now deemed the most considerable, will be found, with no great exception…to have acquired no
small portion of [their estates]…from monastic or other ecclesiastical foundations.”


In consolidating opposition against Rome to protect their own position, therefore, the Tudors

also consolidated opposition to future kings. Many amongst the gentry were especially wary of



                                                 20
monarchs who had Catholic leanings, or who sought ties with other Catholic monarchs.xxxii The

troubles faced by King Charles I (executed) and James II (deposed) were in no small part, due to

this.

        Parliament provided the coordination the dispersed gentry needed to assert its recently

acquired economic power. Parliament, historically, had been the institution whose consent the

King needed to impose new taxes. It was the mechanism by which the King negotiated with his

principal sources of taxes, and it was not easily dispensed with, especially once the king came to

rely on the squirearchy to collect his taxes. This does not immediately mean that Parliament

could stand up to the monarch. The early Tudors exerted almost absolute dominion over

Parliament.xxxiii Elizabeth only had to pass the word to Parliament not to discuss a subject for

them to desist. Her chancellor, on confirming a new speaker of the House of Commons, warned

him against the House of Commons meddling in any thing touching on ‘her majesty’s person or

estate, or church government.’xxxiv His warning was obeyed scrupulously.

        But as the gentry grew in wealth and power, and as they saw signs of revival of

Catholicism, their opposition strengthened. Parliament had already become fractious towards the

end of Elizabeth’s reign, complaining vociferously about the creation and sale of monopolies

over such essentials as salt. By the time of her successor, James I, Parliament was actively voting

down the King’s proposals and standing up for the right to free speech and the liberties of its

members. James vainly threatened his Parliament, “I am a man of flesh and blood, and have my

passions and affections as other men; I pray you do not go too far to move me to do that which

my power may tempt me unto.”xxxv But Parliament ignored him.

        A simple economic calculus would explain why Parliament had become so confident.

Suppose matters came to a head between the King and the Parliament about property or,




                                                 21
equivalently, taxes. While honor and custom would sway a few, many citizens, especially those

who were being recruited to fight, would decide on the basis of their pocket. The newly recruited

militias would give their loyalty to those that would pay them regularly and well: As the saying

goes, pecunia nervus belli or money is the sinews of power. The King could promise to declare

his opponents traitors, seize their lands, and use the proceeds as well as his own wealth to pay

those who sided with him. Parliament could promise to do the same thing in reverse. So the side

that would attract the greater following would be the side that could promise the militia greater

wealth, both of its own and from seizing its opponents.

       For reasons discussed earlier, the gentry were especially good at managing and

generating wealth from their land. The King and the great lords had no such ties to their land. Far

less would be lost if the King and the great lords were relieved of their holdings and the gentry

retained theirs, than if the reverse happened. So the gentry clearly had the ability to promise

militias more. There were, of course, other factors that added to their ability to attract a

following. Much of the land tax collection machinery was in the hands of the gentry, so they

were better prepared to fund the war while it was in progress. Furthermore, they were men with

strong ties to the local population while the King and lords were remote. The fundamental point,

however, is that the balance of power had changed. If the monarchy were not far-sighted enough

to see this, it might indeed take a Civil War, a beheading, and a revolution to convince the

monarchy that power had indeed shifted hands! Certainly, there were men in the midst of these

revolutionary times who saw that matters had changed. Thus Henry Neville, a member of

parliament, exclaimed to the House of Commons in 1658xxxvi

“The Commons, till Henry VII, never exercised a negative vote. All depended on the Lords. In
that time it would have been hard to have found in this house so many gentlemen of estates. The
gentry do not now depend on the peerage. The balance is in the gentry. They have all the lands.”




                                                  22
As an elected Parliament gained power over the monarch, the conditions for a constitutionally

limited government were finally in place.xxxvii The Glorious Revolution formalized this state of

affairs, and enshrined the concept that taxation could not be arbitrary, and required the consent of

the peoples’ representatives. Less than a century later, this principle was reiterated in the

American Declaration of Independence.

A Summary

       Let us recapitulate. There were three critical steps on the way to limited government. The

first was the decline of the coercive power of the great nobles. This ensured that raw physical

might no longer determined economic outcomes, and that ownership was not the prerogative of

an inefficient few. The second was emergence of an intermediate class, the gentry, who were not

just economically powerful as a class, but also efficient exploiters of the land they owned. The

third was the existence of Parliament as a coordinating institution. Without it, the dispersed

gentry would have struggled to assert its new economic power. Thus, the Parliament, weak in the

Tudor years when the gentry was emerging, became strong when the gentry became wealthy.

The power of the Parliament was also strengthened by the commonality of interests among the

gentry. Most derived income from land and many owned land that was previously expropriated

from the Catholic Church.

       Thus the emergence of property rights in England was due to a fortuitous combination of

factors. Were all of these factors necessary? James Harrington, an Englishman who was a

contemporary of Oliver Cromwell, and studied the sources of power in his 1656 book, Oceana,

believed the redistribution of land through the great Tudor expropriations (and the land sales by

Stuart monarchs as they attempted to fund their extravagances) was solely what changed the

balance of power. This belief in property as the fount of power – because those who have




                                                 23
property have the ability to pay armies -- is clearly enunciated in one of Harrington’s

pamphletsxxxviii

All government is founded upon overbalance in propriety. [i.e., governmental power derives
from property; the man or men whose property exceeds (overbalances) the total wealth of others
in the state controls its government]


If one man hold the overbalance unto [over] the whole people in propriety, his propriety causeth
absolute monarchy.


If the few hold the overbalance unto the whole people in propriety, their propriety causes
aristocracy or mixed monarchy.


If the whole people be neither overbalanced by the propriety of one, nor of a few, the propriety
of the people (or of the many) causeth the democracy or popular government.


       There is a long tradition for the belief that widely distributed property leads to democracy

and civil society. Some societies have suggested maximum limits on what can be owned while

others have suggested minimum limits: The Roman Republic had an `agrarian law’ that limited

the land any one person could own. Jefferson’s draft constitution for Virginia, written in 1776,

required that each adult have 50 acres of land.xxxix Yet the argument that property is power is, at

some level, circular. To claim that property leads to power is to presuppose that the government

respects allocations of property. Else why could the government – which enforces property rights

-- simply not declare the property rights of the rebels null and void if it feels that they would

fund armies against the government?

       If we were to stress a single most important factor in the emergence of property rights, it

would not just be the wider distribution of property but also the economic (or social) ties

between the property and the owner, which is all that would persist in an atmosphere of anarchy.

Thus Harrington omits a vital step in his arguments: The sale of seized land and the flourishing



                                                 24
subsequent land market led to property being held by those who could manage it much better. It

was this – the economically efficient holding of property -- that enhanced the security of

property, because the efficient holders had the economic power to defend their property against

others. In addition, of course, the ability for the gentry to coordinate action through Parliament

helped convert their dispersed, but substantial, economic power into political power.

        Would it have been enough to open a market for land? Was the expropriation of the great

lords and the monasteries necessary for the wider distribution of power? While it is hard to

answer such counterfactual questions categorically, we believe the expropriations, despite

violating property rights, somewhat paradoxically helped build future limitations on the

monarchy. For one, the expropriations did redistribute wealth directly spreading economic

power. More important, the lords and monasteries owned a significant portion of the land in their

localities. They were local monopolists. Even if smaller properties were more efficiently

managed, like all monopolists they may have preferred holding on to their land, managing it

inefficiently, but squeezing monopoly profits out of the local populace. Thus a market for land

may not have moved land into more efficient hands, were it not for the expropriations, which

were a sort of anti-trust action.

        Our argument suggests why government was much more participatory in the cities than

in the nation states. In the city-states, the dominant source of wealth was not land but trade and

manufacture. The surplus generated by these activities was clearly closely tied to the expertise,

incentives, and relationships of the owner of the business, much as land was tied to the

commercial farmer. It made economic sense to respect property rights within the city and to give

citizens (a word that originates from the French cite and was originally applicable only to




                                                 25
residents of a city) the sense of security by allowing them to participate in government. As the

old saying goes “Stadtluft macht frei” or “City air makes free”.

       Clearly, the cities grew along with business, and there is no reason to believe that respect

for property was highly developed in the early life of a city. But over time, the quantum of

business grew and businessmen demanded, and obtained, respect for property, as well as

participation in city government.

       In the nation states, by contrast, the dominant source of revenue was land. So long as

property holdings were concentrated, the nation state could not commit to respect property. Even

if manufacture or trade started up, it would be hard for the nation state to show respect for

business property when business output formed only a small fraction of total output. Thus it was

only after the breakup of the feudal estates or after extensive land reforms that the group of

gentry emerged who not only were strong advocates of the institution of private property, but

also forced government to respect it. This then paved the way for competitive industry to

emerge. Of course, once industry became sufficiently important, the pattern of land holdings

might become less important to the security of property.

       English history offers some evidence of this sequence. One of the rights the king

attempted to usurp for himself as industries grew was the right to grant industrial monopolies.

Consider the following case, which vividly demonstrates that these monopolies contributed to

the insecurity of property, the arbitrary power of the king, and the ruin of economic activity. In

1614, a scheme was concocted toxl

“take from the Merchant Adventurers [a trading company] their rights to export unfinished
woolen cloth to the Netherlands and to give to a new company the exclusive right to export
cloth…It was estimated that the export of entirely finished cloth…would bring in an additional
profit of 600,000 to 700,000 pounds a year to those engaged in the cloth trade. Of this the king
was to have 300,000 pounds for his grant of the franchise to the new company. The
Dutch…refused [to let in] the English finished cloth, and the new company came to a quick end.



                                                 26
Yet before the Merchant Adventurers could recover their old rights, which they did at a cost of
between 60,000 and 70,000 in bribes to James’ officials, the entire cloth trade had been
disorganized…As late as 1620 the English merchants were exporting only half as much cloth as
they had sent abroad in 1613.”


       Parliament saw the danger to the security of property (and its own power) from these

monopolies, and in 1624, passed the Statute of Monopolies, which forbade the issuance by the

king of patents of monopoly to individuals except in the case of new inventions. The anti-

monarch Parliament that served between 1640 and 1660 went further, and virtually ended the

practice of granting monopolies to corporations, as well as individuals.xli So in addition to

protecting the rights of land owners, the power of the landed gentry acting through Parliament

placed constraints on the arbitrary powers of the king over industry.

       Eventually, of course, industry became the source of security to property. Even though

the landed gentry were instrumental in breaking the power of the monarchy, eventually they used

Parliament to further their own interests. The emergence of small and medium sized farmers in

the 16th and 17th century – the Yeoman revolution – gave way to Parliamentary enclosures and

the Landlord revolution in the 18th and 19th century. While the former movement was progressive

and enhanced productivity, the latter redistributed wealth to the newly politically powerful.xlii

But industry had come into its own -- as evidenced by the battle over tariffs on food that it

eventually won – and power shifted to new defenders of property.

Other Countries

       We have focused on England because it is the canonical example of the emergence of

constitutionally limited government. It is useful to see briefly whether other countries that

developed constitutional government fit the mold.




                                                 27
         France is often the canonical counter to Britain. Historians have puzzled over why

France did not achieve constitutionally limited government until the 19th century. One reason is

simply that the nobility and the church in France were all too strong before the French

Revolution. Even a powerful king like Louis XIV only played the grandees off, one against the

other. When he died they regained their power.xliii Since French kings could not suppress the

great lords, they tried to enlist the peasantry’s support by protecting their property rights against

encroachment by the lords.xliv So the peasantry in France held a substantial portion of the land,

but in small, relatively inefficient holdings.xlv Land sales also did not take off, in part because the

king had no incentive to make alienation easy for that would allow the peasants to sell out to, or

be dispossessed by, the lords, and in part because, unlike England, there was no initial grand sale

of expropriated land to jump-start the land market. So the gentry did not emerge as a class.

Finally, since the king levied and collected taxes through a centralized bureaucracy directly from

the peasants, he really had no need to summon any form of Parliament on a regular basis.

        The French Revolution and the confiscation and sale of the properties of the church and

the aristocracy had some of the effect in France that the Tudor expropriations had in England. It

reduced the land and power of the nobility, strengthened the then miniscule French gentry as

well as the rich peasant farmer, created a national market for land and food by abolishing internal

impediments to trade, and created a more permanent institutional structure for representative

government. As a consequence, the productivity of French agriculture increased substantially in

the nineteenth century.xlvi The political and economic effects of these changes were undoubtedly

critical in fostering the late, but substantial, French industrial revolution.

        If our arguments hold generally, then they should not be valid just historically but also

more recently. Very crudely, our arguments suggest that in predominantly agricultural countries,




                                                  28
the security of property – clear laws facilitating the ownership of property and its sale as well as

a judiciary and a government that respects them and enforces rights -- should be low where land

ownership is highly concentrated. Not only do big landowners have the ability to defend their

property through private armies or through their influence over the local apparatus of the state,

they have no incentive to see the infrastructure of a free market emerge to challenge their

power.xlvii

        This leads us to a final question. If wider (but not too wide) distribution of land led to

participatory politics and respect for private property, why did every country not undertake land

reform? Why till 1861 were the vast majority of Russians serfs, tied to the land and without

protection from their overlords, and from the government? Why did it take the French

Revolution, the Napoleonic conquests, and the revolutions of 1830 and 1848 for land to be

distributed in Continental Europe in a way more conducive to intensive commercial farming and

greater respect for property rights?

        One reason may be the nature of the land in some countries. Some lands lend themselves

to intensive farming, while others lend themselves to a mode of agriculture such as plantations

that is more extensive. This may partly explain why Costa Rica has had a more democratic

history than Columbia. The effects of the initial distribution of land may persist long after the

distribution is no longer optimal as we noted in the introduction to the book. For example, even

after the emancipation of indentured or slave labor reduced the profitability of the large Latin

American haciendas, the owners did not disband them. The need to maintain a ready pool of

unskilled, poorly educated, labor may explain why many of these hacienda-dominated countries

did not pursue universal education and economic and social rights as vigorously as others did.xlviii




                                                  29
       The argument that the necessary technology of production does not permit an ownership

pattern favorable to the emergence of strong property rights applies not only to land but also to

industry. When industry consists of large monopolies, which exist only because the government

affords them privileges, the government is likely to have little respect for property. For example,

firms in extractive industries have value largely because of their rights to extract, and really do

not utilize huge amounts of human ingenuity. In countries that are abundant in natural resources

– such as Zaire – the government can extract large amounts of money simply by withdrawing a

mining privilege from one company and auctioning it off to another. Of course, eventually

bidders realize they will have to factor in the cost of future bribes that will be needed to keep

their privileges. The outcome, however, is that the government will have little incentive to

respect property rights. Only a few countries have overcome the curse of being richly endowed

with mineral resources.

       But the most important reason for why countries did not attain the appropriate

distribution by design may be that the self-interest of the government and the nobility did not

permit land reform, even if it would benefit the country as a whole. Certainly, an individual lord

could not hope to gain by dividing up his land and selling the pieces to the peasants who farmed

it. If other lords did not follow suit and force an eventual change in the climate of property rights

enforcement, our revolutionary lord would find that the peasants he had sold land to enjoyed

even less security of tenure now that the lord was not present to protect them. Moreover, any

wealth the lord gained from sale would itself be up for grabs, now that he could not hold out the

prize of grain or below-market-rents to enlist the support of his peasants in battle.xlix

       The sovereign might also not have had the incentive to move to distribute land widely.

After all, even if property rights became more secure, and the land became more productive, he




                                                  30
would lose power. In many cases, it would be in the monarch’s self interest to continue coercive-

extractive policies, even if detrimental in the long run for the country -- as Louis XV is famously

supposed to have said, “France will last my time.”

       If initial distributions of land holdings tend to persist in the absence of forcible reform,

the legacy of history may explain why some countries, or even parts thereof were lucky, while

others not. For example, Northern Italy and Southern Italy are extremely different in their

economies, Northern Italy being much more progressive than Southern Italy. Estates were much

larger in the South and the peasants far poorer. A number of historical factors including the

Norman conquest of the South in the eleventh century and the greater devastation caused by the

plague in Southern Italy in the fourteenth century could account for the differences in land

distribution.l In turn, these differences may partly explain the disparity in economic progress

between the North and the South that persists even today.

       The legacy of historic land distribution patterns seems to be important in India. Areas in

which property rights over land were given over to large landlords by the British in colonial

times have significantly lower agricultural investment, lower agricultural productivity, lower

rates of literacy, and higher rates of infant mortality in recent years.li The growing disparity

between the booming West and South of India and the relatively stagnant Central and Northeast

areas is probably, in some measure, a legacy of history.

       Similarly, some former colonies of European powers developed stronger respect for

property rights earlier than others: The initial European settlers migrated en masse to a colony if

the climate was hospitable and the land disease-free – leading to the emergence of a group of

yeoman farmers who formed a solid base for representative, constitutionally bound government.

By contrast, land holdings in a colony were much more concentrated, and industry much more




                                                 31
extractive, if the land was inhospitable so that only the minimum number of Europeans migrated

to oversee large holdings worked by native labor.lii These latter countries would have had to

await the emergence of a viable manufacturing and trading class to establish secure property

rights, but the emergence of that class would itself be held back by the absence of property rights

and finance.

       Finally, some governments care more about their own power than the prosperity of their

citizens, giving us examples of the consequences of inappropriate redistributions of property.

Fearful of their role in supporting the institution of private property, Stalin exterminated the

yeoman farmers in Russia, the Kulaks, in the 1920s and 1930s and gathered their land into large

collective farms. The collectivization of Russian land caused enormous losses in agricultural

production – but served the intent of removing the yeomanry, a strong force for private property

completely from the Russian landscape. Government could move ahead with communism

unopposed.

       More recently, formerly socialist economies have attempted to figure out how to

distribute state owned property to private citizens so as to ensure a smooth transition to

capitalism. Some economists have argued that it does not really matter who owns the property,

all that matters is that property finds its way into private hands.liii Our arguments suggest

otherwise. Property in the wrong hands, especially if concentrated, can be very detrimental both

to reducing the power of the state and to the emergence of free markets. The Russian Republic

provides one clear illustration. In an underhand deal to win support for the 1996 Presidential

election, Boris Yeltsin agreed to give a few powerful operators some of the best Russian

companies at bargain basement prices. This was just the most egregious of events by which

Russian industry and finance became dominated by a few, whose primary competence was




                                                 32
contacts rather than business acumen. It is little wonder that these “businessmen” came to be

known as oligarchs, reminiscent of the reactionary feudal lords that stood in the way of

capitalism.

        Not only do these oligarchs oppose the development of free markets and free access to

finance, they also offer little countervailing force to a powerful state. Since their empires are not

built on competence, they can be taken away as easily as they were acquired. The government of

Vladimir Putin has, in fact, cut some of these oligarchs down to size and assumed significant

power. Whether the oligarchs are replaced by others in a game of merry-go-round, or whether

the oligarchs are done away with so that a truly competent and competitive business class

emerges is a matter to be seen. In that lies the future of Russian democracy and free market

enterprise in that country.

Conclusion

        Historically, the greatest obstacle to the development of free markets, especially free

financial markets, was the rapacity of governments. We have argued that the emergence of a

class in England that individually was large enough to farm commercially and take risks, but was

not individually strong enough to protect itself, created the demand for a constitutionally limited

state. Institutions like Parliament and the administrative machinery served to coordinate this

class and give it political power, which then resulted in the limitations on government it sought.

        These safeguards were extremely important to ease the path of government finance.

Unlike with land or industrial assets, most financial assets are held passively – the holder has no

great expertise in generating value from those assets. Since the government suffers only a loss of

reputation if it expropriates the cash or gold held by its citizens, or if it repudiates the debt it

owes them, the holders of financial assets are the first to be targeted by a government in need. It




                                                   33
is rare that a troubled modern government takes the land farmers own, or the machines firms

have, to pay its bills, but it is perfectly willing to pay public creditors only a fraction of the

amount it owes. Finance therefore has to come within the perimeter of defenses built against the

government by other forms of property for it to flourish.

        But when investors feel safe, a country can benefit greatly because it can borrow to fund

national enterprise, and not be limited by what it can raise in the short run through taxes. As

historian Richard Ehrenberg, writing in the early part of the twentieth century, puts it, “England

would not have been the Great Britain of today, it would not have conquered half the world, if it

had not incurred a national debt of 900,000,000 pounds between 1693 and 1815.” liv

i
   See D. North and B. Weingast, 1989, “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional Governing
Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”, The Journal of Economic History, 49, Issue 4: 803-832.
ii
    This is reminiscent of Gary Becker’s argument (Gary Becker, 1983, “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure
Groups for Political Influence” Quarterly Journal of Finance, 98, Issue 3: 371-400) that economically inefficient
policies tend to lose out when in competition with more efficient policies. Our point is that economically efficient
owners will be better able to command power than inefficient ones, provided they can come to the fore. Through
much of the feudal period, they were not able to do so because of their lack of organization, the suppression of
markets and the primacy of coercive power.
iii
    Weatherford, Jack. The History of Money: From Sandstone to Cyberspace. New York: Crown Publishers, 1997;
65.
iv
    Barber, Malcolm. The New Knighthood: A History of the Order of the Temple. London: Cambridge University
Press, 1994; 268.
v
    Barber, p266, see above.
vi
    Barber, p270, see above.
vii
     Weatherford, p69, see above.
viii
     Barber, p298, see above.
ix
    Pipes, Richard. Property and Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf Publishers, 1999; 17-18.
x
    See D. North and B. Weingast, 1989, “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional Governing
Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”, The Journal of Economic History, 49, Issue 4: 803-832.
xi
    Henry Hallam. Constitutional History of England. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1876, p. 26.
xii
     Carruthers, Bruce. City of Capital: Politics and Markets in the English Financial Revolution. Princeton
University Press: 1996; 122.
xiii
     p. 822 –824, D. North and B. Weingast, 1989, “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”, The Journal of Economic History, 49, Issue 4: 803-
832.
xiv
     See D. North and B. Weingast, 1989, “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutional Governing
Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England”, The Journal of Economic History, 49, Issue 4: 803-832.
xv
     See Carruthers, Bruce. City of Capital: Politics and Markets in the English Financial Revolution. Princeton
University Press: 1996; 122 for a development of this argument, see above.
xvi
     Finer, S. E. The History of Government III. London: Oxford Press, 1997; 1271.
xvii
      See H. Pirenne. Economic and Social History of Mediaeval Europe. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
Inc., 1937; 63.
xviii
      Lawrence Stone, Crisis of the Aristocracy. Oxford, 1956: 97.



                                                        34
xix
      Clay, C.G.A. Economic Expansion and Social Change: England 1500-1700. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984; 70.
xx
     Clay, p. 83, see above.
xxi
      For the greater readiness to use new knowledge by the gentry, see for example, H.J. Habakkuk, 1987. “The
Market for Monastic Property, 1539-1603” Economic History Review, 10, Issue 3: 362-380, and Clay, 1984, see
above. The passage is from Tawney, p. 16, 1949, see below.
xxii
      G.G. Coulton, “The Mediaeval Village” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1925, p. 13.
xxiii
       Coulton, “The Mediaeval Village”, p. 39.
xxiv
       Stone, p121, see above.
xxv
      Finer, p 1338, see above.
xxvi
       Many of these historians drew from the investigations of Arthur Young. See the references in Robert Allen,
Enclosure and the Yeoman: The Agricultural Development of the South Midlands, 1450-1850. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1992, for a list of his works.
xxvii
       See Allen (1991) for a cogent analysis, see above.
xxviii
        See Gregory Clark, “Yields per Acre in English Agriculture, 1250-1860: Evidence from labor inputs”,
Economic History Review (1991), 44, 445-460 for a time path of productivity increases, and Allen (1991) Enclosure
and the Yeoman, see above, for the controversies surrounding it.
xxix
       R.H. Tawney. “The Rise of the Gentry, 1558-1640” The Economic History Review, XI: 5, and Stone, 1965, p.
75, see above.
xxx
      Hallam, p. 55, see above.
xxxi
       Hallam, p. 55, see above.
xxxii
       See, for example, Hallam, p. 36-37, see above.
xxxiii
        Hallam , p. 35, p. 38, see above.
xxxiv
        Hallam, p. 151, see above.
xxxv
       Hallam, see above.
xxxvi
        Pipes, p. 33, see above.
xxxvii
        We are being very imprecise about what part of the landed gentry opposed the monarchy. Certainly, the
opposition to Charles I was concentrated amongst the lower gentry. But it also included elements of the nobility and
the upper gentry.
xxxviii
         Negley and Patrick, The Quest for Utopia: An Anthology of Imaginary Societies. New York: Henry Schuman,
1952: 383.
xxxix
        Allen, p. 305-306, see above.
xl
    Dietz, Fredrick. An Economic History of England. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1942; 263.
xli
     Dietz, p. 267, see above.
xlii
      See Allen, 1991, see above.
xliii
      Finer, p. 1325, see above.
xliv
      Robert Brenner, “Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development”, in The Brenner Debate, ed. by. T. H.
Aston and C. H. E. Philipin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
xlv
      p. 240, Patrick Karl O’Brien, “Path Dependency, or why Britain became an industrialized and urbanized economy
long before France”, Economic History Review, 1996, vol. 49, 213-249.
xlvi
      Peter McPhee, 1989, “The French Revolution, Peasants, and Capitalism”, American Historical Review, 94:
1265-1280.
xlvii
       See R. Rajan and L. Zingales, “Which Capitalism? Lessons from the East Asian Crisis” Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance, 11: 40-48, for an early statement of this point in a different context.
xlviii
       See Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth Sokoloff, 2000, “Institutions, Factors Endowment, and Path of
Development in the New World”, Journal of Economic Perspective, 3: 217-232.
xlix
      In an atmosphere where property rights are not enforced, it is better for a skilled lord to let the wealth be “buried”
in the ground, and draw it out at regular intervals to pay his peasants, than to convert it into cash and see them take it
away.
l
   John P. Powelson. The Story of Land: A World History of Land Tenure and Agrarian Reform. Cambridge: The
Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 1988, p. 89.
li
   See Abhijit Banerjee and Lakshmi Iyer, “History, Institutions and Economic Performance: The Legacy of Colonial
Land Tenure Systems in India”, Working Paper, M.I.T., 2002.




                                                            35
lii
     See D. Acemoglu, S. Johnson, and J. Robinson 2001, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
Empirical Study” American Economic Review 91: 1369-1401 for a theory of development based on the pattern of
settlement.
liii
     See for example Maxim Boycko, Andrei Shleifer and Vishny. Privatizing Russia. Cambridge: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 1995. Hindsight is always 20/20. In all fairness, given there was little in the way of an
entrepreneurial class, those who reformed Russia had very little to work with, and not much of guidance from past
work. Many of the recent advances in Institutional Economics have come from those who learnt from their Russian
experiences.
liv
     Capital and Finance in the Age of the Renaissance: A Study of the Fuggers and their Connections by Richard
Ehrenberg, 1928 Harcourt, New York.




                                                        36
