NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUITY MARKET LIBERALIZATIONS AS COUNTRY IPOs
Rodolfo Martell
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 9481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9481
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

Respectively, Ph. D. candidate, The Ohio State University, and Reese Chair of Banking and Monetary
Economics, The Ohio State University, and NBER. We are grateful to Dong Lee, Andrew Karolyi, Enrico
Perotti, Robert Shiller, and Andrei Shleifer for useful comments. This paper was prepared for the session of
the January 2003 American Economic Association meetings titled “Debt, equity, and financial openness.”
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Rodolfo Martell and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.

Equity Market Liberalizations as Country IPOs
Rodolfo Martell and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 9481
February 2003
JEL No. F3, G14, G15, F21
ABSTRACT
Equity market liberalizations are like IPOs, but they are IPOs of a country's stock market rather than
of individual firms. Both are endogenous events whose benefits are limited by poor investor
protection, agency costs, and information asymmetries. As for stock prices following an IPO, there
are legitimate concerns about the efficiency in the period following the liberalization of the stock
market returns of countries that liberalize their equity markets. Equity markets of liberalizing
countries experience extremely strong performance immediately after the liberalization, but then go
through a period of poor performance. This pattern of stock returns is more dramatic for countries
with poorer financial development before the liberalization.

Rodolfo Martell
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
810 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
martell_11@cob.osu.edu

René M. Stulz
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

Equity market liberalizations make shares of common stock of local firms
available to a new class of investors, foreign investors. Initial public offerings (IPOs)
make shares in existing firms available to a new class of investors, the general public.
Equity market liberalizations and IPOs are therefore similar events in that they increase
the pool of investors who can invest in firms. We show in this paper that viewing equity
market liberalizations as country IPOs helps understand equity market liberalizations
better and raises important issues that future research should examine.
Much of the focus of the literature on equity market liberalizations has been to
show that they increase stock prices and reduce the cost of capital.1 The literature on
IPOs has also shown that there is a substantial stock price increase when firms go public.
However, this literature has further been concerned with whether the market for IPO
stocks is efficient. There is a large controversial literature examining why firms
underperform broad stock market indices following IPOs.2 We show that countries that
liberalize their equity markets have dramatic positive returns in the year following the
liberalization, but these dramatic returns are followed by poor returns. This pattern of
returns raises the question of whether stock prices overreact to equity market
liberalizations. Further, the IPO literature has also tried to answer why some firms go
public while others do not. It has shown that firms go public because their owners benefit
from them doing so, but market conditions affect which firms go public and at times
market conditions are not receptive to IPOs. The literature on equity market
liberalizations has mostly ignored the issue of why some countries liberalize their equity

1
2

See Stulz (2003) for a review of the evidence and the issues.
Ritter and Welch (2002) review the IPO literature.
2

markets and others do not. We argue that equity market liberalizations do not necessarily
benefit the controlling shareholders of large firms in emerging markets, so that we would
expect some countries to abstain from liberalizing their equity market if controlling
shareholders of large firms have an important impact on the decision to liberalize.
Further, the benefits from equity market liberalizations are limited because investors are
poorly protected in emerging markets. This poor investor protection limits the extent to
which local firms can issue new equity to take advantage of the increase in the pool of
investors for their stock.
The analogy between equity market liberalizations and IPOs has obvious
limitations. An IPO involves the issuance of shares that had no public market. As a result,
the IPO literature has studied extensively how the issue takes place and how it is priced.
Much of the IPO literature in the U.S. attempts to understand why the owners of firms
that go public leave money on the table at the time of the IPO through the underpricing of
the shares sold at that time. Equity market liberalizations have taken place without new
shares being sold by firms, and if new shares are sold, they might be secondary offerings
by firms whose shares are already traded. Liberalizations taking place through the
creation of a country fund involve an IPO, but this IPO typically does not involve the
issue of new shares by the firms of the liberalizing country. However, as for IPOs,
emerging market liberalizations enable firms to undertake offerings that otherwise they
would not have been able to undertake. Further, emerging market liberalizations make it
possible for private or public firms in the process of being privatized to go public when
they might not have been able to do so otherwise. When secondary offerings take place as
part of the emerging market liberalization or subsequently as a result of it, these offerings

3

cannot be underpriced in the same way as IPO offerings because a market for the shares
already exists. As a result, the literature that deals with the pricing of the shares when
they are sold at the IPO has little relevance for emerging market liberalizations.
The literature on equity market liberalizations has emphasized the risk-sharing
benefit of equity market liberalizations. As foreign investors invest in the stocks of
liberalizing countries, the risk of these stocks is shared among more investors. As local
investors bear less of the risk of local stocks, the risk premium on these stocks falls, their
price increases, and the country’s cost of capital is reduced. The literature has also been
concerned about whether equity market liberalizations increase stock return volatility, but
they do not seem to do so in a way that would justify concern. Given the clear benefits
and less decisive costs of equity market liberalizations, countries should be eager to
liberalize their equity markets, but few have done so fully. Further, Bekaert and Harvey
(2000) show that the cost of equity capital falls by roughly 100 basis points following
equity market liberalizations. In economic terms, the effect is therefore rather limited.
The risk-sharing benefit theory cannot explain why the number of countries that liberalize
their equity markets over the last twenty years is relatively small, why the impact of
equity liberalizations on the cost of capital has been so limited, and why long-run stock
returns of liberalizing countries behaved the way they did. We show that viewing equity
market liberalizations as country IPOs can help resolve these issues.
The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 1, we show the long-run behavior of
stock prices around liberalizations. In Section 2, we present an analysis of emerging
equity market liberalizations that, drawing on the comparison between IPOs and

4

liberalizations, stresses the implications of emerging market corporate governance and
investor rights for equity market liberalizations. We conclude in Section 3.

1. Equity market liberalizations and stock prices.
The existing literature makes the case that equity market liberalizations decrease the
cost of capital in two ways. First, Henry (2000a) shows that stock prices in liberalizing
countries increase sharply in the months preceding the liberalization date. This date is
when a liberalization event takes place rather than when investors discover that it will
happen, so that in an efficient market, the stock price impact of the liberalization should
be impounded in prices before the liberalization date. The results of Henry (2000a) are
consistent with investors applying a lower discount rate to future expected cash flows
after liberalization. Second, Bekaert and Harvey (2000) show that the dividend yield falls
after liberalization. If some assumptions are met, the dividend yield is a good proxy for
the cost of capital. Both studies conduct various tests to try to make sure that the
liberalization effect they identify is not due to confounding factors.
We extend the analysis of the stock-price impact of liberalizations and investigate
whether there are similarities in long-run returns between countries that liberalize their
equity markets and IPO firms.3 In Figure 1, we show the equally-weighted average
cumulative buy-and-hold returns in excess of the risk-free rate of liberalizing countries
3

Existing studies do not agree on equity market liberalization dates for a number of countries. Further,
these studies include different countries among the liberalized countries. Rather than attempting to sort out
the exact liberalization dates, we study the behavior of stock prices around the liberalization dates used by
Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000a), and exclude Japan and New Zealand to focus on emerging
markets. Other liberalization dates are provided by Kim and Singal (2000) and Levine and Zervos (1996).
Appendix A lists the liberalizations dates and the countries we use. An alternative approach would be to
use the dates of depository receipts offerings, which can be viewed as liberalizing events (see Karolyi
(2002)). The dates we use precede depository receipts offerings from firms in the countries we consider.
Foerster and Karolyi (2000) show that firms have poor returns after depository receipt offerings and
Errunza and Miller (2000) show that such offerings reduce the offering firm’s cost of capital.
5

from five years before the liberalization month until five years after the liberalization.
This is not a feasible investment strategy since investors did not know which country
would liberalize and which would not, but it provides an assessment of stock market
performance over the 11-year period surrounding the liberalization. The stock indices we
use are the S&P Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB) Total Return Indices (U.S. dollar
denominated) from December 1975 to September 2000. These indices are not available
for all countries for the period we are looking at. Since we are looking for an estimate of
what an investor would have received in excess of the risk-free rate had she invested in a
liberalizing country starting five years before the liberalization, we only use the countries
for which data is available five years before the liberalization in the figure.4
Investing in markets that liberalize pays off. The average cumulative buy-andhold excess return is 491% using the Bekaert and Harvey (2000) liberalization dates and
546% using the Henry (2000a) liberalization dates. This strong performance of
liberalizing countries supports the hypothesis that there is a risk-sharing benefit, but with
this hypothesis, we would expect the stock price gains to be incorporated as of the time of
the liberalization date. In Figure 1, returns are spectacular after the liberalization month.
The general pattern of cumulative returns is similar across countries. For instance, there
is no country whose omission from the sample would significantly affect Figure 1. At the
same time, however, the magnitude of the cumulative returns varies sharply across
countries – but the magnitude of cumulative returns varies also strongly across IPOs.
The large returns of liberalizing countries after the liberalization date seem
incompatible with the workings of efficient markets since it would be possible for
4

Our approach is exactly the same as the approach used by Ritter (1991) to estimate buy-and-hold returns
of IPO firms. When returns stop being available for a country, we average cumulative excess returns across
the remaining countries in the index.
6

investors to buy stocks in the liberalizing country immediately after the liberalization date
and benefit from the subsequent increase in prices. It is necessary to be cautious,
however, in interpreting these large returns because, at most, we have 20 liberalizing
countries and the event windows over which returns are calculated overlap among these
countries. With traditional event studies, the expectation is that when the number of
events with non-overlapping windows becomes large, idiosyncratic effects not associated
with the event wash out and the resulting event return captures the impact of the event on
stock prices. Here, the number of events is small, countries that liberalized may have
experienced similar economic shocks, and the clustering may be endogenous. It is also
well-known that emerging market returns have fat tails which complicate statistical
inference. Further, it is possible that it took time for the markets to learn the implications
of equity market liberalizations, so that they initially under-reacted to liberalization
events, but they may not do so in the future because investors now understand better the
implications of equity market liberalizations. Finally, one should be concerned about the
following bias. Except for Chile, the countries in our sample did not reverse their
liberalization in the short run.5 If markets were unconvinced that the liberalization would
last, so that initially investors believed there was a large probability that the liberalization
would be reversed, then stock prices would have reflected only partially the impact of the
liberalization initially and would have incorporated the benefits of the liberalization fully
only as investors became convinced that the liberalization would last.6

5

In 1991 the Chilean central bank imposed a one-year unremunerated reserve requirement on foreign
funds. Between 1991 and 1997 the coverage of the requirement was extended to cover most forms of
foreign funding, with the exception of foreign direct investment. The rate of this requirement was 30% in
May 1992, and was lowered to 10% in June 1998 (Adams, et. al. 1998).
6
Perotti and van Oijen (2001) discuss a similar concern in relation to the initiation of country privatization
programs where stock prices increased in value sharply after the initiation. Laeven and Perotti (2001)
7

The striking returns of emerging markets around the liberalization date make it
surprising that so few countries have opened their equity markets to foreign investors.
Using the 2001 World Development Indicators CD from the World Bank, 36 emerging
countries with a population that exceeds 3 million with equity market data had not
liberalized their equity market by 1999, in contrast to 20 emerging countries that had
liberalized their equity market.
Another way to look at the data is to compute the yearly average return on an equallyweighted portfolio of countries starting five years before the liberalization year and
ending five years after the liberalization year. Using the Bekaert and Harvey (2000)
dates, we find that the liberalizing countries in our sample earn 13.44% per calendar year
before the liberalization year, 67.60% the year of the liberalization, 20.96% per year in
the two years after the liberalization, but -4.29% per year in years +3 through +5. 1993
was a year with considerable inflows into emerging markets. Seven countries have 1993
in the last three years of the five-year post-liberalization window. If we take out 1993, the
average annual return per calendar year in years +3 through +5 is -12.39%.
We examined returns for liberalizing countries in a number of ways, but the general
pattern shown in Figure 1 holds up. The evidence of high returns in the years
immediately following the equity market liberalization is stronger than the evidence of
subsequent underperformance. Movements in global markets or emerging markets cannot
explain the pattern. The evidence of underperformance does not seem robust when the
Henry (2000a) dates are used. This could be due to the fact that the Bekaert and Harvey
(2000) dates seem more closely associated with an upward shift in flows from foreign

model how a policy change such as a privatization program can gain credibility over time and show that as
it does so financial development increases.
8

investors, but the result indicates that the choice of liberalization may matter for
assessments of long-run performance.7 We estimated for each country a regression of the
monthly excess return on a constant, the excess return of the world market (using the
Datastream world index), the excess return of the emerging markets index (EMBD
composite index), a dummy variable corresponding to the event window used by Henry
(2000a), which goes from month -7 before the liberalization date to the liberalization
month, and a dummy variable for each one of the first five twelve-month periods starting
the month immediately after the liberalization. The coefficient on each dummy variable is
the average monthly return for the period over which the dummy variable takes a value of
one. The emerging market index return is available from January 1985, so that our
regressions start then. The average across countries of the dummy variable corresponding
to the first twelve-month period following the Bekaert and Harvey (2000) liberalization
dates is 4.23%. In contrast, the average for the fifth twelve-month period is -1.7%, so that
liberalizing countries outperform on average by more than 50% in the first twelve-month
period and underperform on average by more than 20% in the fifth twelve-month period.
These averages of the dummy variables are significantly different from zero at the 5%
level.
A similar pattern of spectacular returns followed by disappointing returns is observed
for stocks that undergo an initial public offering (IPO). There has been much debate on
the statistical significance of the poor performance of IPO firms. Alternate estimation
methods lead to different results. It will be even harder to reach a consensus on the longrun performance of liberalizing countries because there are few such countries and a
number of liberalization dates are close to each other. Both for equity market
7

See Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2002).
9

liberalizations and for IPO stocks, there are good reasons to think that some of the
corrective market mechanisms that limit valuation departures from fundamentals are
more impeded than they are for well-established stocks. When an investor believes that a
stock is overvalued, she can attempt to profit from her knowledge by selling the stock
short. We know that short-selling is often difficult for IPO stocks; it is also typically
difficult for emerging markets stocks because of regulatory restrictions, limited liquidity,
and lack of supporting institutions. It would therefore not be surprising if, following an
equity market liberalization, prices would be driven up by the most optimistic investors,
with a correction eventually taking place.
We examined whether stock returns depend on a proxy for the liquidity of the
stock market before liberalization. In a less liquid market, optimistic investors would
affect prices more when they trade. When the sample is split, the subsample sizes are
more reasonable when we use the Bekaert and Harvey (2000) dates. Using turnover in the
year before liberalization as a measure of liquidity, we find that countries with turnover
below the median turnover of the liberalizing countries have much stronger returns
around the time of the liberalization but poorer returns afterwards. In the calendar year of
the liberalization, countries with low turnover earn more than twice what the countries
with high turnover earn. However, in the calendar years +3 through +5 following
liberalization, the average annual return of the countries with low turnover before
liberalization is -8.73% and the average annual return of the other countries is -0.35%.
Low turnover markets seem more prone to what appears to be a pattern of overreaction.
Figure 2 shows the returns of liberalizing countries for the period of minus seven months
before the liberalization date to the liberalization month and for each of the first five

10

twelve-month periods afterwards. We also reproduce the return from having invested in
the emerging market total return index during these years.

2. The IPO model of liberalizations.
Why would a country liberalize its equity market? There are three important reasons
why the owners of a private firm would want to take it public: they want to cash out, they
require external funding to finance the firm’s growth opportunities, or they want to have
more equity in the firm’s capital structure.8 For these arguments to explain why firms in
emerging markets want the country to liberalize its equity market, it has to be that the
controlling shareholders of the large corporations in a country have a decisive say in
whether the equity market is liberalized. This need not be so. Some IMF programs led to
greater opening of equity markets. The country might also want to liberalize so that it has
a larger market for the shares of privatized firms or for other reasons.9 However, we
focus here on the motivations of large controlling shareholders. In most countries, one
would expect these shareholders to have an important say on the extent to which the
equity market is open to foreign investors.
To understand why firms in an emerging country might push for liberalization, it is
important to understand that in such a country, firms are closely held. They have a large
shareholder or group of shareholders, often a family, with a controlling stake. The
average fraction of shares held by controlling shareholders in our sample of liberalizing
countries is 53.61% using the sample drawn from Bekaert and Harvey (2000).10 It is most

8

See Pagano, Panetta, and Zingales (1998).
See Boutchkova and Megginson (2000) for evidence on the importance of privatized firms in emerging
markets.
10
We use the data from Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003). See Appendix B.
9

11

likely that before liberalization, ownership was even more concentrated. Consider a
typical firm in such a country. By selling a significant fraction of the shares they own,
controlling shareholders would take the risk of losing control. If the equity market of that
country opens up, foreign investors could own at most 46.39% of the shares of that firm
if the controlling shareholders do not sell some of the shares they own, which limits the
extent to which risk-sharing can take place.
For firms to push for liberalization, their controlling shareholders must benefit
from it. When are these controlling shareholders likely to favor liberalization? They can
benefit from liberalization in many ways, but three benefits stand out, two of which are
also the main possible benefits of an IPO for the owners of the firm going public. First,
liberalization may provide the controlling shareholders with an exit if they want to reduce
their stake in their firm.11 Foreign shareholders or a foreign firm could buy their stake.
Second, liberalization enables them to raise capital from foreign investors. After
liberalization, a firm can have its equity listed on a foreign exchange. This makes it
possible, for instance, for the firm to start an ADR program, have an NYSE listing, or
raise equity in the U.S. A foreign listing can also help the firm raise capital through debt
issues, bank borrowing and private placements. By raising equity capital, the firm can
finance new investment or reduce its leverage. Third, an equity market liberalization
makes it possible for firms in emerging markets to rent the institutions of more developed
countries. Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2003) show that a listing in the U.S. increases firm

11

No paper we know of analyses the impact of the equity market liberalization events of Henry (2000a) or
Bekaert and Harvey (2000) on corporate governance and ownership. However, Doidge (2002) investigates
how ownership changes after a firm from an emerging market starts an ADR program. He finds that 24 out
of 101 firms had a change in control and in 18 of these 24 firms the new controlling shareholder was
foreign.
12

value because, by subjecting the firm to some U.S. laws and regulations, a listing helps
make a credible commitment to protect the rights of minority shareholders.
Though the risk-sharing theory of equity market liberalizations implies that these
liberalizations necessarily improve welfare, controlling shareholders may be affected
adversely by liberalization. Suppose a firm can raise all the funds it requires through
banks in the local market, perhaps because of political connections, and the controlling
shareholders of the firm have no intention of reducing their stake because doing so would
endanger the extent to which they can extract private benefits from control of the firm. In
this case, equity market liberalization could help competing firms that are less well
established or politically connected in the country by giving them access to outside
capital. Perhaps more importantly, following a liberalization, foreign investors will
monitor local firms and any actions detrimental to minority shareholders that otherwise
might have remained hidden could be exposed by outsiders. This monitoring by foreign
investors could therefore make it harder for controlling investors to extract private
benefits from the firms they control. Consequently, if a country’s largest firms do not
have unmet financing needs and if the controlling shareholders of these firms are not
looking for an exit, these controlling shareholders are unlikely to push for an equity
market liberalization and may actually oppose such a liberalization strongly.12
For controlling shareholders of major firms who are not looking for an exit to
want the equity market liberalized, it has to be that these firms have growth opportunities
that cannot be financed. If that is the case, liberalization takes place when the local
market’s ability to provide funding to established companies becomes insufficient to

12

It could be that controlling shareholders are in favor of an equity market liberalization, but that it does
not take place because the politicians respond to other constituencies.
13

meet the needs of these companies. The local market could fail in financing local
companies because these companies experienced an increase in growth opportunities,
because the local market became less able to fund these companies due to internal
problems (for instance, a banking crisis), or because controlling shareholders of local
firms cannot credibly commit to protect the rights of minority shareholders through the
use of local institutions.
For local companies to be able to get funding abroad after not having been able to
do so in their home country, they have to draw the attention of foreign investors to the
country. This is much like an IPO. For foreign investors to be interested, they have to
hear a good story that draws their attention. This suggests that a country is unlikely to
liberalize its equity market when its financial system is performing poorly and can no
longer fund local firms as well as it did in the past. One would expect instead an equity
market liberalization to take place when the country and local firms have improved
growth prospects that require additional financing, when foreign investors think that this
is the case, or when emerging markets are expected to do well and nothing in the country
indicates that its prospects are weaker. However, this means that equity market
liberalizations will take place when higher growth is expected. Though Henry (2000b)
shows that there is an increase in investment following a liberalization and Bekaert,
Harvey, and Lundblad (2002) show that growth increases, the changes they uncover may
therefore equally cause the liberalization as being caused by it. Further, because of the
difficulties in selling stocks short in liberalizing countries and the limited liquidity of
their stock markets, it is plausible that the most optimistic foreign investors might drive
prices higher than warranted by fundamentals. Such overreaction would eventually be

14

offset by poor stock returns. We saw that the empirical evidence is consistent with such a
scenario. The possibility of such a scenario should make us leery of drawing strong
conclusions from the data about expected returns following liberalizations.
For an IPO to succeed, there has to be a demand for the firm’s shares by public
investors. That demand will determine how many shares can be sold at the IPO. For an
equity market liberalization to succeed, there has to be a demand for the existing or newly
issued shares from firms in the liberalizing country by foreign investors. The success of
the liberalization is determined by the extent to which foreign investors buy these shares,
but while IPO shares are bought at the IPO price, shares from firms of the liberalizing
country are bought at the price at which they trade in that country. Several factors limit
the demand for these shares by foreign investors. Some of these factors are similar to
those that limit the demand for shares in IPOs, but others are not. In particular, equity
market liberalizations do not remove all barriers to holding local equity for foreign
investors. Many of the remaining barriers cannot be eliminated by decrees. Countries
with weak enforcement of investor rights and poor financial development are necessarily
hazardous for foreign investors. Such countries lack transparency, have legal systems that
can be manipulated by residents, have expropriation risks, and so on. As a result of these
risks for foreign investors, it is still the case after a liberalization that foreign investors
can be at a disadvantage relative to domestic investors. Further, while a government
decree can reduce barriers to international investment that lead to a home bias on the part
of investors, it cannot overcome the behavioral considerations that lead investors to
prefer domestic stocks.

15

Second, the literature on IPOs emphasizes that the owners of the private firm
know more about the firm than potential investors (the information asymmetry problem)
and have some ability to take actions after the IPO that benefit them at the expense of the
new shareholders (the agency problem). To protect themselves against being taken
advantage of, investors are only willing to buy at a lower price than if there were no
information asymmetry and agency problems. The owners of the private firm are less
likely to take advantage of the public investors if they keep their ownership stake high,
because they would then be taking advantage of themselves since they would reduce the
value of their stake. This explains why IPO firms typically have concentrated ownership
after the IPO. Rational investors would be unlikely to buy the shares of a firm going
public where it is known that all the insiders are selling their shares in the IPO. The same
issue arises with equity market liberalizations.
Similarly to periods when sentiment is favorable to IPO firms, there are periods
when sentiment is favorable to emerging markets, making it more advantageous for
countries to liberalize their equity markets, and periods when there is little benefit from
making shares available to foreign investors because these investors are reducing their
allocation to these markets.
If local firms want to sell equity abroad and if local shareholders want to sell to
foreign investors, the more they do so, the more costly it will be for them in terms of the
impact on local share prices. Usually, in the case of firms in emerging markets, investors
are typically poorly protected. This makes it easier for controlling shareholders to take
advantage of minority shareholders. In these countries, concentrated ownership is a
mechanism used to control the agency costs of controlling shareholders in that controlling

16

shareholders who hold a larger stake in their firm find it more expensive to extract private
benefits from control.13 Suppose controlling shareholders own a fraction w of the firm’s
cash flows. When these shareholders extract from the firm $1 of private benefits, they
would get $w of that $1 in any case. If it costs the firm $x to extract $1 of private
benefits, controlling shareholders pay $wx to get $(1 - w). The greater w, the lower the
net benefit to shareholders from extracting private benefits from the firm. As the fraction
of cash flows owned by controlling shareholders falls because of new equity issued, the
price of shares falls because the incentives of controlling shareholders to extract private
benefits increase. Even though controlling shareholders can take actions to limit this
effect, they cannot eliminate it. Consequently, the ability of firms to take advantage of an
equity market liberalization is limited by the extent to which investor protection in the
local market makes it optimal for cash flow ownership by controlling shareholders to be
high. As investor protection improves, firms in a country become better able to take
advantage of their ability to raise capital from foreign investors.

3. Conclusion.
In this paper, we argue that viewing equity market liberalizations as country IPOs
provides the basis for a more useful model of equity market liberalizations than the
simple risk-sharing model. Viewing equity market liberalizations as country IPOs forces
us to take into account the endogeneity of equity market liberalizations and to
acknowledge that the short-run impact of equity market liberalizations does not provide a
complete picture of how liberalizations affect countries. Perhaps even more importantly,

13

See Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002).
17

how much a country benefits from an equity market liberalization depends on the extent
to which firms can take advantage of the liberalization.
In the long run, the ability of firms to benefit from an equity market liberalization
depends on corporate governance and on the protection of investor rights. Because of the
limited financial development and investor protection in liberalizing countries, stock
prices may overreact following an equity market liberalization and risk-sharing can only
be limited. For countries to gain more from equity market liberalizations, they have to
improve their financial development and the degree to which they protect investors. With
greater financial development, stock prices are less likely to overreact to purchases or
sales by foreign investors. With greater investment protection, shares will be more
diffusively owned and foreigners will be less at a disadvantage, which will enable foreign
investors to participate more in local markets.

18

Bibliography
Adams Charles, Donald J. Mathieson, Garry Schinasi, and Bankim Chadha, 1998.
International Capital Markets Developments, Prospects, and Key Policy Issues,
Annex IV, International Monetetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets, Journal of Finance, v55(2), pp. 565-613.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Robin Lumsdaine, 2002, Dating the Integration of
World Capital Markets, Journal of Financial Economics 65, pp. 203-247.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2002, Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?, Working Paper, Duke University, Durnham, NC.
Boutchkova, Maria K., and William L. Megginson, 2000, Privatization and the Rise of
Global Capital Markets, Financial Management, Vol. 29, Number 4, pp 31 – 76.
Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003,
Corporate Governance and the Home Bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis, forthcoming.
Doidge, Craig, 2002, Do Laws Matter for Corporate Ownership and Control? Evidence
from emerging markets firms that list in the U.S., working paper, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2003, Why Are Foreign Firms
that List in the U.S. Worth More?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Darius P. Miller, 2000, Market Segmentation and the Cost of
Capital in International Equity Markets, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 35, pp. 577-600.
Foerster, Stephen, and Karolyi, G. Andrew, 2000, The Long Run Performance of Global
Equity Offerings, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, pp. 499-528.
Henry, Peter Blair, 2000a, Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform and Emerging
Market Equity Prices, Journal of Finance, v55(2), pp. 529-564.
Henry, Peter Blair, 2000b, Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?,
Journal of Financial Economics 58, pp. 301-330.
Karolyi, G. Andrew, 2002, The Role of ADRs in the Development and Integration of
Emerging Equity Markets, working paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH.

19

Kim, E. Han, and Vijay Singal, 2000, Stock Markets Openings: Experience of Emerging
Economies, Journal of Business 73, pp. 25-66.
Laeven, Luc, and Enrico C. Perotti, 2001, Confidence Building in Emerging Stock
Markets, CEPR working paper No. 3055, CEPR, London, England.
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos, 1996, Capital Control Liberalization and Stock
Market Development, Policy Research Working Paper No. 1622, The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
Pagano Marco, Fabio Panetta and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Why do Companies go Public?
An Empirical Analysis, The Journal of Finance, Vol 53, pp 27-64.
Perotti, Enrico C., and Pieter Van Oijen, 2001, Privatization, Political Risk and Stock
Market Development in Emerging Economies, Journal of International Money
and Finance, Vol 20, pp. 43-69.
Ritter, Jay R., 1991, The Long-run Performance of Initial Public Offerings, The Journal
of Finance, Vol 46, No. 1, pp. 3-27.
Ritter, Jay R., and Ivo Welch, 2002, A review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,
The Journal of Finance, Vol 57, No. 4, pp 1795 - 1828.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor Protection and Equity Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol 66, No. 1, pp. 3-27.
Stulz, René M., 2003, Should We Fear Capital Flows?, in International Financial
Markets: The Challenge of Globalization, Leonardo Auernheimer (Editor), University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill., forthcoming.

20

700.00%
600.00%

Cumulative Excess Return

500.00%
400.00%
300.00%
200.00%
100.00%
0.00%
T-60

T-48

T-36

T-24

T-12

0

T+12

T+24

T+36

T+48

T+60

-100.00%
Bekaert-Harvey (2000)

Henry (2000a)

Figure 1 Average cumulative buy and hold excess return of liberalizing countries
The figure shows the average cumulative buy and hold dollar return of liberalizing
countries in excess of the dollar risk-free rate. The countries used in the sample are the 15
liberalizing countries that have returns in the EMDB database starting five-years before
the liberalization. The liberalization countries and dates are either drawn from Bekaert
and Harvey (2000) or from Henry (2000a).

21

All liberalizing countries
Low turnover countries
High turnover countries

100.00%

EMDB total return index

80.00%
60.00%
40.00%
20.00%
0.00%
-20.00%
0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 2. Stock returns and equity market liberalization.
This figure shows the returns of liberalizing countries during the period (period 0 in the
figure) from month -7 to the month of the liberalization, and of each of the first five
twelve-month periods from month +1 (periods 1 to 5). The returns are the total return
indices from the Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB). A liberalizing country is
included in the sample for any year in which it has a return in EMDB.

22

Appendix A. Liberalization dates across different previous studies.
This table lists the liberalization dates from Henry (2000a), Bekeart and Harvey (2000), Levine and Zervos (1996), and Kim and Singal (2000).

Country

Bekaert and Harvey (2000)
Liberalization
Event
date

Henry (2000a)
Liberalization
date

Event

Levine and Zervos (1996)
Liberalization
Event
date

Kim and Singal (2000)
Liberalization
Event
date

Argentina

Nov-89

New foreign investment decree

Nov-89

New foreign investment decree

Jun-80

Eased restrictions on foreign
portfolio investment in Argentina

Nov-89

New foreign investment decree

Brazil

May-91

Foreign investment law changed.
Investors can now hold up to
49% of voting stock and 100% of
non voting stock

Mar-88

Country fund introduction

Jun-90

Liberalized capital repatriation
and capital inflow restrictions

May-91

Foreign investment law changed.
Investors can now hold up to
49% of voting stock and 100% of
non voting stock

Chile

Jan-92

Ease of restrictions on
repatriation of capital. Coincides
with broad economic reform

May-87

Country fund introduction

Jan-88

Liberalized repatriation of
dividends

Oct-89

First country fund admitted

Colombia

Feb-91

Resolution 49, foreigners are
given same rights as domestic
investors, 100% remittances and
equal access to local credit
sources

Dec-91

Policy Decree: Resolution 52,
foreign investors are allowed to
purchase up to 100% of locally
listed companies

Dec-89

Eased portfolio and direct foreign
investment restrictions

Feb-91

Policy Decree: Resolution 52,
foreign investors are allowed to
purchase up to 100% of locally
listed companies

Greece

Dec-87

Liberalization of currency
controls

Aug-86

European Community nationals
are allowed to invest in Greek
securities

India

Nov-92

Government allowed foreign
portfolio investors to invest in
Indian listed securities

Nov-92

Government allowed foreign
portfolio investors to invest in
Indian listed securities

Indonesia

Sep-89

Minister of Finance allows
foreigners to buy up to 49% of
listed firms except financial firms

Sep-89

Minister of Finance allows
foreigners to buy up to 49% of
listed firms except financial firms

Jordan

Dec-95

Foreigners allowed to purchase
without government approval

Korea

Jan-92

Stock market opens to investors,
foreigners cannot own more than
3% individually and 10%
collectively

Jun-86

Jun-87

Country fund introduction

Country fund introduction

23

May-90

Automatic approval of foreign
investment proposals of foreign
companies with equity share up
to 40%

Jan-87

Liberalized capital repatriation

Jan-78

Amman Stock Exchange opens.
Investors are allowed to own
49% of equity

Aug-81

Liberalized inflows and outflows
of direct foreign investment

Jan-92

Stock market opens to investors,
foreigners cannot own more than
3% individually and 10%
collectively

Feb-92

Liberalized portfolio inflows and
outflows

Bekaert and Harvey (2000)

Levine and Zervos (1996)

Henry (2000a)

Country

Liberalization
date

Malaysia

Dec-88

Liberalization of foreign
ownership policies

May-87

Country fund introduction

Nov-86

Liberalization of direct foreign
investment and portfolio inflow
restrictions

Mexico

May-89

Relaxation of 1973 law
controlling foreign investment.
Tax amnesty for capital
repatriation

May-89

Policy Decree: Liberalization of
foreign portfolio inflows

May-89

Nigeria

Aug-95

Government repeals the
Exchange Control Act of 1962
and Enterprise Promotion Act of
1989

Pakistan

Feb-91

Relaxation of both domestic and
foreign investment procedures

Philippines

Jun-91

Foreign Investment Act is signed.
It removes, over three years, all
restrictions on foreign
investments

Portugal

Jul-86

Portugal enters the EC

Taiwan

Jan-91

Implementation of second phase
of liberalization plan. Foreign
institutional investors can now
invest directly if they have
received approval as qualified
foreign institutional investor.

May-86

Thailand

Sep-87

Inauguration of Stock Exchange
of Thailand's Alien Board

Jan-88

Turkey

Aug-89

Communiqué passes allowing
foreign mutual funds to have
access to equities market

Venezuela

Jan-90

Decree 727, opening the market
(except banks) to foreign
investors

Zimbabwe

Jun-93

New investment guidelines and
export incentives that effectively
open the Zimbabwe Stock
Exchange to foreign portfolio
investment

Event

Liberalization
date

May-86

Jan-90

Liberalization
date

Event

Event

Kim and Singal (2000)
Liberalization
date

Event

Prior to 1985

Most stocks were already 100%
available to investors

Liberalized direct foreign
investment inflows

May-89

Foreign investment now allowed
up to 100% in 73% of Mexico's
754 economic sectors

Jan-90

Liberalized dividend and capital
repatriation

Feb-91

Foreigners are allowed to own
100% equity in any industrial or
business venture

Jan-88

Liberalized dividend and capital
repatriation

Mar-86

Ouster of Ferdinand Marcos

Jan-88

Liberalized dividend repatriation

Jul-86

Foreigners are allowed to own
100% of companies except arms
sector

Country Fund introduction

Feb-91

Opened stock market to foreign
investment

Jan-91

Opening of stock market,
foreigners can invest up to 10%
subject to overall limit

Country Fund introduction

Jan-88

Liberalized capital and dividend
repatriation

Aug-88

"Foreign Board" was established
as a parallel stock exchange for
trading shares that could be hold
by foreigners

Feb-90

Finished 18 month process of
liberalizing portfolio inflows and
outflows

Aug-89

Market considered 100% open by
IFC

Jan-90

Liberalized direct foreign
investment and portfolio inflows

Jan-90

Decree 727, opening the market
(except banks) to foreign
investors

Jul-93

Foreigners allowed to purchase
up to 25% of listed shares

Country Fund introduction

Policy Decree: Decree 727,
opening the market (except
banks) to foreign investors

24

Appendix B. Average fraction of shares held by controlling shareholders
The data is from Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003).
Bekaert and Harvey (2000) sample

Henry (2000a) sample

Country

Country

Percentage of market
capitalization closely held

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Greece
India
Indonesia
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Nigeria
Pakistan
Philippines
Portugal
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

52.68
67.13
64.94
NA
75.18
40.32
68.97
65.55
39.23
52.15
26.15
NA
77.37
51.13
35.04
22.26
57.83
70.86
61.53
36.63

Average

53.61

25

Percentage of market
capitalization closely held

Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
India
Korea
Malaysia
Mexico
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand
Venezuela

52.68
67.13
64.94
NA
40.32
39.23
52.15
26.15
51.13
22.26
57.83
61.53

Average

51.31

