                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DO AND SHOULD FINANCIAL AID PACKAGES
                         AFFECT STUDENTS’ COLLEGE CHOICES?

                                           Christopher Avery
                                           Caroline M. Hoxby


                                          Working Paper 9482
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9482


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




The authors are affiliated, respectively, with the John F. Kennedy School of Government and the Department
of Economics, Harvard University. The authors gratefully thank Andrew Fairbanks and Jim Barker, who
helpedtodesign and implement the College Admissions Project survey. They also thank Michael Behnke,
Larry Momo, andJay Matthews for help at initial stages. 510 high school counselors really made the survey
happen; the authors wishthey could thank them individually The authors owe thanks to the research
assistants who contacted high school ounselors, coded data, programmed, and otherwise regarded the data
thoughtfully. Their perspicacity is what made the College Admissions Project data as interpretable and error-
free as we are grateful to think they are: Joshua Barro, Rohit Chandwani, Michael Cuthbert, Suzanne Ko,
Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael McNabb, Kathryn Markham, Emily Oster, Jenna Robins, Aaron Roth, Maria
Shim, Catherine So, Rania Succar, Michael Thakur, and Kenneth Wang. Scott Resnick deserves special
thanks. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by Christopher Avery and Caroline M. Hoxby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice,
is given to the source.
Do and Should Financial Aid Packages Affect Students’ College Choices?
Christopher Avery and Caroline M. Hoxby
NBER Working Paper No. 9482
February 2003
JEL No. I2, J0, H0

                                           ABSTRACT

Every year, thousands of high school seniors with high college aptitude face complicated "menus"
of scholarship and aid packages designed to affect their college choices. Using an original survey
designed for this paper, we investigate whether students respond to their "menus" like rational

human capital investors. Whether they make the investments efficiently is important not only
because they are the equivalent of the "Fortune 500" for human capital, but also because they are

likely to be the most analytic and long-sighted student investors. We find that the typical high
aptitude student chooses his college and responds to aid in a manner that is broadly consistent with
rational investment. However, we also find some serious anomalies: excessive response to loans and
work-study, strong response to superficial aspects of a grant (such as whether it has a name), and

response to a grant's share of college costs rather than its amount. Approximately 30 percent of high
aptitude students respond to aid in a way that apparently reduces their lifetime present value. While
both a lack of sophistication/information and credit constraints can explain the behavior of this 30

percent of students, the weight of the evidence favors a lack of sophistication.



Christopher Avery                                     Caroline M. Hoxby
Kennedy School of Government                          Department of Economics
79 JFK Street                                         Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              and NBER
christopher_avery@ksg.harvard.edu                     choxby@harvard.edu
               I. How Scholarships and Aid Affect the College Choices of High Aptitude Students

         Every year, thousands of high school seniors who have high college aptitude are faced with complicated

arrays of scholarships and aid packages that are intended to influence their college choices. Some of the scholarships

and aid are meant purely to relieve liquidity constraints that might prevent needy students from attending the college

they most prefer. Other scholarships and aid packages are designed to alter students' preference ranking of

colleges–for instance, by attracting them to a college that might be unappealing in the absence of a scholarship. A

student with high aptitude has complex financial supports for his college education: outside scholarships that are

purely merit-based; outside scholarships that are merit- and need-based; state scholarships that are usable only at in-

state public colleges; state scholarships that are usable at any in-state college; work-study programs; college

scholarships that are purely merit-based; college scholarships that are merit- and need-based; college grants (as

opposed to named scholarships) that are merit- and need-based; subsidized and unsubsidized loans from their

college, outside charitable organizations, and the government.

         This fascinating array of scholarships, grants, loans, and work-study programs exists because many parties

want to alter meritorious students' college choices. The parties' objectives are diverse–from a purely altruistic desire

to relax constraints facing the needy to a college's self-interested desire to enroll high aptitude students who raise its

profile or improve education for other students on campus.

         The students who face these complex choices are not a large group, but they are important. Many

commentators would say that they are important because they will later account for a disproportionate share of the

nation's leaders, scientists, and intellectuals. Their human capital and abilities are often thought to generate social

spillovers. However, the behavior of high aptitude students is also important purely for reasons of scientific inquiry.

They are capable of the largest human capital investments in the nation: by the time these students complete their

education, some of them will be "walking capital stocks" of considerable income-generating power. In this era in

which the human capital stock of developed economies like America's is thought to be crucial to growth, it is

important to know whether the biggest investors in human capital make their investments efficiently. It is not only

the size of their investments that makes them interesting: observing them allows us to witness the forces that affect

human capital investments at their most highly charged because the stakes are high. Finally, high aptitude students

are likely to be the investors who most closely obey the model of the rational human capital investor: they are

capable of complex analysis, they are the least risky for creditors, and they tend to be patient people who take future

benefits seriously.

         Despite the interest inherent in the question of how meritorious students respond to scholarships and aid,

very little evidence exists. We believe that this is primarily because analysis is impossible with traditional sources of

student survey data, which do not contain sufficiently large numbers of this relatively rare type of student. That is,
one cannot hope to use survey data to understand such students' behavior unless the survey greatly oversamples

them. For this paper, we created a survey directed specifically to high aptitude students, with the result that we use

the largest existing data set on this type of student.

         Although almost no systematic evidence exists on how high aptitude students respond to scholarships and

aid, many selective colleges do perform internal analyses using data on the students they themselves admit. See, for

instance, Ehrenberg and Sherman's (1984) study of students who were accepted by Cornell University in the spring

of 1981. W hile we believe that college’s internal analyses provide helpful evidence, they have flaws: they

necessarily focus on a narrow set of students (the students accepted by one college); they are sometimes tacit about

their empirical methods; and the studies are hard to compare because most are unpublished (distribution is often

purely internal). Also, while colleges have complete information about their own aid offers and matriculation, they

typically have poor information about their admittees’ other college acceptances and aid offers.

         Though there is scarcity of systematic evidence on the college choice behavior of meritorious students who

can attract complex offers of financial support, there is no similar scarcity about the effects of financial aid on the

typical student or the poor student. W e shall not attempt a survey here, but instead direct readers to the chapters by

Long, Bettinger, and Dynarski in this volume.



                            II. How Should Students Respond to Scholarships and Aid?

                       A Swift Review of the Standard M odel of Human Capital Investment

         Throughout this paper, we are working from a model of human capital investment. It sets the standard we

use in our attempt to determine whether students react too much or too little to scholarships and aid. Because it

underlies our question, a quick review seems in order.

         It may be useful to state the implication of the model in intuitive terms. In return for getting more aid, a

student must generally accept a reduction in the human capital investment made in him at college or a reduction in

the consumption he enjoys at college. Put more bluntly, a student must generally enjoy a less resource-rich college

environment or a less rich peer environment in return for larger grants and other subsidies.

         A simple version of the human capital investment problem will show why students generally face these

trade-offs. Consider the problem facing a student who has very high college aptitude. In the United States, it is

reasonable to assume that he knows that he is going to attend some four-year college and must only decide which

college to attend among those that have admitted him. 1 If he acts as a "rational" investor, not bound by credit



         1
           W hen he is applying to colleges, the student must form expectations of his probability of admission to
each college and the scholarships or aid each college would likely offer him. That is, in order to avoid the
inconvenience and cost of applying to all colleges, a student attempts to foresee the choices he will have and the
actions he will take in the stage upon which we focus: the stage at which the student chooses among colleges that
constraints (an issue we will consider below), then he need make only two calculations for each college in his choice

set. Supposing that the student has figured out the cheapest way to attend each college, given the aid offered him, his

first calculation is the present discounted cost of attending each college j:




(1)




His second calculation is the presented discounted value of the consumption he enjoys at college j plus the presented

discounted value of the stream of income generated by the human capital invested in him at college j:




(2)




         In both equations (1) and (2), i indexes individual students, j indexes colleges,       is the discount rate on

future years, and t indexes years (t=1 is the freshman year, t=5 is the first post-baccalaureate year, and T i is the end

of working life.

         In equation (1), the first term is the present discounted value of total potential costs of college: tuition, fees,

room, and board. Notice that these costs apply only to the four years of college. The second term is the present

discounted value of the potential costs that he does not (immediately) pay: the grants that apply to college j (college

j's institutional grants and outside scholarships usable at college j), the loans that apply to college j (college j's

institutional loans, subsidized loans from the federal government and outside charitable groups, and unsubsidized

bank loans), and the subsidy value of the work-study program given the number of hours and job he works. The

third term records the present discounted value of the payments the student makes (up to the end of his working life

if necessary) in order to repay the college loans recorded in the second term. The variables that have asterisks



have accepted him. W hile we do not model the application stage because it is not necessary for our analysis, the
extension of our model to the earlier stage requires only simple adaptations: application must have a cost (at least an
effort or psychic cost, if not a financial one); students must use expected probabilities of admission; and students
must use expected grants, loans, et cetera.
require the student to choose them optimally.2

         In equation (2), the first term is the present discounted value of the consumption that the students enjoys at

the college: food, housing, and other consumption like recreational facilities, concerts, and so on. Of course, this

consumption does not include consumption for which the student pays out of his own pocket, although it may include

college-financed discounts at on-campus restaurants, concerts, et cetera. The second term is the present discounted

value of the returns he enjoys on the human capital invested in him at college j. This human capital is assumed to

come from two sources: resources invested in his learning (faculty time, college advisors' time, library resources,

laboratories, et cetera) and knowledge spillovers from his peers. Peer spillovers are only a possible source of human

capital; though they are generally believed to exist, their form and even their existence is somewhat doubtful.3

Notice that we allow the student's return on the stock of human capital he acquires in college to be specific to him

(because of ability) and specific to each year (because human capital acquired at college interacts with human capital

acquired through experience). The student's return on his stock of human capital need not be exclusively financial.

Any return–psychic, social, et cetera–that the student values may be included in r it. Of course, we will have

difficulty quantifying non-financial returns.

         The alert reader may notice that we have said nothing about the opportunity cost of college, which is the

income and value of leisure the student sacrifices when he attends college. These opportunity costs are

approximately the same for any college chosen by the meritorious student, so we do not need to consider them when

we explain his college choice.

         In order to choose which college to attend, the student has only to subtract equation (1) from equation

(2) and consider the difference he obtains for each college. He should attend the college with the largest

difference–that is, the college at which the present discounted benefits of college most exceed the present discounted

costs.



         2
            The optimal use of loans on offer should take into account each loan's interest rate, its repayment
schedule, and its provisions (if any) in case of disability or other exogenous reason why the student might fail to have
sufficient income to repay. In practice, the optimal use of loans tends to be simple: students exhaust more
subsidized loans, then exhaust less subsidized loans, leaving their marginal loan an unsubsidized one. The choice of
optimal work-study hours is a good deal more complicated. A student should take into account the per-hour subsidy
implicit in the work-study program and the loss of human capital caused by using hours for work that might be used
for study. Note the subsidy he needs is the true value of the subsidy, compared to the market wage for an equivalent
job. In order to consider an equivalent job, he will generally need to think about the equalizing wage differential
associated with sort of job provided under the work-study program–is it menial, educational, or in a particularly
convenient location? We can observe very little of the information that we would need to assess the true subsidy
value of work-study or to determine whether the student is choosing his work-study hours optimally. Therefore, we
will have little to say about optimal work study after this.

         3
            Good peers may merely facilitate a student's absorbing the non-peer resources invested in him; in this
case the functional form, though not the spirit, of equation (2) should be altered. Specifically, the equation should
include terms that interact peer quality and resources, not the level of peer quality.
         It should now be clear that it could not be an equilibrium for students not to face trade-offs between aid and

the resources available at a college (including peers). For instance, suppose a group of students could be admitted to

colleges A, B, and C, and that college C was preferable or at least as good as the others on the grounds of peers, the

resources available for students, tuition (that is, lower tuition), campus life, location, and so on. Suppose also that

college C systemically offered more aid (that is, systemically offered aid packages containing subsidies with a

greater total value). Then, no trade-off would exist; the students would do better all around by matriculating at

college C.

         This no-trade off situation could not be an equilibrium. If all students saw the clear advantages of college C

and received more aid, college C would be so over-subscribed that it would automatically become more selective, so

that the typical student admitted to colleges A and B would no longer be admitted to college C. As a consequence,

college C's peer quality would no longer be equivalent to that of colleges A and B. Of course, it is possible that an

individual student will face no trade-off between two colleges in his choice set. However, such no-trade-off

situations must necessarily be idiosyncratic to individual students. They cannot hold generally.

         W e will say that a student is acting like a rational human capital investor if he always chooses the college

that maximizes the difference between equation (2) and equation (1) for him. That is, he will never be tempted by

more aid to attend a college that offers such reduced consumption and human capital investment that he is worse off,

over his lifetime. Similarly, he will not refuse to attend colleges that offer aid packages that are so generous that they

more than offset the reduction in consumption and human capital investment he experiences in college. Also, he will

act in accordance with the presented discounted value of various forms of aid –for instance, he will recognize that

loans must be repaid and that only part of a work-study package is a subsidy. In this paper, when we test students

against a standard of rational human capital investment, we are attempting to determine whether they act in

accordance with the last few sentences. (The word "rational" can be loaded with meaning about mental processing.

W e are using it in a strictly limited way. In this chapter, rational means that a student obeys the standard model of

human capital investment.)

         There are three broad reasons why students might fail to respond to aid like the rational human capital

investor. First, a student may be rational but credit constrained. In particular, his parents may be too well-off to

attract need-based aid and unwilling to pay for the optimal college themselves and unwilling to co-sign loans so that

he can pay for the optimal college himself. Second, a student may be rational but systemically misinformed–for

instance, he may be naive about colleges' different levels of resources and therefore choose a college at which he will

accumulate much less human capital than he thought he would. Third, a student may simply not attempt to maximize

his own lifetime utility when he chooses a college.
                                 III. The College Admissions Project Survey Data

         Our data comes from the College Admissions Project, in which we surveyed high school seniors applying to

college during the 1999-2000 academic year.4 The survey was designed to gather data on an unusual group of

students: students with very high college aptitude who are likely to gain admission to and attract merit scholarships

from selective colleges. W hile such students are represented in surveys that attempt to be nationally representative,

such as the National Educational Longitudinal Survey, they are a very small share of the population of American

students. As a result, the number of such students is always so small in typical surveys that their behavior cannot be

analyzed, even if the survey contains a large number of students. Yet, questions of the type that motivate this paper

apply acutely to students of high college aptitude, who can–if they wish–consider a wide variety of colleges, merit

scholarships, and aid packages. By focusing on students with very strong academic credentials, we hope to learn

how students who can attract interesting aid packages respond to them.

A. The Survey Design

         In order to find students who were appropriate candidates for the survey, we worked with counselors from

510 high schools around the United States. The high schools that were selected had a record of sending several

students to selective colleges each year, and they were identified using published sources (such as Peterson's guides

to secondary schools) and the experience of admissions experts (Andrew Fairbanks, Michael Behnke, and Larry

Momo). Each counselor selected ten students at random from the top of his senior class as measured by grade point

average. Counselors at public schools selected students at random from the top 10% of the senior class, while

counselors at private schools (which tend to be smaller and have higher mean college aptitude) selected students at

random from the top 20% of the senior class.5 The counselors distributed the surveys to students, collected the

completed surveys, and returned them to us for coding.6 Students were tracked using a randomly assigned number;

we never learned the names of the students who participated.

         Survey participants completed two questionnaires over the course of the academic year. The first

questionnaire was administered in January 2000. It asked for the same background, academic, and extracurricular

information that college applications require. The majority of these questions were taken directly from the Common


         4
             See Avery and Hoxby [2000] for additional detail.

         5
            The counselors were given detailed instructions for random sampling from the top 20, 30, 40, or 50
students in the senior class depending on the size of the school. For example, a counselor from a public school with
200 students in a class was asked to select 10 students at random from the top 20 students in the senior class, with the
suggestion that the counselor select students ranked #1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, and 19.

         6
           The exception was the parent survey, which parents mailed directly to us in an addressed, postage-paid
envelope so that they would not have to give possibly sensitive financial information to the high school counselor.
Because counselors have access to the information on the students' surveys (and must, in order to support their
applications competently), we were not as concerned about students' giving information to their counselors.
Application, which is accepted by many colleges in place of their specific application forms. In addition, each

student listed (up to) his ten most preferred colleges regardless of whether he had applied to them yet. Each student

also listed the colleges and graduate schools (if any) attended by each parent and the colleges (if any) attended by

older siblings along with their expected graduation dates.

         The second questionnaire was administered in May 2000 and asked for information about the student's

admission outcomes, financial aid offers, scholarship offers, and matriculation decision. Each student listed their

financial aid packages with the amounts offered in three categories: Grants, Loans, and W ork Study. Each student

also listed institutional scholarships (scholarships offered by a specific college for exclusive use there) and outside

scholarships (and their restrictions, if any).7 The responses on merit-based scholarships, both institutional and

outside, were accurate and clear, presumably because students were proud of them as accomplishments. 8 Finally,

each student was asked an open-ended question: "Did finances play a role in your decision?"

         A third questionnaire was distributed to a parent of each survey participant. The parent was asked to

indicate whether either tuition or financial aid considerations (or both) would affect their child's choice of college. In

addition, each parent was asked to check one of fifteen boxes to indicate their income range in 1999. (See Table 1

for the income categories.)

         W e matched the College Admissions Project data to colleges' administrative data on tuition, room, board,

comprehensive cost, enrollment, and expenditure. In all cases, the ultimate source for the administrative data was the

college itself and the data were for the 2000-01 school year, which corresponds to the survey participants' freshmen

year.9

         The College Admissions Project survey produced a response rate of approximately 65%, including

information for 3,240 students from 396 high schools. So far as we could discern from the data we had on

respondents, partial respondents, and non-respondents, lack of participation was uncorrelated with observable

student and school characteristics. This was probably because counselor vagaries accounted for most of the partial




         7
           Students were offered the option of photocopying their financial aid offers, blacking out their names, and
submitting the copy in place of answering the question. A minority of students did so.

         8
             In most cases, we were able to validate the terms of the scholarship because it is described on the
college’s website or in its publications. Our survey respondents’ descriptions were very accurate; in no case did we
will fail to validate the key terms of a scholarship.

         9
            W e collected the administrative data from the following sources in order: The United States Department
of Education's Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), the United States Department of
Education's College Opportunities Online system (COOL), the College Board's annual survey (ACS), the 2001
edition of Peterson's Guide to Colleges, and colleges themselves. That is, we attempted to fill in each observation
using the first source first; missing observations were filled in using one of the remaining sources, in order.
and non-responses. 10 The final sample contains students from 43 states plus the District of Columbia. 11 Although the

sample was constructed to include students from every region of the country, it is intentionally representative of

students who apply to highly selective colleges and therefore non-representative of American high school students as

a whole. Regions and states that produce a disproportionate share of the students who apply to selective colleges are

given a weight in the sample that is approximately proportionate to their weight at very selective colleges, not their

weight in the population of American high school students. Of course, all of the students in the sample have very

strong academic records. It is not surprising that the sample contains students whose parents have higher incomes

and more education than typical American parents.

B. The Typical Student in the College Admissions Project

            The summary statistics shown in Tables 1 and 2 (and in Appendix Tables 2 and 3) demonstrate that the

sample is quite special. The average (combined verbal and math) SAT score among participants was 1357, which

put the average student in the sample at the 90th percentile of all SAT takers. About 5 percent of the students won a

National Merit Scholarship; 20 percent of them won an outside scholarship that was fully portable; and 46 percent of

them won a scholarship from at least one college. 45 percent of the students attended private school, and their

parents' income averaged $119,929 in 1999. However, 76 percent of the sample had incomes below the cut-off

where a family is considered for aid by selective private colleges (the cut-off averaged $160,000 for 2000-01, but the

actual cut-off depended on family circumstances). 59 percent of the students applied for need-based financial aid,

and 41 percent of the families reported that finances influenced their college choice.12 Of course, a college may

offer a student a scholarship or grant to persuade him to matriculate, regardless of whether he has applied for aid.

            83 percent of the student's parents were currently married, and 23 percent of the students had at least one

sibling currently enrolled in college. The racial composition of the survey participants was 73 percent white non-

Hispanic, 16 percent Asian, 3.5 percent black non-Hispanic, and 3.8 percent Hispanic. W e found that the black and

Hispanic sub-groups were too small for separate analysis. W e also found that the white and Asian sub-groups




         10
            The most common reasons for failure to return the survey were changes in the job of the high school
counselor (so that the survey would not longer be a natural part of his job), the counselor’s becoming pregnant or ill,
and other administrative problems that were unrelated to the college admissions outcomes of students who had been
selected to participate. W e tested whether respondents, partial respondents, and non-respondents differed in school
characteristics, January survey characteristics, and basic characteristics reported by counselors (sex, race, class rank).
W e did not find any statistically significant differences among respondents, partial respondents, and non-
respondents.

            11
           The states missing from the sample are Alaska, Delaware, Iowa, Mississippi, North Dakota, South
Dakota, and W est Virginia.

            12
                 That is, either the parent, the student, or both claimed that finances influenced the college choice
decision.
behaved similarly, all else equal. Thus, we will not discuss students' races further in this chapter.

         Looking at Appendix Table 2, which shows descriptive statistics on the colleges where the students applied,

we can see that the survey participants applied to a range of colleges that included "safety schools" (the mean college

to which a student applied had a median SAT score 8.5 percentiles below the student's own). However, the

participants also made ambitious applications: 47.5 percent of them applied to at least one Ivy League college.

         Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for colleges to which the students were admitted. This is the set of

observations on which we concentrate in our analysis of college choice–for the simple reason that students can

choose only among those colleges to which they were admitted. Comparing Table 2 to Appendix Table 2, we can

see that the students made logical application decisions. The mean college to which they applied had a median SAT

score at the 83 rd percentile; the mean college to which they were admitted had median SAT score at the 81 st

percentile. This small difference suggests that the students aimed a little high in their applications, a procedure that

is optimal. 66 percent of the colleges to which they were admitted were private, and their mean tuition was $17,671.

Notice that we show the colleges' in-state tuition, out-of-state tuition, and the tuition that actually applies to the

students in the sample (in-state or out-of-state as appropriate).

         Finally, Appendix Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for the colleges at which the students matriculated.

They are more selective, on average, than the colleges to which the students were admitted: their median SAT score

is at the 83.4 th percentile, as opposed to the 81 st percentile median SAT score of the colleges to which students were

admitted. This makes sense because it implies that students included "safety schools" in their choice sets, but that

they did not actually matriculate at their "safety schools" when they did not need to. One measure of the unusual

college aptitude of the survey participants is the list of colleges at which the largest numbers of participants enrolled.

Seventeen institutions enrolled at least 50 students from the sample: Harvard, Yale, University of Pennsylvania,

Stanford, Brown, Cornell, University of Virginia, Columbia, University of California–Berkeley, Northwestern,

Princeton, Duke, University of Illinois, New York University, University of Michigan, Dartmouth, and Georgetown.

C. Some Variables with Interesting Measurement Issues

         Our measurement of most variables was perfectly straightforward, but a few exceptions are worth

mentioning. W e converted American College Test (ACT) scores to SAT scores using the cross-walk provided by

The College Board. W e converted all college admissions scores into national percentile scores using the national

distribution of SAT scores for the freshman class of 2000-01. 13 W e used longitude and latitude to compute the




         13
            This is an important, though often neglected, conversion. A given change in an SAT scale score (of, say,
100 points) corresponds to a differing number of percentiles depending where the scale score is in the distribution.
For instance, the difference between a combined 1500 and 1600 is only a few percentiles, but the difference between
a combined 1400 and 1500 is three to four times as many percentiles. The unconverted scale scores generate
seriously biased estimates when used in regression equations where the scores enter linearly.
distance between a student's high school and each college to which he applied. W e used parents' reports of their own

incomes whenever available.

         W hen a parent report of income was unavailable, we substituted an estimate of parents' income based on the

Expected Family Contribution reported by the student. (The Expected Family Contribution is the standardized

federal estimate of the amount that parents should be able to contribute towards the student's college education.) We

can explain 88 percent of the variation in the Expected Family Contribution using just two variables: parents'

income and likely current expenditures for the college education of older siblings. W e know about siblings'

enrollment and likely expenditures for their education. Therefore, our estimates of parents' income based on the

Expected Family Contribution and siblings' college expenses are highly accurate. Later, readers will see that we

only need to group parents into four income groups. For families that reported both parents' income and an Expected

Family Contribution, our estimate of parents' income based on Expected Family Contribution placed families into the

correct group 97 percent of the time.

         A remaining 3.4 percent of families had neither a reported parents' income nor a reported Expected Family

Contribution. For these families, we estimated parents' income by assigning parents the mean incomes for people

with the same detailed occupation in the March 2000 Current Population Survey (which asks about a person's 1999

income from his occupation). For families for which we could check this method, we found that it assigned them to

the correct income group 91 percent of the time. 14

         Finally, because the aid and scholarship variables are important, we hand-checked every observation to

ensure that no scholarship was counted twice (as a grant and again as a scholarship), recorded incorrectly as a four-

year total rather than an annual amount, or recorded with insufficient restrictions. In all cases where a student

reported a named scholarship or grant with published parameters (for instance, Morehouse Scholars at the University

of North Carolina), we validated the basic terms of the scholarship or grant.



                                               IV. Empirical Strategy

         Our empirical strategy is straightforward. W e are interested in discovering the factors that influence a

student's choice among the colleges to which he is admitted. This is an estimation problem for which conditional

logit (also known as McFadden's Choice Model) is ideally suited.



         14
            For the occupation-based estimate of parents' income, nearly all of the "mistakes" were caused by our
assigning families to the medium-high income group when they truly belonged in the high income group. We
suspect that our medium-high income group probably contains about 12 families that should be assigned to the high
income group. The under-assignment to the high income group is caused by professional occupations' having income
distributions with a right-hand skew. Think, for instance, of attorneys. Parents make it into the high income group
because they are, say, unusually highly paid lawyers, not because the mean income for a lawyer would put them
there.
         Intuitively, conditional logit groups together the colleges to which each student was admitted. This

becomes a student's menu or college choice set. A binary outcome variable shows which college was actually

picked–in our case, it is a dummy variable equal to 1 for the college at which the student matriculated and 0 for all of

the other colleges in his choice set. Each college in the choice set has a number of attributes, some of which are the

same for all students (such as whether the college is public or private) and some of which depend on the identity of

the student (such as grants to the student from the college). Conditional logit estimation relates the binary outcome

variable to the college attributes by maximizing the following log likelihood function:

(3)

where

(4)



Examining equation (3), one sees that the conditional logit estimates are those that maximize the similarity of the

estimated likelihoods and the actual matriculation decisions.

         In equations (3) and (4), i indexes the student; j indexes the college; the indicator variable           is equal

to one if student i chooses to matriculate at college j, and zero otherwise; and                   is simply the student's

college choice. The vector      includes the attributes of choice j for student i–note that the subscripts indicate that

the attributes may be match specific.     is the vector of effects that we are interested in estimating. One maximizes

the log of the likelihood simply to make estimation easier.

         The choice problem we are investigating is suitable for conditional logit estimation but unsuitable for

multinomial logit estimation. Although multinomial logit is related to conditional logit and sometimes confused with

it, it cannot be used to examine choice in a situation where choices have match-specific attributes, such as a

scholarship that applies to one student accepted by a college but not to all students accepted by that college.

         There are a number of empirical issues that deserve comment.

A. The Variation that Drives the Estimates

         It is important to be explicit about the variation that drives our estimates. First, all of the variation used is

within the choice set of a student. Second, within a given student's choice set, there is variation in the attributes of

colleges because colleges vary for reasons that are effectively exogenous to the individual student. For instance,

colleges differ in location, in whether they are publicly or privately controlled, in endowment, in the niche they fill in

the market for college education, and so on. All of this and much more variation in their attributes is effectively

exogenous or parametric to the individual student, who must accept the range of choices available to him, given his

characteristics and aptitude.

         There is one possible worry about the endogeneity of the attributes of colleges, but it seems minor based on
a priori grounds as well as empirical evidence. It is as follows. W e might worry that a college's aid offer to a

student is not only a function of his merit but also reflects effort on the student's part that is observed by that college

only and that is a function of his desire to attend that particular college. Note our emphasis on the effort being

observed by one college only. Any merit or effort that can be observed by all colleges is not a problem. For

instance, if a student collects special letters or other evidence of merit that he sends only to his most preferred

college, it could cause a problem (the aid package offered by his most preferred college might be a function of a

match-specific liking). If he collects the special letters or evidence of merit with one college in mind but actually

sends them with all his applications, there is no problem.

         There are three reasons to think that this form of endogeneity is minor. First, even if a student gathers

special information with only one college in mind, he is still best off sending it to all colleges. Second, colleges ask

for information in a calculating way. Although a student who supplies un-asked-for information may improve his aid

package somewhat, he is unlikely to get it changed radically because most important achievements are revealed in

the application materials. Third, in our survey data, there is little indication that students were able to make special

efforts that convinced colleges to give them substantially different aid offers. The College Admission Project survey

asked students whether they had been able to get any aid offer revised. Revisions occurred in only 9 percent of

possible college choices, and most of the revisions were very minor in character, based on the verbatim responses of

students who described the revision they obtained. Only two students described a revision that would cost a college

more than $1,000 over four years.

B. The Role of a Student's Own Attributes

         People are sometimes surprised to find that there are no individual student attributes (such as the student's

SAT score) included in the vector       for conditional logit estimation. However, a little thought shows why this is so.

The student's own characteristics are same regardless of the choice he makes, so they cannot be a reason for choosing

one college over another. It is only college attributes or match-specific attributes that can influence his choice. For

instance, a student might care about whether his SAT score is much higher or lower than the average SAT score at a

college. Thus, the difference between a student's SAT score and a college's average SAT score is a match-specific

attribute included in the vector    . College attributes that differ across colleges but are constant across students

within a college (such as whether the college is publicly or privately controlled) are also in the vector      since they

obviously can be reasons for choosing one college over another.

         Individual student attributes may affect college choice even though they are constant across all of a student's

choices. This is because they may affect the way that he responds to a particular college or match-specific attribute.

For instance, a student from a low income family may be more responsive to loans offered by a college than is a

student from a high income family (which presumably has many more alternatives to the college's loan, including
regular bank or home equity loans). Thus, although we cannot include student attributes as       variables that affect

college choice, we do estimate our choice model separately for students with different attributes. For instance, we

show tests for different responsiveness of students with different family income, of students whose parents attended

more and less selective colleges, and of students from private and public secondary schools. In fact, we tested for

different responsiveness along many other dimensions, such as region, gender, and race. W e show every dimension

for which the data even hinted at there being differential responsiveness.

C. The Consequences of Observing Only a Subset of a Student's Possible College Choices

         W e do not observe all of the colleges to which a student could have been admitted and all of the financial

aid packages they would have offered him. W e focus on the subset of colleges to which he was admitted, among

those to which he applied. In the Econometric Appendix, we offer more detail on this issue. 15 Here, we offer the

logic of the situation.

         Suppose that we did observe all of the colleges to which student could have been admitted and the financial

aid packages he would have received at each college.16 Then, it would be the case that, given the student's

preferences, some colleges were dominated by others. The dominated colleges would be irrelevant to the student's

choice. For instance, many students apply to a "safety school" to which they know they will be admitted with near

certainty. However, no student applies to numerous, similar "safety schools." Some of the "safety schools" would

be dominated and therefore irrelevant to his choice. W hen a student chooses to apply to a school, he is revealing that

he expects the college to be a relevant alternative in some scenario. Put another way, when a student chooses not to

apply to a college, he is revealing that the college will be dominated in all likely scenarios. Dominated colleges may

be very similar to (but nevertheless less preferred than) other colleges in the student's choice set. By forming his

choice set this way (called "endogenous choice set formation"), the student is helping to exclude irrelevant

alternatives from his choice set. Irrelevant alternatives pose a problem for conditional logit estimation.

         In addition, some readers may be comforted by the fact the data do not reject in the Hausman-type test of

the independence of irrelevant alternatives (see Econometric Appendix).

D. Early Decision Applicants

         W hen a student applies early decision, he gets the admission benefits of an early decision application (a

slight relaxation of the admissions standard) in return for giving up the right to use the knowledge conveyed by the



         15
             Specifically, we address three issues: the independence of irrelevant alternatives, endogenous choice
sets, and lack of balance in choice sets that arises naturally when choice sets are endogenous.

         16
             W e are simplifying for the purpose of exposition. We might actually want to estimate the probability
distribution of aid packages for each college. For instance, the student might have only a 10 percent probability of
receiving a special scholarship of $10,000 at college j, but an 80 percent probability of receiving a small grant of
$1,000 there.
regular admissions process (he cannot bargain with the early decision college using admissions and aid offers from

other colleges). Essentially, he predicts what his other alternatives would have been and chooses to apply early

decision based on those predictions, his preferences, and his beliefs about the relaxation in standards for early

decision applicants.

         Because our survey asks about the ten colleges most under consideration by a student, we know which

colleges the student considered relevant even if he applies early decision. However, for some early decision

applicants, we do not know what admissions and aid outcomes they would have received at the colleges to which

they were applying through regular admission. W e lack such information when a student is accepted early decision

and consequently withdraws his regular applications. Some of our early decision applicants withdraw their

applications before learning about their alternative admissions outcomes; other early decision applicants report

admissions and aid outcomes from regular applications, which suggests that they got this information before

withdrawing. ( Early action applicants rarely withdraw their regular applications, it being to their advantage to have

a wide a menu as possible.) Out of 3,240 students, 338 (or 10.4%) are early decision applicants for whom we do not

observe outcomes from regular college applications.

         Our basic set of estimates does not use the behavior of these 338 students. (The estimation procedure

automatically sets them aside because there is no variation in the outcome matric ij; we do not have to purposely

exclude them.) However, excluding the 338 students is not like excluding students at random–they might be an

unusually risk-averse or sophisticated group of students.

         W e attempt to remedy the problem by showing a second set of results based on our predicting admissions

and aid outcomes for the colleges in the 338 students' most preferred college lists that did not result in completed

regular admissions processes. W e have good conditions for forming these predictions because we nearly always

observe outcomes for similarly qualified students from the same school. This is a useful consequence of our sample

design. We use the following procedure to form the predictions for the "incomplete" colleges. In order to eliminate

colleges to which the student would probably not have been admitted, we first eliminate incomplete colleges where

the student's own SAT score would put him below college's median SAT score. (W e experimented with other

percentile thresholds down to the 25th percentile, but we found that the results did not change much.) We now need

to create reasonable aid packages for a student's incomplete colleges. Because aid tends to have a local character (a

highly meritorious student from Detroit will systemically receive a different aid package at the University of

Michigan than a highly meritorious student from Kansas City), we create an aid package for each student at each

incomplete college by using the aid package of another student in his school who was admitted to that college.

Because grants depend mainly on merit, each incomplete college's grant is filled by the grant actually received by the

other student who (1) came from the student's own high school , (2) was accepted by the college, and (3) had the
SAT score most similar to the student's own. Because loans and work-study depend mainly on parental income, each

incomplete college's loans and work-study are filled by the loans and work-study actually received by the other

student who (1) came from the student's own high school , (2) was accepted by the college, and (3) had parental

income most similar to the student's own.

         W e show the results based on these predicted choice sets, after presenting our basic results. So long as the

two sets of results are similar, we can be reasonably confident that our evidence does not hinge on the exclusion of

early applicants accepted by only one college. W e are interested in whether the results are similar, not identical (or

nearly identical). W e do not expect the results to be identical because the estimates from the predicted choice sets

are likely to be slightly inconsistent because they are based on explanatory variables that are measured with error for

the incomplete colleges (attenuation bias).

E. The Specification of

         Except for reasons of parsimony, we have not attempted to restrict the set of variables that affect college

choice. W e have included all variables available to us that seemed at all likely to affect students' choices.

         W e have imposed only two restrictions that seem worth mentioning. First, we measure all the financial

variables in thousands of annual dollars, not in the natural log of dollars or other transformation. This is because we

wish explicitly to test whether students react similarly to the same dollar amount when it arises in two different, but

fundamentally similar, forms. For instance, a student following the classic human capital investment model would be

expected to react similarly to a reduction of $1,000 in the annual tuition of a college and an increase of $1,000 in the

annual grant given him by the college. Also, we wish explicitly to test whether students react differently to the same

dollar amount when it arises in two forms that cost the college very different amounts. For instance, the

aforementioned rational student should not react similarly to $1,000 in grants and $1,000 in loans. The cost to the

college of a loan may be anywhere from zero to about 15 percent of its face value, but it is rarely if ever close to 100

percent of its face value (as the grant is).

         Second, we restrict most       variables to having a linear effect because this choice facilitates interpretation.

W e have, however, allowed some variables, such as distance and a student's SAT "match" with a college, to have

nonlinear effects.

F. The Interpretation of the Estimates W e Show

         W e display the conditional logit results using odds ratios and Z statistics. An odds ratio gives us the ratio of

the posterior odds of a college choice to the prior odds of a college choice when only the variable in question is

allowed to change. For instance, we could compute the odds that college j is chosen; then raise its tuition by $1,000,

holding all other variables equal, and recompute the odds. The former odds would effectively be the prior odds, and

the latter odds would effectively be the posterior odds. In short, the odds ratio is     in the following expression:
                                                posterior odds =    prior odds.

It is easy to compute the odds ratio from the estimated vector       because the odds ratio is just     .

         The way to interpret the odds ratio for a certain variable in       is the proportional change in the odds of

student i attending college j for a unit increase in the variable, holding all other variables constant. A simple

example would be the indicator for whether a college is public. If the odds ratio is 1.1, then a one unit change in the

variable (corresponding to a switch from private to public) would make the student's odds of attending the college

1.1 times whatever the odds were if the college had been private. Note that the change is proportional to the prior

odds: if the student's prior odds of attending the college were 30 percent, the posterior odds would be 33 percent (30

times 1.1). If the student's prior odds of attending the college were 80 percent, the posterior odds would be 88

percent (80 times 1.1).

         Naturally, an odds ratio greater than one means that an increase in the variable raises a student's probability

of matriculating, all else equal; an odds ratio less than one means that an increase in the variable reduces a student's

probability of matriculating, all else equal.

         The Z statistics are easy to interpret. They are akin to familiar t statistics and have the same thresholds for

statistical significance. Thus, an odds ratio with a Z statistic greater than 1.96 is statistically significantly different

from 1 (the null hypothesis of no effect) with 95 percent confidence, and so on.



                                          V. How Aid Affects College Choice

                                (Basic Results on the Determinants of College Choice)

         In this section, we discuss our basic results on the determinants of college choice, which are presented in

Table 3. Recall that the outcome is matriculation, a binary variable equal to 1 for exactly one of the colleges to

which a student was admitted.

         If we examine Table 3's overall pattern of signs and statistical significance, students' college choices appear

to be very reasonable. Students are more likely to attend a college if, all else equal, it offers them larger grants,

offers them larger loans, offers them a larger amount of work study, is the most selective college to which they were

admitted, is their father's alma mater, or is the same college that their sibling attended or attends. Students are less

likely to attend a college if, all else equal, its tuition is higher, its room and board is higher, its mean SAT score is

below theirs, or it is the least selective college to which they were admitted. Several variables do not have a

statistically significant effect on students in our survey: the amount by which the college's average SAT exceeds the

student's, an indicator for the college being their mother's alma mater, the distance between the college and the

student's high school, whether the college is public, and whether the college is in-state.

         At the broad "sign and statistical significance" level, the results are close to our expectations. But, are they
so close to our expectations when we examine the odds ratios in detail?

         The left-hand column of Table 3 shows us that an additional thousand dollars in grants raises a student's

probability of matriculating by 11 percent of his prior probability; an extra thousand dollars in tuition lowers a

student's probability of matriculating by 2 percent of his prior probability, and an extra thousand dollars in room and

board lowers a student's probability of matriculating by 10 percent of his prior probability. These results hint at

students' being more sensitive to grants and room and board than to reduced tuition. This is not altogether

surprising. A student's reactions to a dollar of grants and tuition need not be identical. An increase in his grant

affects the individual student's costs but leaves the college environment pretty much unchanged. In contrast, a

reduction in tuition lowers the college's revenues, which may reduce the quality of the college environment.

         W hat is more surprising is the response to loans and work study. Recall that an additional thousand dollars

in grants raises a student's probability of matriculating by 11 percent. In comparison, an additional thousand dollars

in loans raises a student's probability of matriculating by 7 percent of his prior probability, and an additional

thousand dollars in work study raises a student's probability of matriculating by 13 percent of his prior probability.

(Note that the work-study response is imprecise and is therefore not statistically significantly different from the

response to grants.) These results suggest that students do not view loans and work study as much inferior to grants,

despite the fact that they cost a college much less than a grant does. Loans and work study have substantial costs for

students, even though the burden of loans is delayed and the cost of work study is in the form of foregone leisure.

         For every percentile that a student's SAT score exceeds the mean SAT score of a college, his probability of

matriculating falls by 5 percent of his prior probability. Although the odds ratio on the percentile that a student's

SAT score fall short of the mean SAT score of a college is not statistically different from one, its point estimate is

greater than one, suggesting that students are not deterred by a college's having higher average SAT scores than their

own. That is, the SAT match variables are not symmetric, but indicate that students only dislike a mismatch if their

own SAT scores are "too high" for the college. Along similar lines, a student's probability of matriculating rises by

63 percent of the prior probability if the college is the most selective among the colleges to which he was admitted,

and it falls by 31 percent of the prior probability if the college is the least selective among the colleges to which he

was admitted. Overall, these results strongly suggest that students place substantial weight on a college's selectivity

as a measure of its value. This is not necessarily because students value selectivity per se rather than a college's

resources; it may simply be that selectivity is highly correlated with resources and that selectivity is easier for

students to observe and econometricians to measure than resources are.

         The overall resource measure in Table 3 is the college's per pupil spending on student-related activities

(instruction, academic support, student services, and scholarships). Each additional thousand dollars in spending

raises a student's probability of matriculating by 2 percent of his prior probability. This may not sound like much but
it means that a 50 percent increase in spending would raise a student's probability of matriculating by about 31

percent. (The last estimate is for the average college in the sample.)

          Finally, having a father or sibling who attended the college greatly increases a student's own probability of

attending it. Having a father who attended raises the probability of matriculating by 70 percent of the prior

probability; having a sibling who attended raises the probability by 90 percent. This strong family alumnus effect

may be due to the student's familiarity with or allegiance to the college, but it might equally be match-specific

attributes that are similar for the student and other members of his family (shared tastes, similar career plans, and so

on).



                                      VI. Are Early Decision Students Different?

          In Table 4, we compare our basic results to results that include early applicants accepted by only one

college. Specifically, the left-hand column of Table 4 repeats our basic results from the left-hand column of Table 3,

and the right-hand column includes the early applicants accepted by only one college, substituting their predicted

choice sets for their actual choice sets. W e described the procedure for generating predicted choice sets in Section

IV.

          The table shows that the results change very little when the early decision students are included with their

predicted choice sets. The coefficients that change in an interesting way are those the college's being the least or

most selective college in the choice set. Consider the coefficient on the most selective college: the change in it

suggests that early decision applicants are less apt than other students to matriculate at the most selective college to

which they were admitted. The behavioral interpretation of this result is that early decision applicants are somewhat

risk averse and also act strategically: they apply early decision knowing that they will face slightly less stringent

admissions criteria. W hat they give up is the chance to apply to and matriculate at the college that would have been

their "long shot." 17

          Now consider the coefficient on the least selective college. Its change suggests that early decision

applicants are also less apt than other students to matriculate at the least selective to which they were admitted.

Again, this fits with postulated strategic behavior among early decision applicants: they aim for greater certainty at a

college with moderately high selectivity on their list, not for certainty at the least selective college on their list.

          Because including the early applicants who have only one college in their choice set makes so little




          17
            Another interpretation of the change in the "most selective" coefficient is that we have mistakenly
predicted admission to a college that the student himself knew would not admit him. It is unclear how the student
would know such a thing if his admissions test scores were indeed above the median.
difference to our results, we do not show results for predicted choice sets from here onwards.18



                  VII. Do Students from Different Families M ake College Choices Differently?

         In this section, we investigate whether students from different family backgrounds make college choices

differently. That is, do they respond differently to the same college and match-specific attributes? By design, the

students in the College Admissions Project sample are similar in aptitude, but their backgrounds are much less

similar along the dimensions of family income, parents' college experience, and so on. In Tables 5 through 8, we

show the results of reestimating our basic conditional logit specification (the specification in Table 3) for different

subsets of students.

A. Students with Different Family Income

         One obvious hypothesis is that students with different family incomes will respond differently to aid,

tuition, room and board, and other attributes of colleges. Because high income families can more easily finance

college out of savings or obtain cheap loans, we suspect that students from such families will be less sensitive to the

variables that determine how much they will actually pay for college in any given year.

         For Table 5, we divided students into four groups based on family income: "low" being less than $40,000;

"medium low" being $40,000 to $80,000; "medium high" being $80,000 to $140,000; and "high" being greater than

or equal to $140,000. The right hand column in the table contains the word "rejected" when the hypothesis that the

odds ratios for the four income groups are equal is rejected with 90 percent confidence.

         Students from families with low incomes respond to $1,000 in grants by raising their probability of

matriculation by about 11 percent of their prior probability. Medium low and median high family income students

respond, respectively, by raising the probability of matriculation by about 13 percent. Students from high income

families also respond, but only by raising the probability of matriculation by 8 percent of their prior probability. W e

can reject the hypothesis that the effect is the same for all income groups, with 90 percent confidence. Despite the

statistically significant differences, we were somewhat surprised by the similarity, not the difference in the response

of meritorious students from different ends of the income spectrum.

         W e cannot reject the hypothesis that all income groups respond identically to $1,000 of loans, although the

point estimates hint that students from low income families are less attracted by loans–perhaps because they foresee

their families have trouble paying off loans. Also, we cannot reject the hypothesis that $1,000 in work-study has the

same effect on students from all income groups. Moreover, the pattern of estimates on work-study is quite difficult




         18
            Readers may be interested to know that if we use predicted choice sets for all students (not just early
applicants), we obtain estimates that suffer from attenuation bias. This is what we expect because the aid variables
are only estimates for many observations.
to interpret. Students may respond to work study in a heterogeneous way that shows up as coefficients that bounce

around. W e suspect that this may be because work-study has important attributes, contained in the job itself, that we

do not observe. For instance, it may be that work-study at one college is an academically valuable research job,

while work-study at another college is an onerous cleaning job.

         The greatest negative response to tuition is among students from medium high income families. This is not

surprising because medium-high income families are well-off enough to pay list tuition but not so well off that list

tuition is small relative to their incomes. Low income parents appear to be quite insensitive to tuition differences.

This is probably because they rely on need-based aid and rarely pay the marginal tuition dollar anyway.

         As family income rises, students become less willing to attend a college where their own SAT scores exceed

the college's mean score. Conversely, students become more eager to attend a college where their own SAT scores

fall below the college's mean score. For instance, the draw of the most selective college in a student's choice set rises

from a 43 percent increase in the probability of matriculation for the low income families to a 90 percent increase in

probability for the high income families. The repulsion of the least selective college in the choice set goes from a 1

percent decrease in the probability of matriculation for low income families to a 33 percent decrease in probability of

for high income families.

         Compared to other students, students from high income families respond less to having a father or sibling

who attended the college but respond to having a mother who attended the college. Only low income students

respond to a college's distance from their secondary school, and only medium high income students respond to a

college's being in-state.

B. Students whose Parents Attended More and Less Selective Colleges

         It may be that college choice differs between families with more and less experience of selective colleges.

W e test this hypothesis in Table 6, where parents are divided into groups based on the selectivity of their colleges

(the maximum of the two parents' colleges selectivity).19 Because the students themselves are solid applicants for

very selective colleges, we were particularly interested in parents' experience with such colleges. Therefore, our high

selectivity group contains parents whose college has a median SAT score at or above the 90th percentile; our

medium selectivity group contains parents whose college has a median SAT score at or above the 70th percentile and

below the 90th percentile; and our low selectivity group contains all other parents.20



         19
            There appear to be no students in the sample from families in which neither parent attended college.
There are, however, a good many parents who have degrees from institutions that grant only the associate's degree or
another degree below the baccalaureate.

         20
             W e were able to include Canadian colleges in the medium and high selectivity groups by approximating
their selectivity. However, all other international colleges were included in the low selectivity group, in part because
we are trying to measure parents' experience with selective American colleges, which admit students, grant aid, and
         W e find that students whose parents attended low selectivity colleges are more responsive to grants and

loans than students whose parents attended high selectivity colleges. For instance, $1,000 in grants raises the

probability of matriculation by 12 percent of the prior priority for a student with "low selectivity parents" but the

corresponding number is only 8 percent for a student with "high selectivity" parents. Also, $1,000 in loans raises the

probability of matriculation by 8 percent of the prior priority for a student with "low selectivity parents" but the

corresponding number is only 4 percent for a student with "high selectivity" parents. It appears that students with

high selectivity parents are much more responsive to work study than other students, but we hesitate to interpret this

result literally because of the variation in work-study jobs.

         The difference in the response to tuition is interesting: while students with low and medium selectivity

parents are repelled by higher tuition (each additional $1,000 in tuition reduces their probability of matriculating by

2 to 3 percent of their prior probability), higher tuition appears to attract students with high selectivity parents (each

additional $1,000 in tuition raises their probability of matriculating by 3 percent of their prior probability). It is

unlikely that tuition itself is attractive to the high selectivity parents, but it is quite probably correlated with measures

of college resources that are not in the regression (for instance, the spending dedicated to undergraduates alone or

non-linear effects of per-pupil spending on students).

         W e also find that, compared to other students, students with high selectivity parents are less attracted to

their sibling's college. Student with medium selectivity parents appear to be the most attracted by their father's and

sibling's college.

C. Students from Public and Private Secondary Schools

         In Table 7, we investigate whether students from public and private high schools make college choices

differently. W e find that an extra $1,000 in room and board reduces the probability of matriculating by 19 percent of

prior probability among public school students, but that it has a statistically insignificant effect of 5 percent on

private school students. We find that private school students are more repelled than are public school students by a

college's being the least selective that admitted them. For public school students, being the least selective college in

the choice set reduces the probability of matriculation by 21 percent of the prior probability. For private school

students, the corresponding number is a much larger 44 percent. Being an in-state college is an attraction for public

school students, whose probability of matriculation rises by 30 percent of their prior probability. Being in-state has

no such draw for private school students. Interestingly enough, a college's being public attracts private school

students but has no such effect on public school students.




charge tuition in manner that differs widely from other colleges around the world, including some colleges that are
very selective in their own country. Only 1.1 percent of families have two parents who attended a non-Canadian
international college.
D. Summing Up the Differences in College Choice among Students From Different Backgrounds

         W hile students' choice behavior is affected by variables like parents' income, parents' college selectivity,

and private high school attendance, many other background differences do not appear to affect students' college

choices. W e tried and failed to find significant differences in choice behavior along several other dimensions:

gender, region of the country, recipiency of an outside scholarship like the National Merit Scholarship, a record of

leadership while in high school, size of the high school, and so on. There are no statistically significant differences

by race either, but this may because there are insufficiently few non-whites in the sample to extract distinct patterns

from their choice behavior. W e suspect that high aptitude students differ systemically in college choice behavior

mainly when they face constraints that are not easily overcome–parents' income and parents' willingness to pay for

private education (which is probably correlated with parents' own college selectivity and willingness to pay for

private high school).

         Overall, we find that students from high income families, whose parents attended more selective colleges,

and who themselves attended private high schools are less deterred by college costs and less attracted by aid. They

are also more attracted by a college's being selective, either because they are more attracted by the resources

correlated with selectivity or because they are more attracted by high aptitude peers. W e might ask, however,

whether the differences in responsiveness shown in Tables 5 through 7 really add up to much. One way to answer to

answer this question is to investigate whether students would alter their college choices if we made them act in

accordance with the estimated model for another group of students. To create Table 8, we use the low income

students' coefficients with the high income students' data, and vice versa. W e performed the same exchange for

students with low and high selectivity parents and for students from private and public schools. W e show the

percentage of students who would be predicted to change their college choice if they were to act in accordance with

another group's model.

         W e find that a sizable minority of students would choose a different college within their choice set if they

were to act like another type of student. Most notable are high income students, 42 percent of whom would

matriculate at a different college if they made choices the way that low income students do. Similarly, 32 percent of

low income students would alter their college choice if they behaved as high income students do. The corresponding

numbers are in the range of 17 percent when we "exchange" the models of public and private high school students

and are in the range of 24 percent when we exchange the models of students whose parents attended low and high

selectivity colleges.

         W e might also ask how the characteristics of the students' colleges would change if they were to alter their

choices. That is, would students merely choose another college that was indistinguishable from their initial college?

It is not possible to answer this question satisfactorily given the limited exercise we are attempting at this point in
this chapter. The reason we cannot give a satisfactory answer is that we are constraining students to re-choose within

the set of colleges to which they applied and were admitted. Given our current purpose, which is merely to give

readers a sense of the scale of the estimates in Tables 4 through 6, this constraint is acceptable. Later, when we

attempt more ambitious thought experiments, it will be important to relax this constraint. Students would apply to a

different range of colleges if they were to foresee themselves acting differently when it came to choosing a college.

For example, if a low income student were to foresee that he would act like a high income student when he chose a

college, he might apply to some high tuition colleges that he currently omits.

         W e can look at two outcomes in a satisfactory manner, however, because they are relative ones: the share

of student who matriculate at the most and least selective colleges within their choice set. Here, we find that the

altered choices are highly distinguishable. For instance, 95 percent of high income students choose the most

selective college in their choice set when they act like themselves, but only 57 percent would do so if they were to

act like low income students. 18 percent of low income students choose the least selective college in their choice set

when they act like themselves, but only 7 percent would do so if they were to act like high income students.



                        VIII. Do Students Respond to Aid Variables They Should Ignore?

         So far, we have had only one test of whether students are responding to aid variables as models of human

capital investment suggest that they should: our test was whether students responded as differently to grants, loans,

and work study as they should, given the very different degree of subsidy incorporated in these three forms of aid.

Students failed this test: they responded similarly to every additional $1,000, regardless of whether it was a grant or

loan. At this point in the paper, we have not made calculations that allow us to judge whether students respond too

much or too little to grants, but given their response to grants, their responses to loans and work-study are too large.

         Furthermore, Tables 5 through 7 show that, while some students (high income, high parents' college

selectivity, private high school) are less sensitive to aid, all students respond too much to loans and work-study, in

comparison to grants. For instance, high income students treat grants and loans about equally.

A. Aid Variables that Students "Should Ignore"

         In this section, we investigate whether students respond to aid variables they should largely, if not

completely, ignore. Specifically, we look at three aspects of a grant. The first is whether the grant is called a

scholarship. In other words, did the student merely report $4,000 in grants, or did he also report that the $4,000 was

the, say, "Jane Doe Scholarship for M erit"? Based on the survey data, it appears that some colleges systemically

name their grants, while others give similar amounts with no name attached. In fact, the correlation between the

amount of a grant and its being called a scholarship is negative: -0.206.

         W e also examine whether a grant is front-loaded, so that the student receives more in his freshman year than
in later years. The students in our survey, all of whom have an extremely high probability of completing college,

should largely ignore such front-loading and look at the total amount of grants. We characterize a grant as front-

loaded if the (nominal dollar) amount for the freshman year is greater than the (nominal dollar) amount for later

years.21 As a rule, front-loaded grants are heavily weighted toward the freshman year (for instance, $10,000 for one

year, and $2,000 thereafter), not steady declining over the college career (for instance, $5,500, $4,500, $3,500, and

$2,500 for the four successive years). Keep in mind that we will be investigating the effect of front-loading, holding

the amount of the grant constant. Thus, we ask whether students respond more to, say, $4,000 per year if it is front-

loaded. As a matter of fact, the correlation between the amount of a grant and its being front-loaded is negative: -

0.189.

         The final aspects of grants that we examine is what percentage they are of tuition, comprehensive cost, and

per-pupil spending on students. Obviously, if all colleges had similar tuition, comprehensive cost, and spending,

larger grants would always represent a higher percentage of costs and expenditures. But, colleges in our sample vary

dramatically in tuition, comprehensive cost, and instructional spending. The standard deviation of in-state tuition is

$9,594; the standard deviation of in-state comprehensive cost is $10,368; and the standard deviation of per-pupil

spending on students is $15,489. Students in the sample applied to 40 colleges at which per-pupil spending on

students was less than $7,000, and they applied to about an equal number of colleges at which per-pupil spending on

students was more than $28,000, which is four times $7,000. Students in the sample applied to 106 colleges that

have in-state tuition below $2,500 and applied to 143 colleges that have in-state tuition above $20,000, which is

eight times $2,500. 22 In short, we should not expect a very high correlation between the amount of a grant and the

percentage of cost or expenditure that it represents. In fact, the correlation between the amount of a grant and the

percentage of tuition that it represents is only 0.251, and the correlation between the amount of a grant and the

percentage of comprehensive costs that it represents is 0.467.




         21
             W e do not assume that students understand discounting. That is, we do not characterize a grant as front-
loaded if it offers the same nominal amount for each year of college, even though the present discounted value of the
freshman year grant is greatest. Also, we do not characterize a grant as front-loaded if it merely has conditions for
continued good performance. For instance, a grant might be $4,000 for the freshman year, which will be renewed
thereafter so long as the student maintains a B average. Such conditions are clearly intended to maintain
achievement, rather than exploit students' impatience or myopia. Many graduate and professional programs use
front-loaded grants because students' ability to earn money or win outside grants rises steeply during a student's
graduate career–think of law schools, business schools, or Ph.D. programs. The same considerations do not apply to
undergraduate programs.

         22
            These include many flagship public universities of the South, Southwest, W est (Wyoming, Utah,
Colorado), and the California State University system (not the University of California). However, most of the low
tuition group is made up of the least selective colleges to which students in the sample applied–branch campuses of
public universities, non-flagship public colleges, and some low selectivity private colleges (which had a mean SAT
percentile of 53, as compared to the average of 84 among colleges in the sample).
         If students behave according a standard model of human capital investment, they should care about the

amount of a grant, not the share of cost or expenditure that it represents. The amount of the grant is a measure of the

investment made freely by others in a student's human capital.23 Given the amount of a grant, a student will care

about the grant's share of tuition or costs only if he is an irrational investor (for instance, naively flattered by

receiving a large share of tuition) or credit constrained (willing to give up others' large donations to his human

capital investment in order to avoid having to make any cash contribution to that investment himself). Even if we

suppose that colleges with high instructional spending are less efficient than others, it is unlikely their efficiency is so

poor that 50 percent of a $28,000 expenditure truly represents a smaller investment than 100 percent of a $7,000

expenditure.

B. Evidence on how Students Respond to the Aid Variables They Should Ignore

         Table 9 presents our estimates of how students make college choices when we allow they to respond to aid

variables they "should ignore." Column (1) of the table reproduces the estimates in Table 3. Recall that the

estimates suggest that each additional $1,000 of grant is estimated to increase the probability of matriculation by 11

percent of the prior probability.

         In column (2), we add the indicators for the grant's being called a scholarship and being front-loaded. We

also add variables indicating the share of tuition and the share of comprehensive cost that the grant represents. The

first thing to note about the results in column (2) is that students no longer respond to the amount of the grant. The

estimated effect of each additional $1,000 of grants is statistically insignificant, and the point estimate is not even

greater than one. Loans, work-study, and other determinants of college choice have about the same effects that they

had when we excluded the variables that "should" be ignored.

         Column (2) also shows that, for a grant of a given amount, calling it a scholarship increases the probability

of matriculation by 86 percent of the prior probability. This is a great effect for an essentially hollow feature of a

grant that any college could replicate at no cost. It is implausible that the indicator for a named scholarship is

picking up a nonlinear effect of the grant amount: recall that the indicator is negatively correlated with the amount of

the grant.

         Front-loading also engenders a strong, positive matriculation response. For a grant of a given annual

amount, its being front-loaded raises the probability of matriculation by 48 percent of the prior probability. Again,

this is a substantial effect for a feature that costs a college little for students who are very likely to stay enrolled for

four years (as are all of the students in the sample). Because of discounting and inflation, front-loading does cost a




         23
            There is another measure of the investment made by others in a student's human capital. It is the implicit
grant created by the difference between a college's per-pupil expenditure and its list tuition. In practice, the size of a
college's implicit grant increases with its selectivity.
college something, but not much in comparison to the cost of inducing a student to attend by raising the amount of

his grant. For instance, recall the annual grant of $4,000 and the front-loaded version mentioned above ($10,000 for

one year, and $2,000 for three years). Discounting future years' spending at 6 percent, it costs the college an

additional $654 to give the student the front-loaded version. However, in order to induce the same matriculation

effect by raising the amount of the grant, the college would have had to raise the grant by $4,435 per year. W hile we

should not take these numbers literally (since they are require a good deal of extrapolation and are based on different

columns of Table 9), it is fairly clear that students respond excessively to front-loading, as compared to the amount

of the grant.

         The next two rows of Column (2) show that students ignore the share of tuition that the grant represents, but

place a great deal of weight on the share of comprehensive cost that the grant represents. (If we were to exclude the

share of comprehensive cost, the share of tuition would–for obvious reasons–pick up much of the same effect.

However, the share of comprehensive cost consistently explains much more of college choice than the share of

tuition.) For every increase of 10 percent (0.10) in its share of comprehensive cost, a grant induces a student to raise

his probability of matriculation by 275.5 percent of his prior probability. At first glance, the odds ratio may

implausibly large, but let us interpret it. Suppose that a student's prior probability of matriculation was 10 percent.

Then, his posterior probability would be 27.5 percent with a grant of 10 percent of comprehensive costs and would

be 55.1 percent with a grant of 20 percent of comprehensive costs. W hat the high odds ratio is telling us is that

students are offered grants that represent a large share of comprehensive costs only by colleges that they would have

had low prior probabilities of attending in the absence of such grants.24 Column (3) simply repeats the specification

of column (2), adding the share of per-pupil spending that the grant represents. This additional variable does not

have a statistically significant coefficient, but the magnitude of the odds ratio on the grant's share of comprehensive

costs does fall somewhat (by about 15 percent).

         W hy is it that the grant's share of comprehensive cost matters, rather than its share of tuition or per-pupil

spending on students? Previously, we argued that a student would care about the grant's share only if he were an

irrational investor (flattery) or severely credit constrained (unwilling or unable to pay cash). The grant's share of

spending is only weakly related to either motive. Spending on students is difficult for students to observe, so the

grant's share of spending is unlikely to be sufficiently salient to be flattering. Also, the grant's share of spending tells

us little about a student's out-of-pocket payments because some colleges' spending substantially exceeds their "list"

tuition and comprehensive cost. Students may respond to the grant's share of comprehensive cost rather than its




         24
           In addition, we should not really focus exclusively on the odds ratio attached to the share of
comprehensive cost because the point estimate of the odds ratio on the share of tuition and the grant amount are
below 1, and we know that the three variables are correlated.
share of tuition because comprehensive cost is both more salient and more relevant to the cash constrained. After all,

there is well-established term for getting a grant equal to 100 percent of comprehensive cost: "a free ride." There is

no similarly accepted term for getting 100 percent of tuition. Also, the colleges that tend to offer grants that are large

shares of comprehensive cost generally have low, even very low tuition ($1,500, $2000, $2,500, etc.). At these

colleges, the non-tuition part of comprehensive cost is three to four times as large as tuition and makes up the lion's

share of out-of-pocket expenses.

C. Do Students' Responses to Aid Variables that "Should Not Matter" Depend on their Backgrounds?

           In Appendix Tables 3 through 5, we investigate whether a student's response to aid variables that "should

not matter" depends on his background. W e find some evidence that it does. To create the tables, we re-estimate the

regression shown in Table 9 separately for students by parents' income group, parents' college selectivity group, and

public versus private high school. Although we estimate odds ratios for all of the variables shown in Table 9,

Appendix Tables 3 through 5 present only the coefficients relevant to our discussion of aid variables that "should not

matter."

           W e find that a grant being called a scholarship significantly attracts students in every group, except students

whose parents have high incomes or whose parents attended highly selective colleges. Also, we find that the grant's

share of comprehensive cost attracts students who parents attended low and medium selectivity colleges, but not

students whose parents attended high selectivity colleges. The latter students respond only to the amount of the

grant.

           Interestingly, when we investigate the very large average effect of the grant's share of comprehensive cost,

we find that its significance depends crucially on students with medium-low parent incomes. Although the odds

ratios for the other income groups are large also, the medium-low income group has by far the largest odds ratio and

the only one that is statistically significant. This makes sense. Given their combination of merit and need, the low

income students in our survey are eligible for and attract need-based aid. Their out-of-pocket contributions are

small, even at expensive private colleges. At the other extreme, medium high and high income students apply less

often to colleges that offer grants that are a large share of a modest comprehensive cost. In contrast, consider

students whose parents have medium-low incomes. They are sufficiently well off to be asked for out-of-pocket

payments that are substantial (though not nearly as substantial as the payment asked of medium-high and high

income students). Yet, medium-low income parents may be unwilling to pay out-of-pocket college expenses. In

short, the circumstances of at least some medium-low income students generate maximum susceptibility to small

grants that represent a large share of comprehensive costs.

           W e find that students from private and public high schools respond quite similarly to aid variables that

"should be ignored."
                   IX. Are Students M aking Reasonable Trade-Offs? Are They Too Attracted

                                         or Not Sufficiently Attracted by Aid?

         W e began with the project of determining whether students were behaving like rational investors in the their

own human capital. That is, are students making the best use of aid in order to maximize their lifetime economic

well-being? Thus far, we have found two fairly obvious violations of rational human capital investment: students'

responding excessively to loans and work-study, given their response to grants; and students' responding to aspects

of grants that should not matter, for a grant of a given amount. However, both of these tests are essentially relative.

That is, we have tested whether, given his response to grants, the student responds excessively to loans and work-

study. We have tested whether, given his response to the grant amount, the student responds excessively to aspects

of the grant that should not affect his human capital investment decision.

         W e have not yet addressed our principal question: whether the student's response to aid is too great or too

small in an absolute sense. Before addressing this question, we should note that it presupposes that some trade-off

exists–that is, that in order to get more aid, a student must give something up. Remember our example in which a

student could be admitted to colleges A, B, and C, and where college C was as good as the others on the grounds of

selectivity, the resources available for students, tuition (that is, lower tuition), campus life, location, and so on. If

college C offered more aid, then, no trade-off would exist: the student would do better all around by matriculating at

college C. We argued that this no-trade off situation cannot hold generally because it would not be an equilibrium:

college C would be so over-subscribed that it would automatically become more selective, so that the student

admitted to A and B might not longer be admitted to C.

         Although it is useful to demonstrate logically why the situation would not be an equilibrium, it is also useful

to show empirically that the situation does not generally exist. In the College Admissions Project survey data, we

find that if we look within students' choice sets (so that we are holding student merit constant), the correlation

between the grant amount that a student receives from a college and the college's median SAT score is -0.32. The

corresponding correlation between the grant amount and the college's spending on students is -0.36. These

correlations suggest that, in general, a student must give up some college selectivity and/or some college resources in

return for a larger grant. Put more bluntly, a student must generally allow the investment in his college education to

be reduced in return for getting greater aid.

         Of course, the fact that students are generally faced with a trade-off when they compare two colleges does

not mean that students are always faced with one. For reasons that are idiosyncratic to the match between a

particular student and college, a student may get the largest grant at the college at which he gets the most resources

and which is the most selective. W e have no difficulty with such idiosyncratic situations; we merely argue that such
situations cannot be general as a logical matter and are not general as an empirical matter.

A. A Empirical Strategy for Determining whether Students Respond Too Much or Too Little to Aid

              Returning to our principal question (whether the student's response to aid is too great or too small in an

absolute sense), recall that the student is responding as a rational human capital investor if he makes the trade-off

according to a condition such as the following:

(a) The subsidy value of the aid allows more consumption now, in return for an equally valuable decrease in future

consumption, which will be caused by reduced human capital.

(b) The subsidy value of the aid allows the students to make less use of loans (thereby reducing future interest

payments), in return for an equally valuable decrease in future earnings, which will be caused by reduced human

capital. 25

              W e need to measure the extent to which students reduce their human capital investment in return for

increased aid. To make such as measurement, we use the estimated college choice model from the previous sections

and perform some thought experiments. W e take away all grants, loans, and other forms of aid (we zero out all of the

aid variables), and we see how students' predicted college choices change. That is, we see how students' choices

would predictably change in the absence of aid.26

              Once we have measures of how students' predicted college choices change when we remove aid, we can

estimate the losses associated with the reductions in human capital and consumption that they accept in return for

aid. W e can then compare these losses to the value of the aid we removed.

B. Measuring Human Capital Investment at a College

              W e would like to measure the human capital investment made in students at various colleges. In principle,

there are two ways to do this: we could measure the inputs available at each college or we could measure the value-

added of each college. If we wanted to measure value-added, we would need to compute the earnings associated

with each college and then control for differences in earnings due to differences in students' incoming aptitudes. W e

would not want to attribute all of a student's earnings to his college; much of his earnings would be due to the

abilities that got him admitted to the college in the first place.

              Although–in theory–either the inputs or value-added strategy could be pursued, we reject the value-added

strategy as impractical. There have been several attempts to measure the value-added associated with colleges, but




              25
           An additional possible trade-off, which we cannot observe in our data, works as follows. The grant
might allow the student to work less and study more, thereby losing income in college but gaining income later in life
because increased study is increased human capital investment.

              26
            Note that we look at how students' predicted college choices change when we zero out aid. Thus, we do
not incorrectly attribute to aid the differences between students' actual and predicted behavior.
there are no commonly accepted estimates and some of the best-known estimates are deeply flawed.27 However, we

do not reject the value-added strategy to avoid controversy. We reject the strategy because every researcher would

agree that it is currently impossible to estimate value-added for a wide range of specific colleges. Some might argue

that we could estimate value-added for a handful of specific colleges; some might argue that we could estimate

value-added for coarse groups of colleges (groups so coarse that some would include hundreds of colleges). No one

would argue that we could estimate value-added for many, specific colleges. This is for a simple reason. There is no

source of data that includes earnings and college identifiers for a broad array of colleges and has more than a few

observations for any one college. 28 W e need measures of human capital investments for nearly all of the colleges in

our study if we are to determine whether students are making decisions like rational investors. W e must use college-

specific measures, not measures for coarse college groups: many of the students in our sample are choosing within a

single coarse group.

         Therefore, we use the inputs strategy for measuring human capital investment. Our approach to measuring

inputs is conservative by design: we count instructional spending and only instructional spending as human capital

investment. Instructional spending not only excludes spending on research, it also excludes some categories of

spending on students: student services (such as health care), academic support, and scholarships. In other words, a




         27
             For instance, Dale and Krueger (1999) attempted to estimate the return to attending specific colleges in
the College and Beyond data. They assigned individual students to a “cell” based on the colleges to which they are
admitted. Within a cell, they compared those who attend a more selective college (the treatment group) to those who
attended a less selective college (the control group). If this procedure had gone as planned, all students within a cell
would have had the same menu of colleges and would have been arguably equal in aptitude. The procedure did not
work in practice because the number of students who reported more than one college in their menu was very small.
Moreover, among the students who reported more than one college, there was a very strong tendency to report the
college they attended plus one less selective college. Thus, there was almost no variation within cells if the cells
were based on actual colleges. Dale and Krueger were forced to merge colleges into crude "group colleges" to form
the cells. However, the crude cells made it implausible that all students within a cell were equal in aptitude, and this
implausibility eliminated the usefulness of their procedure. Because the procedure works best when students have
large menus and most student do not have such menus, the procedure essentially throws away much of the data. A
procedure is not good if it throws away much of the data and still does not deliver "treatment" and "control" groups
that are plausibly equal in aptitude. Put another way, it is not useful to discard good variation in data without a more
than commensurate reduction in the problematic variation in the data. In the end, Dale and Krueger predictably
generate statistically insignificant results, which have been unfortunately misinterpreted by commentators who do not
sufficient econometric knowledge to understand the study's methods.

         28
             The longitudinal surveys and the one Current Population Survey supplement that includes college
identifiers have too few people in each college (often 0, 1, or 2); the College and Beyond survey includes numerous
people in each college, but only includes a tiny group of colleges. The longitudinal surveys with college identifiers
and a reasonably representative sample of the United States population are the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics,
the National Longitudinal Surveys, and five surveys conducted by the United States Department of Education (the
National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972, High School and Beyond, and the National
Education Longitudinal Study, the Beginning Postsecondary Student survey and follow-up, and Baccalaureate and
Beyond). The Current Population Survey supplement with college identifiers is the Occupational Changes in a
Generation study (1972).
good deal of spending at high spending colleges is excluded, even though we believe that much of the excluded

spending is complementary to instructional spending and produce greater human capital. 29 By focusing on

instructional spending, we "bend over backward" in favor of finding that human capital investment is almost as great

at low spending colleges as it is at high spending colleges. Empirically, instructional spending is a much larger share

of total spending at low spending colleges than it is at high spending colleges. Among the colleges in our sample,

the colleges with the highest per-pupil spending have instructional spending shares around 0.1; the colleges with the

lowest per-pupil spending have instructional spending shares around 0.6.

         It is evident from the students' own choice behavior that they prefer more able peers, and it seems likely that

peers should be regarded as inputs. That is, part of the human capital gained by a student is probably generated by

peer spillovers or by the interaction of good peers and college resources. There is no simple way to quantify peer

inputs and add them to instructional inputs. Nevertheless, we do not wish to ignore peer inputs and recognize only

instructional inputs. We deal with this problem in a way that is at least transparent: we simply show changes in

peers' SAT scores and remind readers that they should mentally add peer inputs with the weight they consider

appropriate.

         Although the students' choice behavior suggests that a student benefits from having more able peers, there is

an alternative theory. A high aptitude student surrounded by significantly worse peers may be able to use much more

than his share of a college's resources. W hile some attributes of a college must be shared relatively equally by all

students, others (such as faculty time) can be disproportionately allocated to certain students. Logically, the

disproportionality must be a function of the degree to which a high aptitude students differs from his peers. If a high

aptitude student attends a very selective college where he is typical, he cannot expect to receive much more than an

equal share of the college's per-pupil resources.

         In short, we show how a student's peers change when he accepts a certain college's aid package, but we

leave readers to judge for themselves whether more able peers are net generators or net destroyers of human capital,

for a given level of instructional spending.

C. How Students' College Choices would Differ in the Absence of Aid, Part 1: The Structure of Table 10

         To create Table 10, we first estimate the conditional logit model shown in second column of Table 9. We

then use the coefficient estimates to predict which colleges the student would be most likely to attend (a) with the aid



         29
              W e wish to clear up a common confusion, embodied in the following question: "Does not instructional
spending understate the resources at a public college that is subsidized by the state?" Instructional spending does not
understate resources at public colleges. State governments subsidize tuition and they often provide land and
buildings below cost. The tuition subsidies are important for understanding the sources of revenue related to
instruction, but they are irrelevant to instructional spending. We use instructional spending precisely because it is
what it is, regardless of how the college's tuition is subsidized. Instructional spending excludes spending on
buildings and land, so all colleges are treated equally with regard to these two spending categories.
he was actually offered and (b) in the absence of aid (that is, with all of the aid variables zeroed out). 30 For

simplicity, we will call the former college the "with-aid college" and the latter college the "without-aid college." W e

then compute the present value of the aid we zeroed out, and we show this in column (1) of Table 10.31 That is,

column (1) shows the benefit of taking aid. The succeeding columns show the costs of taking aid. Column (2)

shows the difference in consumption between the with-aid and without-aid colleges. W e measure the difference in

consumption by subtracting the room and board at the without-aid college from the room and board at the with-aid

college. If the difference in consumption is negative, students at the without-aid college enjoy greater food and

housing consumption than students at the with-aid college.32

         Column (3) shows the difference in instructional spending between the with-aid and the without-aid

colleges. Column (4) shows the difference in the median SAT score, in percentiles, between with-aid and the

without-aid colleges. This difference indicates the change in a student's peer group.

         In order to compute the change in a student's net present value from taking aid, we have to make a few

assumptions to create the present values. W e assume a real discount rate of three percent per year and an annual

inflation rate of three percent. W e assume a conservative seven percent real rate of return on human capital

investment, and we assume that human capital pays out for 40 years.33 In column (5), we show the change in a

student's net present value, due to his response to aid. To get column (5), we first sum the instructional spending




         30
             W e allow the student to re-choose among all of the colleges that appear in the College Admissions
Project sample. It is reasonable to have the students choose just among the 755 colleges to which at least one
surveyed student applied. This is because there are more than 3000 other institutions of higher education in the
United States that virtually never enroll a student like those in our sample. They include community colleges and
other institutions that never or rarely grant the baccalaureate degree.

         31
            The vast majority of the variation in the value of aid comes from scholarships and other grants. Our
results would not be noticeably affected by any reasonable procedure to estimate the subsidy value of loans and
work-study commitments. In fact, we use federal estimates of the subsidy value of loans in the federal subsidized
loan program. W e do not attribute any subsidy value to loans with unsubsidized interest rates and repayment
schedules. W e assume that the subsidy value of a work-study commitment is one-third of its value.

         32
              If all grants were tuition discounts, it might be appropriate to consider aid as one side of the trade-off
and human capital investment (and only human capital investment) as the other side of the trade-off. But, many
grants are greater than tuition and only make sense in comparison to comprehensive costs. It would obviously be
incorrect to count such tuition-exceeding grants on one side of the trade-off, yet exclude the consumption they
finance from the other side of the trade-off.

         33
            Our assumption about the number of years over which human capital pays out is not crucial because the
out years are so heavily discounted. Our assumption about the rate of return to human capital is more important, so
we make a conservative assumption of 7 percent, which is near the bottom of the generally accepted range of
estimates. It is probably especially conservative for the highly meritorious group of students whom we are studying.
Indeed, the tendency of highly meritorious students to continue in school beyond the baccalaureate degree strongly
suggests that they earn a super-normal rate of return during their baccalaureate years, which prompts them to
continue enrolling until their rate of return is more in line with their discount rate.
difference between the with-aid and without-aid colleges over four years of college. This gives us the human capital

asset that pays out at seven percent for 40 years. W e compute the present discounted value of this stream of

payments and then add the present value of the change in aid and the present value of the change in consumption.

Keep in mind that the calculation omits the benefits and costs of peers, which we cannot quantify accurately.

         For display in Table 10, we divide students into two groups. The top row contains students who, when we

conducted our thought experiment, appeared to have made good use of the aid they were offered. Their with-aid

choices have higher lifetime values than their without-aid choices. Keep in mind that, merely by sticking with the

same college when aid is zeroed out, a student will be placed in this group; this is because his college variables will

not change and the student's lifetime value will mechanically be higher an amount exactly equal to the present value

of the aid itself. If high achieving peers make a student get more human capital from instructional spending, this

group's size is overstated: some students who appear to have made a rational human capital investment actually gave

up too much in the way of peers. If high achieving peers make a student get less human capital from instructional

spending, this group's size is understated.

         The bottom row contains students who, when we conducted our thought experiment, appeared to have been

seduced by aid into making "irrational" human capital investments. That is, in return for aid, they accepted such

large reductions in human capital investment and consumption that they lost lifetime value. If high achieving peers

make a student get more human capital from instructional spending, this group's size is understated. If high

achieving peers make a student get less human capital from instructional spending, this group's size is overstated.

         Of course, there is a third group of students: students whose without-aid college was the same as their with-

aid college because they actually received no aid. It is not interesting to show changes for them because zeroing out

their aid changes nothing. Clearly, this group contains students who are not easily tempted by aid–if they were, they

would presumably have attempted to get at least a few merit scholarships, which can obtained by any student in our

sample, no matter how rich he is, if he is willing to attend a less selective college.

D. How Students' College Choices would Differ in the Absence of Aid, Part 2: The Evidence in Table 10

         Table 10 shows that 30.8 percent of students responded to aid in such a way that their lifetime value was

increased. Some of these students simply accepted aid at the same college that they would have picked if no aid had

been offered. More interestingly, some of these students accepted aid that was sufficiently generous that it swamped

the reduction in college consumption and human capital investment that they generally faced. Notice that the

average value of aid for students in this group was high: $11,534 per year. They attended a with-aid college that

offered consumption that was, on average, $171 lower per year and instructional spending that was, on average, $26

lower per year. These losses are small. As a consequence, by responding like a rational investor to aid, the average

student in this group gained lifetime present value of $44,075. This gain would be somewhat different if peers
matter because since we have not deducted or added any amount for the students' worse peers. The students

probably lost some human capital investment because their peers were slightly worse (2.7 percentile points worse on

the SAT, relative to the peers they would have had at their without-aid college). On the other hand, their slightly

worse peers may have allowed them to enjoy more than their share of instructional spending.

         The bottom row of Table 10 shows that 38.9 percent of all students did not act like rational investors.

These students accepted an aid package that was too small to make up for the losses in college consumption and

human capital investment that they accepted. Notice that the average value of aid for students in this group was quite

small: $2,793 per year. Compared to the without-aid college they would have attended, students in this group

attended a with-aid college that offered consumption that was, on average, $960 lower per year and instructional

spending that was, on average, $14,538 lower per year. On net, the average student in this group lost lifetime present

value of $76,096. The loss would be somewhat different if peers matter, since we have not deducted or added any

amount for the student's worse peers. They probably also lost some human capital investment because their peers

performed 8.5 percentile points worse on the SAT.

         Readers may be initially surprised that such a non-negligible share of students lose when they respond to

aid, but the statistics in Table 10 are really a straightforward implication of the behavior that we saw illustrated in

Table 9. The students who lose the most are precisely those students who accept aid that is actually quite modest in

value but covers a large share of comprehensive cost at a college that spends very little on instruction. W e know

from Appendix Tables 3 and 4 that not all students are equally likely to be losers of lifetime value: students who

have high income parents or parents who are graduates of selective colleges themselves do not appear to be tempted

by grants that are large shares of comprehensive cost at low spending colleges. These students react only to the

actual amount of a grant. W e suspect that these students behave more like rational investors either because they are

more sophisticated than other students or because they are less credit constrained than other students.



                                             X. Interpreting the Evidence

         Overall, we would describe the college choice behavior of the high aptitude students in our sample as

sensitive to college attributes in the expected direction. W e find that high aptitude students are nearly indifferent to a

college's distance from their home, to whether it is in-state, and to whether it is public. However, they are sensitive

to tuition, room, and board in the expected direction (lower is better). They also prefer to attend the most selective

colleges in the set to which they are admitted. They are attracted by grants, loans, and work-study commitments.

Although we find that students from different backgrounds do exhibit somewhat different college choice behavior,

the differences are not dramatic and much college choice behavior is shared by the entire array of high aptitude

students. The main exceptions to this rule are students whose parents have high incomes or who themselves
graduated from very selective colleges. Such students exhibit less sensitivity to variables that affect college costs.

         This being said, the students in our sample exhibit some hard-to-justify responses to aid that they are

offered. They are excessively attracted by loans and work-study, given the value of these types of aid compared to

grants. They are attracted by superficial aspects of a grant, like its being called a scholarship (with a name) and its

being front-loaded. They are far more sensitive to a grant's share of the college's comprehensive costs than they are

to the amount of the grant. All these behaviors are deviations from the expected behavior of a rational investor in

human capital. W e should note that these peculiar behaviors are generally not shared by the students whose parents

have high incomes or who themselves attended very selective colleges.

         W hen we quantify the effect of students' responses to aid, we find that 61.1 percent of students in our

sample respond as rational investors would in the presence of aid. Of these rational types, about half do not get

enough aid to measurably respond to it and about half improve their lifetime present value by accepting an aid offer

that is more than generous enough to offset the reductions in college consumption and instructional spending

associated with the aid. However, about 38.9 percent of students in our sample respond to aid in such a way that

they reduce their own lifetime present value. They accept an aid offer that is too small to offset the reductions in

consumption and instructional spending that they experience. There are two major, possible explanations for their

behavior: a lack of sophistication and credit constraints.

         A lack of sophistication accounts for at least some of the self-defeating responses to aid: credit constraints

cannot explain why a student would be strongly attracted by a grant's being called a scholarship (when it costs a

college nothing to do it). A lack of sophistication probably also accounts for the attraction of front-loaded grants–an

alternative explanation is impatience, but this seems unlikely in a population of students who so obviously do not

exhibit impatience as a rule. They all have records that show that they can work hard now in return for gains in the

distant future. Credit constraints are also not a good explanation for the attractiveness of front-loading, since a front-

loaded grant does not reduce the credit needs of families who know that their child will be enrolled for four years.

         Either a lack of sophistication or credit constraints could explain the great attractiveness of grants that are a

large share of comprehensive cost, regardless of what that comprehensive cost is. It would probably be impossible to

parse the effect into the share due to naivete and the share due to credit constraints. However, we did examine the

open-ended comments by parents whose children exhibited the most self-defeating responses to aid. The

overwhelming impression is that a lack of sophistication, and not credit constraints, are the problem. Over and over,

these parents complain that they are baffled by the aid process. They argue that the colleges do not explain their

offers well. They complain that other families are more "in the know." Most of all, they worry about whether their

children will benefit sufficiently from greater resources to justify the additional cost. Credit constraints do not

receive nearly as much comment: among parents who commented and whose children exhibited self-defeating
responses to aid, only 6.9 percent stated that they were simply unable to pay the costs associated with their child's

most preferred college. W e do not want to over-interpret the anecdotal evidence from parents' comments because

they may have been embarrassed to say that family circumstances prevented them from paying college costs.

Nevertheless, we think that it is revealing that words like "bewildering" and "confusing" are the modal words in their

comments.

         W e began this chapter by asking whether highly meritorious students, who are the big investors in the

human capital market, act in a manner consistent with maximizing their returns–and thus, American economic

growth, which is increasingly dependent on human capital investments. We come down with a very qualified yes:

high aptitude students understand the incentives that they face well enough to "get the sign right" when they react to

any one factor. However, a substantial minority of them make trade-offs among factors that are wrong. About a

third of the students are probably underinvesting and our conservative calculations suggest that a typical mistake is

worth $76,096 in present value. Being the cost of mere error, $76,096 is a useful number to keep in mind when

thinking about the magnitude of human capital investments and the consequent importance of getting them right.
                                                 Econometric Appendix



         The conditional logit specification implies that the ratio of probabilities of any two alternatives j and j'



(5)



is independent of the probabilities of the remaining alternatives in the choice set. This property, the independence of

irrelevant alternatives (IIA), is violated in certain applications. For our application, it is probably most useful to

think about violations being likely to occur if is a natural nesting structure in students' choice set. In this section, we

first construct an example of a violation, in order to elucidate the problem. W e then construct an example in which

IIA is unlikely to be violated; this example will help readers see how students' endogenous formation of their choice

sets is actually helpful. W e finally construct an example in which IIA is likely to be violated.

         There is a specification test for IIA, but we have decided to explain the issue logically rather than merely

present the results of the test because we believe that a logical understanding will better enable readers to judge our

results. Nevertheless, knowing the results of the specification test is helpful. Hausman and McFadden (1984) and

McFadden (1987) propose a typical Hausman-type test in which, under the null hypothesis that likelihood ratios are

indeed independent of irrelevant alternatives, excluding some alternatives from the choice set will produce inefficient

but consistent estimates. Under the alternative hypothesis, consistency and not merely efficiency will be lost. Our

application never comes close to being rejected by this specification test: if we remove a random college from the

choice sets, we get a test statistic that averages 0.43 (p-value 0.48, it is distributed as   ) . This test statistic is based

on the specification in Table 3.

         Consider the following example in which IIA is violated. Suppose that Colgate University (a private liberal

arts college) and Ohio State University (a public research university) are in a student's choice set and that we

considering the ratio of the probabilities associated with these institutions. Suppose also that the grant at the

University of Michigan (another public research university) increases, raising the probability associated with it. The

Colgate-Ohio State probability ratio need not change: Michigan becomes a more probable choice overall, both

Colgate and Ohio State necessarily become less probable choices overall, but the relative probability of Colgate to

Ohio State may remain unchanged. Let us say, however, that the student actually had a nested structure to his

choice: he first chose his favorite public research university and his favorite private liberal arts college, and then he

held a runoff between the top schools from each group. Say that the grant increase makes Michigan bump Ohio

State from its place as the student's favorite public research university. Then, the grant not only raises the probability

of Michigan overall, it dramatically changes the Colgate-Ohio State probability ratio. IIA is violated; the role that
nesting plays becomes clear.

         Now consider how students' endogenous selection of their choice sets is helpful. Suppose students use all

of the information on colleges than can be observed or predicted at the time of application. Suppose, moreover, that

students assume that unpredictable college attributes (for instance, the part of an aid package that cannot be

predicted based on a college's policies and conventions) are pretty much the same within each of several nesting

groups. For instance, a student might figure if that his application has special appeal for private liberal arts colleges,

each of them will offer him a aid package that is 5 percent more generous than what they would otherwise offer

someone with his characteristics. The student's suppositions produce a natural nesting structure. The student should

examine all colleges, apply to the top institution in each nesting group, and wait for the unpredictable attributes to be

resolved –as they will be, when he receives his admissions offers. The student can then conduct his runoff.

         If the above assumptions and behavior are fulfilled, then the student is likely to satisfy IIA because his

runoff menu of colleges will not contain any nesting structure. He has already taken the nesting structure into

account when deciding where to apply; he has already eliminated less preferred alternatives from each nesting group.

This leaves us with an endogenous choice set in which it is more plausible that IIA holds. In our example:

Michigan's and Ohio State's attributes have already been fully considered and only one of the two institutions is still

in the choice set. In the real world, students may not strictly obey the above assumptions and behavior, but students

do act in accordance with them to a great extent. For instance, no student applies to all or even many public research

universities: he applies his nesting structure and eliminates many of the choices within each nest group. We

econometricians need not know what the nesting structure is. The student has already applied it; we econometricians

need only observe how he makes choices in the runoff among nesting groups.

         Let us consider how the previous example may fall afoul of IIA. We assumed that unpredictable college

attributes are pretty much the same within each of several nesting groups. This assumption is most likely to be

violated if, say, the student believes that admission is random within a nesting group. Such randomness is most

likely to occur at the top handful of selective colleges, where admissions probabilities are so low that there is

probably some arbitrariness in admissions even among institutions that have the same preferences about students.

Thus, a student might apply to the top institution in each of his nesting groups except, say, for the nesting group that

contains the most selective private research universities. He might, in this one nesting group, figure that he has an 33

percent chance of getting into each of his five favorite institutions and figure that these chances are independent.

The student might decide to apply to all five favorites: this would give him an 86.5 percent change of getting into at

least one institution, a 32.8 percent change of getting into exactly two, and so on. If he gets into multiple institutions

in the nesting group (as he will with some non-negligible probability if he applies to all five), the student will face an

endogenous choice set that has some nesting structure.
         Overall, we believe that our data do not reject in the IIA specification test because endogenous formation of

choice sets works for us. That is, we believe that our data fit the model's restrictions better than data would fit them

if we knew nothing about students' endogenous choice sets and estimated a conditional logit with all colleges in

every choice set. (Indeed, if we put all College Admissions Project colleges into each choice set, we get rejections in

the IIA specification test.) W e do not claim to have remedied the IIA issue that arises with conditional or

multinomial logit estimation, but we believe that students' endogenous choice set formation is largely a help, not a

hindrance.

         Readers interested in endogenous choice sets where the choice is observed (as it is in our exercise) may

wish to consult Peters, Adamowicz, and Boxall (1995), Haab and Hicks (1997), Hicks and Strand (2000), and

Parsons, Plantinga, and Boyle (2000). Manski (1977) considers the case in endogenous choice sets are not observed,

so that the econometrician must jointly estimate the endogenous choice set and the choice within the set.

Identification is theoretically possible but very difficult to achieve unless there is ancillary evidence with which to

predict a person's endogenous choice set.

         Finally, with endogenous choice sets, different students have choice sets that contain different numbers of

colleges and arrays of colleges (that is, the choice sets are "unbalanced"). W e have been asked whether this implies

that students who have more colleges in their choice sets exercise disproportionate influence over the estimates. The

answer is "no" on both counts. This becomes clear if we return to the conditional logit equations:




Examine the log likelihood equation. It shows that each student contributes equally to the log likelihood because

each student's college choice probabilities must sum to one (see second equation).
                                                    References

Avery, Christopher, and Caroline M. Hoxby, "The College Admissions Project: Counselor Report," Harvard
        University typescript, 2000.

Brewer, Dominic J., Eric R. Eide, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, "Does It Pay to Attend an Elite Private College?
        Cross-Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 34
        (1), pp. 104-23. Winter 1999.

College Entrance Examination Board, Standard Research Compilation: Undergraduate Institutions. Electronic
        data, 2002.

Dale, Stacy and Alan Krueger, "Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An Application of
         Selection on Observables and Unobservables," NBER W orking Paper 7322, 1999.

Dynarski, Susan, "The Shift to Public M erit Aid and Its Effects," in Caroline M. Hoxby, ed., College Decisions:
        How Students Actually Make Them and How They Could, NBER typescript, 2002.

Ehrenberg, Ronald, "Optimal Financial Aid Policies for a Selective University," Journal of Human Resources, Vol.
        19(2), 1984, pp. 202-230.

Haab, Timothy, and Robert Hicks, "Accounting for Choice Set Endogeneity in Random Utility Models of Recreation
        Demand," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 34(), 1997, pp. 127-147.

Hausman, Jerry, and Daniel McFadden, "A Specification Test for the Multinomial Logit Model," Econometrica,
       Vol. 52 (), 1984, pp. 1219-1240.

Hicks, Robert, and Ivar Strand, "The Extent of Information: Its Relevance for Random Utility Models," Land
        Economics, Vol. 76(3), 2000, pp. 374-385.

Hoxby, Caroline M., "The Return to Attending a More Selective College: 1960 to the Present,” Harvard University
        typescript, 1998.

Hoxby, Caroline M., and Bridget Terry Long, "Explaining Rising Income and W age Inequality among the College-
        Educated," NBER W orking Paper No. 6873.

Kane, Thomas, "The Effects of Expectations About College: The Boston COACH Program and Beyond," in
        Caroline M. Hoxby, ed., College Decisions: How Students Actually Make Them and How They Could,
        NBER typescript, 2002.

Long, Bridget, "The Impact of the Federal Tax Credits for Higher Education Expenses," in Caroline M. Hoxby, ed.,
        College Decisions: How Students Actually Make Them and How They Could, NBER typescript, 2002.

Manski, Charles, "The Structure of Random Utility Models," Theory and Decision, Vol. 8(), 1977, 229-254.

McFadden, Daniel, "Regression Based Specification Tests for the Multinomial Logit Model," Journal of
       Econometrics, Vol 34 () 1987, pp. 63-82.

Parsons, George, Andrew Plantinga, and Kevin Boyle, "Narrow Choice Sets in a Random Utility Model of
         Recreation Demand," Land Economics, Vol. 76(1), 2000, pp. 86-99.

Peters, Thomas., W iktor Adamowicz, and Peter Boxall, "The Influence of Choice Set Consideration in Modeling the
         Benefits of Improved W ater Quality," Water Resources Research, Vol. 613(), 1995, 1781-1787.

Peterson's, Peterson's Guide to Four-Year Colleges, 2002 edition. Princeton, NJ: Peterson's.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, College Opportunities Online.
        Electronic data, 2002.

United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary
        Education Data System, Higher Education Finance Data File. Electronic data, 2001.
                                                        Table 1
                          Description of the Students in the College Admission Project Data
Variable                                                         Mean         Std. Dev.       Minimum   Maximum
Male                                                            0.4120           0.4923             0         1
W hite non-Hispanic                                             0.7321           0.4429             0         1
Black                                                           0.0350           0.1837             0         1
Asian                                                           0.1571           0.3640             0         1
Hispanic                                                        0.0382           0.1918             0         1
Native American                                                 0.0010           0.0313             0         1
Other race/ethnicity                                            0.0366           0.1878             0         1
Parents are married                                             0.8305           0.3752             0         1
Sibling(s) enrolled in college                                  0.2327           0.4226             0         1
Parents' income, estimated if necessary                   119929.0000       65518.2100           9186    240000
Parents' income < $20k                                          0.0221           0.1469             0         1
Parents' income $20-30k                                         0.0379           0.1910             0         1
Parents' income $30-40k                                         0.0301           0.1710             0         1
Parents' income $40-50k                                         0.0398           0.1955             0         1
Parents' income $50-60k                                         0.0497           0.2174             0         1
Parents' income $60-70k                                         0.0594           0.2363             0         1
Parents' income $70-80k                                         0.0690           0.2535             0         1
Parents' income $80-90k                                         0.0522           0.2225             0         1
Parents' income $90-100k                                        0.0855           0.2796             0         1
Parents' income $100-120k                                       0.1495           0.3566             0         1
Parents' income $120-140k                                       0.0923           0.2895             0         1
Parents' income $140-160k                                       0.0771           0.2667             0         1
Parents' income $160-200k                                       0.0761           0.2653             0         1
Parents' income $200+k                                          0.1594           0.3661             0         1
Expected family contribution, estimated if necessary       27653.4700       16523.9200              0    120000
Applied for financial aid?                                      0.5946           0.4910             0         1
Finances influenced college choice?                             0.4114           0.4922             0         1
Amount of outside scholarships, applicable at any
college                                                       203.0781        799.9640              0     12500
National Merit Scholarship winner                               0.0494           0.2167             0         1
Student's SAT score, sum of math and verbal,
converted from ACT score if necessary                       1356.9110         138.8193            780      1600
Student's SAT score, expressed as national percentile          90.4013         12.3362             12       100
Median SAT score at most selective college to which
student was admitted                                           86.4092         10.3836             34        98
Median SAT score at least selective college to which
student was admitted                                           73.8469         14.5646             14        97
Number of colleges to which student was admitted                3.5250           2.1293             1        10
Student's high school was private                               0.4534           0.4979             0         1
Student's high school in AL                                     0.0170           0.1292             0         1
Student's high school in AR                                     0.0028           0.0526             0         1
Student's high school in AZ                                     0.0093           0.0958             0         1
Student's high school in CA                                     0.1222           0.3276             0         1
Variable                                                       Mean    Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
Student's high school in CO                                   0.0120     0.1091          0         1
Student's high school in CT                                   0.0327     0.1779          0         1
Student's high school in DC                                   0.0096     0.0974          0         1
Student's high school in FL                                   0.0287     0.1670          0         1
Student's high school in GA                                   0.0111     0.1048          0         1
Student's high school in HI                                   0.0201     0.1402          0         1
Student's high school in ID                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in IL                                   0.0633     0.2435          0         1
Student's high school in IN                                   0.0086     0.0926          0         1
Student's high school in KS                                   0.0046     0.0679          0         1
Student's high school in KY                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in LA                                   0.0105     0.1019          0         1
Student's high school in MA                                   0.0855     0.2797          0         1
Student's high school in MD                                   0.0327     0.1779          0         1
Student's high school in ME                                   0.0052     0.0723          0         1
Student's high school in MI                                   0.0198     0.1392          0         1
Student's high school in MN                                   0.0056     0.0743          0         1
Student's high school in MO                                   0.0198     0.1392          0         1
Student's high school in MT                                   0.0019     0.0430          0         1
Student's high school in NC                                   0.0219     0.1464          0         1
Student's high school in NE                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in NH                                   0.0167     0.1280          0         1
Student's high school in NJ                                   0.0522     0.2224          0         1
Student's high school in NM                                   0.0102     0.1004          0         1
Student's high school in NV                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in NY                                   0.1278     0.3339          0         1
Student's high school in OH                                   0.0309     0.1730          0         1
Student's high school in OK                                   0.0062     0.0783          0         1
Student's high school in OR                                   0.0105     0.1019          0         1
Student's high school in PA                                   0.0472     0.2121          0         1
Student's high school in RI                                   0.0086     0.0926          0         1
Student's high school in SC                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in TN                                   0.0201     0.1402          0         1
Student's high school in TX                                   0.0395     0.1948          0         1
Student's high school in UT                                   0.0071     0.0840          0         1
Student's high school in VA                                   0.0333     0.1795          0         1
Student's high school in VT                                   0.0031     0.0555          0         1
Student's high school in W A                                  0.0160     0.1257          0         1
Student's high school in W I                                  0.0077     0.0875          0         1
Student's high school in W Y                                  0.0028     0.0526          0         1

Source: 3240 students in College Admissions Project sample.
                                                       Table 2
                            Description of the Colleges to W hich Students Were Admitted,
                                      from the College Admission Project Data

Variable                                                          Mean        Std. Dev.     Minimum   Maximum
Matriculated at this college                                     0.2825          0.4502           0         1
Admitted to this college                                         1.0000          0.0000           1         1
Applied early to this college                                    0.1298          0.3405           0         2
W ithdrew application from this college,
usually after early decision elsewhere                           0.0000          0.0000           0         0
Grants specific to this college                              2719.8600       5870.0240            0     36000
Loans from this college                                       641.3459       2282.1720            0     36548
W ork study amount from this college                          172.1048        593.0736            0     15000
Grant is called a named "scholarship"                            0.1958          0.3968           0         1
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                    0.0212          0.1440           0         1
Grant is this share of tuition                                   0.1885          0.4369           0         7
Grant is this share of comprehensive cost                        0.1109          0.2258           0         2
Student was a recruited athlete at this college                  0.0275          0.1634           0         1
Father is an alumnus of this college                             0.0401          0.1962           0         1
Mother is an alumna of this college                              0.0283          0.1659           0         1
Sibling attended or attends this college                         0.0484          0.2146           0         1
College is public                                                0.3325          0.4711           0         1
College is private not-for-profit                                0.6628          0.4737           0         1
College is international, except for Canadian colleges
which are treated as U.S. colleges                               0.0045          0.0672           0         1
College's median SAT score, in national percentiles            80.5947         12.5188           14        98
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles above
college's median SAT score                                     11.2945         10.2160            0        82
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles below
college's median SAT score                                       1.1006          4.3038           0        58
In-state tuition                                            16435.1500       9594.0020            0     27472
Out-of-state tuition                                        19293.5700       6190.8330            0     27472
Tuition that applies to this student                        17670.6000       8491.8630            0     27472
Room and board at this college                               6808.9370       1322.2720            0     10299
In-state comprehensive cost of this college                 23785.2000      10368.3300            0     35125
Out-of-state comprehensive cost of this college             26641.5400       7032.6210            0     35125
Comprehensive cost that applies to this student             25022.2000       9219.1590            0     35125
Per-pupil expenditure on students (instruction, student
services, academic support, scholarships) of this
college, in thousands                                          26.0321         15.5894            2       146
Instructional per-pupil expenditure of this college, in
thousands                                                      17.4502         11.8691            2        72
College is in-state                                              0.3270          0.4691           0         1
Distance between student's high school and this
college, in miles                                             597.1856        808.9188            0      5769
College is in AK                                                 0.0000          0.0000           0         0
College is in AL                                                 0.0053          0.0724           0         1
Variable             Mean    Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
College is in AR    0.0004     0.0187          0         1
College is in AZ    0.0056     0.0748          0         1
College is in CA    0.1385     0.3454          0         1
College is in CO    0.0109     0.1038          0         1
College is in CT    0.0380     0.1913          0         1
College is in DC    0.0260     0.1591          0         1
College is in DE    0.0032     0.0561          0         1
College is in FL    0.0164     0.1271          0         1
College is in GA    0.0197     0.1389          0         1
College is in HI    0.0035     0.0592          0         1
College is in IA    0.0042     0.0648          0         1
College is in ID    0.0013     0.0363          0         1
College is in IL    0.0543     0.2265          0         1
College is in IN    0.0206     0.1422          0         1
College is in KS    0.0022     0.0468          0         1
College is in KY    0.0006     0.0248          0         1
College is in LA    0.0094     0.0965          0         1
College is in MA    0.1054     0.3070          0         1
College is in MD    0.0219     0.1462          0         1
College is in ME    0.0144     0.1191          0         1
College is in MI    0.0227     0.1488          0         1
College is in MN    0.0089     0.0938          0         1
College is in MO    0.0259     0.1589          0         1
College is in MS    0.0009     0.0296          0         1
College is in MT    0.0010     0.0311          0         1
College is in NC    0.0356     0.1852          0         1
College is in NE    0.0018     0.0419          0         1
College is in NH    0.0118     0.1078          0         1
College is in NJ    0.0217     0.1457          0         1
College is in NM    0.0017     0.0408          0         1
College is in NV    0.0008     0.0281          0         1
College is in NY    0.1212     0.3263          0         1
College is in OH    0.0273     0.1630          0         1
College is in OK    0.0018     0.0419          0         1
College is in OR    0.0087     0.0928          0         1
College is in PA    0.0713     0.2573          0         1
College is in RI    0.0193     0.1376          0         1
College is in SC    0.0049     0.0700          0         1
College is in TN    0.0139     0.1170          0         1
College is in TX    0.0222     0.1474          0         1
College is in UT    0.0045     0.0668          0         1
College is in VA    0.0391     0.1938          0         1
College is in VT    0.0104     0.1013          0         1
College is in W A   0.0122     0.1098          0         1
Variable                                                        Mean         Std. Dev.    Minimum      Maximum
College is in W I                                              0.0090          0.0942             0          1
College is in W V                                              0.0000          0.0000             0          0
College is in W Y                                              0.0003          0.0162             0          1

Source: 11,468 college admissions events for the 3240 students in the College Admissions Project sample.
                                                   Table 3
                                    The Determinants of College Choice
     Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions in which the Binary Outcome is Matriculation

                                                                                                                  1.108
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college                                                                   (14.81)
                                                                                                                  1.068
Loan (in thousands) from the college                                                                              (4.03)
                                                                                                                  1.125
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the college                                                                (1.64)
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or out-of-state as appropriate to the                                  0.980
student                                                                                                          (-1.90)
                                                                                                                  0.903
College's room and board (in thousands)                                                                          (-3.28)
College's per-pupil instructional spending                                                                        1.020
(in thousands)                                                                                                    (6.02)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles above college's average                                         0.959
SAT score                                                                                                        (-6.45)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles below college's average                                         1.001
SAT score                                                                                                       (0.011)
                                                                                                                  1.631
College is most selective to which student was admitted                                                           (7.41)
                                                                                                                  0.694
College is least selective to which student was admitted                                                         (-4.23)
                                                                                                                  1.703
Father is alumnus of this college                                                                                 (3.62)
                                                                                                                  1.001
Mother is alumna of this college                                                                                (0.189)
                                                                                                                  1.896
Sibling attended or attends this college                                                                          (5.04)
                                                                                                                  1.000
Distance between college and student's high school, in hundreds of miles                                          (0.06)
Square of distance between college and student's high school, in 10000s of                                        1.000
miles                                                                                                             (1.03)
Cube of distance between college and student's high school, in 1000000s of                                        1.000
miles                                                                                                            (-1.01)
                                                                                                                  1.162
College is in-state for the student                                                                               (1.59)
                                                                                                                  1.201
College is public                                                                                                 (1.26)
Number of observations                                                                                             9112
                     2
Likelihood ratio (chi )                                                                                         1171.41
Prob>chi 2                                                                                                                0
LogLikelihood                                                                                                  -2335.57
Pseudo R 2                                                                                                        0.201

Notes: The table shows results from conditional logit estimation of how a student chooses his matriculation college
among the colleges to which he was admitted. The results are shown as odds ratios, with Z-statistics in parentheses
below the odd ratios. Results shown in bold print are odds ratios that are statistically significantly different from 1
with at least 90 percent confidence. The source of data is the College Admissions Project.
                                                   Table 4
                       Including Early Decision Students in Estimates of College Choice,
     Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions in which the Binary Outcome is Matriculation

                                                                                                  predicted choice sets
                                                                                                         used for early
                                                                             actual choice sets              applicants
                                                                                         1.108                   1.102
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college                                          (14.81)                 (14.75)
                                                                                        1.068                   1.073
Loan (in thousands) from the college                                                    (4.03)                  (4.29)
                                                                                        1.125                   1.113
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the college                                      (1.64)                  (1.47)
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or out-of-state as appropriate               0.980                    0.984
to the student                                                                         (-1.90)                  (-1.78)
                                                                                        0.903                    0.893
College's room and board (in thousands)                                                (-3.28)                  (-3.76)
College's per-pupil instructional spending                                              1.020                   1.020
(in thousands)                                                                          (6.02)                  (5.35)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles above college's                       0.959                    0.950
average SAT score                                                                      (-6.45)                  (-8.45)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles below college's                        1.001                  1.003
average SAT score                                                                      (0.011)                  (0.26)
                                                                                        1.631                   1.313
College is most selective to which student was admitted                                 (7.41)                  (6.57)
                                                                                        0.694                    0.886
College is least selective to which student was admitted                               (-4.23)                  (-3.49)
                                                                                        1.703                   1.650
Father is alumnus of this college                                                       (3.62)                  (3.54)
                                                                                        1.001                    0.966
Mother is alumna of this college                                                        (0.18)                  (-0.19)
                                                                                        1.896                   1.854
Sibling attended or attends this college                                                (5.04)                  (5.03)
Distance between college and student's high school, in hundreds of                      1.000                    1.000
miles                                                                                   (0.06)                  (-0.05)
Square of distance between college and student's high school, in                        1.000                   1.000
10000s of miles                                                                         (1.03)                  (0.72)
Cube of distance between college and student's high school, in                          1.000                    1.000
1000000s of miles                                                                      (-1.01)                  (-0.70)
                                                                                        1.162                   1.196
College is in-state for the student                                                     (1.59)                  (1.95)
                                                                                        1.201                   1.119
College is public                                                                       (1.26)                  (0.80)
Number of observations                                                                   9112                   10227
Likelihood ratio (chi2)                                                               1171.41                 1447.94
Prob>chi 2                                                                                   0                       0
LogLikelihood                                                                        -2335.57                -2516.18
Pseudo R 2                                                                               0.201                   0.223

Notes: This table is the same as Table 3, except that the right-hand column substitutes predicted choice sets for
actual choice sets for early decision applicants. The prediction procedure is described in the text. All other notes
from Table 3 apply.
                                                   Table 5
   Are Students from Low and High Income Families Equally Sensitive to the Determinants of College Choice?
                          Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                       (notes continue on next page)
                                                            Parents Income is:
                                                                                                  same effect
                                                            Medium       Medium                        for all
                                                  Low         Low          High           High       groups?
                                                  1.114       1.128         1.133         1.075
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college    (5.15)       (7.98)      (10.68)        (5.02)      rejected
                                                  1.036       1.067          1.072        1.076
Loan (in thousands) from the college             (0.65)       (1.68)        (2.55)       (2.60)
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the        1.059       1.219          1.081        1.040
college                                          (1.32)       (1.45)        (0.66)       (1.66)
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or     1.000       0.981          0.964       0.980
out-of-state as appropriate to the student       (0.47)      (-0.40)       (-2.27)      (-0.57)
                                                 0.840        0.945          0.911       0.898
College's room and board (in thousands)         (-1.67)      (-0.85)       (-1.82)      (-1.86)
College's per-pupil instructional spending        1.031       1.016          1.020        1.021
(in thousands)                                   (2.56)       (1.98)        (3.69)       (3.89)
Student's SAT score is this number of
percentiles above college's average SAT          0.986        0.946          0.956       0.957
score                                           (-0.82)      (-3.86)       (-4.33)      (-3.36)
Student's SAT score is this number of
percentiles below college's average SAT          0.986        1.019          1.008        1.015
score                                           (-0.59)       (0.77)        (0.43)       (0.53)
College is most selective to which student        1.430       1.612          1.437        1.899
was admitted                                     (1.57)       (3.27)        (3.30)       (5.41)
College is least selective to which student      0.986        0.798          0.625       0.666
was admitted                                    (-0.05)      (-1.18)       (-3.39)      (-2.46)
                                                  3.772       1.293          2.395        1.256
Father is alumnus of this college                (1.73)       (0.69)        (3.60)       (0.94)
                                                 0.268        2.231          0.510        1.919
Mother is alumna of this college                (-1.02)       (1.79)       (-2.13)       (2.14)      rejected
                                                  2.559       1.900          2.268        1.328
Sibling attended or attends this college         (2.04)       (2.18)        (4.17)       (1.18)
Distance between college and student's high      0.971        1.006          1.003       0.998
school, in hundreds of miles                    (-1.20)       (0.36)        (0.22)      (-0.13)
Square of distance between college and           1.000        1.000         1.000         1.000
student's high school, in 10000s of miles       (-2.00)       (0.47)       (-0.08)       (1.17)
Cube of distance between college and              1.003       1.000          1.000       1.000
student's high school, in 1000000s of miles      (2.00)      (-0.47)        (0.09)      (-1.13)
                                                 0.967        1.079          1.379        1.001
College is in-state for the student             (-0.10)       (0.36)        (2.08)       (0.01)
                                                  1.602       1.909          1.128        1.062
College is public                                (1.00)       (2.02)        (0.51)       (0.22)
Number of observations                             838         2011          3459         2731
Likelihood ratio (chi2)                         151.91       348.23        456.62       314.11
Prob>chi 2                                           0             0             0           0
LogLikelihood                                        -194.7        -468.1        -884.73       -715.03
           2
Pseudo R                                               0.28           0.27          0.21          0.18

Notes: The table shows results from conditional logit estimation of how a student chooses his matriculation college
among the colleges to which he was admitted. The results are shown as odds ratios, with Z-statistics in parentheses
below the odd ratios. Results shown in bold print are odds ratios that are statistically significantly different from 1
with at least 95 percent confidence. Parents are divided into four income groups: low, less than $40,000; medium
low, $40,000 to $80,000; medium high, $80,000 to $140,000; high, greater than or equal to $140000. The right hand
column contains the word "rejected" when the hypothesis that the odds ratios for the four income groups are equal is
rejected with 95 percent confidence. The source of data is the College Admissions Project.
                                                    Table 6
             Are Students whose Parents Attended More and Less Selective Colleges Equally Sensitive
                                    to the Determinants of College Choice?
                           Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                         (notes continue on next page)

                                                              Parents' college selectivity is:
                                                                                                           same effect
                                                                                                                for all
                                                                 low         medium                high       groups?
                                                               1.120            1.100             1.075
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college                (13.15)           (6.41)            (3.19)
                                                               1.075            1.096             1.036
Loan (in thousands) from the college                          (3.48)           (1.84)            (0.93)
                                                              0.995             1.354             2.534
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the college           (-0.06)           (2.00)            (2.62)       rejected
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or out-of-state     0.980            0.965             1.029
as appropriate to the student                                (-1.60)          (-1.60)            (0.90)
                                                               0.882            1.021             0.834
College's room and board (in thousands)                      (-3.17)           (0.34)            (-1.89)      rejected
College's per-pupil instructional spending                     1.018            1.023             1.007
(in thousands)                                                (4.68)           (3.46)            (0.88)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles              0.962            0.946              0.952
above college's average SAT score                            (-5.01)          (-3.65)            (-2.05)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles              1.022            1.176             1.496
below college's average SAT score                             (0.71)           (1.96)            (4.74)
                                                               1.496            1.897             1.635
College is most selective to which student was admitted       (4.74)           (4.73)            (2.60)
                                                               0.699            0.653             0.722
College is least selective to which student was admitted     (-3.32)          (-2.31)            (-1.26)
                                                               1.151            1.925             1.493
Father is alumnus of this college                             (0.44)           (2.82)            (1.45)
                                                               1.342           0.780              0.861
Mother is alumna of this college                              (0.84)          (-0.83)            (-0.37)
                                                               1.936            2.455             0.841
Sibling attended or attends this college                      (4.22)           (3.43)            (-0.39)
Distance between college and student's high school, in         1.010            0.878             1.038
hundreds of miles                                             (1.12)          (-4.57)            (1.66)       rejected
Square of distance between college and student's high          1.000            1.000             1.000
school, in 10000s of miles                                    (0.53)           (2.18)            (-0.02)
Cube of distance between college and student's high           1.000            1.000              1.000
school, in 1000000s of miles                                 (-0.53)          (-1.43)            (-0.03)
                                                               1.191            0.688             2.110
College is in-state for the student                           (1.46)          (-1.87)            (2.59)       rejected
                                                               1.206            1.587             0.789
College is public                                             (1.04)           (1.53)            (-0.48)
Number of observations                                         5673             2280              1159
Likelihood ratio (chi2)                                      733.27           362.49             171.52
Prob>chi 2                                                         0                0                 0
LogLikelihood                                                   -1447.93          -555.72        -283.98
           2
Pseudo R                                                              0.2            0.25            0.23

Notes: The table shows results from conditional logit estimation of how a student chooses his matriculation college
among the colleges to which he was admitted. The results are shown as odds ratios, with Z-statistics in parentheses
below the odd ratios. Results shown in bold print are odds ratios that are statistically significantly different from 1
with at least 95 percent confidence. Parents are divided into college selectivity groups, based on the maximum
selectivity of the two parents' colleges: low, college's median SAT is less than the 70th percentile; medium,college's
median SAT is between the 70th and 90th percentile; high, college's median SAT is greater than or equal to the 90th
percentile. Note that selectivity is based on colleges' current selectivity, owing to the paucity of data on selectivity
for the years in parents attended college. The right hand column contains the word "rejected" when the hypothesis
that the odds ratios for the three selectivity groups are equal is rejected with 95 percent confidence. The source of
data is the College Admissions Project.
                                                    Table 7
   Are Students from Private and Public High Schools Equally Sensitive to the Determinants of College Choice?
                           Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                         (notes continue on next page)

                                                                 Student's high school is private
                                                                                      or public?
                                                                                                    same effect for all
                                                                        public           private             groups?
                                                                         1.112             1.106
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college                          (11.34)            (9.49)
                                                                         1.084             1.049
Loan (in thousands) from the college                                    (3.89)            (1.76)
                                                                         1.187             1.048
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the college                      (1.84)            (0.43)
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or out-of-state as            0.977            0.998
appropriate to the student                                             (-1.78)           (-0.06)
                                                                         0.812             0.955
College's room and board (in thousands)                                (-4.77)            (0.32)              rejected
College's per-pupil instructional spending                               1.020             1.018
(in thousands)                                                          (4.60)            (3.99)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles above                  0.964             0.952
college's average SAT score                                            (-4.51)           (-4.53)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles below                 0.992              1.015
college's average SAT score                                            (-0.51)            (0.83)
                                                                         1.685             1.583
College is most selective to which student was admitted                 (5.70)            (4.74)
                                                                         0.781             0.555
College is least selective to which student was admitted               (-2.16)           (-4.31)              rejected
                                                                         1.971             1.470
Father is alumnus of this college                                       (3.43)            (1.70)
                                                                        0.785              1.406
Mother is alumna of this college                                       (-0.97)            (1.14)
                                                                         2.176             1.388
Sibling attended or attends this college                                (4.95)            (1.48)              rejected
Distance between college and student's high school, in                   1.004            0.987
hundreds of miles                                                       (0.41)           (-1.10)
Square of distance between college and student's high school,            1.000             1.000
in 10000s of miles                                                      (0.13)            (1.15)
Cube of distance between college and student's high school, in          1.000             1.000
1000000s of miles                                                      (-0.13)           (-1.04)
                                                                         1.301            0.989
College is in-state for the student                                     (2.02)           (-0.07)
                                                                        0.967               1.96
College is public                                                      (-0.18)            (2.88)              rejected
Number of observations                                                   4817              4295
                      2
Likelihood ratio (chi )                                                662.95            555.86
Prob>chi 2                                                                   0                 0
LogLikelihood                                                        -1232.24          -1079.63
Pseudo R 2                                                                 0.21              0.20

Notes: The table shows results from conditional logit estimation of how a student chooses his matriculation college
among the colleges to which he was admitted. The results are shown as odds ratios, with Z-statistics in parentheses
below the odd ratios. Results shown in bold print are odds ratios that are statistically significantly different from 1
with at least 95 percent confidence. Students are divided into two groups, based on the control (private or public) of
their high schools. The right hand column contains the word "rejected" when the hypothesis that the odds ratio for
the two groups are equal is rejected with 95 percent confidence. The source of data is the College Admissions
Project.
                                                                          Table 8
                                               The Share of Students who would Matriculate at Another College
                                   If They were to Obey the College Choice Model of Students from a Different Background
                                       Predictions Based on Conditional Logit Regressions Shown in Tables 4 through 6


                                                                                   Students whose Parents' College
                                              Students whose Parent Income is:             Selectivity was:              Students whose High School was:
                                              Actually Low,      Actually High,     Actually Low,     Actually High,   Actually Public, Actually Private,
                                             Acting Like High   Acting like Low   Acting as though   Acting as though Acting like Private Acting like Public
                                             Income Students    Income Students   it had been High   it had been Low   School Students     School Students
Share who would matriculate at a different
college in their choice set                       0.315             0.417              0.244              0.238              0.167              0.172
                                                      Table 9
                          Do Aid Variables that "Should Not Matter" Affect College Choice?
                             Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                      (table and notes continue on next page)
                                                                              (1)                (2)       (3)
                                                                           1.108              0.968     0.968
Grant (in thousands), specific to the college                            (14.81)             (-1.46)   (-1.45)
                                                                           1.068              1.062    1.060
Loan (in thousands) from the college                                      (4.03)             (3.67)    (3.54)
                                                                           1.125              1.207    1.204
W ork study amount (in thousands) from the college                        (1.64)             (2.53)    (2.48)
College's tuition (in thousands), in-state or out-of-state as               0.980             0.998    0.998
appropriate to the student                                                (-1.90)            (-0.65)   (0.50)
                                                                            0.903              0.943    0.946
College's room and board (in thousands)                                   (-3.28)            (-1.70)   (-1.62)
College's per-pupil instructional spending                                 1.020              1.020    1.018
(in thousands)                                                            (6.02)             (6.05)    (5.64)
                                                                                                       1.121
Grant is this share of college's per-pupil instructional spending                                      (0.50)
                                                                                              1.860    1.838
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                                              (6.15)    (6.00)
                                                                                              1.479    1.475
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                                                (1.90)    (1.88)
                                                                                              0.792     0.801
Grant is this share of college's tuition                                                     (-0.98)   (-0.91)
                                                                                             27.551    23.511
Grant is this share of college's comprehensive cost                                           (3.70)    (3.30)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles above                     0.959              0.952    0.951
college's average SAT score                                               (-6.45)            (-7.31)   (-7.36)
Student's SAT score is this number of percentiles below                    1.001              0.998     0.997
college's average SAT score                                               (0.11)             (-0.27)   (-0.18)
                                                                           1.631              1.641    1.644
College is most selective to which student was admitted                   (7.41)             (7.38)    (7.39)
                                                                            0.694              0.676    0.664
College is least selective to which student was admitted                  (-4.23)            (-4.43)   (-4.60)
                                                                           1.703              1.629    1.651
Father is alumnus of this college                                         (3.62)             (3.21)    (3.26)
                                                                           1.001              1.013     0.988
Mother is alumna of this college                                          (0.19)             (0.06)    (-0.06)
                                                                           1.896              1.907    1.975
Sibling attended or attends this college                                  (5.04)             (4.99)    (5.21)
Distance between college and student's high school, in hundreds            1.000              1.003    1.003
of miles                                                                  (0.06)             (0.36)    (0.42)
Square of distance between college and student's high school, in           1.000              1.000    1.000
10000s of miles                                                           (1.03)             (1.20)    (1.20)
Cube of distance between college and student's high school, in             1.000              1.000     1.000
1000000s of miles                                                         (-1.01)            (-1.19)   (-1.19)
                                                                           1.162              1.191    1.220
College is in-state for the student                                       (1.59)             (1.80)    (2.03)
                                                                                 (1)               (2)               (3)
                                                                               1.201             1.513           1.536
College is public                                                             (1.26)            (2.73)           (2.80)
Number of observations                                                         9112              9112              9112
Likelihood ratio (chi2)                                                     1171.41           1283.68          1275.08
Prob>chi 2                                                                         0                 0                0
LogLikelihood                                                              -2335.57          -2255.89         -2232.17
Pseudo R 2                                                                       0.2              0.22             0.22

Notes: The table shows results from conditional logit estimation of how a student chooses his matriculation college
among the colleges to which he was admitted. The results are shown as odds ratios, with Z-statistics in parentheses
below the odd ratios. Results shown in bold print are associated with coefficients that are statistically significantly
different from zero with at least 95 percent confidence. The source of data is the College Admissions Project.
                                                   Table 10
                    Students who Gain and Lose Lifetime Present Value by Responding to Aid
               Top Panel: Students May Re-Choose Among All Colleges W hen All Aid is Zeroed Out
                                          (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                              average change average change average change in         average change
                       percentage                   in college in instructional   median peer's            in lifetime
                       of students   average    consumption, spending, due to SAT percentile,          present value,
                       who are in    value of due to student's        student's due to student's      due to student's
                        this group        aid response to aid response to aid   response to aid       response to aid
 students who gain
    lifetime present
 value, due to their
     response to aid         30.8     11,534             -171                -26               -2.7            44,075
 students who lose
   lifetime present
 value, due to their
    response to aid          38.9      2,793             -960           -14,538                -8.5           -76,096

The remaining 30.3 percent of students would not change their college choice in response to aid being zeroed out,
largely because they actually received little or no aid.

This table is based on predictions from conditional logit equations like that estimated in column (2) of Table 9. See
text for details.
                                                     Appendix Table 1
                                  Description of the Colleges to W hich Students Applied,
                                        from the College Admission Project Data

Variable                                                                 Mean       Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
Matriculated at this college                                           0.1813          0.3853         0         1
Admitted to this college                                               0.6566          0.4748         0         1
Applied early to this college                                          0.1281          0.3389         0         2
W ithdrew application from this college,
usually after early decision elsewhere                                 0.0516          0.2212         0         1
Grants specific to this college                                     1777.8140      4933.3550          0     36000
Loans from this college                                              413.4718      1855.6370          0     36548
W ork study amount from this college                                 110.7380       482.5519          0     15000
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                        0.1291          0.3354         0         1
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                          0.0137          0.1161         0         1
Grant is this share of tuition                                         0.1229          0.3676         0         8
Grant is this share of comprehensive cost                              0.0722          0.1902         0         2
Student was a recruited athlete at this college                        0.0327          0.1779         0         1
Father is an alumnus of this college                                   0.0314          0.1744         0         1
Mother is an alumna of this college                                    0.0209          0.1431         0         1
Sibling attended or attends this college                               0.0388          0.1932         0         1
College is public                                                      0.2631          0.4403         0         1
College is private not-for-profit                                      0.7328          0.4436         0         1
College is international, except for Canadian colleges
which are treated as U.S. colleges                                     0.0040          0.0633         0         1
College's median SAT score, in national percentiles                   83.8816        12.0390         14        98
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles above
college's median SAT score                                             8.7393          9.5927         0        82
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles below
college's median SAT score                                             1.7454          5.6654         0        68
In-state tuition                                                  18181.2300       9198.9780          0     27472
Out-of-state tuition                                              20497.7600       5890.7530          0     27472
Tuition that applies to this student                              19276.9000       7965.1400          0     27472
Room and board at this college                                      6975.7190      1244.3320          0     10299
In-state comprehensive cost of this college                       25745.7900       9935.6770          0     35125
Out-of-state comprehensive cost of this college                   28059.7200       6681.4230          0     35125
Comprehensive cost that applies to this student                   26841.9800       8662.0230          0     35125
Per-pupil expenditure on students (instruction, student
services, academic support, scholarships) of this college,
in thousands                                                          29.9219        17.1009          2       146
Instructional per-pupil expenditure of this college, in
thousands                                                             19.8160        12.5401          2        72
College is in-state                                                    0.2666          0.4422         0         1
Distance between student's high school and this college, in
miles                                                                673.2152       873.1788          0      5774
College is in AK                                                       0.0001          0.0106         0         1
College is in AL                                                       0.0038          0.0613         0         1
Variable             Mean    Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
College is in AR    0.0003     0.0168          0         1
College is in AZ    0.0039     0.0622          0         1
College is in CA    0.1388     0.3458          0         1
College is in CO    0.0078     0.0881          0         1
College is in CT    0.0533     0.2246          0         1
College is in DC    0.0260     0.1591          0         1
College is in DE    0.0025     0.0497          0         1
College is in FL    0.0111     0.1047          0         1
College is in GA    0.0169     0.1290          0         1
College is in HI    0.0024     0.0491          0         1
College is in IA    0.0032     0.0561          0         1
College is in ID    0.0009     0.0300          0         1
College is in IL    0.0458     0.2090          0         1
College is in IN    0.0166     0.1278          0         1
College is in KS    0.0014     0.0375          0         1
College is in KY    0.0005     0.0212          0         1
College is in LA    0.0070     0.0836          0         1
College is in MA    0.1339     0.3406          0         1
College is in MD    0.0199     0.1395          0         1
College is in ME    0.0159     0.1250          0         1
College is in MI    0.0173     0.1303          0         1
College is in MN    0.0075     0.0865          0         1
College is in MO    0.0217     0.1456          0         1
College is in MS    0.0007     0.0260          0         1
College is in MT    0.0006     0.0249          0         1
College is in NC    0.0411     0.1986          0         1
College is in NE    0.0012     0.0344          0         1
College is in NH    0.0170     0.1293          0         1
College is in NJ    0.0311     0.1735          0         1
College is in NM    0.0011     0.0327          0         1
College is in NV    0.0005     0.0225          0         1
College is in NY    0.1187     0.3235          0         1
College is in OH    0.0201     0.1405          0         1
College is in OK    0.0011     0.0335          0         1
College is in OR    0.0058     0.0759          0         1
College is in PA    0.0723     0.2589          0         1
College is in RI    0.0320     0.1761          0         1
College is in SC    0.0037     0.0604          0         1
College is in TN    0.0106     0.1023          0         1
College is in TX    0.0185     0.1346          0         1
College is in UT    0.0032     0.0565          0         1
College is in VA    0.0361     0.1866          0         1
College is in VT    0.0110     0.1042          0         1
College is in W A   0.0088     0.0936          0         1
Variable                                                           Mean        Std. Dev.   Minimum     Maximum
College is in W I                                                 0.0061         0.0781            0          1
College is in W V                                                 0.0001         0.0075            0          1
College is in W Y                                                 0.0003         0.0168            0          1

Source: 17,871 college application events among the 3240 students in the College Admissions Project sample.
                                                    Appendix Table 2
                               Description of the Colleges at W hich Students Matriculated,
                                        from the College Admission Project Data

Variable                                                            Mean         Std. Dev.    Minimum   Maximum
Matriculated at this college                                       1.0000           0.0000          1         1
Admitted to this college                                           1.0000           0.0000          1         1
Applied early to this college                                      0.3142           0.4722          0         2
W ithdrew application from this college,
usually after early decision elsewhere                             0.0000           0.0000          0         0
Grants specific to this college                                4029.0040        7051.1670           0     36000
Loans from this college                                        1020.0040        2721.6190           0     36348
W ork study amount from this college                             296.3472        768.4207           0     15000
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                    0.2692           0.4436          0         1
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                      0.0343           0.1820          0         1
Grant is this share of tuition                                     0.2875           0.5517          0         7
Grant is this share of comprehensive cost                          0.1665           0.2728          0         2
Student was a recruited athlete at this college                    0.0402           0.1964          0         1
Father is an alumnus of this college                               0.0664           0.2491          0         1
Mother is an alumna of this college                                0.0396           0.1949          0         1
Sibling attended or attends this college                           0.0831           0.2761          0         1
College is public                                                  0.2843           0.4512          0         1
College is private not-for-profit                                  0.7086           0.4562          0         1
College is international, except for Canadian colleges
which are treated as U.S. colleges                                 0.0068           0.0822          0         1
College's median SAT score, in national percentiles               83.4215         12.5494          32        98
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles above
college's median SAT score                                         8.4548           9.1831          0        53
Student's SAT score is this many percentiles below
college's median SAT score                                         1.4351           4.8994          0        50
In-state tuition                                              17431.8300        9512.6270           0     27472
Out-of-state tuition                                          19841.1300        6370.6670           0     27472
Tuition that applies to this student                          18340.3700        8599.1560           0     27472
Room and board at this college                                 6821.8120        1352.4620           0     10299
In-state comprehensive cost of this college                   24881.0900       10409.1500           0     35125
Out-of-state comprehensive cost of this college               27285.9500        7335.3150           0     35125
Comprehensive cost that applies to this student               25792.1800        9469.9140           0     35125
Per-pupil expenditure on students (instruction, student
services, academic support, scholarships) of this
college, in thousands                                             29.6174         17.6089           2        78
Instructional per-pupil expenditure of this college, in
thousands                                                         19.4170         12.4205           2        72
College is in-state                                                0.3368           0.4727          0         1
Distance between student's high school and this
college, in miles                                                575.6313        827.2526           0      5769
College is in AK                                                   0.0000           0.0000          0         0
College is in AL                                                   0.0050           0.0705          0         1
Variable             Mean    Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
College is in AR    0.0006     0.0250          0         1
College is in AZ    0.0053     0.0727          0         1
College is in CA    0.1199     0.3249          0         1
College is in CO    0.0094     0.0963          0         1
College is in CT    0.0537     0.2255          0         1
College is in DC    0.0265     0.1608          0         1
College is in DE    0.0022     0.0467          0         1
College is in FL    0.0203     0.1410          0         1
College is in GA    0.0131     0.1138          0         1
College is in HI    0.0044     0.0660          0         1
College is in IA    0.0025     0.0499          0         1
College is in ID    0.0022     0.0467          0         1
College is in IL    0.0571     0.2321          0         1
College is in IN    0.0190     0.1367          0         1
College is in KS    0.0025     0.0499          0         1
College is in KY    0.0006     0.0250          0         1
College is in LA    0.0050     0.0705          0         1
College is in MA    0.1218     0.3271          0         1
College is in MD    0.0187     0.1356          0         1
College is in ME    0.0140     0.1177          0         1
College is in MI    0.0194     0.1378          0         1
College is in MN    0.0053     0.0727          0         1
College is in MO    0.0212     0.1442          0         1
College is in MS    0.0012     0.0353          0         1
College is in MT    0.0012     0.0353          0         1
College is in NC    0.0390     0.1937          0         1
College is in NE    0.0022     0.0467          0         1
College is in NH    0.0172     0.1299          0         1
College is in NJ    0.0284     0.1662          0         1
College is in NM    0.0009     0.0306          0         1
College is in NV    0.0022     0.0467          0         1
College is in NY    0.1065     0.3085          0         1
College is in OH    0.0178     0.1322          0         1
College is in OK    0.0022     0.0467          0         1
College is in OR    0.0078     0.0880          0         1
College is in PA    0.0743     0.2623          0         1
College is in RI    0.0300     0.1705          0         1
College is in SC    0.0066     0.0807          0         1
College is in TN    0.0140     0.1177          0         1
College is in TX    0.0225     0.1483          0         1
College is in UT    0.0091     0.0947          0         1
College is in VA    0.0406     0.1974          0         1
College is in VT    0.0106     0.1025          0         1
College is in W A   0.0094     0.0963          0         1
Variable                                                        Mean        Std. Dev.    Minimum         Maximum
College is in W I                                              0.0059          0.0768             0            1
College is in W V                                              0.0000          0.0000             0            0
College is in W Y                                              0.0006          0.0250             0            1

Source: 3240 college matriculation events among the students in the College Admissions Project sample.
                                            Appendix Table 3
 Are Students from Low and High Income Families Equally Sensitive to Aid Variables that "Should Not Matter"?
                     Selected Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                                                             Parents Income is:
                                                                             Medium                Medium
                                                                  Low          Low                   High          High
                                                                  2.584          2.538                2.048       1.313
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                  (3.11)         (4.39)               (4.26)       (1.24)
                                                                  1.004         0.971                 1.989       1.687
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                    (0.01)        (-0.06)               (2.00)       (1.28)
                                                                 0.760          0.540                 1.153       0.621
Grant is this share of college's tuition                        (-0.42)        (-1.44)               (0.32)      (-0.75)
                                                                10.789         24.333               16.695        6.585
Grant is this share of college's comprehensive cost              (0.97)         (2.84)               (1.24)       (1.85)
regression includes all other variables shown in Table 9?           yes               yes               yes          yes

                                               Appendix Table 4
            Are Students whose Parents Attended More and Less Selective Colleges Equally Sensitive to
                                     Aid Variables that "Should Not Matter"?
                        Selected Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                                                                    Parents' College is:
                                                                             low              medium                high
                                                                      selectivity           selectivity       selectivity
                                                                           1.927                  1.887           1.236
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                           (5.32)                  (2.88)          (0.62)
                                                                           1.277                  1.671           2.599
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                             (1.00)                  (1.00)          (1.44)
                                                                           0.789                   0.718          2.227
Grant is this share of college's tuition                                  (-0.80)                 (-0.74)         (0.59)
                                                                          27.988                  30.870          1.315
Grant is this share of college's comprehensive cost                        (3.08)                  (1.87)         (0.06)
regression includes all other variables shown in Table 9?                    yes                     yes             yes

                                               Appendix Table 5
    Are Students from Public and Private Schools Equally Sensitive to Aid Variables that "Should Not Matter"?
                       Selected Estimated Odds Ratios from Conditional Logit Regressions
                                                                      Public High School             Private High School
                                                                                         1.833                    1.934
Grant is called a "scholarship"                                                         (4.69)                    (3.98)
                                                                                         1.519                    1.130
Grant is front-loaded (more in freshman year)                                           (1.74)                    (0.29)
                                                                                        0.782                     0.826
Grant is this share of college's tuition                                               (-0.88)                   (-0.37)
                                                                                       25.484                    20.827
Grant is this share of college's comprehensive cost                                     (2.93)                    (1.88)
regression includes all other variables shown in Table 9?                                   yes                      yes
