                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              CONSTRAINTS ON THE LEVEL AND
                              EFFICIENT USE OF LABOR IN JAPAN

                                              Hiroshi Ono
                                            Marcus E. Rebick


                                          Working Paper 9484
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9484


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




The authors wish to thank Masayuki Kakuho and Hiromi Murata of Recruit Works Institute, Minoru Ito of
the Japan Institute of Labor, Koichiro Masuda, Fumio Ohtake, Kazumi Ota, Yasuo Takahashi, and
participants in the March 2002 NBER-CEPR-EIJS conference and the Oxford Labor Economics Seminar.
All omissions and errors are of course our own. A slightly different version of this paper appears as SSE/EFI
Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance 500. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Hiroshi Ono and Marcus E. Rebick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.
Constraints on the Level and Efficient Use of Labor in Japan
Hiroshi Ono and Marcus E. Rebick
NBER Working Paper No. 9484
February 2003
JEL No. J16, J24, J31, J60, J68

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine a number of personnel practices, laws and regulations that lower the supply of labor
in the Japanese economy. Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of impediments, those that restrict
the movement of labor between firms, and those that discourage women from participating to a

greater extent. Using other OECD countries and especially the United States as a benchmark, we
estimate that removal of these barriers would increase the productive labor supply in Japan by some

13 to 18 percent and thus could raise the potential growth rate of the Japanese economy by roughly
1% per annum over a ten-year period.


Hiroshi Ono                                          Mark Rebick
The European Institute of Japanese Studies           Nissan Institute of Japanese Studies
Stockholm School of Economics                        27 Winchester Road
P.O. Box 6501                                        Oxford, OX2 6NA
S-113 83, Stockholm, SWEDEN                          United Kingdom
Hiroshi.Ono@hhs.se                                   mark.rebick@nissan-institute.oxford.ac.uk
         Japanese labor market institutions have been given substantial credit for
Japan’s enviable growth performance after World War II. The personnel management
system – with its strong job protection, enterprise-based unionism, and intensive
on-the-job training – is especially seen as a factor that allowed Japan to utilize
imported technology so rapidly and successfully. High levels of training, along with
group-oriented activities, have also been linked to the high quality of the Japanese
goods that reached export markets in the 1970s and 1980s. Indeed, many Japanese
workplace practices such as quality-control circles have been adopted to good effect
in the United States and Europe. On the macroeconomic side, the coordinated but
decentralized bargaining system is seen as providing for the wage flexibility that
allowed Japan to adjust to supply shocks, such as the two oil crises, more rapidly
than most other OECD economies. Finally, the egalitarian nature of the compensation
system has been credited with providing the widespread prosperity that underlies
domestic demand.
         The prolonged slowdown of the 1990s has led many to question whether the
institutions that were appropriate for the past are as wholesome for the health of
the contemporary and future economy. In particular, the rise in the unemployment rate
since 1998 from around 3% to almost 6% has changed views about the macroeconomic role
played by the labor market.
         This disillusionment can be quickly summarized. Strong job protection makes
it difficult for companies to restructure their activities effectively in response
to the changing external environment. This means companies are less likely to improve
their balance sheets. A poorly developed external labor market impedes movement of
experienced and knowledgeable employees to companies where they might be more valuable.
The government, lacking confidence in the external labor market to absorb the
unemployed, may have been reluctant to push for more drastic resolution of the bad
debt problem that hampers the financial system. Under conditions of weak demand,
the coordinated bargaining system makes it difficult for employees to increase their
incomes and thereby may reduce domestic demand. Wage restraint is contributing to
the deflation that currently is making difficulties for the effective use of monetary
policy to revive economic growth. The aging of the work force makes it difficult to
maintain a system where rewards are delayed and provided through promotion.
         In this paper we address impediments to growth of the labor supply that are
affecting the economy. Broadly, these are barriers to inter-firm mobility for career
employees, especially older men, and the difficulty women face in developing
meaningful careers after taking time off to raise children. The latter depresses
the labor force participation of women, especially the middle-aged who have high
educational attainment. Both of these issues are closely tied to the Japanese
personnel management system and the legal framework that supports it.
         A third impediment to growth on the labor supply side is the reluctance to
accept large numbers of immigrants into Japan. The outlook is that Japan will continue
with its existing policies in the short- to medium- run, and we do not consider the
issue. We also do not address the way in which the unemployment benefit system may
induce individuals to remain unemployed, or how retirement benefits may encourage
earlier retirement. With respect to the unemployment rate and participation rate
of those over 60, Japan is doing as well, if not better, at using potential labor
resources than other OECD countries. It should be noted that the institutional
features of the economy that we view as impediments would be significantly less
problematic if the economy was growing at the rates seen through the 1980s. If growth


                                                                                    1
could be restored to 1980s levels through a surge in consumer and investment demand,
much of the estimated losses to labor input might well be eliminated. However, that
is unlikely to happen.
         In the next section we provide an outline of the state of Japanese labor in
2001, focusing on the extent to which institutions long seen as characteristic of
the Japanese labor market have stayed the same or been changing. Next, labor law and
its consequences are discussed. We then look at impediments to the mobility of career
employees (primarily men) that may be affecting growth. Reasons why female labor
force participation may be lower than levels seen in the United States are then
examined. A quantitative perspective of the barriers is presented, including their
overall implications for economic growth. The role of government policy in removing
barriers is taken up, and we outline some areas in need of further research.


1   The Employment System

Japanese labor markets and institutions have been affected by the slump in growth
that began in the 1990s, but many of the main features remain largely intact. Widely
noted aspects of the “Japanese model” such as enterprise-based unionism, low
inter-firm mobility, low unemployment, compensation within gender groups that is
highly determined by age and seniority, large gender gaps in pay and promotions, and
widespread use of mandatory retirement systems have not dissolved in the face of the
slowdown, despite press reports.

1.1 Evidence of Only Minor Change
Evidence that the system has seen only minor change includes the following seven
points.
1        Unions remain enterprise based, although union density has fallen steadily
from around 35% at the time of the first oil shock (1973) to 21% in 2000.
2        Job tenure for full-time regular employees remains high (Chuma 1997) and may
even be increasing for some age groups.
3        Inter-firm mobility rates remain virtually unchanged (Rebick 2000) although
the number of employees forced to move because of bankruptcies has risen since the
Asian economic crisis of 1998.
4        The 5.4% unemployment rate in May 2002, although high by Japanese standards,
remains lower than the OECD average of 6.9% (OECD standardized rates).
5        Although performance- and results-related pay are becoming more important
components of compensation arrangements, there is still a close relationship between
age (and, to a lesser extent, seniority) and pay. Japanese age-wage profiles are
steep mainly because blue-collar workers as well as white-collar workers see large
increases in pay with age and seniority. With the exception of the managerial class
of employees, the variance of pay within age groups remains stable (Genda and Rebick
2000). All of this is testimony to the continuing presence of enterprise unions and
the influence of large, unionized firms on wage-setting practices outside the
organized sector.
6       The gender pay gap has narrowed for full-time employees (especially the young),
but the gap in hourly pay between part-time female workers and male full-time employees
remains large. Because some 40% of women work part-time, the overall gender gap remains
large. Among eight OECD countries including Korea, only in Japan is gender – rather


                                                                                     2
than occupation, age, or industry – the most important determinant of wages
(Tachibanaki 1998).
7       Japan has relatively few women in senior management or director positions
compared with the United States or United Kingdom.

1.2 Examples of Change
In spite of these observations, the Japanese model is evolving. Further, most of the
changes appear to be permanent, rather than temporary accommodations to economic
conditions or the need for restructuring.
1        The proportion of individuals who are part-time or contract workers is
increasing. In particular the percentage of employees working part-time has been
rising steadily since the 1960s, reaching highs of 39% of women and 13% of men in
1999 (OECD 2001). The number of temporary agency workers remains low at about 1%
of the work force, but has been increasing rapidly with liberalization of the laws
regulating agency work.
2        There has been a decline in the family-based enterprise sector. Some women
who would have been family workers, and men who would have become self-employed after
mandatory retirement, are now in the part-time employee labor force. Although some
of this trend may be due to small businesses suffering during the 1990s, much of it
is due to other aspects of the fundamental restructuring of the economy that is taking
place.
3        Managerial compensation is becoming much more sensitive to various measures
of performance. This is shown not only by surveys across companies, but also by the
fact that the variance of pay of middle-aged men with higher education degrees has
been increasing since the mid 1980s (Genda and Rebick 2000).
4        Attitudes are changing, especially among young people. Although the rates
of separation for young workers have not increased much, most young employees say
that they expect to change jobs before mandatory retirement. Cohort effects not
withstanding (Ohtake and Inoki 1997), young workers are quitting jobs at an increasing
rate despite the poor state of the economy. In 1999, 32% of university graduates
and 47% of high-school graduates quit their first jobs within three years, both
increases since 1996 (MOL 1999).
5        There is an increasing level of part-time work among the young. Often
referred to as "freeters," they may be finding it difficult to find desirable full-time
jobs in the current economic climate (Genda 2001). On the other hand, because of
greater affluence, they may feel less pressured into taking jobs they don't really
want.


2   Worker Protection

The most obvious problem facing companies burdened with redundant workers is the
difficulty in shedding workers. There is long-standing agreement between management
and labor in Japan that allows management to move workers around in the company (or
even to loan workers to other companies) in return for a guarantee of employment until
mandatory retirement age (Gordon 1985, 1998). Since the late 1970s this has been
altered somewhat: employees might be sent to other companies prior to mandatory
retirement provided that the guarantee of employment still holds. In most cases,
the original company ensures there are no financial losses to those transferred,


                                                                                     3
making supplemental payments to workers if necessary. Although this is seen as a
commitment by management to labor, which might be upheld in order to maintain the
reputation of the employer (and industrial peace), it is reinforced by Japanese case
law. (The remainder of this section leans heavily on Chuma 1998.)
         Japanese labor law does not, by statute, provide guarantees of continued
employment to employees, except that employers must give 30 days notice of dismissals.
The Japanese constitution, however, enshrines the individual's right to work (Article
27) and the right to a minimum standard of “wholesome and cultured living” (Article
25). On this basis, Japanese courts have interpreted the law to impose four main
standards on employers wishing to dismiss workers. The employer must show that:
1 It is under severe duress, such as facing possible bankruptcy and redundancies
   are unavoidable.
2 It has made efforts to avoid redundancies by taking measures such as cutting
   overtime, hiring freezes, transfers, seconding workers to other companies, or
   seeking voluntary retirements.
3 It has consulted with its labor unions and employees.
4 It has a rational procedure for selecting those to be dismissed.
         This case law developed in the 1950s in reaction to the widespread dismissals
that followed implementation of the disinflationary Dodge Line of 1949-50 and the
numerous industrial disputes that followed. The courts were concerned about
dismissals being used as a way of undermining labor union strength, and the four
conditions were aimed primarily at establishing what constituted unfair labor
practice under postwar labor laws. The courts also established that redress for
violation of these principles is not only that the fired worker must be compensated,
but that the worker must be reinstated with back pay. Again, this was to act as a
deterrent to labor practices deemed unfair.
         The rulings had an effect: in 1975, at the peak of post-oil shock dismissals,
the proportion of separations that were “at the employer’s will” stood at only
10%, compared to 21% in 1954, and through the late 1970s firms in general took every
action to avoid dismissals (Chuma 1998). The case law was further strengthened
through rulings in the late 1970s, at a time when a number of court cases examined
dismissals for the purpose of labor adjustment during the downturn of the mid 1970s.
In the 1970s and after, protection of workers from dismissals was extended to temporary
and fixed-contract workers who had been repeatedly rehired after their contract
expired and even to workers in the first, probationary year of employment.
         Until 1998 the Labor Standards Law limited fixed-term contracts to one year
or less. This was intended to force employers to offer indefinite-period contracts
to employees. After the 1998 revision, the law allows contracts of up to three years,
but only in the case where the employee is over 60, or is in a specialized occupation,
or under other restricted circumstances determined by the Ministry of Health, Labor
and Welfare (MHLW). Further, such a contract is not renewable, except for one year
(Yamakawa 1998). This is a considerable restriction, and has been heavily criticized
(Ohtake 2001, Yashiro 1999).Since 1999 there have been a number of court rulings that
have relaxed and even, in at least one case, dispensed with the framework of the four
conditions, but it is still too early to know what overall effect these rulings will
have (Yamakawa and Araki 2001).

2.1     Consequences
One problem with the level of job protection provided by dismissal case law has been


                                                                                     4
the reluctance of employers to hire employees that they are not sure they wish to
keep indefinitely. There also are negative externalities (Yashiro 1999). We later
deal with one of the more serious of these: the lack of a well-developed external
labor market and the information problems that result.
         Another effect of current law is that it encourages companies to seek
government help in the form of subsidies, protection from competition, and protection
from creditors. Although labor case law was not responsible for this action, it is
part of a general approach that provides economic security through employers rather
than directly from the state or private insurance provision (Noguchi 1995). This
may come at the expense of growth in total factor productivity. For example, Hayashi
and Prescott (2002) note that TFP growth was exceptionally low at 0.8% per annum during
1978-83 when the government took action to subsidize and otherwise support industries
that were in need of restructuring and firms endeavored to avoid dismissals.
         Although arguments can be made for worker protection from the viewpoint of
economic efficiency, there is little rationale for imposing a penalty whereby workers
must be reinstated with back pay. Chuma (1998) argues that it would be better to
simply impose a cash penalty that employers should pay workers who have been dismissed
in violation of the conditions. He also suggests that courts may not be in the best
position to evaluate the financial concerns of the company and that if the "severe
duress" condition is imposed too stringently it may compromise the survival of the
firm over the long run.
         If a firm can no longer produce competitively, its human capital may have
lost value regardless of what the firm is paying the employee. The benefits of worker
protection may be quickly outweighed by the costs when there is a widespread drop
in the value of some kinds of firm-specific human-capital.


3   Barriers to Mobility Between Firms

There are many barriers to mobility in the Japanese labor market. Table 1 gives us
some indication of the problems from the point of view of employees, based on a survey
by Recruit, an employment service. Here, individuals who wanted to change jobs were
asked why they found it difficult to do so. Of course, there also are corresponding
issues on the employer side of the labor market. We analyze all of these beginning
with information problems, skill mismatch, and lack of pension portability. Seniority
pay and age-based discrimination are then taken up, followed by differentials in pay
by firm size and egalitarian pay norms. Job protection, the result of both law and
firms' employment practices, is analyzed as a cause of both excess workers within
firms and skill mismatch.

3.1 Information Problems
A long-standing problem in the Japanese labor market concerns the lack of available
employment information. Commonly, workers do not know exactly (in terms of quality
or quantity) what skills they have, and employers are unclear about the skills they
need. That is, there has been a symmetric lack of information, and this is almost
certainly due to the poor development of the external labor market in an economy with
overall low mobility. “Better information for job seekers” has been a recurrent
slogan in a situation where job postings tend to be ambiguous and crucial information
such as job description and required skills are lacking (JIL 1998).


                                                                                     5
         Employment information can be categorized into extensive information, which
consists of information available to all job-seekers such as firm size and wages,
and intensive information, which is more likely to be insider in nature such as work
norms and work atmosphere of the employer (Rees 1966).           Access to intensive
information is a benefit insofar as it improves the quality of the job match, and
subsequently leads to higher rewards and better job satisfaction (Granovetter 1974,
reporting a study of white-collar males in Boston). Watanabe (1992) explains that
workers are more likely to obtain intensive information through acquaintances or
former employers. According to Recruit's 2001 survey, 41% of job seekers gathered
employment information through “contacts with friends, family and former employers”
and 72% of those found jobs through this channel (equal to 30% of all those who found
jobs). In Granovetter's study, 56% used contacts.
         A labor market that favors informal job-search methods disfavors job-seekers
who are not endowed with network ties or otherwise must seek re-employment through
formal means. Workers seeking employment through direct applications through
employment agencies experience considerable hardship. This includes longer duration
of job-search and a poor quality of match (JIL 1998). This is not a problem peculiar
to Japan.
         In a society where a market for job-changers is only just evolving and
one-fifth of worker surveyed said they “do not know how to look for jobs” it is
not surprising that firms specialized in headhunting and re-employment services are
growing rapidly. Human resource firms are focusing on the information mismatch
between buyers and sellers of labor. Their services include helping employers grasp
which skills are needed, and helping job-seekers identify what types of skills they
have and the options available to them. The government is gradually deregulating
the market for private employment services, including temporary employment agencies,
through revision of the Dispatched Employees Law. All this may lead to improvement.
         Access to privileged information from social networks may not be limited to
employment information. The quantity and quality of social resources are determined
not only by the breadth and depth of an individual’s network of acquaintances, but
also by virtue of belonging to a particular organization. Establishing important
connections with business partners, and gaining trust and reputation within the firm,
are important forms of social resources that workers acquire through their jobs.
However, in most cases, such resources are lost if a worker relocates to a different
establishment. Social resources acquired through business can be a benefit that
facilitates workers’ upward mobility within firms, but it can also be an impediment
to inter-firm mobility as workers fear that they “will lose personal contacts
established through work.”

3.2 Skill Mismatch
Skill mismatch is a problem related to information availability, and it is of
increasing concern in Japan. A survey of OECD economies reports that the Beveridge
curve (which graphs unemployment rates against vacancies) has been shifting outward
in Japan since the 1970s (Nickell and others 2001) and this trend has clearly
accelerated in the late 1990s (Genda and Rebick 2000). This implies more jobs are
available for any given unemployment rate, and that suggests there may be an increasing
mismatch of skills. A survey of businesses and job seekers found that the level of
vacancies (690,000) and applicants (740,000) across 60 occupational categories were
fairly close, but within categories the the ratio of vacancies to applicants ranged


                                                                                     6
from 9.95 to 0.05 (METI-Recruit 2001).
         A lack of necessary qualifications of job applicants, especially in some of
the more specialized occupations such as IT-related work, also is highlighted in the
METI-Recruit study. It is clear information flows must be improved in several ways.
Firms need to convey to those who provide training just what skills they need, and
that information must also reach those seeking training or needing it as a result
of being laid-off. Outplacement departments could do a better job as regards the latter.
Public funds for retraining are offered to both companies and individuals, are and
there proposals to increase the levels.

3.3 Lack of Pension Portability
Closely related to the problem of seniority-based pay (taken up later) is the lack
of portability of private, firm-based pensions. Japan implemented the equivalent
of the US 401(k)-type defined-contribution plans in October 2001. Prior to this,
there were no tax advantages to saving outside of the defined-benefit plans offered
by firms.
         Firm-based pensions take a number of different forms and can make lump-sum
payments or provide annuities after retirement, but they share the characteristics
of offering benefits based on years of service and final base salary. A recipient
with 35 years tenure typically gets two to four years of base pay (that is, not
including semi-annual bonuses), with the higher rates going to the better-educated
employees of large firms (MOL 2000b). Portability problems arise because payouts
often are reduced more than proportionately if an employee leaves before mandatory
retirement. At the same time, an individual with low tenure at mandatory retirement
(due to switching firms) may suffer from a more than proportional reduction in benefits.
In other words, the likely losses in earnings from a move extend to losses in pensions.
         Ichinose (2001) uses pension tables to compute the pension losses that would
be experienced by individuals who leave a large firm (more than 1000 employees) and
move to a smaller firm at lower pay, which is the most common pattern. The losses
are computed assuming that an individual is paid the average for the firm size and
according to tenure. Pension losses can amount to ¥10 million to ¥20 million from
an average pension of ¥35 million, depending on age at separation. The younger the
age, the greater the loss. For this reason, firms, especially large firms, offer
additional lump-sum payments to individuals who leave under early retirement plans.
The additional payments – typically between ¥5 million and ¥10 million – cover some,
but not all of the losses in pension value. In comparison to the overall losses of
up to ¥100 million that may be realized by workers who lose their jobs at large firms
at age 40, these are not large quantities, but as suggested by the responses in Table
1, have some influence on behavior.


4   Seniority and Pay Structure

There are significant tenure effects on earnings from seniority in the Japanese
workplace. The work of Koike (1988), Hashimoto and Raisian (1985) and Mincer and
Higuchi (1988) drew attention to the importance of on-the-job training and the
development of firm-specific human capital for Japanese men. Along with the case
studies and direct surveys of Koike, the latter two papers highlighted the apparently
large increase in earnings with tenure (seniority) in Japan compared to the United


                                                                                     7
States.
         Work by Ohtake (1998) and others using cross-section microdata has, however,
modified this view substantially. First, Ohtake finds that the return to tenure was
smaller than had earlier been reported, even in the past. Second, he shows that the
returns to tenure fell between 1980 and 1992, while rising in the United States. The
cross-sectional data suggest that the increase in earnings attributable to tenure
is 1% to 2% per year in Japan, still somewhat higher than in the United States. This
is mainly, but not entirely, due to the fact that seniority has a much larger effect
on the earnings of Japanese blue-collar workers than their US counterparts.
         Although there may well be an explanation in terms of firm-specific human
capital to support the high returns to tenure in Japan, there are other views of this
pattern that suggest that it may be a compensation policy developed in the 1920s and
strengthened in the immediate postwar period to motivate workers and to provide for
basic needs. In this view, the returns to seniority can be reduced through managerial
reform without having any adverse effect on productivity, if pay-for-performance
systems are introduced. This seems to be what is taking place, albeit at a slow pace
(Rebick 2001). If the returns to seniority were further reduced, this should
naturally raise the rate of mobility and also lessen the motivation of the courts
to maintain such high standards of legal protection. Some of the arguments used by
the courts have made reference to the need for worker protection given the nature
of the Japanese employment system, including the pay accorded to seniority (Chuma
1998).
         What makes the tenure effect so important for Japan, is that average tenure
is higher in Japan than in most other OECD countries for all age categories, Italy
being a notable exception. As a result, middle-aged Japanese employees stand to lose
more by leaving their firm than their counterparts in most other countries. This
is particularly important for the higher-paid employees of large Japanese firms who
have almost double the median tenure of those in smaller firms (Ohtake 1998, Table
4.7). The losses in earnings experienced by workers who leave firms after many years
have an effect on mobility because they will increase resistance to the employer by
unions or workers who know they have the support of the legal system.

4.1 Age-Based Discrimination
A consequence of the long-term employment and seniority systems is that Japanese firms
impose age limits when recruiting and hiring. Workers exceeding the age limit of
the jobs posted continues to be the most common reason for workers not changing jobs
(Recruit 2001a, JIL 2001c). For this reason, here we pay special attention to the
overt age-based discrimination in Japan's labor market.
        Over 90% of Japanese firms impose age restrictions, generally 35 to 40, on
their job openings. There is little variation across industry, firm size, and city
size (JIL 2001a). There are many reasons why firms impose age limits, but they
primarily concern how older workers do not fit into the firm’s current employment
system (Table 2). These reasons make sense in light of the previous discussion.
Because of the prevailing norm of long-term employment, there is still a stigma
attached to older or mid-career job seekers and firms often view them as “hard to
handle” or as “unable to adapt well to the corporate culture.” It is also likely
that many individuals who have lost jobs in other companies are simply not as able,
so a potential employers’ view that they don't adapt well applied in their former
company. The hesitancy to hire mid-career workers is partly rooted in the notion


                                                                                    8
of equity. Indeed, from Table 2 we can infer that the reason for age restrictions
is less because of the “relative ease of hiring young workers” and more because
“older workers do not mix well with younger workers” or “to avoid exceeding the
age structure of previous hires.”
        Under pressure for reform, “guidelines” to abolish age limits in recruiting
and hiring were introduced in October 2001 as part of the revised Employment Measures
Law. However, the guidelines specify 10 cases or exceptions where limits are
acceptable. One exception is phrased almost specifically to prevent disruptions in
the seniority system: "(4) Cases where recruiting or hiring is intended for workers
under a certain age in situations where, in order to make wage payments regardless
of age to new employees, companies will be required to revise present regulations
determining wages mainly in accordance with age (JIL 2001c)."
        As it stands, the guidelines are viewed mainly as a cosmetic gesture; it simply
states that employers should make efforts to abolish age limits. Unlike some
countries, the Japanese guidelines do not impose any penalty for violations. A
cursory glance at job postings after the guidelines went into effect confirms that
the vast majority continue to have age limits. (See, for example,
[employment.yahoo.co.jp/].) It is thus questionable whether they will have any
effective results in the foreseeable future. The experience of other countries
suggests that the problem will not go away even if the law is imposed with greater
force. The high levels of tenure held by Japanese workers, especially in large
companies, mean that their losses of both earnings and specific capital are likely
to present them with even greater problems than their counterparts elsewhere.


5   Firm-size Differentials and Egalitarian Pay Norms

An important stylized fact about mobility in Japan is that employees tend to move
to smaller firms. In 1997 there were 1,670,000 employees who switched firms, and
by definition separations equaled accessions (Employment Trends Survey 1998, Table
10). If we restrict attention to firms with more than 1000 employees, there were
192,000 separations involving inter-firm moves, but only 172,000 accessions. The
main source of this “mobility deficit” for large firms is found in the 50 and over
age groups. One reason for this distorted mobility pattern may be found in the
egalitarian pay norms (described in the next section) and the presence of firm-size
pay differentials.
         Smaller firms pay substantially lower wages than larger ones, even after
differences in worker attributes are taken into account (Tachibanaki and Ohta 1994;
Rebick 1992). The reasons small firms pay less are not completely understood.
Whatever they are, it is unlikely that the underlying causes, many of which are rooted
in Japan’s industrial organization, will change over the short- or medium- term.
As we explain in the next section, the lower average pay levels found in smaller firms
make them more likely to hire older employees.

5.1 Maintaining "Fairness"
Baron (1988) emphasizes the role of peer groups and normative comparisons in shaping
worker assessments of fairness, and explains that worker perceptions of fairness
concerning output and rewards are governed more by social comparison when there is
greater homogeneity among workers.       He explains that work force homogeneity


                                                                                     9
“facilitates identification with peers and co-workers, and that such homogeneity
(is noted to be) greater in Japanese than US facilities” (p 516). Under a system
where wages and promotion are determined primarily by age and seniority, careful
measures are taken to ensure that workers are promoted in accordance with seniority,
and that deviations from the main career track are minimized. Promotion rates among
Japanese establishments do vary across time, firm-size, industry sector, and sectoral
output growth (Ariga, Brunello and Ohkusa 2000). However, Japan-US comparisons have
consistently shown that the variance in wages among Japanese organizations are smaller
than their US counterparts (see, for example, Kalleberg and Lincoln 1988).
         Bringing older workers into the work force disrupts the seniority structure,
and hence the wage structure, because the employment system presumes entry from below.
This is a reason why introduction of pay-for-performance systems that really deliver
high variance in outcomes has been so slow. The preference for egalitarian pay in
the presence of pay systems that have a strong age-consciousness means that firms
often feel that it is necessary to pay mid-career hires as if they had similar seniority
to those of the same age in the firm. For example, a survey of 13,000 establishments
(MOL 2000a) indicates that in the majority of firms surveyed, new employees are in
principle paid approximately the same as existing employees of the same age and
occupation. Only 15% indicated that they would pay the new hires less than their
age cohort, presumably because they lacked firm-specific experience. Since much of
the value of older employees may be firm-specific, they are much less valuable after
changing firms. It is easier for smaller firms, with lower average pay levels to
fit these employees into their pay structure in a way that does not violate the
egalitarian norms of the firm. This is one of the reasons why we see a marked tendency
for older employees to move to smaller firms. Exceptionally able or skilled employees
may stay in the large firm sector or move up to larger firms but, on average, employees
tend to move down the firm-size hierarchy.
         What we wish to emphasize is that it is the combination of seniority- and
age- related pay, preference for egalitarian pay for similar age groups, and the
firm-size differential that distort the pattern of inter-firm mobility in Japan. In
particular, this means that the kinds of jobs that are available to older men in Japan
will be severely restricted. This in turn makes it more difficult for larger firms
to dismiss their employees.


6   Female Labor Force Participation

This section provides an overview of women's involvement in the Japanese labor force.
Following sections analyze specific barriers that have made that involvement less
than it might be. These are exclusion from firms' internal labor markets and various
aspects of the pension and benefit systems. Initiatives to reconcile work and family
life are also taken up.
        Table 3 shows female labor force participation rates and the rates of
part-time work for women in Japan and elsewhere in the OECD. It is clear that Japanese
women, while not having the lowest rate of overall participation, are far from having
the highest. There is therefore room for Japan to increase its labor inputs from
this source. Further, Japanese women are more likely to work part-time (defined as
less than 35 hours per week) than most of their counterparts elsewhere. There are
a number of reasons why these situations exist.


                                                                                     10
         Women are more likely to exit the labor force for child-rearing or other family
responsibilities and later return to the labor force. This exit and re-entry results
in the M-curve pattern of labor force participation rates. The M-curve has flattened
since the early 1990s but as Figure 1 shows, the mass exit of women in their 30s
continues to be a pronounced pattern in international comparisons.
         However, the proportion of women who want to work but cannot also is highest
among the 30s age group. When this proportion is included in the actual participation
rates, we obtain a curve that resembles Western counterparts. This curve, known as
the potential participation rate curve, has received considerable attention in policy
circles concerned with Japanese women’s requirements for reconciling work and family
life. The potential participation rates provide an upper bound of the number of women
who could be employed under conditions where various institutional barriers have been
removed. For example, Osawa (1998), citing results from the 1992 National Survey on
Lifestyle Preferences, reports that actual participation will resemble potential
participation if the proportion of women who would work under conditions of reliable
child care facilities are included.
         Another feature concerns the growth in part-time employment. As Figure 2
shows, the proportion of women in regular employment has changed little since 1965.
However, there has been a remarkable transition from the informal sector
(self-employed and family workers) to part-time employment. This is attributable
mainly to changes in industrial structure: a decline in agricultural employment and
family-run work, a rise in work opportunities in firms (Nagase 1997), and a relative
improvement of female wages (Shimada and Higuchi 1985).
         Women’s working patterns are better understood by first accounting for their
non-market activities. Although expectations and attitudes concerning traditional
gender division of labor are declining, Japanese women still face pressure to remain
as full-time mothers for children under school age, and must maintain flexible work
patterns to accommodate their non-market responsibilities. The Japanese government
is attempting to change this situation through measures such as the New Angel Plan,
which includes expansion of child care arrangements (MHLW 2001, p 248-51).
         Compounding these supply-side problems are demand-side impediments such as
the difficulty women face in being hired into the internal labor market, and
disincentives stemming from the unintended consequences in the tax and benefit system.


7   Exclusion from Internal Labor Market

Both men and women face problems if they change firms or leave the labor market for
a time. Women are far more likely to temporarily leave the labor force. Japanese
firms, especially the more desirable employers, typically create an internal labor
market. This involves extensive training within the firm that presumes a long-term
relationship between workers and employers. Employers thus seek workers who plan
to remain with the firm over a long period, so that the costs of their investments
will not be lost. Because women are more likely to exit for reasons of marriage or
child-rearing, they face statistical discrimination (see, for example, Brinton 1989).
High-status positions in the seniority system are awarded to workers with
long-standing tenure, so few women reach the upper echelons. Moreover, although
Japanese women may enter large firms in equal proportions to men, only a very small
proportion of the women even enter career-track positions. It is not that there has


                                                                                     11
been a "glass ceiling" in Japan, it is that there has not even been a ladder.
         The common route for women is to re-enter the labor force as part-time workers.
Women who re-enter the market tend to find employment in smaller firms. In fact,
Saso (1990) explains that older Japanese women are much more concentrated than young
women in small firms and unskilled blue-collar occupations. Better educated married
women with children are more likely to remain non-participants, other things equal.
This may be because the available jobs are not interesting or otherwise attractive
to such women, who may prefer to develop non-market (leisure) activities.
         Using census data for Japan and the United States, Brinton and Ngo (1993)
estimate the index of gender segregation for the two countries in two occupational
categories – managers and administrators, and unskilled blue-collars. They find that
among managers and administrators segregation is greater in Japan, and the segregation
is greater among older age groups in Japan, while it remains stable across all age
groups in the US. Among unskilled blue-collar occupations, segregation is greater
in the United States, and it decreases with age in Japan, while it increases with
age in the US.
         These findings are consistent with the M-curve pattern of labor force
participation among Japanese women. The likelihood of their placement into the
internal labor market at the port of entry is lower than men’s, but their attrition
rate is even greater, as large numbers of women exit the labor force for family duties.
When they re-enter, they do so into unskilled occupations. This pattern of labor
mobility results in higher gender segregation among management occupations and lower
gender segregation among unskilled occupations for older workers.


8   Tax and Benefit Systems

The structure of tax and benefit schemes distorts the labor supply behavior of married
women in part-time employment. For example, second earned income are treated in such
a way that the after-tax income of some households may actually decline if the second
income exceeds the limit (usually around ¥1 million per year). (Tax exempt status
and pension benefits for spouses are not gender specific in Japan but, as we are
analyzing their impact on married women in general and those who are not their family's
primary wage earner in particular, we refer only to women.)
         In general, the schemes originally were introduced to protect married women
from declines in household income when they moved from market work to household work.
However, because they rest on the implicit assumption that married women should remain
as full-time housewives, the unintended consequences of such “policies to protect
full-time housewives” (Higuchi 1995) have come under severe scrutiny amidst
increasingly diversifying patterns of women’s employment. There is strong evidence
that women in Japan adjust employment hours and annual income so as not to exceed
the critical exemption levels. (Horioka 1999).
         As a good basis for discussion, Table 4 presents 1990 and 2001 surveys that
examine how employment patterns of married women in part-time positions are affected
by taxes and benefits. An increasing number of respondents - 36% in 1990 and 49%
in 2001 - adjusted their employment level in response to these policies. Moreover,
70 percent of the wives of salaried workers responded that they will increase their
work hours if these policies were removed. (National Survey on Lifestyle Preferences,
cited in Nagase 2001). Clearly, the proportion of women who withhold labor as a


                                                                                     12
consequence of such policies is not negligible.
        The following discussion focuses on three factors – the tax exempt status
of spouses, social security programs, and fringe benefits provided by employers –
and examines how they may constitute disincentives to married women’s employment.
A noteworthy pattern observed across the three factors is that the adjustments in
labor supply are more pronounced among educated women (Abe and Ohtake 1997, Higuchi
1995). There are three principal explanations for this. First, education is
positively correlated with wages, so higher-educated women reach the critical level
of earnings more quickly than lower-educated women. Second, higher-educated women
have better knowledge of the lower and upper bounds of various exemptions and respond
more sensitively. Three, wives’ education is positively correlated with husbands’
education (hence higher husbands’ earnings), so they may have less incentive to work.
Whatever the reasons, such an incentive structure depresses the rate of return to
education for women, and discourages the younger generation of women from pursuing
higher education.

8.1 Tax Code
The income tax code in Japan has undergone several revisions in the postwar period.
The 1950 revision introduced a system that placed the tax burden on individual income
instead of household income. However, because the per capita disposable income of
a household declines as the number of dependents increases, the system also introduced
exemptions for part of spousal income. In the latest version, introduced in 1988,
spouse’s income was tax exempt up to ¥700,000 annually, after which for each ¥50,000
incremental increase in income, the exemption decreased ¥50,000, so the exemption
became zero at ¥1.4 million. This was an improvement compared to its predecessor
because it eliminates kinks or discontinuities in (after-tax) household budgets.
Still, even with the revisions, the marginal tax rate for households is higher when
the spouse’s income is between ¥1 million and ¥1.35 million, than when it is over
¥1.35 million.
        Using the General Survey on Part-time Workers Conditions, Abe and Ohtake
(1997) examine the labor force participation rates of married women in part-time
positions as a function of their annual earnings and show that the distribution is
concentrated around the ¥1 million mark, with a significant drop in participation
for earnings over that. Nagase (2001) shows similar results using monthly income (not
annual income). Abe and Ohtake further show that the distribution of work-hours
becomes a bimodal distribution when adjusted for hourly wages, with spikes
concentrated around the hours where the budget constraints are discontinuous. An
increase in wages implies that workers reach the ceiling more quickly, so the
consequence is that workers work less hours. Put differently, there is no incentive
for married women to increase their supply of labor under the current system (Osawa
1993).
        There also is ample evidence that non-convexities in the household budget
distort the labor supply of women. Higuchi (1995) and Osawa (1993) present theoretical
discussion of the impact of tax exemption schemes on women’s labor supply, before
and after the revision of 1988.

8.2 Benefits and Pensions
Features of the social security system have been criticized for causing distortions
in the labor supply of women. Under the current system, contributions to health


                                                                                   13
insurance and public pensions are exempt for spouses provided employment hours do
not exceed 75% of hours worked by regular full-time workers and annual income does
not exceed ¥1.3 million. (The physically challenged and workers over 60 can earn
¥1.8 million.) In addition, contributions to unemployment insurance are not required
of a spouse with an annual income less than ¥900,000 who works less than 20 hours
per week. Hatta and Kimura (1993) argue that the current pension system clearly
favors households with full-time housewives, and that the removal of such “artificial
barriers” to women’s employment will encourage more women to seek full-time
employment. The rise in regular employment will increase the base of pension payments
and subsequently alleviate the current imbalance between payments and receipts in
the pension system.
         The labor supply of married women is further constrained by the fringe
benefits provided by their husband’s companies. Abe and Ohtake (1997) suggest this
is the most important barrier to married women earning more than ¥1 million per year.
Higuchi (1995) reports that over 80% of Japanese companies provide fringe benefits
for employee dependents (such as special benefits for families and children),
averaging ¥9300 per month in 1992, but 60% of the companies will terminate benefits
if spousal income exceeds a certain level, usually around ¥1 million. The value of
the benefit may not be substantial sum, but it affects the employment of 12% to 16%
of married women (Table 4).


9   Initiatives to Reconcile Work and Family Life

Under the Child Care Leave and Family Care Leave Law, child care leave became mandatory
for enterprises with more than 30 employees, and family care leave became mandatory
for all enterprises. Employees receive 25% of their wages while on leave. Despite
this, a mere 0.6% of male workers took child care leave following the birth of a child
(MOL 1997). The vast majority who take leave are women. Some 70% of women quit instead
of taking maternity leave, citing reasons such as “it was not the right climate at
work” (from the 1996 National Survey on Family Planning, cited in Breslin 1997.)
         Companies that have re-employment schemes, where former employees are hired
back, receive subsidies to facilitate re-employment of women. The system is
beneficial to both workers and employers insofar as it allows recovery of previous
investment in employer-specific skills (Imada 1998). However, the proportion of
companies that have the system stood at just 21% in 1996. Moreover, the system is
subject to numerous terms and conditions. For example, only 14% of these firms will
re-employ their returnees as regular employees. In short, the current system does
not offer particularly promising prospects for women who seek re-employment.
         The presence of small children dramatically reduces Japanese women’s labor
supply (Hill 1989; Nagase 1997; Ogawa and Ermisch 1996), to a degree beyond that
witnessed in Western societies. For example, Tusya, Bumpass. and Choe (2000) show
that the percentage of wives employed among households with preschool age children
is 37% in Japan and 58% in the United States. Studies have shown that maternity leave
policies and access to child care facilities increase women’s job continuity (with
the same employer) or re-entry into the labor force (Nakamura and Ueda 1998). In
particular, Higuchi, Abe, and Waldfogel (1997) show that child care leave had a
positive and significant effect on married-woman job continuity in Japan, the United
States, and United Kingdom, but the marginal effect was found to be largest in Japan.


                                                                                    14
Although the number of women who take advantage of child care leave may be small,
the authors argue that their findings are encouraging. They conclude that what is
required is not only for companies to install child care policies, but to ensure an
environment that allows workers to take advantage of such policies.
         In response to growing worker demands, some Japanese companies have
introduced “family-friendly” policies, or measures that help employees reconcile
the claims of work and family life (Sato 2000). Flexible working schedules, subsidies
for the costs of family care, and provision of child care facilities in the workplace
are common forms of these policies. The policies are a private initiative, but the
MHLW has set up a system of “awards for family-friendly firms” to encourage their
spread. The need for such policies is a high-priority issue in light of the changing
values among Japanese workers. Survey results show that the proportion of men and
women who support the traditional gender division of labor is rapidly decreasing,
while the proportion of men and women who desire a balance between family and work
is increasing. (Consider, for example, the 1999 NHK survey cited in Sato 2000.)
         However, the implementation of family-friendly policies in Japanese firms
remains limited. A Ministry of Labor survey in 1997 found that 51% of Japanese firms
had no family-friendly policies apart from the legal requirements. The survey found
great variation over firm size and industry, with large firms not surprisingly doing
the most. Close to 100% of establishments with more than 500 employees had
family-friendly policies of some kind, averaging 11.7 policies in place (out of a
possible 24) versus 44% and 3 policies among establishments with fewer than 30
employees. By industry, over 95% of firms in finance and insurance had policies,
averaging 7.8, while in construction it was just 40% and 1.5 policies (1996 Survey
on Women Workers’ Employment Management, cited in Sato 2000).
         A common way for Japanese families to reconcile work and family life is to
depend on extended family: that is, their children's grandparents (Morgan and Hirosima
1983). Empirical studies have found that co-residence with grandparents greatly
increases the probability of women’s entry into regular employment (Nagase 1997),
and increases employment hours (Tsuya, Bumpass, and Choe 2000). However, it should
be noted that the proportion of elderly in need of care is increasing, and the burden
of care will likely fall on women (Ogawa and Ermisch 1996, Osawa 1990). Hence, reliance
on grandparents to support women’s work-lives cannot be a long-term solution.


10   Quantifying the Barriers

Our approach to understanding the extent to which problems in the labor market are
affecting economic growth is based on simple growth accounting and looks at the medium
term. We look for unutilized (or under-utilized) labor assets and assume that they
can be moved into production evenly over a given period. This lets us know how much
the potential growth of the labor input could be altered if the impediments to the
supply of this labor were removed. The resulting figure can then be multiplied by
labor’s share of national output (roughly 70% in the Japanese case) to yield a
potential increase in output to the economy. This contribution is a one-time increase
but, for a fixed period, represents an increase in the potential growth rate. The
calculation is necessarily crude, and depends a lot on the assumptions behind the
estimates of the amount of labor that is not being utilized. Still, this is a useful
exercise to gain some idea of the scale of the losses experienced by the economy from


                                                                                    15
labor market supply problems.
        We divide losses into four categories. One is excess labor being carried
by firms that are avoiding firing workers. We include in this category the extent
to which employers are unable to dismiss workers whose productivity is low due to
mismatch, although we do not treat them separately. The second is losses from factors
that may be increasing the extent of mismatch in the economy and thereby raising the
natural rate of unemployment. The third relates to women working part time and the
fourth to women not working at all.

10.1 Excess Labor
It is difficult to know the extent to which firms are carrying excess labor. MHLW
in its quarterly Survey of the Labor Economy (Rōdō Keizai Dōkō Chōsa) reports the
percentage of establishments surveyed that have surplus workers, as well as the
percentage with labor shortages, for different industries and occupations. These
are useful for understanding cyclical conditions and how they differentially affect
different parts of the labor market, but they give no real sense of the size of the
problem.
         Japanese firms carry some employees on their payrolls who are sent home for
spells, often on a rotating basis, during downturns. There are government subsidies
in some cases to encourage firms to do this rather than dismiss the workers (Dore
1986). These individuals are picked up in the Labor Force Survey under a special
category (kyūgyōsha) that includes all workers who are not at work on the survey day,
including for illness or absenteeism. Hashimoto (1993) notes that the number of
kyūgyōsha moves counter-cyclically and that adjustment in their number is generally
less important than adjustment in hours and inventory as aspects of company reactions
to the business cycle. The number of kyūgyōsha rose some 20% from 1989 to 2000,
nowhere near the doubling of the unemployed. The increase represents some 200,000
employees, equal to 0.3% of total employment. This is a reasonable lower bound for
the number of surplus workers in Japanese firms.
         An approach for setting an upper bound is to look at figures for total factor
productivity growth and argue that slower TFP growth is due to labor hoarding during
downturns. The 1990s were undoubtedly a period of slower TFP growth, as was the mid
1970s following the first oil shock. Hayashi and Prescott (2002) calculate, after
taking account of working hours, that TFP grew at 3.7% between 1983 and 1991 and then
at only 0.5% between 1991 and 2000. They calculate that capital deepening increased
during the 1990s from the 1980s, so it is unlikely that any drop in TFP growth could
be attributed to a drop in the rate of investment. If all of the drop is attributed
to excess labor being held in firms, we see a loss of 3.2% in the potential growth
rate, assuming that this surplus labor could have been re-employed productively
elsewhere. This is unlikely, as it would imply that almost a quarter of the labor
force was surplus to firms’ needs by the end of the decade.
         Still, if we assume that if firms were able to dismiss workers more easily,
the economy could reach the OECD average for TFP growth per annum during 1979-97 of
1.1%, then surplus labor kept in firms lowers TFP growth by up to 0.6% per year. (In
practice the effect would be smaller because the reallocated labor would lose much
of its job-specific human capital.) This implies that the quantity of surplus labor
currently is around 5% of the employed, about the same as the number of unemployed.
This number often is quoted in press accounts, although it is unclear where reporters
get their figures. We take it as the upper bound for the number of redundant workers


                                                                                   16
in Japanese firms.

10.2 Skill Mismatch
The problem of skills mismatch and the outward shift of the Beveridge curve was
discussed earlier. The Labor White Paper for 2000, uses time series of the
unemployment rate and the vacancy rate to estimate that the natural rate of
unemployment has risen from just over 2.0% to 3.5% since 1993 (MOL 2000c). This is
attributed mainly to structural change, particularly the decline in manufacturing,
although aging of the work force is undoubtedly also part of the explanation. Using
the result of the Labor Ministry, we attribute a loss of 1.5% in overall labor input
to the mismatch problem in the labor market.

10.3 Female Labor Supply
We measure losses from barriers to the supply of women’s labor as being losses from
women working part time and from women not participating in the labor force at all.
To estimate the extent to which labor market institutions reduce labor force
participation, we use the United States as a benchmark. If Japan raised the
participation rate of women from its level of 67% to the US level of 77%, there would
be an increase of about 15% in the female labor force input.
        Japanese women put in around 136 hours per month, which is 82% of the 165
hours averaged by men. If employed Japanese women all worked as many hours as the
men, they would increase their labor input by 21%. This is grossly unrealistic
because some of these women are young and attending school, many would prefer to stay
home with small children even if child care is available, and many have household
duties including caring for elderly relatives that take up much of their available
time. However, it does serve as an upper bound for the effects of impediments that
restrict hours of work. A plausible lower bound for the effect of disincentives to
working full-time comes from Higuchi (1995). He estimates that married women who
constrain their hours deliberately because of the tax and benefits system lower the
overall labor input of women by 1.4%.
        For our estimate of the contribution of impediments that encourage part-time
work, we look at what would happen if the rate at which women 25 to 64 in Japan worked
part-time was at the US level (20%) rather than its actual 42%. (Women younger than
25 are excluded because many are still in school. Women over 64 are more likely to
wish to work part-time regardless of impediments to working full-time.) Japanese
women 25 to 64 work about half as many hours as their full-time counterparts. If
50% of them worked full-time, this would increase the female labor input by roughly
10%.1
        Adding the two effects (and compounding), gives a total increase in the labor
input of women of 26.5%. In terms of the overall labor force, this is an increase
of around 11%. This figure is slightly smaller if adjusted for quality. (Experience
is an important component of quality, and on average female workers have less of it
than male workers.)

10.4 Overall Implications for Economic Growth

1
  Computed as (share of women working part time) times (share of hours of full-time
women worked by part-time women) times (share of women switching from part- to full-
time work): 0.4 * 0.5 * 0.5 = 0.1.


                                                                                   17
Table 5 summarizes the calculations. The results are intended to give some idea of
how much of an impediment to economic growth the factors mentioned might be. Output
might be increased by between 9% and 12%. This is approximately equal to a 1% increase
in the potential growth rate of the economy over a 10-year period. This is, of course,
only a one-time benefit that the Japanese economy could exploit, but it is hardly
a negligible one.
         One question that naturally arises is why the impediments to the mobility
of male employees that we examined have not been a problem in the past. In fact,
many of the institutions, including the strong protection of regular employees and
the personnel management system, have previously been analyzed by many observers as
great strengths (Koike 1988). Our argument is that these institutions have been
successful under the strong demand conditions that characterized the macroeconomy
in Japan up to the 1990s, but they have not been successful under stagnant demand
thereafter.
         Aging of the work force also means that Japanese personnel practices are in
need of reform, but change has been slow so far (Ariga and others 2000). Under these
conditions, institutions which were well-suited to a high-demand, moderate-rapid
growth environment may become problematic. This is one area where better theoretical
understanding of institutions under different growth environments is needed.


11   Role of Government Policy

Given that impediments to potential growth exist, how can government policy address
them? We are unable to quantify the extent to which government actions may be able
to address the issues raised here, but we can distinguish those areas where appropriate
government policy should be able to increase effective labor inputs into the economy.
         Table 6 provides a summary look at the role that government policy could play.
Many of these policies are already being introduced or are under discussion in
government deliberative councils. Looking at the mobility of male employees, it is
clear that government legislation can change the nature of employment protection given
employees. If the costs of dismissal can be reduced for employers, then this should
release labor for more productive use. As suggested by Ohtake (2001), revision of
the laws governing fixed-term employment should make it easier for employers to hire
workers without making indefinite commitments to them. Both of these actions will
undermine some of the loyalty of employees toward the firm, but this must be weighed
against the demoralization felt by many employees who are not contributing much to
the output of their firm.
         There is probably not much that government policy can do to change the nature
of personnel management in the Japanese firm, although it can continue to promote
the development of defined-contribution pension schemes. In this area, government
policy is moving in the right direction.
         Barriers to mid-career hires are unlikely to be removed by government action.
The prohibition of age limits in job advertisements is unlikely to have much effect
on age discrimination, at least in the short run. Subsidies to encourage mid-career
employment have been tried in the past and are too blunt a tool: they may well be
taken up by firms that plan to hire middle-aged and older workers anyway. The
development of new career paths that can be entered by middle-aged men and women is
something that firms will need to develop though their own action. The government


                                                                                    18
may be able to play a useful role, however, by leading through example in its own
employment policies.
         The government is working at improving information provision in the labor
market, but continued deregulation of the employment-placement industry should help
to change the environment. The government can play a leading role in the development
of a more open environment for information through example, by making its own
activities more transparent.
         Much is already being done by the government to promote family-friendly
policies at firms and to develop day-care provision so that women can remain at work.
The government is contemplating major reform of the income tax system that will abolish
many of the features that discourage women from participating or working longer hours
(Asahi Shimbun, 16 May 2002).


12   Conclusion

This paper has examined a number of personnel practices, laws, and regulations that
lower the supply of labor in Japan. Broadly, there are two kinds of impediments,
those that restrict the movement of labor between firms, and those that discourage
women from participating to a greater extent. There has been a symmetric lack of
information between employers and job seekers, and this is almost certainly due to
the poor development of the external labor market in an economy with overall low
mobility. After a worker is over 30 it has been quite difficult to find attractive
job opportunities. This is especially true for women re-entering the labor force.
For married women, barriers also include disincentives in the tax system and the dearth
of meaningful work, especially for women re-entering the labor force after rearing
children. Despite changes, further modifications in the legal structure and practices
of Japan's employment system are necessary to facilitate the diversifying patterns
of employment and work attitudes of both men and women. Using other OECD countries
and especially the United States as a benchmark, we estimate that removal of these
barriers would increase the productive labor supply in Japan by 13% to 18% and thus
could raise the potential growth rate of the Japanese economy by roughly 1% a year
over a 10-year period.
         There are a number of empirical and theoretical areas where further work is
needed. First, we need to know more about the real extent of surplus labor within
firms. This requires more detailed surveys of individual firms than have been carried
out. Second, regarding mid-career hires and their pay, research is needed beyond
the qualitative studies done by the government, especially concerning actual pay
levels. Longitudinal data on individuals are needed to see who manages to make a
mid-career move successfully. Third, further research in the area of labor market
problems and social norms would help us better understand why such features such as
egalitarian pay norms and firm-size differentials are more persistent than others.
         A better theoretical understanding of the way in which institutions that
function well during periods of normal or rapid growth may become liabilities when
growth is stagnant is especially important. The role of the family and of state policy,
and their effect on female labor supply during periods of rapid social change, needs
to be better understood. This could be usefully looked at in an international
comparative perspective, especially southern European countries where women also have
had less of a role in the labor market in the past but are now increasing participation.


                                                                                     19
        Although changes to overcome some of the barriers, such as the poor provision
of information in the labor market, are being promoted by government and business
leaders, many other changes require broader transformation of the Japanese economy.
As Noguchi (1995) has pointed out, Japanese economic policy is still based to a large
extent on the premise that much of the security and welfare of individuals in the
economy will be provided through their employers. Japanese labor law (as developed
through case law), industrial policy, and financial regulation have been based on
this assumption.
        Policy makers and regulators in areas other than labor will need to change
their approach for the full benefits of any change in labor regulations to be realized.
The large-scale restructuring that is required if Japan is to continue to shift away
from manufacturing and reduce the size of its construction industry also requires
a shift toward increasing provision of security through private or state-provided
insurance. This in turn may have the effect of introducing a different set of
inefficiencies, including an increased rate of unemployment and earlier retirement.
Policies will need to be designed carefully if this kind of outcome is to be avoided.




                                                                                    20
References

Abe, Yukiko and Fumio Ohtake. 1997. AThe Effects of Income Tax and Social Security on
      the Part-time Labor Supply in Japan.@ Review of Social Policy 6: 45-64.
Ariga, Kenn, Giorgio Brunello and Yasushi Ohkusa. 2000. Internal Labour Markets in Japan.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Asahi Shinbun. 2002 May 16. AHaigusha Kujo wa Shukusho mata wa Haishi Wo Fukuda Kanbo
      Chokan@ (General Secretary Fukuda says that the Tax Exemption for Spouses should
      be          reduced          or         abolished).           Available          at
      [www.asahi.com/politics/reform/security/K2002051603071.html]
Baron, James N. 1988. AThe Employment Relation as a Social Relation.@ Journal of the
      Japanese and International Economies 2: 492-525.
Breslin, M. 1997. AJapanese Women Want More Children than Their Total Fertility Rate
      Suggests.@ Family Planning Perspectives 29: 291-92.
Brinton, Mary C. 1989. AGender Stratification in Contemporary Japan.@ American
      Sociological Review 54: 549-64.
Brinton, Mary C, and Hang-Yue Ngo. 1993. AAge and Sex in the Occupational Structure:
      A United States-Japan Comparison.@ Sociological Forum 8: 93-111.
Chuma, Hiroyuki. 1997. AKeizai kankyô no henka to chûkô nensô no chôkinzokuka,@ (The
      changing economic environment and the lengthening of seniority) in H. Chuma and
      T.Suruga (eds) Koyô Kankô no Henka to Josei Rôdô (Changing Employment Customs and
      Women=s Labor), p 47-114. Tokyo: Tokyo Daigaku Shuppankai.
Chuma, Hiroyuki. 1998. AKaikoken Ranyô Hôri no Keizaigaku@ (The economics of the legal
      principle of abuse of the right to dismissal)." In Yoshio Miwa, Hideki Kanda and
      Noriyuki Yanagawa, editors, Kaishahô no Keizaigaku (The Economics of Company Law).
      Tokyo: Tokyo University Press.
Dekle, Robert. 2000. ADemographic density, per-capita consumption, and the Japanese
      saving-investment balance.@ Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 16(2): 46-60.
Dore, Ronald. 1986. Flexible Rigidities: Industrial Policy and Structural Adjustment
      in the Japanese Economy, 1970-1980. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Genda, Yuji. 2001. Shigoto no naka no aimai no fuan: yureru wakamono no genzai (Vague
      anxiety amidst work B the shaking world of youth today) Tokyo: Chûôkôron Shinsha.
Genda, Yuji, and Rebick, Marcus. 2000. AJapanese labour in the 1990s: Stagnation and
      stability,@ Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 16(2): 85-102.
Gordon, Andrew. 1985. The Evolution of Labor Relations in Japan: Heavy Industry,
      1853-1955. Cambridge, USA: Harvard University Press.
Gordon, Andrew. 1998. The Wages of Affluence: Labor and Management in Postwar Japan,
      Cambridge, USA: Harvard University Press.
Granovetter, Mark S. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contracts and Careers. Cambridge:
      Harvard University Press.
Hashimoto, Masanori. 1993. AAspects of labor market adjustments in Japan,@ Journal of
      Labor Economics, 11(1): Part 1, p 136-61.
Hashimoto, Masanori. and Raisian, John. 1985. AEmployment Tenure and Earnings Profiles
      in Japan and the United States,@ American Economic Review, 75: 721-35 (Sep).
Hatta, Tatsuo and Yoko Kimura. 1993. AKôteki nenkin wa sengyô shufu setai wo yûgû
      shiteiru@ (The Japanese Public Pension System Favors Household with Full-time
      Housewives). Kikan Shakai Hoshô Kenkyû (Quarterly of Social Security Research)
      29: 210-21.
Hayashi, Fumio and Prescott, Edward. 2002. AThe 1990s in Japan: A lost decade,@ Review
      of Economic Dynamics, 5: 206-35.
Higuchi, Yoshio. 1995. ASengyô shufu hogo seisaku no keizai-teki kiketsu@ (The Economic
      Consequences of Policies to Protect Full-time Housewives). In Tatsuo Hatta and
      Naohiro Yashiro, editors, Jakusha hogo seisaku no keizai bunseki, p 185-219.
      Tokyo. Nihon Keizai Shimbunsha.
Higuchi, Yoshio, Masahiro Abe and Jane Waldfogel. 1997. ANichi-bei-ou ni okeru ikujj



                                                                                      21
      kyûgyô shussan kyûgyô seido to josei shugyô@ (Childcare and Maternity Leave
      Policies and Women=s Employment in Japan, US and UK). Jinkô Mondai Kenkyû (Journal
      of Population Problems) 53: 49-66.
Hill, M. Anne. 1989. AFemale Labor Supply in Japan.@ Journal of Human Resources 24:
      143-61.
Horioka, Charles Yuji. 1999. AJapan's Public Pension System: What=s Wrong with It and
      How to Fix It.@ Japan and the World Economy 11: 293-303.
Ichinose, Tomohiro. 2001. ATenshoku ni yoru shôgai chingin no genshô to sôki taishoku
      yûgû seido@ (Early Retirement Plans and the Decline in Lifetime Income Resulting
      from Job Changes). Rôsei Jihô. 3484: 27-34.
Imada, Sachiko. 1998. ARe-employing Japanese Women: Female Labor and Sustained
      Support.@ Japan Labor Bulletin 37 (Jun).
Institute of Labor Administration. 2001. ASôki taishoku yûgû to kibô taishoku seido@
      (Early Retirement and Voluntary Retirement Programs). Rôsei Jihô. 3484: 2-26.
Japan Institute of Labor. 1998. AChûkônensha no tenshoku jittai to koyô shokugyô tenbô@
      (Employment Outlook and State of Job-changes among Middle-age and Older Workers).
      Japan Institute of Labour Report, 111.
Japan Institute of Labor. 2000. A2000 Survey on Employment Management: Managing of
      Retiring Older Workers.@ Japan Labor Bulletin (Oct).
Japan Institute of Labor. 2001a. AKôzô mondai no kenkyû@ (Structure of Unemployment).
      Japan Institute of Labour Report 142.
Japan Institute of Labor. 2001b. AReorganization of Businesses and Employment Adjustment
      Aimed at Middle-aged and Older Workers.@ Japan Labor Bulletin (May).
Japan Institute of Labor. 2001c. AGuidelines to Abolish Age Limits in the Revised
      Employment Measures Law.@ Japan Labor Bulletin (Nov).
Kalleberg, Arne L. and James R. Lincoln. 1988. AThe Structure of Earnings Inequality
      in the United States and Japan.@ American Journal of Sociology 94: S121-53.
Koike, Kazuo. 1988 Understanding Industrial Relations in Modern Japan, London,
      Macmillan Press.
METI-Recruit. 2001, AKoyô no misumattchi no jittai bunseki,@ (Empirical analysis of
      mismatch in employment), Published jointly by the Ministry of Economics, Trade
      and Industry and Recruit Works Research Center, Tokyo; available at:
[www.meti.go.jp/kohosys/press/0001722.remove597167316452/0/010719koyou.pdf]
MHLW (Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare). 2001. Kôsei Rôdô Hakusho (White Paper
      on Welfare and Labor), Tokyo: Gyôsei.
Mincer, Jacob and Higuchi, Yoshio. 1988 AWage structures and labor turnover in the United
      States and Japan,@ Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 2: 97-133.
MOL (Ministry of Labour). 2000a. Tenshokusha no Jittai (Heisei 10 Nen Chôsa) (The
      Current Situtation of Job-Changers B 1998 Survey) Tokyo: Ministry of Finance.
MOL. 2000b. Taishokukin Seido no Genjô to Kadai, (The current situation and problems
      in the company pension system) Tokyo: Rômu Gyôsei Kenkyusho.
MOL. 2000c. Rôdô Hakusho (White Paper on Labor) Tokyo: Japan Institute of Labor.
Morgan, S. Philip and Kiyosi Hirosima. 1983. AThe Persistence of Extended Family
      Residence in Japan: Anachronism or Alternative Strategy?@ American Sociological
      Review 48: 269-81.
Nagase, Nobuko. 1997. AWage Differentials and Labour Supply of Married Women in Japan:
      Part-time and Informal Sector Work Opportunities.@ Japanese Economic Review 48:
      29-42.
Nagase, Nobuko. 2001. APart no chingin ni 103 man en no kabe wa jûyoka@ (Is the Upper
      Limit of 1.03 Million Yen Significant in Determining a Wage Rate for Part-Timers?).
      The Japanese Journal of Labour Studies, 489: 60-61.
Nakamura, Jiro and Atsuko Ueda. 1999. AOn the Determinants of Career Interruption by
      Childbirth among Married Women in Japan.@ Journal the Japanese and International
      Economies 13: 73-89.
Nickell, Stephen J., L. Nunziata, W. Ochel, G. Quintini. 2001, AThe Beveridge Curve,



                                                                                      22
      Unemployment and Wages in the OECD.@ CEP, LSE Discussion Paper 502, forthcoming
      in M. Woodford (ed.): AKnowledge, Information and Expectations in Modern
      Macroeconomics: Papers in Honor of Edmund S. Phelps", Princeton University Press,
      2002.
Noguchi, Yukio. 1995. 1940 Nen Taisei: Saraba ASenji Keizai@, (The 1940 System: Japan
      Under the Wartime Economy) Tokyo: Tôyô Keizai Shinpôsha.
Ogawa, Naohiro and John F. Ermisch. 1996. AFamily Structure, Home Time Demands, and the
      Employment Patterns of Japanese Married Women.@ Journal of Labor Economics 14:
      677-702.
Ohtake, Fumio. 1998 AThe United States,@ in Toshiaki Tachibanaki (ed) Wage Differentials:
      an International Comparison, London: Macmillan.
Ohtake, Fumio. 2001. Koyô mondai wo kangaeru (Employment-related problems in Japan).
      Osaka: Osaka University Press.
Ohtake, Fumio, and Takenori Inoki. 1997. ARôdôshijô ni okeru sedai kôka,@ (The cohort
      effect in the labor market) in Gendai Makuro Keizai Bunseki: Tenkanki no Nihon
      Keizai (Modern Macroeconomic Analysis: the Japanese economy in an era of change)
      Kazumi Asako, Naoyuki Yoshino and Shinichi Fukuda (eds.) Tokyo: Tokyo University
      Press
Osawa, Machiko. 1990. AWomen's Response to Economic Changes.@ Japan Labor Bulletin 29:
      5-8.
Osawa, Machiko. 1993. Keizai henka to joshi rôdô (Economic Change and Women=s Labor).
      Tokyo: Nihon keizai hyôronsha.
Osawa, Machiko. 1998. Atarashii kazoku no tame no keizaigaku (Economics for New Family).
      Tokyo: Chûô Kôron.
Rebick, Marcus. 1992. AThe persistence of firm-size earnings differentials and labor
      market segmentation in Japan,@ Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
      7: 132-56.
Rebick, Marcus. 1993. AThe Japanese approach to finding jobs for older workers,@ in Olivia
      Mitchell (ed.) As the Workforce Ages: Costs Benefits and Policy Challenges, Ithaca:
      ILR Press.
Rebick, Marcus. 2001. AJapanese labor markets: can we expect significant change@ in
      Magnus Blomström, Byron Gagnes and Sumner La Croix (eds) Japan=s New Economy:
      Continuity and Change in the Twenty-First Century, Oxford: Oxford University
      Press.
Recruit Works Institute. 2001a. Working Persons Chosa 2000 - Shutoken.
(Working Persons Survey 2000 - The Greater Tokyo Area). Tokyo: Recruit.
Recruit Works Institute. 2001b. Hi-tenkei koyo rodosha chosa 2001 - Shuhu
part timer. (Non-standard Employment Survey - Married Women in Part-time
Employment). Tokyo: Recruit.
Rees, Albert. 1966. AInformation Networks in Labor Markets.@ American Economic Review
      56: 559-66.
Saso, Mary. 1990. Women in the Japanese Workplace. London: H. Shipman.
Sato, Hiroki. 2000. AThe Current Situation of >Family-friendly= Policies in Japan.@ Japan
      Labor Bulletin 39: 5-10 (Feb).
Shimada, Haruo and Yoshio Higuchi. 1985. AAn Analysis of Trends in Female Labor Force
      Participation in Japan.@ Journal of Labor Economics 3: S355-74.
Statistics Bureau, Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs and Posts and
      Telecommunications. (Formerly Management and Coordination Agency) Various years.
      Labour Force Survey Annual Report.
Tachibanaki, Toshiaki. 1998. AIntroduction to Wage Differentials: An international
      comparison,@ in Toshiaki Tachibanaki (ed) Wage Differentials: an International
      Comparison, London: Macmillan.
Tachibanaki, Toshiaki, and Ohta, Souchi. 1994. AWage differentials by industry and the
      size of firms, and the labour market in Japan,@ in Toshiaki Tachibanaki (ed) Labour
      Market and Economic Performance: Europe, Japan and the US. London: Macmillan.


                                                                                      23
Tsuya, Noriko O., Larry L. Bumpass, and Minja Kim Choe. 2000. AGender, Employment, and
      Housework in Japan, South Korea, and the United States.@ Review of Population and
      Social Policy, No. 9: 195-220.
Yamakawa, Ryuichi. 1998. AOverhaul After 50 Years: The Amendment of the Labour Standards
      Law,@ Japan Labor Bulletin, 37:11.
Yamakawa, Ryuichi, and Araki, Takashi. 2001. ARôdô Hanrei kono 1 nen no sôten@ (Labor
      Law Precedents 1999-2000: The Issues Involved), Nihon Rodo Kenkyu Zasshi, 43(11):
      2-37.
Yashiro, Naohiro. 1999. Koyô Kaikaku no Jidai: Hatarakikata wa dô Kawaru ka? (The Age
      of Employment Reform: How Will our Ways of Work Change?). Tokyo: Chûkôshinsho.




                                                                                     24
                                       Table 1
                 Reasons Changing Jobs is Difficult, The Worker View



    Percentage
    giving            Reason
    reason
         40.8         I exceed the age limit of the job postings
         23.4         My work experience is not transferable to the general society
         21.8         Returns to seniority will be lost and I will suffer wage loss
         19.1         I do not know how to look for jobs
         14.1         I will lose personal contacts established through my work
         13.5         I will suffer a loss in my pension


Source: Recruit Works Institute, 2001a




                                     Table 2
             Reasons Firms Give for Age Restrictions in Recruitment



     Percentage
     giving              Reason
     reason
           33.8          Older workers lack physical endurance
           26.9          Older workers require higher wages
           24.9          Occupational skills do not match firm(s expectations
           23.8          Desire to maintain a young work force
           20.2          To restrict number of job applicants
           14.9          Older workers do not mix well with younger workers
           12.9          Older workers are hard to handle
            9.9          Older workers do not adapt well to corporate culture
            8.8          To avoid exceeding the age structure of previous hires
            6.7          Older workers lack motivation
            5.7          Relative ease of hiring young workers
            4.8          No posts for older workers and cannot accommodate them
            3.0          Because other firms impose age limits

Source: Japan Institute of Labour 2001a




                                                                                      25
                                         Table 3
               Female Labor Force Participation and Part-time Employment,
                              Selected OECD Countries, 2000



                    Participation1    Part-time2
                         59.6              39.4         Japan
                         76.4              21.4         Sweden
                         70.8              18.2         United States
                         68.9              40.8         United Kingdom
                         63.2              33.9         Germany
                         61.7              24.3         France
                         46.2              23.4         Italy



1 Percentage of females ages 15-64 in the labor force.
2 Part-time female workers as a percentage of all female workers. Part-time is defined
  as less than 30 hours per week except Japan where it is less than 35 hours per week.

Source: OECD Employment Outlook, 2001




                                         Table 4
         Reasons Married Women in Part-Time Positions Gave for Adjusting Income

1990*1     2001*2   Reason for adjusting annual income

35.7       49.1     Any reason

30.0       27.8     To avoid paying income tax3
23.5       32.6     To avoid exceeding tax exempt and special tax exempt status for spouses

12.0       15.7     To receive fringe benefits from spouse's employer
11.5       30.5     So health insurance and pension covered by spouse
 0.8        1.4     So spouse's employer will not find out that I am working

 2.0        7.5     To avoid paying unemployment insurance

Multiple answers were allowed
1 General Survey on Part-time Workers Condition conducted by the Ministry of Labor,
  taken from Higuchi 1995.
2 Recruit Works Institute, 2001b.
3 The General Survey also asked this question in two other forms. "I plan in advance
  so that my annual income will not exceed (1 million" (which is the usual tax
  exemption) was checked by 16.2% of respondents and "I adjust my work patterns
  throughout the year so that my annual income will not exceed (1 million" by 13.8%.




                                                                                        26
                                     Table 5
   Effect on Labor Input and Economic Output from Changes in the Labor Market

(percents)
  Labor Input    Economic Output2           Factor
     0.3-5.0             0.2-3.5            Reduce excess labor held by firms
       1.5                 1.1              Reduce skill mismatch
       4.1                 2.9              Increase women(s hours1
       6.2                 4.3              Increase women(s participation1

    12.8-17.5            9.0-12.2           Total3

As explained in the test, these are one-time effects that would be spread out over
several years.
1 Computed by multiplying the figures in the text by the proportion of women in the
  labor force (41%).
2 Computed as the increase in labor input (column 1) times labor(s share of output
  (70%).
3 The effect of the two contributions concerned with women are compounded in
  calculating the total.




                                     Table 6
        Government Policies to Reduce Labor Market Impediments to Growth

Labor market problem              Government Policy Measures

Employment protection             Legislation to reduce the cost of dismissals

Seniority pay structures and
                                  No measures
egalitarian pay norms

Pension portability               Encourage defined-contribution plans

Information problems in the job   Further deregulation of the employment-placement
market                            industry

Barriers to mid-career hires      Lead by example in the public sector

Government tax and benefit        Abolish the exemption for dependent spouses and
policies that discourage female   reform the benefit system to encourage greater
labor supply                      participation of women

                                  Encourage family-friendly workplaces with day-care
Female career interruptions
                                  provision and re-employment for women who take short
during child-bearing years
                                  career breaks



                                                                                   27
                                      Figure 1
        Labor force participation rates by age cohort for selected countries


      100


       80

                                                                              Japan
       60
                                                                              Japan - potential LFPR
  %
                                                                              US
       40
                                                                              EU

       20


        0
            15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   over
            to   to   to   to   to   to   to   to   to   to   to    70
            19   24   29   34   39   44   49   54   59   64   69




SOURCE: International Labor Organization 1999, data for Japan taken from Ministry
        of Labor 1999




                                        Figure 2
                  Composition of female labor force by work categories

       50


       40

                                                                   Self- employed
       30
                                                                   Family workers
  %




                                                                   Regular employees
       20
                                                                   Part-time employees

       10


        0
            1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

* Part-time employees refer to workers with less than 35 working hours per week.




                                                                                                       28
