                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MONETARY POLICY AND REAL STABILIZATION

                                          Lars E. O. Svensson

                                          Working Paper 9486
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9486


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




Presented at “Rethinking Stabilization Policy,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City and held at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29—31, 2002. I thank Alan Auerbach, Claes Berg,
Villy Bergstr(om, Alan Blinder, Guy Debelle, Allan Meltzer and Lawrence Summers for comments, and
Kathleen DeGennaro for editorial and secretarial assistance. Financial support from Princeton University’s
Center for Economic Policy Studies is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Lars E. O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization
Lars E. O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 9486
February 2003
JEL No. E42, E52, E58

                                                 ABSTRACT

Monetary policy can achieve average inflation equal to a given inflation target and, at best, a good
compromise between inflation variability and output-gap variability. Monetary policy cannot completely
stabilize either inflation or the output gap. Increased credibility in the form of inflation expectations anchored
on the inflation target will reduce the variability of inflation and the output gap.

Central banks can improve transparency and accountability by specifying not only an inflation target but also
the dislike of output-gap variability relative to inflation variability.

Central banks can best achieve both the long-run inflation target and the best compromise between inflation
and output-gap stability by engaging in "forecast targeting," where the bank selects the feasible combination
of inflation and output-gap projections that minimize the loss function and the corresponding instrument-rate
plan and sets the instrument-rate accordingly. Forecast targeting implies that the instrument responds to all
information that significantly affects the projections of inflation and the output gap. Therefore it cannot be
expressed in terms of a simple instrument rule, like a Taylor rule.

The objective of financial stability, including a well-functioning payment system, can conveniently be
considered as a restriction on monetary policy that does not bind in normal times, but does bind in times of
financial crises. By producing and publishing Financial Stability Reports with indicators of financial stability,
the central bank can monitor the degree of financial stability and issue warnings to concerned agents and
authorities in due time and this way avoid deteriorating financial stability.

Forecast targeting implies that asset-price developments and potential asset-price bubbles are taken into
account and responded to the extent that they are deemed to affect the projections of the target variables,
inflation and the output gap. In most cases, it will be difficult to make precise judgments, though, especially
to identify bubbles with reasonable certainty.

The zero bound, liquidity traps and risks of deflation are serious concerns for a monetary policy aimed at low
inflation. Forecast targeting with a symmetric positive inflation target keeps the risk of the zero bound,
liquidity traps and deflation small. Prudent central banks may want to prepare in advance contingency plans
for situations when a series of bad shocks substantially increases the risk of falling into a liquidity trap, as
well as contingency plans escaping from a liquidity trap. An open economy, for instance, Japan, can use the
foolproof way of escaping from a liquidity trap, with a price level target, a currency depreciation and a
temporary exchange rate peg, and an exit strategy with a shift to inflation targeting when the price-level target
has been reached.

Lars E.O. Svensson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
svensson@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

Over the past two decades, maintenance of low inflation, “price stability,” has become the prin-
cipal focus of central banks around the world. At the same time, the view has emerged that
monetary policy is better suited than fiscal policy for short-run stabilization purposes. This
paper examines to what extent monetary policy can be directed at both “monetary stabiliza-
tion,” stabilizing inflation at a low level and “real stabilization,” stabilizing output or, rather,
the output gap and whether there are significant limitations on the use of monetary policy for
real stabilization purposes. Section 2 discusses what a realistic view of monetary policy is, what
monetary policy realistically can and cannot achieve, what the long-run and short-run trade-
oﬀs are between inflation and output, what the appropriate objectives for monetary policy are,
and what the role of credibility is for the tradeoﬀ between inflation and output stabilization.
Section 3 discusses how central banks can make the objectives of low and stable inflation and
a stable output gap precise and the benefits thereof, how central banks can achieve the best
outcome relative to these objectives by a procedure called “forecast targeting,” and how this
procedure is best implemented. Section 4 discusses how the objectives of financial stability and
a well-functioning payment system can be taken into account and reconciled with the objectives
of low and stable inflation and stable output gap, and to what extent central banks may want to
respond to asset prices and bubbles. Section 5 discusses how the risks of hitting the zero (lower)
interest rate bound and falling into a deflationary liquidity trap can be handled, how central
banks can avoid falling into liquidity trap, and how central banks can escape from a liquidity
trap if having fallen in. Section 6 summarizes the conclusions of the paper.


2. A realistic view of monetary policy

A discussion of whether stabilization of the real economy is consistent with a policy directed
at low and stable inflation and how a central bank can achieve a desirable combination of real
and monetary stability is more eﬀective if it starts from a realistic view of what monetary
policy can and cannot do. Such a view of monetary policy is also important in a discussion
of the appropriate goals for monetary policy and in understanding why an increasing number
of countries have selected low and stable inflation, “price stability,” as the primary goal for
monetary policy.1
  1
      This section builds on Svensson [45].



                                                 1
      Let me start from the presumption that the ultimate objective of economic policy is to guar-
antee and enhance the citizens’ welfare. This ultimate objective is often expressed as a number
of separate goals which contribute to the citizens’ welfare, for instance, eﬃcient resource utiliza-
tion, full and stable employment, high economic growth, price stability, equitable distribution
of wealth and income, regional balance and environmental protection.
      Monetary policy is part of economic policy. At first, one might think that it is natural
that monetary policy has the same goals as overall economic policy. However, since monetary
policy only has sustained or persistent eﬀects on a limited number of variables aﬀecting economic
welfare, it is more suitable that monetary policy is assigned a limited number of goals. Specifying
goals for monetary policy that it cannot achieve would be unproductive and could even be
counterproductive. Instead, monetary policy is more eﬀective if it is assigned goals that it can
achieve and that are consistent with the ultimate objective for economic policy. In order to
determine which goals are most suitable for monetary policy, one must therefore understand the
eﬀects of monetary policy and what monetary policy can and cannot achieve.


2.1. How monetary policy aﬀects the economy

Monetary policy aﬀects real and nominal variables through a number of channels, together
referred to as the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.2 Central banks normally conduct
monetary policy by setting a short nominal interest rate, the central bank’s instrument rate (for
instance, the federal funds rate in the U.S.). Suppose the central bank lowers the instrument
rate. How is the economy aﬀected? In the short term, domestic prices and domestic inflation in
industrialized countries are relatively slow to change (or sticky). This means that private-sector
inflation expectations for the short term are relatively sticky. This further implies that central
banks, by controlling the short nominal interest rate, can also aﬀect the short real interest rate:
the diﬀerence between the short nominal rate and short-term inflation expectations. Via market
expectations of future real rates, longer real rates are also aﬀected. Thus, the lowering of the
instrument rate normally lowers short and longer real interest rates, which will aﬀect economic
activity.
      Furthermore, a reduction in the short interest rate normally depreciates the domestic cur-
rency and hence increases the nominal exchange rate (when the nominal exchange rate is ex-
pressed as units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency). Since domestic prices in
  2
      See Svensson [48] for a more formal discussion.



                                                        2
practice are sticky (at least for industrialized countries), the domestic currency also depreciates
in real terms. That is, the real exchange rate (the price of foreign goods and services in terms of
domestic goods and services, or the price of tradable goods and services in terms of nontradable
goods and services) also rises. The rise in the real exchange rate implies that the domestic price
of imported and exported final goods increases (when the foreign-currency prices of imported
and exported final goods are sticky). Since these goods enter the Consumer Price Index (CPI),
this means that CPI inflation increases, the extent of which depends on these goods’ share in
the CPI. This is the so-called direct exchange rate channel to CPI inflation. The direct eﬀect
on CPI inflation usually occurs within about a year, or even quicker.
   The fall in short and longer real interest rates mentioned above will stimulate consumption
and investment and thereby increase aggregate demand and output in the economy (in practice,
output is demand-determined in the short to medium term, at least in industrialized countries).
This is the so-called real-interest-rate channel to aggregate demand. The rise in the real exchange
rate makes domestically produced goods less expensive relative to foreign goods. This increases
demand for export and for import-competing goods, which also adds to aggregate demand.
This is the exchange rate channel to aggregate demand. The eﬀects through these two channels
usually occur in about a year or so.
   The monetary policy literature has also discussed a so-called credit channel to aggregate
demand. It works in the same direction as the pure real-interest-rate eﬀect on aggregate demand.
For simplicity, we can therefore include the credit channel in the above real-interest-rate channel
to aggregate demand. The real-interest-rate channel also includes the eﬀect on aggregate demand
of wealth changes of interest-rate changes, for instance, eﬀects via changes in the stock-market
value.


2.1.1. The impact of monetary policy on inflation

Having traced the transmission channels to aggregate demand, let me discuss the eﬀects on
domestic inflation: the rate of change in the prices of the domestically produced goods and
services. (Inflation in domestically produced tradable and nontradable final goods and services
is the main component of CPI inflation; another substantial component is inflation in imported
final goods.) We normally think of current output as determined mainly by aggregate demand
in the short and medium term. Potential output is the hypothetical output level that would
result in the absence of price and wage stickiness. It is largely determined by factors other


                                                3
than monetary policy.3 The output gap is the diﬀerence between current output and potential
output. It can be seen as a measure of general excess demand in the economy. The above
transmission channels to aggregate demand are hence also channels to the output gap. The
increase in aggregate demand and the output gap will then lead to an increase in domestic
inflation, because increased production increases the costs of production and because increased
demand allows firms to increase prices. The increase in domestic inflation usually occurs within
another year or so. This is the aggregate-demand channel to domestic inflation.
    For a given output-gap level, domestic inflation is also independently aﬀected by production
costs, for instance wage costs and costs of imported intermediate inputs, like oil and raw mate-
rials. The fall in the exchange rate increases the cost of imported intermediate inputs as well as
imported final goods, and the reduced purchasing power of wages may trigger increased wage
demands. This can be called the production-cost channel to domestic inflation. Finally, price
and wage setting are strongly aﬀected by expectations of future inflation, since movements in the
expected future price level are the obvious starting point for individual price and wage setting.
This is the expectations channel to domestic inflation. Any increased inflation expectations that
may be generated by the lowering of the instrument rate and the resulting increase in activity
will then independently add to the eﬀect on domestic inflation.
    Thus, a reduction in the central bank’s instrument rate aﬀects the economy through a number
of channels with diﬀerent lags. The exchange rate and short and longer interest rates are usually
immediately aﬀected. Within about a year or less, there is an eﬀect on CPI inflation through
the direct exchange rate channel. As this first eﬀect is working through, in about a year or
so there is an increase in output and the output gap. Through that linkage, within another
year or so there is a second eﬀect on CPI inflation. Both eﬀects are in the same direction,
namely to increase inflation. However, the lags mentioned are only very rough rules of thumb.
In practice, the lags and the strength of the eﬀects through the diﬀerent channels vary across
channels and over time, and the eﬀects are spread out over several quarters. For instance, the
lag and the strength of the direct exchange rate eﬀect on CPI inflation depends on the so-called
pass-through of exchange rate changes: the degree to which importers pass on exchange rate
changes to buyers rather than absorbing them in their profit margins. The pass-through varies
considerably depending on the circumstances, for instance, with the perceived persistence of the
   3
     Thus, potential output is distinct from a pure trend of actual output, and it will vary with real shocks to the
economy. Potential output is defined inclusive of real imperfections like imperfect competition. Thus, potential
ouput is lower than the eﬃcient output level resulting under perfect competition and no frictions.



                                                         4
exchange rate change, the size of the initial profit margins, and the price sensitivity of demand
for imports. Furthermore, the economy is subject to a never-ending sequence of shocks and
disturbances, directly and indirectly, to inflation and output, including price changes of raw
materials, shifts in international capital flows, productivity changes, changes in indirect taxes,
etc. Many of these shocks are quite diﬃcult to identify, and many occur during the lag between
instrument adjustment and eﬀects on output and inflation. Thus, it is worth emphasizing that
the central bank’s control over inflation, output and other macro variables is quite imperfect.


2.1.2. The long-term eﬀects of monetary policy

We have seen above how the central bank, by lowering its instrument rate, thereby reducing
the short real interest rate and depreciating the currency, can increase aggregate demand and
output, for a couple of years, say. Can the central bank indefinitely maintain a low instrument
rate and depreciated currency and in this way stimulate the economy indefinitely? The answer
is definitely no. In the longer term, the central bank must set its instrument rate so that on
average the short real interest rate is equal to the average neutral real interest rate. The neutral
real rate is the real interest rate that is consistent with output equal to potential output. Thus,
the neutral real rate is the hypothetical real interest rate that would result in the absence of price
stickiness and other frictions. It is largely determined by factors other than monetary policy.4
If the central bank tries to maintain a short real rate below the neutral real rate for too long,
aggregate demand outstrips potential output, the economy becomes overheated, and inflation
increases to high single-digit, then double-digit inflation, and eventually hyper-inflation.5 As
history has demonstrated several times, a hyper-inflationary situation eventually results in a
breakdown of the market system and a severe economic and financial crisis. Thus, sustained
stimulation of the real economy through monetary policy is not a feasible option.
    In the long term, monetary policy can only control nominal variables such as inflation and
the exchange rate. In the long term, monetary policy cannot increase the average level or
the growth rate of real variables such as GDP and employment, or aﬀect the average level
of the real exchange rate. There is evidence that monetary policy that leads to high and/or
variable inflation is harmful to the real economy and to economic growth, by making the market
    4
      Thus, similarly to potential output, the neutral real rate (also called the Wicksellian natural interest rate)
is distinct from a pure trend of the actual real interest, and it will vary with real shocks to the economy.
    5
      The mirror image of this is a rapidly increasing rate of growth of the monetary base. In order to maintain
the short real interest rate below the neutral rate, the central bank has to inject money into the economy at a
rapidly increasing rate. At higher inflation rates, this money-growth channel to inflation becomes dominant.



                                                         5
mechanism work less well and by creating unnecessary uncertainty. However, once monetary
policy brings inflation down to relatively low and stable levels, monetary policy has no long-term
eﬀects on the average level and average growth rate of real variables. Nevertheless, monetary
policy can aﬀect the variability of real variables, as further discussed below.


2.2. Suitable goals for monetary policy

In the long run, output fluctuates around potential output, which is determined by factors other
than monetary policy (except that, as already noted, bad and volatile monetary policy may
well create a volatile and uncertain economic environment that deters investment and hence
growth in potential output). Thus, there is a conspicuous diﬀerence between output targets and
inflation targets for monetary policy. Whereas a long-run inflation target for monetary policy
makes eminent sense and can be achieved, a long-run level or growth target for output diﬀerent
from potential output does not make sense for monetary policy, because it cannot be achieved.
Thus, the long-run output target is given by potential output, which is largely independent of
monetary policy.6 In the long term, monetary policy can at best provide a stable environment
for the real economy. However, the fact that monetary policy has eﬀects on the level of real
variables in the short and medium term creates considerable tensions and temptations that need
to be faced and handled.
    A crucial ingredient in a stable environment for the real economy is a nominal anchor: an
anchor for the nominal variables and private-sector expectations of future nominal variables. An
increasing number of countries have found that low and stable inflation provides the best nominal
anchor. The reason is that the alternative, higher inflation, has serious negative consequences.
In practice, higher inflation always comes with higher variability in inflation. High and variable
inflation impairs the capacity of the market mechanisms to achieve eﬃcient resource allocation,
and the ensuing uncertainty makes it more diﬃcult for firms, consumers and savers to make the
right decisions. It leads to arbitrary and inequitable redistributions of incomes and assets, for
instance, a shift away from small savers to professional investors, and from tenants to owners of
houses and property. Inflation is eﬀectively theft from small savers and low-income groups. High
inflation has no lasting positive eﬀects, and the adverse eﬀects eventually become unbearable.
Numerous historical experiences have demonstrated that bringing inflation down from a high
   6
     Increasing potential output towards the eﬃcient output level is an important objective for economic policy,
but other policies than monetary policy should be used, for instance, structural policies that improve the degree
of competition on markets for goods and services and the workings of the labor market.



                                                       6
level is costly; as a rule, a deep recession with high unemployment is required. Accordingly, it
is important to avoid letting inflation take oﬀ in the first place. For these reasons, an increasing
number of countries have specified “price stability” as the primary goal for monetary policy.7
    However, completely disregarding the real consequences of monetary policy in the short and
medium term and focusing exclusively on controlling inflation at the shortest possible horizon
would have bad consequences. This policy is called “strict inflation targeting” in the literature.
In practice, in an open economy, it would mean relying almost exclusively on the direct exchange
rate channel to CPI inflation described above, since it has the shortest lag. For instance, any
disturbance to domestic inflation that could arise from a number of diﬀerent sources would be
countered by attempts to move the exchange rate so as to let the domestic price of imported and
exported final goods adjust to stabilize CPI inflation. This would require aggressive and volatile
policy and lead to considerable volatility in interest rates and the nominal and real exchange
rate, which would contribute to increased volatility of output, and surely be detrimental to
welfare.
    A more moderate policy, called “flexible inflation targeting” in the literature, maintains that
the primary goal of monetary policy is to achieve price stability in the form of an inflation target,
but also attaches some weight to stabilizing the business cycle and, consequently, stabilizing
output movements around potential output. In practice and in most situations, this means
taking a somewhat more gradual and more moderate approach to monetary policy, aiming
to achieve the inflation target at a somewhat longer horizon (say 2—3 years) than would be
technically feasible (perhaps 3—4 quarters). It also means accepting that inflation will, in the
short term, deviate, sometimes quite a bit, from the inflation target. This approach also relies
more on the aggregate demand channel than the direct exchange rate channel to inflation.
    It is sometimes said that monetary policy, with essentially only one instrument, the instru-
ment rate, can only have one goal, preferably low and stabile inflation. This is an oversimplifi-
cation. With only one instrument, monetary policy can still have several goals, as long as these
goals are weighted together into a single objective function, as discussed in greater detail in
section 3.1.
    7
      “Price stability” in the literature usually, somewhat inappropriately, refers to a situation with low and stable
inflation, and not only to a situation with a stable price level. Throughout this paper, I only discuss inflation
targeting, not price-level targeting. As discussed in Svensson [43], these are not identical. Inflation targeting
makes inflation stationary, but not the price level. Imperfect control of inflation introduces shocks to the price
level that are not undone. The price level becomes a random walk with drift. Even with a zero inflation target,
the price level becomes a random walk. Thus, the variance of the future price level increases linearly with the
forecast horizon. Price-level targeting, also with a steady increasing price-level target, would make the price level
trend-stationary and the variance of the future price level would be constant. Price-level targeting has, to my
knowledge, only been explicitly attempted in Sweden in the 1930s, see Berg and Jonung [9].


                                                          7
         Figure 2.1: The tradeoﬀ between inflation variability and output-gap variability




                                                       SIT


                              Output-gap variability
                                                         FIT



                                                                                     SOT

                                                             Inflation variability



2.2.1. The tradeoﬀ between inflation variability and output variability

The tradeoﬀ between inflation variability and output-gap variability and the choice between
strict and flexible inflation targeting have been discussed extensively in the monetary policy
literature, for instance, in several papers presented at the Jackson Hole symposia in 1996 and
1999 (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [21] and [22]). The tradeoﬀ is often illustrated
as in figure 2.1, with inflation variability around a given inflation target measured along the
horizontal axis and output-gap variability measured along the vertical axis. The intersection
of the axes corresponds to zero variability of inflation and the output gap, that is, inflation
always equal to the inflation target and the output gap always equal to zero. Because of the
complex transmission mechanism of monetary policy, unpredictable shocks, imprecise control
and inevitable uncertainty, zero variability is a completely infeasible outcome. Instead, the curve,
which can be called the Taylor curve, in honor of Taylor [53], where it first appeared, shows the
most eﬃcient and feasible combinations of inflation and output-gap variability that monetary
policy can achieve.8 Points above and to the right of the curve correspond to ineﬃcient monetary
policy, where either inflation variability or output-gap variability, or both, could be reduced by
better monetary policy. Points below and to the left of the curve correspond to outcomes
that are infeasible. The point SIT corresponds to strict inflation targeting, when the central
bank concentrates on stabilizing inflation without considering the consequences for output-gap
   8
     Taylor [53] measured inflation and output-gap variability in terms of standard deviations. Given the discussion
of a quadratic loss function in section 3, it is more convenient to express variability in terms of variances.


                                                                    8
variability. It results in the lowest feasible variability of inflation but high variability of the
output gap. A point such as FIT corresponds to flexible inflation targeting, where the central
bank puts some weight on stabilizing output-gap variability. It leads to somewhat increased
inflation variability but reduced output-gap variability. The point SOT, to the right outside the
figure, corresponds to “strict output-gap targeting”, when the central bank puts all weight on
stabilizing the output gap. It would lead to very high inflation variability or worse, since the
economy is then eﬀectively lacking a monetary anchor.
    Discussions among policymakers, experts and researchers in the monetary policy area (as
reported, for instance, in [21] and [22]) have by now resulted in considerable agreement that
flexible inflation targeting is the best compromise for monetary policy (see also Debelle [17]).
There is also general agreement that inflation-targeting central banks in industrialized countries
in practice conduct policy in this way. That is, they aim to stabilize inflation around the inflation
target but also to some extent stabilize output around potential output–acknowledging that,
because of the tradeoﬀ, unpredictable shocks, uncertainty and unavoidably imperfect control,
there will always remain some variability in both inflation and the output gap. The Federal
Reserve System, although not being as transparent and systematic as the inflation-targeting
central banks and probably having shifting goals over time, appears nevertheless to display
elements of flexible inflation targeting with a relatively large weight on output-gap stabilization.


2.2.2. Credibility and the tradeoﬀ between inflation and the output gap

One important mechanism for improving the tradeoﬀ is by achieving credibility, in the sense
of anchoring inflation expectations on the inflation target. With an explicit inflation target,
credibility of the inflation-targeting regime can be measured as the degree of proximity between
private-sector inflation expectations and the inflation target. Shocks to inflation expectations are
historically an important source of variability in inflation and output, since shifts in inflation
expectations have independent eﬀects on future inflation (the direct expectations channel to
domestic inflation mentioned above).9 Shifts in inflation expectations also cause additional
indirect disturbances to output and inflation by aﬀecting real interest rates and exchange rates.
As a result, volatility in inflation expectations shifts the curve in figure 2.1 up and to the right
and worsens the variability tradeoﬀ. Conversely, more stable inflation expectations anchored
on the inflation target improve the tradeoﬀ, shift the curve down and to the left, and allow
   9
      Goodfriend [25] discusses “inflation scares.” Debelle [17] discusses credibility and the tradeoﬀ between vari-
ability of inflation and the output gap.


                                                         9
inflation variability or output-gap variability (or both) to fall. This is also because inflation
expectations anchored on the inflation target create a strong tendency for actual inflation to
revert to the inflation target and, everything else equal, mean that monetary policy needs to be
less active. Interest rates and output need to move less to counter unfavorable movements in
inflation expectations. The economy is to some extent put on autopilot. This situation is every
inflation-targeting central banker’s dream. Although central bankers often may seem obsessed
with credibility, this obsession is for good reason.
   Practical experience shows that credibility has to be earned over time. In most new inflation-
targeting regimes, especially when initial inflation is high and a period of disinflation is required,
inflation expectations are high and credibility is low. An idea that makes a lot of sense is that, in
a new inflation-targeting regime, the central bank puts more weight on reducing and stabilizing
inflation and is a less flexible inflation targeter, in order to more quickly achieve credibility. The
cost would be more output-gap variability in the beginning of the regime. The benefit would be
an improved tradeoﬀ and lower variability of both inflation and the output gap later on, when
credibility has improved and the central bank can aﬀord to be a more flexible inflation targeter.
   This can be illustrated in terms of figure 2.1 in the following way: Suppose, because of
low initial credibility, that the economy initially is at a point northeast of point FIT, with
higher variability of both inflation and the output-gap. This initial point would be on an initial
tradeoﬀ curve located to the northeast of the curve through points FIT and SIT. Suppose the
central bank implements strict inflation targeting. This would correspond to a move northwest
along the initial tradeoﬀ curve. If credibility improves, the tradeoﬀ curve would shift to the
southwest, to the curve through points FIT and SIT. The economy would then be at point SIT.
If the central bank then implements flexible inflation targeting, the economy would move to
point FIT. Compared to the initial situation, the economy would benefit from lower variability
of both inflation and the output gap.


2.2.3. Independent stabilization of interest rates and the exchange rate

A separate issue is the desirability and feasibility of independent stabilization of interest rates
and the exchange rate. It is certainly possible for the central bank to stabilize either the
interest rate or the exchange rate somewhat, at the cost of increased variability of inflation
and/or the output gap. Is it desirable for the central bank to do so? Except in situations of
financial fragility with concerns about the stability of the financial and payment system (to be


                                                 10
discussed in section 4), I find it diﬃcult to see good reasons for such stabilization at the cost of
increased inflation and output-gap variability (see further discussion in section 3.1). In practice,
flexible inflation targeting, with a longer horizon to meet the inflation target and concern for
output-gap variability, will normally mean a more gradual approach and a less activist policy
and hence reduced interest rate variability. Since interest rate changes lead to exchange rate
changes, everything else equal, this also reduces exchange rate variability. Increased credibility
and increasingly stable inflation expectations will reduce a major source of shocks to both
interest rates and exchange rates. Thus, successful and credible flexible inflation targeting is
likely to contribute to less variability of interest rates and exchange rates. However, exchange
rates are by nature volatile asset prices and are aﬀected by a number of shocks beyond inflation
expectations and interest rate changes. Such shocks will continue to cause unavoidable exchange
rate variability.


2.3. Summary

In the long term, monetary policy can only control nominal variables such as inflation and the
nominal exchange rate. It cannot increase the average level or the growth rate of real variables
such as GDP and employment, or aﬀect the average level of the real exchange rate. At best it
can reduce the variability of real variables somewhat. In the short and medium term, monetary
policy has eﬀects on both nominal and real variables. However, the complex transmission mech-
anism of monetary policy, varying lags and strength of the eﬀects through diﬀerent channels,
unpredictable shocks and inherent uncertainty combine to prevent any fine-tuning. There is gen-
eral international support for a regime of flexible inflation targeting, where inflation is stabilized
around a low inflation target in the medium term (rather than at the shortest possible horizon)
and a gradual and measured policy response avoids creating unnecessary variability in the real
economy. This still leaves some ambiguity about the precise relative weight on output-gap sta-
bilization relative to inflation stabilization. I will argue in the next section that this remaining
ambiguity can be eliminated, and that it is a good thing to do so.


3. How to achieve the optimal compromise between inflation stability and
   output-gap stability

How can a central bank achieve the optimal compromise between inflation stabilization and
output-gap stabilization, while maintaining long-run price stability in the sense of an average

                                                 11
inflation equal to the inflation target? I believe this can be done by refined flexible inflation
targeting in the following way:

  1. The central bank first formulates, announces and motivates an explicit loss function for
     inflation deviations from the inflation target and output deviations from potential output.
     This loss function is eﬀective for several years. (Although this idea of an explicit loss
     function may appear quite shocking to some central bankers, as we shall see, we are only
     talking about one more number than the inflation target.)

  2. Before each major monetary-policy decision (say about every quarter), conditional on
     the central bank’s view of the transmission mechanism, its estimate of the current state
     of the economy, and its judgment about relevant circumstances and shocks, the central
     bank constructs a set of conditional (mean) forecasts, projections, of the target variables
     for alternative instrument-rate paths, thereby tracing out the feasible set of alternative
     inflation and output-gap projections.

  3. The central bank then selects the projections of inflation and the output gap in the fea-
     sible set that minimizes the loss function and thereby best fulfill the objectives. These
     projections will return inflation to the inflation target and output to potential output at
     the appropriate pace, thereby achieving the long-run inflation target as well as the best
     compromise between any short-run deviations of inflation from the inflation target and
     output deviations from potential output.

  4. The central bank announces the optimal projection of the target variables and the corre-
     sponding projection of the instrument-rate path (normally time-varying), and publishes
     and explains the analysis that results in these projections. These projections then be-
     come the central bank’s best unconditional forecast of future inflation, output gap and
     instrument rate (“unconditional” forecast in the standard sense of incorporating all rel-
     evant information, including the central bank’s best prediction of its future interest-rate
     setting).

  5. The central bank then sets the current instrument rate in line with the optimal instrument
     projection, and continues to do so until the next major monetary-policy decision.

  6. At the time of the next monetary-policy decision, the central bank repeats step 2-5, taking
     into account the new information that has arrived, its new estimate of the current state

                                               12
       of the economy, and its new judgment about relevant circumstances and shocks.

    It is worth emphasizing that the above is not a mechanical procedure and that it does not
rely on models only. Instead it allows for considerable judgment and discretion in constructing
the projections. It is an example of the “constrained discretion” that according to Bernanke
and Mishkin [13] characterizes inflation targeting. It has much in common with current best
international practice of inflation targeting, in New Zealand, the U.K. and Sweden.10 It is
“refined” flexible inflation targeting in that it goes beyond current best practice in making
precise and explicit (rather than implicit) the real stabilization objective and in formulating an
explicit loss function, and in using this loss function to select the optimal projections of inflation
and the output gap. It is similar to the practice in New Zealand of publishing a time-varying
projection for the interest rate, but it goes beyond the practice in Sweden and the U.K. of relying
on and publishing projections of inflation and output conditional on an unchanged interest rate.


3.1. Specifying an explicit loss function

An essential element in achieving the best compromise between inflation and output-gap sta-
bilization is obviously to specify what is meant by the best compromise. There are several
advantages to being explicit and transparent and avoiding ambiguity and obfuscation about the
loss function: Explicit objectives improve the focus inside the central bank on achieving the
goals, provide for more consistent policy, and allow more precise internal evaluation of past pol-
icy. Transparent communication of those objectives allows more precise and relevant external
monitoring and evaluation of central-bank policy, thereby improving the incentives for the cen-
tral bank to achieve the stated objectives. Furthermore, it allows scrutiny of and debate about
the objectives themselves, an essential aspect of a democracy.11
    Inflation-targeting central banks, although being strong advocates of transparency in mone-
tary policy, have so far avoided completely specifying their loss function. However, without such
specification, the precise monetary-policy objectives under inflation targeting are still open to
  10
     Some readers may ask why I do not include Canada as a country with best international practice of inflation
targeting. After all, Canada was the second country after New Zealand to introduce an explicit inflation target,
and Bank of Canada has considerable accumulated experience and has been quite influential in advising other
central banks introducing inflation targeting. The reason is that Bank of Canada does not yet live up to best
international practice when it comes to transparency, since it does not publish a detailed internal inflation forecasts.
When that occurs, I will be very pleased to list Bank of Canada as one of the best-international-practice inflation
targeters. However, the competition at the top may be stiﬀening: Bank of Norway, for instance, is a competent
and enthusiastic newcomer to the inflation-targeting camp, see Svensson, Houg, Solheim and Steigum [51].
  11
     Goodhart [26, p. 173] expresses some scepticism about feasibility of both establishing and minimizing an
explicit loss function for monetary policy. I argue in some detail against that scepticism in Svensson [49], on
which paper this section builds.



                                                          13
interpretation and continue to suﬀer from a lack of transparency. Especially, how much weight
is put on stabilizing the real economy relative to stabilizing inflation around the inflation tar-
get? Indeed, the objectives can be misunderstood. For instance, Meyer [35], although arguing
strongly in favor of a numerical inflation target, interprets the inflation-targeting regimes in
New Zealand, Canada and the U.K. as having a “hierarchical” mandate for price stability and
contrasts this with a “dual” mandate (which he favors) in Australia and the U.S. Although, as
explained below, I believe this distinction between a hierarchical and dual mandate is a misun-
derstanding of the nature of flexible inflation targeting (and I argue in Svensson [45] that New
Zealand is currently a prime example of flexible inflation targeting), as long as inflation targeting
central banks do not announce a precise loss function for monetary policy, misunderstandings
of the precise objectives are invited.
      The objectives corresponding to flexible inflation targeting can be described precisely by a
quadratic period loss function

                                       Lt = (π t − π ∗ )2 + λ(yt − ȳt )2 ,                                 (3.1)

where π t and yt denote inflation and output in period t, respectively, π ∗ is the inflation target,
ȳt is potential output, yt − ȳt is consequently the output gap, and λ > 0 is the relative weight
on output-gap stabilization. Thus, inflation and output are the “target variables,” that is,
the variables that enter the loss function. The corresponding “target levels” are π ∗ and ȳt ,
respectively. (Equivalently, we can say that inflation and the output gap are the target variables,
with the target levels π ∗ and 0, respectively.)
      Because of the lags in the eﬀect of monetary policy actions on inflation and output, the central
bank has to be forward-looking and consider the eﬀects of current monetary-policy actions on
future inflation and output gap. Furthermore, because of the unavoidable uncertainty and
imperfect control, the objectives have to be expressed in terms of expected future losses. Also,
potential output, ȳt , is an unobservable variable that has to estimated. This is achieved by
considering an intertemporal loss function in each period t in the form of expected discounted
future losses,
                                                             ∞
                                                             X
                                          Lt = (1 − δ)Et            δ τ Lt+τ ,                              (3.2)
                                                             τ =0

where δ (0 < δ < 1) is a discount factor and Et denotes expectations (estimations) conditional
on information available in period t.12
 12
      The scaling by 1 − δ of the expected sum of discounted future losses is practical, since it implies that the


                                                        14
    The target level for the output gap is thus equal to potential output. There is general
agreement that inflation-targeting central banks do normally not have overambitious output
targets, that is, exceeding potential output. Thus, discretionary optimization does not result
in average inflation bias, counter to the case in the standard Kydland-Prescott-Barro-Gordon
setup. Since the inflation target is subject to choice but the output target is given by (estimated)
potential output (as discussed above in section 2.2, having an output target for monetary policy
diﬀerent from potential output makes no sense), there is an asymmetry between the inflation
target and the output target, consistent with the inflation target being the “primary objective”
and a “hierarchical” mandate. On the other hand, once the inflation target has been determined,
the objective is to minimize an expected weighted sum of squared inflation deviations from the
inflation target and squared output deviations from potential output. In this sense, flexible
inflation targeting can be interpreted as a “dual” mandate. Thus, the hierarchical mandate
applies to the average level objectives, whereas the dual mandate applies to the variability
objectives. Thus, flexible inflation targeting can be interpreted as having both a hierarchical
and a dual mandate, and no conflict need arise between them.
    The intertemporal loss function has only three parameters: π ∗ , λ and δ. For an inflation-
targeting central bank, there is a specified inflation target (a point target or the midpoint of a
range), π ∗ , and a specified index measuring inflation. The inflation target can be determined
by the government, as in the U.K., specified in an agreement between the government and
the central bank, as in New Zealand, or determined by the central bank as an interpretation of
legislation specifying “price stability” as the target for monetary policy, as in Sweden. Regarding
the remaining two parameters, the discount factor and the relative weight, δ and λ, the discount
factor is for all practical purposes likely to be very close to one, especially when the period is
a quarter. Interestingly, when the discount factor is close to unity (and the intertemporal loss
function is scaled by 1 − δ as in (3.2)), the intertemporal loss function is approximately equal
to the weighted sum of the unconditional variances of inflation and the output gap,

                                      lim Lt = Var[π t ] + λVar[yt − ȳt ]                                    (3.3)
                                      δ→1

(when the unconditional means of inflation and the output gap equal the inflation target and
zero, respectively: E[π t ] = π ∗ and E[yt − ȳt ] = 0).13 As mentioned, flexible inflation targeting
sum of the scaled discount factors is unity, Σ∞            τ
                                              τ =0 (1 − δ)δ = 1. This implies that the sum is of the same order of
magnitude and in the same units as period losses.
  13
     However, a fine point to remember is that, since (3.3) does not allow derivatives with respect to inflation and
output gap in a particular (future) period, when such derivatives are needed, they must be computed before the


                                                        15
corresponds to a positive weight on output gap stabilization, λ > 0. Strict inflation targeting
would be the unrealistic case of a zero weight on output-gap stabilization, λ = 0. In figure
2.1, with the variance of inflation and the output gap along the axes, the indiﬀerence curves
corresponding the loss function (3.3) then corresponds to negatively sloped straight lines, with
the slope of the line being the reciprocal of λ. Thus, strict inflation targeting (λ = 0, 1/λ = ∞)
corresponds to vertical indiﬀerence lines, making the point SIT optimal. Strict output-gap
targeting (λ = ∞, 1/λ = 0) corresponds to horizontal indiﬀerence lines, making the point
SOT optimal. Flexible inflation targeting (λ > 0, 1/λ > 0) corresponds to negatively sloped
indiﬀerence lines, making a point like FIT optimal.
    Thus, there is eﬀectively actually only one parameter, λ, that needs to be determined be-
yond the inflation target for the loss function to be completely explicit. Thus, although some
(conservative?) central bankers may be shocked by the idea of determining and announcing
an explicit intertemporal loss function, we are only talking about one more number than the
inflation target. Furthermore, that number has a very simple interpretation, the relative weight
on output-gap variability relative to inflation variability in the loss function. Thus, a λ equal
one means that the central banker dislikes output-gap variability to the same extent as he or
she dislikes inflation variability. A λ equal to a half means that the central banker dislikes
output-gap variability by a half relative to the dislike of inflation variability.
    For the normal case of central banks where decisions are made by a committee, which we
generically call the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), majority voting is a natural mechanism
for aggregating decisions and preferences (New Zealand is the exception among industrialized
countries with a single decision maker for monetary policy). Since under majority voting, the
median wins, the MPC’s aggregate λ would be the median of the MPC members’ individual
λs.14 Of course, the MPC members may need some introspection and assistance in deciding what
their individually favored λ is, for instance, by ranking a few potential outcomes. Fortunately, as
noted above, the interpretation of λ is very simple, though. The members simply need to make
up their mind about what their relative dislike of output-gap variability relative to inflation
variability. (That is, λ is the marginal rate of substitution of inflation variance for output-gap
variance.)
limit is calculated. Along the same line of reasoning, objectives in the form of expected discounted future losses
like (3.2) with (3.1) are more operational than in the form (3.3), since the former form can be used to evaluate
single projections of inflation and the output gap (see further discussion below).
   14
      Let median(v) denote the median of the elements of the vector v. For an MPC with J members, let λj
denote the individually preferred relative weight of member j, j = 1, ..., J. Then the MPC’s aggregate relative
weight, λ̄, will simply be given by λ̄ = median(λ1 , λ2 , ..., λJ ).


                                                       16
    Since potential output is an unobservable variable that needs to be estimated, the members
also need to decide on what concept of potential output to be used and what is the best estimate
of potential output each time. Again, majority voting will result in the MPC’s concept and
estimate of potential output being the medians of the MPC members’ individual concepts and
estimates. (Of course, the MPC handles numerous such decisions on a number of variables,
especially those MPCs who are more actively involved in the projection process of the bank, so
such decisions are actually commonplace and not at all exotic.)
    Indeed, compared to many other real-world committee decisions, this aggregation procedure
into an MPC loss function is quite simple. After the MPC’s loss function has been specified,
the members could agree to jointly apply that loss function rather than their individual ones.
Such an aggregate loss function can be seen as the majority’s operational interpretation of
government instructions like the Chancellor’s letter to Bank of England or legislation like the
Swedish Riksbank Act or the U.S. Federal Reserve Act.15                 16


    Regarding additional objectives, like interest-rate stabilization and/or smoothing (corre-
sponding to additional terms λi (it − i∗ )2 + λ∆i (it − it−1 )2 ), my own view is that there are no
good reasons why they would enter a loss function corresponding to inflation targeting (this is
discussed in some detail in Svensson [50, section 5.6]). I believe the observed serial correlation
in actual instrument-rate settings can be explained by other circumstances (gradual updating of
  15
      Although some might argue (and even favor) that MPCs, especially the Federal Open Market Committee
of the Federal Reserve System, work by members having diﬀerent individual loss functions and voting according
to those individual loss functions, I find that situation of diﬀerent unknown loss functions inconsistent with a
reasonable degree of transparency.
  16
      Gaspar and Smets [24] discuss several cases when the central bank achieves better results, from the point
of view of society, if it has a relative weight on output-gap stabilization, λ, that is less than society’s, what is
called “weight-conservativeness” in Svensson [42]. The classic argument for weight-conservativeness is in Rogoﬀ
[40], where it reduces average inflation bias under discretion. This, of course, presupposes that the central bank
has an output target that exceeds potential output (an output-gap target that is positive), so there is an average
inflation bias in the first place. Average inflation bias seems to have more or less vanished from practical monetary
policy. I believe the best explanation for this is rather that central banks have become “output-conservative,” in
the sense of having an output-gap target equal to zero, as discussed above for inflation-targeting central banks.
This explanation is also consistent with the data, since countries with lower inflation do not have higher output
variability (higher output variability is a prediction of weight-conservativeness). Gaspar and Smets discuss more
recent arguments for weight-conservativeness, for instance, that it may reduce the “stabilization bias” that results
under discretion in more complex models than the original Kydland-Prescott-Barro-Gordon model. However,
stabilization bias is quite model-dependent, and it need not always go in the same direction. Furthermore, a
commitment to an optimal targeting rule, as in Svensson and Woodford [52], is a better way to avoid stabilization
bias, and the optimal targeting rule remains quite simple in the models considered by Gaspar and Smets. Ehrmann
and Smets [20] shows that, in the (very realistic) situation where there is uncertainty about potential output,
a weight-conservative central bank under discretion would only marginally improve social welfare. Even then, a
commitment to the relatively simple optimal targeting rule would be best. Orphanides and Williams [37] consider
a situation with simple learning and expectation formation by the private sector, in the form of the running of
simple regressions of current inflation on lagged inflation, and show that weight-conservativeness has the good
eﬀect of stabilizing inflation expectations. However, this is a very primitive form of learning, and transparent
inflation-targeting central banks aﬀect inflation expectations much more directly via published inflation forecasts
and by explaining how monetary policy works. On balance, I am not convinced by the various arguments presented
in favor of weight-conservativeness, and I believe that the MPC should not try to be weight-conservative relative
to society, except possibly when a new inflation-targeting regime needs to establish credibility, as discussed in
section 2.



                                                         17
unobservable state of the economy, implicit history-dependence corresponding to a commitment
to “continuity and predictability” or optimal policy in a time-less perspective, etc.). However, if
MPC members interpret the instruction from the government or the legislation as implying such
additional objectives, they could vote on how to specify them and make the corresponding terms
in the loss function explicit. Furthermore, as discussed in section 4, I believe that additional
objectives like financial stability and a functioning payment system can be best handled as con-
straints that do not bind under normal circumstances. In exceptional circumstances, when they
do bind, this could be explicitly announced and entered into the motivation for policy decisions.
Under normal circumstances, the constraints can be disregarded and do not aﬀect policy.
    The period loss function (3.1) is a symmetric loss function (the value for π t − π ∗ is the same
as the value for − (π t − π ∗ ), etc.). Some researchers have argued that asymmetric preferences
are relevant in monetary policy and also examined their implications. This would require a more
complex loss function. Put diﬀerently, a second-order approximation is not enough, and higher-
order terms are needed. I find a symmetric loss function for monetary policy very intuitive,
especially since these days not only too high inflation but also too low inflation is considered
undesirable, due to the risk of falling into liquidity traps and deflationary spirals (see section
5). Furthermore, more complex loss functions and more complicated tradeoﬀs may be too
sophisticated to be both operational and suﬃciently verifiable for reasonable accountability.17


3.2. Forecast targeting

Once the central bank has specified its precise loss function, how does it conduct policy so as to
actually minimize it? I believe “forecast targeting” is the way to do it.
    As discussed in section 2, monetary policy aﬀects the economy with considerable lags. Cur-
rent inflation and output are, to a large extent, determined by previous decisions of firms and
households. Normally, current monetary-policy actions can only aﬀect the future levels of infla-
tion and the output gap, in practice with substantial lags and with the total eﬀects spread out
over several quarters. This makes forecasts of the target variables crucial in practical monetary
policy. By “forecast targeting,” I mean using forecasts of the target variables eﬀectively as in-
termediate target variables, as in King’s [28] early characterization of inflation targeting. This
   17
      Nobay and Peel [36], ali-Nowaihi and Stracca [2] and Ruge-Mercia [41] examine alternative asymmetric
monetary-policy loss functions. Asymmetric loss functions are frequently motivated from a descriptive rather
than prescriptive point of view, for instance, corresponding to observed deviations from rational behavior. I
believe an informed and competent MPC deciding on the appropriate loss function should approach the issue
from a prescriptive point of view and select the most appropriate and rational loss function.



                                                     18
means minimizing a loss function where forecasts enter as arguments.18
    Let us assume that the transmission mechanism is approximately linear, in the sense that the
future target variables depend linearly on the current state of the economy and the instrument
rate. Furthermore, assume that any uncertainty and any deviation from the simple models enter
additively. Finally, let the intertemporal loss function be quadratic, as above in (3.1). It is then
a standard result in optimal-control theory that so-called certainty-equivalence applies, and that
optimal policy need only focus on conditional mean forecasts of the future target variables, that
is, mean forecasts conditional on the central bank’s current information and a particular future
path for the instrument rate. Since this implies treating the forecasts as (intermediate) target
variables (that is, putting forecasts of the target variables in the loss function), the procedure
can be called “forecast targeting.”19         20


    Let me be more specific. Let it = {it+τ ,t }∞
                                                τ =0 denote an instrument-rate plan in period t

(where it+τ ,t denotes the planned instrument level for period t + τ , τ ≥ 0). Conditional on
the central bank’s information in period t, denoted It (including its view of the transmission
mechanism, etc.), and its “judgment,” denoted z t , and conditional on alternative instrument-
rate plans it , consider alternative (mean) forecasts for inflation, π t = {π t+τ ,t }∞               t
                                                                                      τ =0 , output, y =

{yt+τ ,t }∞                          t             ∞                                     t    t
          τ =0 , potential output, ȳ = {ȳt+τ ,t }τ =0 , and hence for the output gap, y − ȳ = {yt+τ ,t −

ȳt+τ ,t }∞                                     t        t
          τ =0 . That is, π t+τ ,t = E[π t+τ | i , It , z ], the expectation of inflation in period t + τ ,

conditional on the instrument path it , the central bank’s information It and its judgment z t ,
etc. Furthermore, consider the intertemporal loss function in period t applied to the forecasts
of the target variables, that is, when the forecasts are substituted into the intertemporal loss
  18
     Meltzer [33], writing in 1986, emphasized the magnitude of forecast errors and expressed severe doubts about
discretionary policy based on forecasts and judgment. Evidence from the last decade undoubtedly puts policy,
that is based on forecasts and judgment but, in addition, is constrained by a more explicit objective and explained
in a transparent way, in a much better light.
  19
     In cases when the assumptions of a linear model and quadratic loss function are not fulfilled, as discussed
in Svensson [46] and [50], one can still apply “distribution forecast targeting,” where the forecasts are explicit
probability distributions and the intertemporal loss function is the explicit or implicit integral over those distri-
butions.
  20
     Bank of England and the Riksbank do not publish graphs of mean (that is, probability-weighted average)
forecasts in their Inflation Reports but rather of mode (that is, maximum probability) forecasts, with “fan charts”
and confidence intervals illustrating the probability distribution. Since the mode forecast has no special policy
relevance (unless the loss function is of the rather bizarre all-or-nothing kind, see Wallis [55] and Vickers [54]), it
would make more sense to plot graphs of mean forecasts. The mean and the mode are usually not that diﬀerent,
though, since they (for a uni-modal probability distribution) diﬀer only when the probability distribution is
asymmetric and the distribution is usually relatively symmetric. When the probability distribution is asymmetric,
there is usually some discussion in their Inflation Reports of the relative size of “upward” and “downward” risks,
which can perhaps be interpreted as a modification of the mode forecast towards the mean. If the mean would be
plotted instead, no such modification would be needed, and the fan chart can be interpreted as just displaying the
uncertainty of the forecast around the mean. This would be a more transparent way of communicating, I believe.




                                                          19
function (3.2) with (3.1),
                                       ∞
                                       X         £                                            ¤
                       Lt = (1 − δ)           δ τ (π t+τ ,t − π ∗ )2 + λ(yt+τ ,t − ȳt+τ ,t )2 .              (3.4)
                                       τ =0

    Each period t, conditional on the central bank’s forecasting model, information It and judg-
ment z t , the bank then finds the combination of feasible forecasts π t and yt − ȳt and instrument-
rate plan it that minimizes (3.4), and then makes the current instrument-rate decision according
to the current optimal instrument-rate plan. The process will result in an endogenous reaction
function for the current instrument-rate decision, it , a function it = F (It , z t ) of the central
bank’s information and judgment in period t. This reaction function need not be specified ex-
plicitly, however, and it need not be followed mechanically. (This is fortunate, since even in very
simple problems, this reaction function is often quite complicated.)21
    So which prices and quantities and other information available to the central bank would it
then respond to under this procedure? The answer is the prices, quantities and other information
that have an eﬀect on the projections. Put diﬀerently, the information available to the central
bank is filtered through the projections, and only the information that has an eﬀect on the
projection is worth responding to. Thus, the central bank may respond to current inflation,
output gap and other important variables, but only to the extent that these have an eﬀect on
the projections. To repeat, the implicit reaction function, it = F (It , z t ), will be a very complex
function of the central banks information and judgment, but fortunately the reaction function
can remain implicit and the central bank need not face the impossible task of making this
reaction function explicit. Thus, forecast targeting is very diﬀerent from a commitment to a
simple instrument rule, like the Taylor rule, as discussed in more detail in Svensson [50].
    More generally, since the central bank will only respond and adjust its instrument rate to
information that aﬀect the projections suﬃciently far, a large share of the new information will
not be responded, because it has no impact on the projections. Furthermore, apparently sizeable
pieces of information may have still have quite small impacts on the projections and therefore
lead to a very small response. Thus, there is no fine-tuning in the sense that there is not a
response to every incoming piece of information.
    Forecast targeting requires that the central bank has a view of what the policy multipliers
  21
     For simplicity I here abstract from a time-consistency problem that arises with models with forward-looking
variables. Even in the absence of an average inflation bias, this time-consistency problem results in “stabilization
bias” (non-optimal coeﬃcients in the implicit reaction function) and a lack of history-dependence. The magnitude
of the problem may be small in realistic models with relatively strong backward-looking elements. The nature of
the problem and possible solutions, including “a commitment to continuity and predictability” or a commitment
to an optimal targeting rule are discussed in Svensson and Woodford [52] and Svensson [50].


                                                           20
are, that is, how instrument-rate adjustments aﬀect the conditional inflation and output-gap
forecasts. But it does not imply that forecasts must be exclusively model-based. Instead, it
allows for extra-model information and judgmental adjustments, as well as very partial infor-
mation about the current state of the economy. It basically allows for any information that is
relevant for the inflation and output-gap forecasts.
       How would the central bank find the optimal projections and instrument-rate plan? One
possibility is that, conditional on the information It and the judgment z t , the central-bank
staﬀ generates a set of alternative projections for a set of alternative instrument-rate plans.
This way, the staﬀ constructs the transformation set of feasible projections and instrument-rate
plans. The MPC would then select the combination of projections that “looks best,” in the
sense of achieving the best compromise between stabilizing the inflation gap and stabilizing the
output gap, that is, minimizes (3.4). This can be done informally with visual inspection of
the projections. It can also be done more formally with the explicit loss function, since then
the loss for each combination of inflation and output-gap projections can easily be calculated
numerically. (To do the latter is one of my suggestions to the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in
Svensson [45].)
       Another possibility is that the MPC determines a “targeting rule,” a condition that the
projections of the target variables must fulfill. Conditional on the information and the judgment,
the staﬀ then has to generate the combination of projections of the target variables that fulfills
the targeting rule and the corresponding instrument-rate plan. The Bank of England and
the Riksbank have formulated a simple targeting rule to guide policy, which can be expressed
approximately as “set the instrument-rate so a constant-interest-rate inflation forecast about
two years ahead is on target” (Goodhart [26] and Heikensten [27]).22 With the period being a
quarter, this targeting rule can be written

                                                   π t+8,t = π ∗ ,

with the understanding that the inflation forecast is constructed under the assumption of a
constant interest rate. Although this targeting rule is both simple and operational, it is not
likely to be optimal.
  22
     As Goodhart [26, p. 177] puts it: “When I was a member of the MPC I thought that I was trying, at each
forecast round, to set the level of interest rates so that , without the need for future rate changes, prospective
(forecast) inflation would on average equal the target at the policy horizon. This was, I thought, what the exercises
was supposed to be.”
   Nevertheless, Bank of England (2000, p. 67) states that “[h]owever, there is no mechanical link between the
projected level of inflation in two years time based on constant interest rates and the appropriate current setting
of monetary policy.”


                                                         21
    As is discussed in some detail in Svensson [50] and [49], an optimal targeting rule instead
expresses the equality of the marginal rates of transformation (in the transmission mechanism)
and substitution (in the loss function) between the target variables in an operational way. In
the popular New Keynesian model with a forward-looking Phillips curve, this targeting rule has
the simple form

                                         λ
                       π t+τ ,t − π ∗ = − [(yt+τ ,t − ȳt+τ ,t ) − (yt+τ −1,t − ȳt+τ −1,t )],                  (3.5)
                                         κ

where λ is the relative weight on output-gap stabilization in the loss function and κ is the slope
of the short-run Phillips curve. That is, the targeting rule says that the deviation of the inflation
projection from the inflation target should be negatively proportional to the projection of the
output-gap change, where the proportionality factor is the ration between the relative weight
on output-gap stabilization and the slope of the short-run Phillips curve.
    As discussed more thoroughly in Svensson [50], the optimal targeting rule has the attractive
properties that it only depends on the marginal tradeoﬀs between the target variables. Therefore,
it only depends on the loss function (via the relative weight λ) and the form of the aggregate
supply/Phillips curve (via the slope of the short-run Phillips curve, κ). In particular, judgment
does not enter explicitly in the optimal targeting rule. Still, judgment will be incorporated in
the construction of the forecasts. Furthermore, the targeting rule solves the time-consistency
problem, so that it corresponds to the full commitment equilibrium “in a time-less perspective”
(Woodford [56] and Svensson and Woodford [52]). Thus, it causes no “stabilization bias” and it
has the appropriate “history-dependence” that is a characteristic of the fully optimal solution
when there are forward-looking variables.
    We note that the intertemporal loss function (3.4) and the optimal targeting rule (3.5) refer
to the whole future path of the inflation and output-gap projections. It does not refer to a
specific horizon, like the two-year horizon emphasized by Bank of England and the Riksbank
at which the inflation forecast shall be on target. Indeed, the focus on a specific horizon is not
supported by this approach.23         24

  23
     Furthermore, as discussed in Svensson [47], inflation-forecast targeting, either in the general form of mini-
mizing a loss function over forecasts or in the specific form of fulfilling a targeting rule is generally not the same
thing as implementing a “forecast-based” instrument rule, as
                                                it = γ(πt+T,t − π∗ ),
where the instrument rate responds to a T -period-ahead inflation forecast, or the variants thereof that originated
in Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model and are examined by, for instance, Batini and Haldane [6],
McCallum and Nelson [32] and Batini and Nelson [8].
  24
     Batini and Nelson [8] discuss two very diﬀerent definitions of the policy horizon in monetary policy, calling



                                                         22
3.3. Time-varying instrument-rate paths

The above decision-making process centers on finding the optimal combination of inflation and
output-gap projections and instrument-rate plan, the (π t , xt , it ) that minimizes the intertemporal
loss function or fulfill the targeting rule, conditional on current information, including the view
of the transmission mechanism, and current judgement. There is no reference to the forecasts
conditional on an unchanged instrument rate that are used by Bank of England and the Riksbank
(and by the Eurosystem as well). Thus, the process involves the MPC agreeing on forecasts and
instrument-rate plans that normally are time-varying.
    One argument against using time-varying interest-rate paths has been formulated by Good-
hart [26, p.172—173]: “[I]t is hard to see how a committee could ever reach a majority for any
particular time path. A great advantage of restricting the choice to what to do now, this month,
is that it makes the decision relatively simple, even stark. Given the diﬃculties involved already
in achieving majority agreement in the MPC on this simple decision, the idea of trying to choose
a complete time path by discretionary choice seems entirely fanciful and counter-productive.”
    I am not convinced by this argument. MPCs are already agreeing on time-varying inflation
and output forecasts, so agreeing on a time-path does not seem to be impossible at all. It is true
that there are general problems aggregating preferences in a MPC and that it is easiest to vote
about a one-dimensional issue, like an instrument-rate level (or the parameter λ as discussed
above). In particular, majority voting will lead to the median-voter outcome, in which the
median of the MPC members’ individually favored levels of the instrument-rate will be chosen.
    Along these lines, I have a simple proposal for how an MPC can reach agreement on an
instrument-rate plan: Let each MPC member plot his/her preferred instrument-rate plan in
the same graph with the future periods (quarters) on the horizontal axis and the instrument
rate on the vertical axis (the resulting set of curves might cross each other at several future
dates). Form the MPC’s aggregate instrument-rate plan by taking the median of the instrument
rates for each future quarter.25 This median instrument-rate plan can be seen as the result of a
majority vote in a particular voting procedure.26 Conditional on this instrument-rate plan, agree
them the “optimal policy horizon” and the “optimal feedback horizon.” The former refers to the horizon at
which inflation reaches the target after a shock away from the target; the latter refers to the optimal horizon T
for a forecast in a forecast-based instrument rule. In general, there is no specific relation between the leads of
inflation that appear in the optimal specific targeting rule and the leads that correspond to these optimal-horizon
definitions. Put diﬀerently, there is no specific “optimal horizon.”
   25
        Let each member j, j = 1, ..., J, of the MPC individually prefer the instrument-rate plan itj ≡
{ijt+τ ,t }∞                                                                      t            ∞
           τ =0 in period t. Then the MPC’s aggregate instrument-rate plan, ı̄ ≡ {ı̄t+τ ,t }τ =0 , fulfills ı̄t+τ ,t =
             1     2             J
median(it+τ ,t , it+τ ,t , ..., it+τ ,t ) for all τ ≥ 0.
   26
       The proposal can be seen as a mechanism for aggregating preferences that avoids the so-called Condorcet


                                                         23
on the inflation and output-gap projection. If necessary, let each MPC plot his/her projection
of inflation and the output gap, and pick the median outcome of these. If these do not look
good, let each MPC member consider new individual instrument-rate plans, and then take the
median of these. I would be surprised if this procedure does not converge very quickly.
    The observant reader will realize that a median instrument-rate plan and inflation and
output-gap projections picked this way need not be entirely consistent, in the sense that the me-
dian inflation and output-gap projections may include segments that correspond to instrument-
rate plans diﬀering from the median instrument-rate plan. Still, I believe any such inconsistency
must be a minor problem, and a final round of adjustments in the MPC’s decision may explicitly
aim to reduce or eliminate any such inconsistency. Furthermore, the staﬀ of the central bank
will be able to spot any inconsistencies and assist the MPC in eliminating them.
    The resulting instrument-rate plan and inflation and output-gap projections would then be
seen as reflecting the majority view of the MPC. Dissenters then have the option to explicitly
dissent in the minutes of the meeting. The general setup with the MPC’s decision reflecting the
majority view and the possibility of dissent is already used by the Riksbank’s Executive Board.
I think it is more logical and easy to understand than the idea of the “best collective judgment”
used by Bank of England’s MPC (see Kohn [29]).
    The advantages in using the optimal inflation and output-gap projections and instrument
plans (rather than inflation and output-gap projections conditional on a constant interest rate)
seem overwhelming to me: (1) This combination of projections and instrument plan are the best
forecasts of inflation, the output gap and the instrument rate conditional on the information
available and the central bank’s judgment. This means that it makes sense to compare these to
private-sector forecasts, and to actual outcomes. (2) It is longer real interest rates rather than
the short real rate that aﬀects aggregate demand. Therefore, monetary policy is more eﬀective if
it impacts the whole term structure of interest rates. The best way to do this is to announce the
central bank’s instrument-rate plan. (3) When policy is credible, there would be little diﬀerence
between these central-bank forecasts and market expectations for inflation, the output gap and
interest rates. This means that market values of exchange rates and asset prices can without
inconsistency be used as inputs in the projections.
paradox, that with multiple policy alternatives there may not be a policy that commands a majority vote against
all alternatives (see, for instance, Person and Tabellini [38]). The proposal means that the MPC members vote
simultaneously on the instrument rate for all future periods, by each member first writing down his/her preferred
instrument rate for each period. The aggregate instrument rate for each period t + τ , the median rate for that
period, can then be seen as the result of voting on the instrument rate in that period, independently of the outcome
of the voting for other periods.


                                                        24
   Goodhart [26, p. 175] presents another argument against time-varying instrument-rate plans,
namely that a time-variable path would imply some degree of undesirable commitment to fu-
ture policy actions, and that such commitments would be burdensome and undesirable. I am
not convinced by that argument either. Observers of inflation-targeting central banks are al-
ready used to seeing published graphs of time-varying inflation and output-gap forecasts, and
they have already learned that new information may warrant revisions of previously announced
forecasts. There is no diﬀerence between revising a forecast of optimal time-varying interest
rates due to new information and revising other forecasts. Furthermore, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand already publishes time-varying interest-rate forecasts that are revised when new
information arrives, and during my review [45], I did not notice that this created any problems
or misunderstanding by observers of the bank.
   In addition, to the extent that published instrument-rate paths would be understood as
some degree of commitment, this may actually be a good thing. It is a well-known result that
optimal policy with forward-looking variables require a degree of history-dependence and inertia
(as discussed in classic papers by Backus and Driﬃll [3] and Currie and Levine [16], and more
recently by Woodford [57] and Svensson and Woodford [52]).
   Once the central bank has settled on the preferred projections of inflation and the output
gap, and the corresponding instrument-rate plan, transparency requires that it publishes these,
as well as the preceding analysis and deliberations, in a regular publication, like the Inflation
Reports of Bank of England and the Riksbank and the Monetary Policy Statement of the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand. This way external observers can scrutinize and evaluate the analysis and
decisions, which provides the best incentive for high quality analysis and decisions in the first
place. Furthermore, the impact on inflation expectations and the term structure of interest rates
is maximized, and the implementation of monetary policy thereby becomes most eﬀective. The
only thing that remains until next monetary-policy decision is then to set the instrument rate
in accordance with the announced plan.


4. Financial stability and asset prices

4.1. Financial stability

Maintaining financial stability, including a well-functioning payment system, is an important
objective for many central banks. How can this objective be reconciled with flexible inflation



                                               25
targeting, when do conflicts arise, and how can they be handled?
       Does financial stability belong in the loss function for the central bank, together with infla-
tion and the output gap? I believe the best way of handling this additional objective is as a
constraint on monetary policy rather than as separate target variable that appears in the loss
function.27 The reason is that (at least in industrialized countries) under normal circumstances
financial stability is good and does not pose any constraint on monetary policy. Only rarely,
when financial crises occur, does financial stability impose constraints on monetary policy and
force the central bank to modify its decisions. Typically, monetary policy is modified in a direc-
tion towards more expansionary policy, in order to improve the situation for a fledging financial
sector, perhaps winning some time for a financial sector clean-up and reform. A transparent
central bank would then explicitly announce when financial-stability concerns restrict its policy
and motivate the corresponding deviation from normal policy (for instance, a deliberate over-
shooting of the inflation target). The nature of the constraint would seem to be quite complex
and diﬃcult to specify in advance, for instance, having to do with probability assessments of
various bankruptcies in the financial sector. The complexity of the constraint of course makes
it attractive to regard it as a constraint that does not bind and can be disregarded in normal
times.28
       How does the central bank know whether the constraint binds or not? It knows by contin-
ually monitoring the state of the financial sector. In some countries, for instance, Sweden, the
U.K., and Norway, the central bank publishes a regular Financial Stability Report (typically
semiannually). This report includes analysis of indicators of the state of the financial sector,
in particular early-warning indicators of potential future problems. (Producing and publish-
ing such a regular report is one of the proposals for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in my
review [45].) These reports serve to assure the general public and economic agents that every-
thing is well in the financial sector when this is the case. They also served as early warnings
for the agents concerns and for the financial-regulation authorities when problems show up at
the horizon. Early action can then prevent any financial instability to materialize, keeping the
  27
     There is an equivalence between a constraint and a modified loss function (this is the idea behind using a
Lagrangian to solve a constrained optimization problem). In the same way as there is, for an import quota, an
equivalent alternative (variable) import tariﬀ, there is, for a given restriction, an equivalent alternative additional
term in the loss function with an endogenous and nonlinear shadow price of the constraint. The endogeneity and
nonlinearity of the shadow price make the additional term in the loss function more complex than a quadratic
term, though.
  28
     A constraint that binds in some situations and not in others introduces a nonlinearity. Then the conditions for
certainty-equivalence, by which the mean projections of the target variables are suﬃcient, are no longer fulfilled.
Strictly, the central bank should then apply the “distribution forecast targeting” referred to in footnote 19.
Continuing to use mean projections may still be an acceptable approximation, more so the smaller the probability
of the constraint binding.


                                                          26
probability of future financial stability very low.


4.2. Asset prices and bubbles

Much recent discussion has focused on to what extent the central bank should take account of
asset prices and, in particular, potential asset-price bubbles? In the forecast targeting described
above, asset prices will aﬀect policy to the extent they are deemed to aﬀect the projections of
the central bank’s target variables, inflation and the output gap.
    Suppose asset-price increases or an asset-price bubble is deemed to eventually increase spend-
ing on consumption and investment so that aggregate demand exceeds potential output. The
central bank would then project a higher future output gap and higher future inflation, and,
everything else equal, the central bank would respond with a tighter instrument-rate plan. Sup-
pose a large asset-price increase is deemed to be fragile and a possible bubble, with a significant
risk for a future collapse. Suppose further that a future collapse is deemed to have undesirable
consequences for inflation and the output gap. Then the bank faces a delicate situation. It is
possible that an instrument-rate plan with a higher instrument-rate in the near future will be
deemed to dampen asset-price increases in the near future and also reduce the risk or size of
a collapse in the farther future, this way providing a more stable development of inflation and
the output gap. These are examples of situations when the central bank may choose to respond
to asset-price developments. However, the reason for those responses is that the central bank
is concerned with the repercussions for inflation and the output gap, not with the asset prices
as such. That is, asset prices are not target variables; they do not enter the loss function. It
goes without saying that in most realistic situations, it will be very diﬃcult to judge whether
a particular asset-price movement is grounded in expectations about reasonable fundamentals
or a bubble, and whether there are repercussions on inflation and the output gap that motivate
adjustment of the instrument-rate plan. This is obviously an area where good judgment is cru-
cial. It is not a place for any mechanical adjustment to asset prices or bubbles. (Svensson [50]
discusses the unavoidable role of judgment in monetary policy in greater detail.) The central
bank’s reaction will not be stable but shift with its judgment, and counter to substantial parts
of the literature, I do not believe that is productive to discuss these issues directly in terms of
the central bank’s reaction function, for instance, as modifications of a Taylor rule.29
  29
      The role of asset prices and bubbles in inflation target has been the subject of relatively intensive debate in,
for instance, Batini and Nelson [7], Bernanke and Gertler [11] and [12], Cecchetti, Genberg, Lipsky and Wadhwani
[14] and Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani [14]. Most of this debate has been in terms of whether or not an
instrument rule should include responses to asset prices and bubbles. This is, in my mind, too mechanical an


                                                         27
    Asset-price movements and asset-price bubbles may directly threaten financial stability and
cause the financial-stability constraints on monetary policy to bind. Thus, the central bank
may want to respond to asset price developments that bring increased risk of future financial
instability. Again, in many realistic situations, the diﬃculty in making such judgments will be
very large, and there will in many cases be insuﬃcient information for taking such preemptive
action.
    Preemptive action to avoid future financial instability and corresponding future constraints
on monetary policy is an example of preemptive avoidance of future restrictions on policy. It is
from a principle point of view similar to preemptive action in order to avoid a future binding zero
bound on the instrument rate, to be discussed in section 5. Furthermore, because a restriction
that binds in some situations and not in others is inherently nonlinear, policy that attempts to
avoid future restrictions will also tend to be nonlinear. Indeed, with nonlinear restrictions for
objectives or in the transmission mechanism, optimal policy is nonlinear rather than linear.


5. The zero bound, a liquidity trap and deflation

Low inflation and low nominal interest rates imply some risk for hitting the zero (lower) bound
for nominal interest rates. Flexible inflation targeting aimed at low and stable inflation and a
stable output gap needs to take the zero bound, a liquidity trap and the risks of a deflationary
spiral into account. The risk of the economy falling into a liquidity trap needs to be kept
small. Ways of escaping from a liquidity trap, if the economy would ever fall in, also need to be
considered.30
    Suppose the economy is hit by bad shocks that cause both a recession (a negative output
gap) and deflation. The central bank would like to stimulate the economy (there is in this case
no conflict between getting out of the recession and getting inflation back to normal) and lower
the interest rate. The central bank can only lower the nominal instrument rate to zero. With
deflation and expectations of deflation, the real interest rate (the nominal interest rate plus
expectations of deflation) may still be higher than the level required to stimulate the economy
out of recession and deflation. If the nominal interest rate is zero, the economy is satiated
with liquidity. Open-market operations by the central bank to expand the monetary base by
approach to the question of whether or not inflation-targeting central banks should respond to the information
contained in asset prices and bubbles. As discussed in Svensson [50], with judgment playing an essential role,
the central-bank reaction function becomes overwhelmingly complex, and it is more practical to discuss policy in
terms of the much simpler optimal targeting rule, the Euler condition of optimal monetary policy.
  30
     Two conference volumes, Fuhrer and Sniderman [23] and Bank of Japan [48], discuss these issues at length.



                                                      28
buying Treasury bills have no eﬀect on prices and quantities (other than quantity of money
and outstanding quantity of Treasury bills). The private sector is eﬀectively indiﬀerent between
holding zero-interest-rate Treasury bills and money (once money holdings exceed the satiation
point, the transactions and precautionary demand for money at a zero interest rate) and simply
holds less Treasury bills and more money. This is a liquidity trap: expanding liquidity (the
monetary base) beyond the satiation point has no eﬀect. Because the real interest rate is too
high, the economy may sink further into a spiral of deflation and depression. This is the night-
mare of central bankers. Fortunately, it is a nightmare whose realization can be made very
unlikely.
       There are two parts of the solution to the problems associated with the zero bound and a
liquidity trap. The first part concerns how to avoid hitting the zero bound and falling into a
liquidity trap; the second part concerns how to escape from a liquidity trap after falling in.
       As discussed more extensively in my contribution [43] to the Jackson Hole symposium 1999, a
credible positive symmetric inflation target larger or equal to 1 percent (per year) is an eﬀective
way to avoid falling into a liquidity trap. An inflation target of 2 percent, say, provides an
ample margin to the liquidity trap. Suppose transparent inflation targeting succeeds in making
this target credible, so that private inflation expectations are anchored at the target. If the
normal real interest rate is about 2 percent, the average nominal interest will then be about 4
percent. If the inflation target remains credible, so that inflation expectations remain about 2
percent, reducing the nominal interest rate to zero gives a real interest rate of minus 2 percent, 4
percentage points below the normal real interest rate. This would, in most cases, provide ample
stimulus to the economy.
       Indeed, forecast targeting as discussed above automatically means watching for changes in
future inflation and reacting in time, well before actual inflation has turned into deflation. The
MPC selecting the feasible projection of inflation and the output gap that minimizes the loss
function as discussed in section 3 will automatically avoid projections and policy that get stuck
in a liquidity trap. This is most eﬀective if the loss function is symmetric around the inflation
target (and is perceived to be so by the private sector), and if the central bank acts as decisively
to inflation projections falling below the target as to those falling above.31
  31
     As for the restriction corresponding to financial stability discussed above (footnote 28), the zero bound
implies a nonlinearity that strictly violates the certainty-equivalence results that implies that mean forecasts are
suﬃcient to guide policy. In most cases, it is still probably an acceptable approximation to continue to use mean
forecasts when the probability of the zero bound binding is positive. However, if the central bank deems that the
approximation is not suﬃciently good, it may need to shift to distribution-forecast targeting.




                                                        29
    The above goes a long way to prevent sustained deflation and a liquidity trap from ever
materializing. Still, given the potential harm a liquidity trap and a deflationary spiral may
cause, and given the small, but still positive risk that a series of unfortunate shocks may push
even an exemplary inflation-targeting regime close to a liquidity trap, as discussed in more detail
in [43], an additional safeguard for prudent central banks and fiscal authorities is to prepare for
the worst and make advance contingency plans for a series of expansionary emergency measures
to be undertaken at prescribed indications of an imminent liquidity trap.


5.1. The foolproof way

If the economy has fallen into a liquidity trap, with a zero nominal interest rate, deflation, and
recession or even depression, there is as mentioned above no conflict between stabilizing the real
economy and achieving the (positive) inflation target. From the point of view of both objectives,
strongly expansionary policy is called for. As several authors have pointed out, an open economy
has access to a very eﬀective stimulative measure, namely a currency depreciation. From that
insight, I have constructed a specific proposal, the foolproof way to escape from a liquidity
trap, published as an academic article with all technical details, [48], in a conference volume
from a conference organized by Bank of Japan and as a newspaper article, [44], in Financial
Times. Although this proposal is directed to the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance of
Japan (the latter because the MOF is formally in charge of exchange rate policy in Japan), the
foolproof way applies to any suﬃciently open economy that has fallen into a liquidity trap.32                   33


    Getting Japan out of recession/depression and deflation arguably is arguably the world’s
most urgent monetary-policy task. Japan has already lost a decade to economic stagnation and
deflation. Its monetary policy has been said to represent the world’s worst monetary-policy
mistake since the Great Depression. Without drastic policy measures, Japan may very well lose
another decade. The zero-interest-rate policy implemented from February 1999 to August 2000,
and again from March 2001, via the “quantitative easing” (expanding the monetary base), is not
suﬃciently expansionary to induce a recovery. With expectations of deflation, the real interest
  32
     An ambitious Federal Reserve Board paper on preventing deflation and the lessons from Japan’s experience
strangely leaves out any discussion of a currency depreciation, Ahearne et al. [1, fn. 7]: “In this paper, we focus
on the constraints to conventional monetary policy posed by the zero-lower-bound on nominal interest rates. We
do not dispute the possibility of using other nonconventional means of monetary stimulus once the zero bound is
reached—see Krugman (1998), Goodfriend (1997, 2000), Bernanke (2000), Clouse, Henderson, Orphanides, Small
and Tinsley (2000), and Svensson (2001), among others, as well as Ueda (2001) for the BOJ’s views toward such
options. Nevertheless, we would agree with many analysts that once the zero bound is reached, reactivating the
economy becomes more diﬃcult and more uncertain.”
  33
     See www.princeton.edu/∼svensson/japan/japan.htm for more details on Japan and the foolproof way.



                                                        30
rate remains positive. But the zero interest rate need not be the limit for monetary expansion.
Indeed, there is a foolproof way to jump-start the Japanese economy. The BOJ (in charge of
monetary policy) and the MOF (in charge of exchange rate policy) could cooperate to replace
stagnation and deflation by growth and low inflation.
   The foolproof way is to announce (1) an upward-sloping price-level target path to be achieved,
(2) a depreciation and a temporary peg of the yen, and (3) the future abandonment of the peg
in favor of inflation targeting when the price-level target path has been reached; then, the policy
authorities just have to behave accordingly.
   The price-level target path provides the best nominal anchor and also an exit strategy for
the temporary peg. It can start above the current price level, by any “price gap” to be undone.
Several years of zero or negative deflation may have resulted in a price level below previous
expectations, increased the real value of debt and contributed to deteriorating balance sheets
for firms and banks. The price gap may be 10-20 percent or more. The upward slope corresponds
to a small positive inflation target appropriate to for Japan, 1 or 2 percent, say.
   How to achieve the price-level target? This is the role of the depreciation and the temporary
peg. First, a depreciation and temporary peg of the yen is technically feasible. If the peg would
fail, the yen would appreciate back to where it was, making it a good investment. Thus, initially,
before the peg’s credibility has been established, there will be excess demand for yen. This is
easily fulfilled, though, since the BOJ can print unlimited amounts of yen and sell those for
foreign exchange. Indeed, there is a big diﬀerence between defending a fixed exchange rate for
a strong currency under appreciation pressure (when foreign-exchange reserves rise) and for a
weak currency under depreciation pressure (when foreign exchange reserves fall). Thus, the peg
can be maintained, and after a day or a few, the peg’s credibility will have been established.
   Second, in order to be eﬀective, the initial depreciation of the yen should be so large that
it results in a real depreciation relative to any conceivable long-run equilibrium real exchange
rate. This may require a peg at 140 or 150 yen to the dollar, or even more. Then the future
must eventually bring a real appreciation. Thus, the market and the general public must expect
a future real appreciation. But with an exchange rate peg, the real appreciation can only occur
with a rise in the domestic price level. Hence, by pure logic, once the credibility of the exchange
rate peg has been established, the market and the general public must expect future inflation in
Japan. Thus, gloomy deflation expectations will be replaced by optimistic inflation expectations.
   Third, the expected future real appreciation of the yen will induce a desirable fall in the long


                                                31
real interest rate in Japan. Indeed, equilibrium on the international capital market requires that
the expected real return on investment in Japan and the rest of the world (including expected
real exchange rate movements) move approximately in parallel. This fall in the long real rate in
Japan can also be seen as the result of the increased inflation expectations noted above.
   All this will jump-start the Japanese economy and increase output and the price level. First,
the real depreciation will stimulate Japanese export and import-competing sectors. Second, the
lower long real interest rate will stimulate Japanese consumption and investment. Aggregate
demand and output will rise. Third, the real depreciation, the increased aggregate demand, and
the increased inflation expectations will all contribute to inflation and an increasing price level.
   The price level will approach the price-level target path from below. When the price-level
target has been reached, the peg is abandoned, the yen floated, and the BOJ can adopt explicit
inflation targeting.
   The foolproof way can be followed unilaterally by Japan, without cooperation from countries
in the region or from the U.S. The objections to a real depreciation of the yen that have been
voiced by other countries in the region and some U.S. oﬃcials are mistaken. Expansion in Japan
requires a lower real interest rate, and a real depreciation is the unavoidable mirror image of
a lower real interest rate. A real depreciation means that Japanese exporters get a short-term
competitive edge, but growth in Japan and increased aggregate demand will increase Japan’s
import from the rest of the world. A real depreciation has both a substitution and an income
eﬀect on the trade balance. These eﬀects are of opposite signs. Thus, the real depreciation
will tend to increase Japan’s trade surplus. But the income eﬀect, due to increased output,
employment and income in Japan, will tend to reduce the trade surplus, because of Japan’s
increased import. Therefore, the net eﬀect on the trade balance is probably quite small. The
foolproof way is therefore not a beggar-thy-neighbor policy, except possibly in the very short
run. In the medium and long run, the region, the US, and the world will gain substantially from
an expansion in Japan. In particular, if the rest of the world is sluggish, Japan is needed even
more as an engine of growth and trade.
   Other proposals for Japan have focused on introducing inflation targeting (for instance,
Bernanke [10], Krugman [30] and Posen [39]) and/or depreciating the yen (for instance, Bernanke
[10], McCallum [31] and Meltzer [34]). The foolproof way is consistent with these proposals, but
it provides better benchmarks, in the form of a peg for the yen, a price-level target path, and
an exit strategy for the peg. The peg also provides an arena where the BOJ and the MOF can


                                                32
quickly demonstrate their resolve to end stagnation and deflation and thereby gain credibility.
   Finally, the foolproof way is not a substitute for the structural reform and a clean-up of
the financial sector in Japan that many observers recommend. Importantly, it is a complement
rather than a substitute to these other policy actions.
   Some commentators (The Economist [19] and Financial Times [18], as well as a number of
newsletters from various investment banks) seem to assume that the only eﬀects of a depreciation
of the yen are a rise in the Japanese CPI due to increased import prices and a stimulation of
exports. They have consequently concluded that the eﬀect of an exchange-rate depreciation is
more modest. As shown above, and fortunately for Japan, the eﬀects of a depreciation and
a peg of the yen depend on the whole policy package of the foolproof way and will therefore
be much more widespread. Thus, the main eﬀect of a depreciation of the yen and a peg is
not the direct eﬀect on CPI inflation trough domestic prices of imports (the direct exchange-
rate channel to CPI inflation mentioned in section 2). This direct exchange-rate eﬀect is an
additional eﬀect to the ones mentioned above for the foolproof way. Thus, the foolproof way
discussed increased inflation of domestically produced goods and services, that is, the Japanese
GDP deflator, increased expectations of inflation in the GDP deflator, and increased demand for
domestically produce goods and services from a lower real Japanese GDP-deflator interest rate,
the nominal interest rate less inflation of the GDP deflator. Indeed, the “price level” referred to
in the foolproof way is really the GPD-deflator, not the CPI. (This is made clear in the technical
article [48] but not in the popular article [44]. The foolproof way can also be expressed in terms
of the CPI price level, but the analysis is then slightly more complex.)
   The foolproof way takes the rest of the world as given and, in particular, assumes that the
rest of the world is not in a liquidity trap and a deflationary spiral but has positive inflation
and a positive nominal interest rate (which has fortunately always been the case since the Great
Depression). If the rest of the world would also be in a deflationary spiral (a highly unlikely
outcome if the rest of the world has suﬃciently positive inflation targets), it and Japan can
obviously not apply the foolproof way at the same time.
   Some commentators have been concerned about the fall in Japanese bond prices and corre-
sponding negative balance-sheet eﬀects that the foolproof way would cause. The foolproof way
implies, once the temporary peg has become credible, that the Japanese short nominal interest
rate has to rise above zero (to the level of the U.S. rate, if the peg is against the dollar). This
implies that there will be a capital loss for holders of Japanese government bonds. However,


                                                33
these losses are gains of the same size for the Japanese government. If the losses are considered
a problem, the government could compensate the losers by a subsidy, for instance, in the form
of an increased coupon on the outstanding government bonds. Of course, any recovery and
return to growth and expansion in Japan must imply an eventual increase in the short nominal
interest rate above zero and therefore a capital loss on bonds. Avoiding that capital loss will
mean avoiding a recovery. Furthermore, the total balance-sheet eﬀects of the foolproof way, with
lower real interest rates, increased demand, output, employment and profits, would seem to be
overwhelmingly positive, with rises of stock prices and property values that would swamp any
capital losses on government bonds.
   Interestingly, since the current U.S. short nominal interest rate is low, the rise in the Japanese
nominal rate from the foolproof way would be small. From this point of view, this may be a
good time to initiate the foolproof way. Nevertheless, Japan would have been in better situation
today, the earlier it would have initiated the foolproof way.
   The foolproof way could jump-start Japan out of recession/depression and deflation. Not
applying the foolproof way could mean another lost decade for Japan. The foolproof way can help
any suﬃciently open economy to escape from a liquidity trap. It belongs among the contingency
plans that prudent central banks would want to prepare for the worst-case scenario of falling
into a liquidity trap and risking a spiral of deflation and depression.


6. Summary and conclusions

The conclusions of this paper can be summarized in the following bullet points:

   • In the long term, monetary policy can only control nominal variables such as inflation and
     the nominal exchange rate. It cannot increase the average level or the growth rate of real
     variables such as GDP and employment, or aﬀect the average level of the real exchange
     rate. At best it can reduce the variability of real variables somewhat. In the short and
     medium term, monetary policy has eﬀects on both nominal and real variables. However,
     the complex transmission mechanism of monetary policy, varying lags and strength of the
     eﬀects through diﬀerent channels, unpredictable shocks and inherent uncertainty combine
     to prevent any fine-tuning. There is general international support for a regime of flexible
     inflation targeting, where inflation is stabilized around a low inflation target in the medium
     term (rather than at the shortest possible horizon) and a gradual and measured policy re-


                                                34
  sponse avoids creating unnecessary variability in the real economy. Monetary policy can
  achieve average inflation equal to a given inflation target and, at best, a good compro-
  mise between inflation variability and output-gap variability. Monetary policy cannot
  completely stabilize either inflation or the output gap. Increased credibility in the form
  of inflation expectations anchored on the inflation target will reduce the variability of
  inflation and the output gap.

• Central banks can improve transparency and accountability by specifying and announcing
  an explicit loss function for monetary policy. This actually boils down to just specifying one
  more number than the inflation target, namely a parameter with a simple interpretation,
  the dislike of output-gap variability relative to inflation variability. The Monetary Policy
  Committee can simply vote on the relative weight, as they vote on a number of other
  things. Specifying and announcing an explicit loss function will better focus the work
  inside the bank on achieving the optimal compromise between inflation stability around the
  inflation target and output stability around potential output, allow more precise external
  monitoring and evaluation of monetary policy, and allow more precise scrutiny and debate
  about the monetary-policy objectives.

• Central banks can best achieve both the long-run inflation target and the best compro-
  mise between inflation and output-gap stability by engaging in “forecast targeting,” where
  at each major monetary-policy decision, the bank selects the feasible combination of in-
  flation and output-gap projections that minimize the loss function and the correspond-
  ing instrument-rate plan and sets the instrument-rate accordingly. These projections are
  then the central bank’s best unconditional forecasts of inflation, the output gap and the
  instrument rate. Announcing and motivating these forecasts maximize the impact on
  private-sector expectations and the economy and make the implementation of policy most
  eﬀective. This allows the most eﬀective external monitoring and evaluation of the policy,
  and thereby creates the strongest incentives for the bank to conduct good policy. It also
  allows precise debate about the monetary-policy objectives.

• Because of the variety and complexity of the information the central bank responds to
  and the unavoidable big role of judgment in its response, forecast targeting cannot be
  expressed in terms of a simple instrument rule, like a Taylor rule.

• Financial stability, including a well-functioning payment system, is an important additional

                                            35
    objective for many central banks. This objective can conveniently be considered as a
    restriction on monetary policy that does not bind in normal times, but does bind in
    times of financial crises. Transparency then requires central banks to explain when this
    restrictions does bind and how it induces deviations from normal policy. By producing
    and publishing Financial Stability Reports with indicators of financial stability, the central
    bank can monitor the degree of financial stability and issue warnings to concerned agents
    and authorities in due time and this way avoid deteriorating financial stability.

  • Forecast targeting implies that asset-price developments and potential asset-price bubbles
    are taken into account and responded to the extent that they aﬀect the projections of
    the target variables, inflation and the output gap. Situations can arise when asset-price
    developments are deemed unsustainable and hence bubbles, and when a future collapse is
    deemed likely. If the probability of such a future collapse is deemed to impact on inflation
    or output gap projections, the central bank may want adjust policy to moderate the asset-
    price developments and reduce the probability of future collapses, thereby achieving more
    preferable inflation and output-gap projections. In most cases, it will be diﬃcult to make
    such precise judgments, though, especially to identify bubbles with reasonable certainty.

  • The zero bound, liquidity traps and risks of deflation are serious concerns for a monetary
    policy aimed at low inflation. A symmetric positive inflation target is likely to provide
    suﬃcient margin to those risks. Forecast targeting with such an inflation target will avoid
    the zero bound, liquidity traps and deflation. Prudent central banks and ministries of
    finance may want to prepare in advance contingency plans for situations when a series
    of bad shocks substantially increases the risk of falling into a liquidity trap, as well as
    contingency plans for how to escape from a liquidity trap if the economy has fallen in.
    An open economy, such as Japan, can use the foolproof way to escape, with a price level
    target, a currency depreciation and a temporary exchange rate peg, and an exit strategy
    with a shift to inflation target when the price-level target has been reached.


References

[1] Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, Steve Kamin, Christopher Erceg, Jon
   Faust, Luca Guerrieri, Carter Hemphill, Linda Kole, Jennifer Roush, John Rogers, Nathan




                                              36
    Sheets and Jonathan Wright (2002), “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experi-
    ence in the 1990s,” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 729, Federal Reserve Board.

 [2] al-Nowaihi, Ali, and Livio Stracca (2001), “Non-Standard Central Bank Loss Functions,
    Skewed Risks, and the Certainty-Equivalence Principle,” working paper.

 [3] Backus, David, and John Driﬃll (1986), “The Consistency of Optimal Policy in Stochastic
    Rational Expectations Models,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 124.

 [4] Bank of England (2000), Inflation Report, November 2000, Bank of England.

 [5] Bank of Japan (2000), The Role of Monetary Policy under Low Inflation: Deflationary
    Shocks and Policy Responses, Monetary and Economic Studies 19(S-1), Bank of Japan, .

 [6] Batini, Nicoletta, and Andrew G. Haldane (1999), “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary
    Policy,” in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago University Press, 157—192.

 [7] Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson (2000), “When the Bubble Bursts: Monetary Policy
    Rules and Foreign Exchange Market Behavior,” working paper.

 [8] Batini, Nicoletta, and Edward Nelson (2001), “Optimal Horizons for Inflation Targeting,”
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 25, 891—910.

 [9] Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999), “Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish
    Experience 1931—1937,” Journal of Monetary Economics 43, 525—551.

[10] Bernanke, Ben S. (2000), “Japanese Monetary Policy: A Case of Self-Induced Paralysis?”
    in Adam Posen and Ryoichi Mikitani, eds., Japan’s Financial Crisis and Its Parallels to
    US Experience, Special Report 13, Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC,
    149—166.

[11] Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1999), “Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility,” in
    Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [22], 77—128.

[12] Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (2001), “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements
    in Asset Prices?” American Economic Review : Papers and Proceedings 91, 253—257.

[13] Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A Strategy for
    U.S. Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2), 97—116.


                                             37
[14] Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg, John Lipsky and Sushil Wadhwani (2000), Asset
    Prices and Central Bank Policy, Geneva Report on the World Economomy 2, CEPR and
    ICMB,Geneva.

[15] Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg and Sushil Wadhwani (2002), “Asset Prices in a
    Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework,” working paper.

[16] Currie, David, and Paul Levine (1993), Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic Policy Co-
    ordination, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[17] Debelle, Guy (1999), “Inflation Targeting and Output Stabilization,” Research Discussion
    Paper 1999-08, Reserve Bank of Australia.

[18] Finacial Times (2002), “Japan plays its final card in battle to revive growth,” FT.com, Jan
    8, 2002.

[19] The Economist (2002), “On the slide,” The Economist, Jan 5, 2002.

[20] Ehrmann, Michael, and Frank Smets (2002), “Undertain Potential Output: Implications
    for Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Dynamcis and Control, forthcoming.

[21] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1996), Achieving Price Stability, A Symposium Spon-
    sored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City.

[22] Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1999), New Challenges for Monetary Policy, A Sym-
    posium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City.

[23] Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C., and Mark S. Sniderman, eds., (2002), Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation
    Environment, Journal of Money Credit and Banking 84, 845—1109.

[24] Gaspar, Vitor, and Frank Smets (2002), “Monetary Policy, Price Stability and Output Gap
    Stabilisation,” working paper, European Central Bank.

[25] Goodfriend, Marvin (1993), “Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979—
    92,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79: 1—24.

[26] Goodhart, Charles A.E. (2001), “Monetary Transmission Lags and the Formulation of the
    Policy Decision on Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review July/August
    2001, 165—181.


                                              38
[27] Heikensten, Lars (1999), “The Riksbank’s Inflation Target–Clarification and Evaluation,”
    Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 1/1999, 5—17.

[28] King, Mervyn A. (1994), “Monetary Policy in the UK,” Fiscal Studies 15, No. 3, 109—128.

[29] Kohn, Donald L. (2000), “Report to the Non-Executive Directors of the Court of the Bank
    of England on Monetary Policy Processes and the Work of Monetary Analysis,” Bank of
    England.

[30] Krugman, Paul (1998), “It’s Baaack! Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1998, 137—187.

[31] McCallum, Bennett T. (2000), “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on
    Nominal Interest Rates,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking 84, 870—904.

[32] McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999), “Performance of Operational Policy
    Rules in an Estimated Semi-Classical Structural Model,” in John B. Taylor., ed., Monetary
    Policy Rules, Chicago University Press, 15—45.

[33] Meltzer, Allan H. (1986), “Limits of Short-Run Stabilization Policy: Presidential Address
    to the Western Economic Association,” Economic Inquiry 25, 1—14.

[34] Meltzer, Allan H. (1999), “Commentary: What More Can the Bank of Japan Do?” Mone-
    tary and Economic Studies 17(3), Bank of Japan, 189—191.

[35] Meyer, Laurence H. (2001), “Inflation Targets and Inflation Targeting,” Speech at Univer-
    sity of California at San Diego Economics Roundtable, San Diego, July 17, 2001.

[36] Nobay, Robert P., and David A. Peel (1998), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Model of
    Asymmetric Central Bank Preference,” FMG Discussion Paper No. 306.

[37] Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2002), “Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation
    Expectations and Monetary Policy,” working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

[38] Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (2000), Political Economics: Explaining Economic
    Policy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[39] Posen, Adam S. (1998), Restoring Japan’s Economic Growth, Institute for International
    Economics, Washington, DC.


                                             39
[40] Rogoﬀ, Kenneth (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to a Monetary Target.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1169—1190.

[41] Ruge-Murcia, Francisco J. (1999), “Inflation Targeting under Asymmetric Preferences,”
    working paper.

[42] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997), “Optimal Inflation Targets, ’Conservative’ Central banks, and
    Linear Inflation Contracts,” American Economic Review 87, 98—114.

[43] Svensson, Lars E.O. (1999), “How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted in an Era of
    Price Stability?” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [22].

[44] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001a), “How Japan Can Recover,” Financial Times, Sep 25, 2001.

[45] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001b), “Independent Review of the Operation of Mone-
    tary Policy in New Zealand:       Report to the Minister of Finance,” February 2001,
    www.princeton.edu/˜svensson.

[46] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001c), “Price Stability as a Target for Monetary Policy: Defining and
    Maintaining Price Stability,” in Deutsche Bundesbank, ed., The Monetary Transmission
    Process: Recent Developments and Lessons for Europe, Palgrave, New York, 60—102. (Also
    available as CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2196.)

[47] Svensson, Lars E. (2001d), “Requiem for Forecast-Based Instrument Rules,” working paper.

[48] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2001e), “The Zero Bound in an Open-Economy: A Foolproof Way of
    Escaping from a Liquidity Trap”, Monetary and Economic Studies 19(S-1), Bank of Japan,
    277—312.

[49] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2002a), “The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function,” in Paul
    Mizen, ed., Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honour of Charles
    Goodhart, Edward Elgar, forthcoming.

[50] Svensson, Lars E.O. (2002b), “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in
    Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

[51] Svensson, Lars E.O., Kjetil Houg, Haakon Solheim and Erling Steigum (2002), “An In-
    dependent Review of Monetary Policy and Institutions in Norway,” Centre for Monetary
    Economics, Norwegian School of Management, in preparation.

                                              40
[52] Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (2002), “Implementing Optimal Policy through
    Inflation-Forecast Targeting,” working paper.

[53] Taylor, John B. (1979), “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
    Expectations,” Econometrica 47, 1267—1286.

[54] Vickers, John (1998), “Inflation Targeting in Practice: the UK Experience,” Bank of Eng-
    land Quarterly Bulletin 38, 368—375.

[55] Wallis, Kenneth F. (1999), “Asymmetric Density Forecasts of Inflation and the Bank of
    England’s Fan Chart,” National Institute Economic Review No.167 (January), 106-112.

[56] Woodford, Michael (1999a), “Commentary: How Should Monetary Policy Be Conducted
    in an Era of Price Stability?” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City [22], 277—316.

[57] Woodford, Michael (1999b), “Optimal Monetary Policy Inertia,” working paper.




                                             41
