                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE VALUE OF A STATISTICAL LIFE:
                        A CRITICAL REVIEW OF MARKET ESTIMATES
                                THROUGHOUT THE WORLD

                                             W. Kip Viscusi
                                             Joseph E. Aldy

                                          Working Paper 9487
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9487


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




Viscusi’s research is supported by the Sheldon Seevak Research Fund, the Harvard Olin Center for Law,
Business, and Economics, and the Environmental Protection Agency. Aldy’s research is supported by the
Environmental Protection Agency STAR Fellowship program The authors thank James Hammitt, Randall
Lutter, and Robert Smith for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to
the source.
The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates throughout the World
W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy
NBER Working Paper No. 9487
February 2003
JEL No. I10, J17, J28

                                            ABSTRACT

A substantial literature over the past thirty years has evaluated tradeoffs between money and fatality
risks. These values in turn serve as estimates of the value of a statistical life. This article reviews
more than 60 studies of mortality risk premiums from ten countries and approximately 40 studies

that present estimates of injury risk premiums. This critical review examines a variety of
econometric issues, the role of unionization in risk premiums, and the effects of age on the value of

a statistical life. Our meta-analysis indicates an income elasticity of the value of a statistical life
from about 0.5 to 0.6. The paper also presents a detailed discussion of policy applications of these
value of a statistical life estimates and related issues, including risk-risk analysis.


W. Kip Viscusi                                  Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Law School                              Department of Economics
Hauser Hall, 302                                Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                             Littauer Center, 2nd Floor
and NBER                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
kip@law.harvard.edu                             aldy@fas.harvard.edu
Introduction

       Individuals make decisions everyday that reflect how they value health and

mortality risks, such as driving an automobile, smoking a cigarette, and eating a medium-

rare hamburger. Many of these choices involve market decisions, such as the purchase of

a hazardous product or working on a risky job. Because increases in health risks are

undesirable, there must be some other aspect of the activity that makes it attractive.

Using evidence on market choices that involve implicit tradeoffs between risk and

money, economists have developed estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL). This

article provides a comprehensive review and evaluation of the dozens of such studies

throughout the world that have been based on market decisions.1

       These VSL estimates in turn provide governments with a reference point for

assessing the benefits of risk reduction efforts. The long history of government risk

policies ranges from the draining of swamps near ancient Rome to suppress malaria to the

limits on air pollution in developed countries over the past 30 years (McNeill 1976,

OECD 2001). All such policy choices ultimately involve a balancing of additional risk

reduction and incremental costs.

       The proper value of the risk reduction benefits for government policy is society’s

willingness to pay for the benefits. In the case of mortality risk reduction, the benefit is

the value of the reduced probability of death that is experienced by the affected

population, not the value of the lives that have been saved ex post. The economic

literature has focused on willingness-to-pay (willingness-to-accept) measures of mortality

risk since Schelling’s (1968) discussion of the economics of life saving.




                                              2
       Most of this literature has concentrated on valuing mortality risk by estimating

compensating differentials for on-the-job risk exposure in labor markets. While the early

studies assessed such compensating differentials in the United States, much of the more

recent work has attempted to estimate risk-money tradeoffs for other developed and some

developing countries. In addition, economists have also investigated price-risk (price-

safety) tradeoffs in product markets, such as for automobiles and fire alarms.

       Use of the economic research on the value of mortality and injury risks in

government policy evaluation has been a key benefit component of policy evaluations for

a wide range of health, safety, and environmental policies. The policy use of risk

valuations, however, has raised new questions about the appropriateness of these

applications.   How should policymakers reconcile the broad range of VSL estimates in

the literature? Should the value of a statistical life vary by income? Should the VSL

vary by the age distribution of the affected population? What other factors may influence

the transfer of mortality risk valuation estimates from journal articles to policy evaluation

in different contexts?

       We begin our assessment of this literature with an overview of the hedonic wage

methodology in Section 1. This approach motivates the discussion of the data and

econometric issues associated with estimating a VSL. Although there continue to be

controversies regarding how best to isolate statistically the risk-money tradeoffs, the

methodologies used in the various studies typically follow a common strategy of

estimating the locus of market equilibria regarding money-risk tradeoffs rather than

isolating either market supply curves or market demand curves.




                                              3
        Section 2 examines the extensive literature based on estimates using U.S. labor

market data, which typically show a VSL in the range of $4 million to $9 million. These

values are similar to those generated by U.S. product market and housing market studies,

which are reviewed in Section 3. A parallel literature reviewed in Section 4 examines the

implicit value of the risk of nonfatal injuries. These nonfatal risks are of interest in their

own right and as a control for hazards other than mortality risks that could influence the

VSL estimates.

        Researchers subsequently have extended such analyses to other countries.

Section 5 indicates that notwithstanding the quite different labor market conditions

throughout the world, the general order of magnitude of these foreign VSL estimates

tends to be similar to that in the United States. International estimates tend to be a bit

lower than in the United States, as one would expect given the positive income elasticity

with respect to the value of risks to one’s life.

        A potentially fundamental concern with respect to use of VSL estimates in

different contexts is how these values vary with income. While the income elasticity

should be positive on theoretical grounds, extrapolating these values across different

contexts requires an empirical estimate of this elasticity. Our meta-analyses of VSL

estimates throughout the world in Section 6 imply point estimates of the income elasticity

in the range of 0.50 to 0.60. The meta-analysis also provides a characterization of the

uncertainty around the measures of central tendency for the value of a statistical life, i.e.,

95 percent confidence intervals for the predicted VSLs. Heterogeneity in VSL estimates

based on union status (Section 7) and age (Section 8) indicate that the VSL not only

varies by income but also across these important labor market dimensions. The existence




                                               4
of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary note for policy. While policymakers have

relied on VSL estimates to an increasing degree in their benefit assessments, as Section 9

indicates, matching these values to the pertinent population at risk is often problematic,

particularly for people at the extreme ends of the age distribution.



1. Estimating the value of a statistical life from labor markets

1.1 The hedonic wage methodology

       More than two centuries ago, Adam Smith (1776) noted in The Wealth of Nations

that: “The wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness or dirtiness, the

honourableness or dishonourableness of the employment” (p. 112). Finding empirical

evidence of such compensating differentials, however, has been problematic. Because of

the positive income elasticity of the demand for safety, the most attractive jobs in society

tend to be the highest paid. To disentangle the wage-risk tradeoff from the other factors

that affect wages, economists have relied on statistical models that control both for

differences in worker productivity as well as different quality components of the job.

The primary approach has been hedonic wage and hedonic price models that examine the

equilibrium risk choices and either the wage levels or price levels associated with these

choices.2 Market outcomes reflect the joint influence of labor demand and labor supply,

but hedonic models do not examine the underlying economic structure that gives rise to

these outcomes. For concreteness, we focus on the hedonic wage case.

       The firm’s demand for labor decreases with the total cost of employing a worker.

The cost of a worker may include the worker’s wage; training; benefits such as health

insurance, vacation, child care; and the costs of providing a safe working environment.




                                             5
Because worker costs increase with the level of safety, for any given level of profits the

firm must pay workers less as the safety level rises. Figure 1 depicts two firms with

wage-risk offer curves (isoprofit curves) with wage as an increasing function of risk, OC1

for firm 1 and OC2 for firm 2. For any given level of risk, workers prefer the wage-risk

combination from the market offer curve with the highest wage level. The outer

envelope of these offer curves is the market opportunities locus w(p).

       [Figure 1]

       The worker’s supply of labor is in part a function of the worker’s preferences over

wages and risk. The labor supply is best characterized subject to several mild restrictions

on preferences. Consider a von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility model with state-

dependent utility functions.3 Let U(w) represent the utility of a healthy worker at wage w

and let V(w) represent the utility of an injured worker at wage w. Typically, workers’

compensation after an injury is a function of the worker’s wage. We assume that the

relationship between workers’ compensation and the wage is subsumed into the

functional form of V(w). Further, assume that workers prefer to be healthy than injured

[U(w) > V(w)] and that the marginal utility of income is positive [U'(w) > 0, V'(w) > 0].4

       Workers choose from potential wage-risk combinations along some market

opportunities locus w(p) to maximize expected utility. In Figure 1, the tangency between

the constant expected utility locus EU1 and firm 1’s offer curve OC1 represents worker

1’s optimal job risk choice. Likewise, worker 2 maximizes expected utility at the

tangency between EU2 and OC2. All wage-risk combinations associated with a given

worker’s constant expected utility locus must satisfy

                       Z = (1 − p)U ( w) + pV ( w) .



                                              6
The wage-risk tradeoff along this curve is given by

                         dw    Zp      U ( w) − V ( w)
                            =−    =                           >0,
                         dp    Zw (1 − p)U ' ( w) + pV ' ( w)

so that the required wage rate is increasing in the risk level. The wage-risk tradeoff

consequently equals the difference in the utility levels in the two states divided by the

expected marginal utility of income.

        Actual labor market decisions by workers can be depicted by the wage-risk

combinations at the tangencies of the offer curves and expected utility loci at points (p1,

w1) and (p2, w2). All that is observable using market data are these points of tangency.

Expanding beyond our two worker example, observations of a large set of workers can

show the locus of these workers’ wage-risk tradeoffs, depicted by the curve w(p) in

Figure 1. Hedonic wage analyses trace out points on this w(p) curve that workers find

acceptable.

        The observed labor market decisions (pi, wi) reflect the joint influence of supply

and demand on the market equilibrium. The estimated tradeoff between wage and risk,

∂w/∂p, is a local measure of the wage-risk tradeoff for marginal changes in risk. This

estimated slope corresponds to both the worker’s marginal willingness to accept risk and

the worker’s marginal willingness to pay for more safety and the firm’s marginal cost of

more safety as well as the firm’s marginal cost reduction from an incremental increase in

risk. For the worker and firm associated with a given labor market decision (pi, wi),

∂wi/∂pi reflects both the marginal supply price and the marginal demand price of risk.

Econometric models that estimate a linear w(p) curve are estimating an average tradeoff

rate across different levels of risk.




                                              7
        The estimated wage-risk tradeoff curve w(p) does not imply how a particular

worker must be compensated for non-marginal changes in risk. Consider workers 1 and

2 in Figure 1. Worker 2 has revealed a willingness to accept risk p2 at wage w2(p2) along

EU2. A change in the risk exposure to worker 1 from p1 to p2 would require a higher

wage compensation to keep worker w1 on the expected utility locus (EU1), implying that

w1(p2) > w2(p2) (or alternatively, that ∂w1/∂p2 > ∂w2/∂p2). With large changes in risk, a

worker’s wage-risk tradeoff will not be the same because the relevant tradeoff must be

made along the worker’s expected utility locus, not the estimated market wage-risk

tradeoff.



1.2 Econometrics and data issues in hedonic labor market analysis

        Most researchers estimate the wage-risk relationship in labor markets by

specifying a wage equation along the lines of the following:

        wi = α + H i′β1 + X i′β 2 + γ 1 pi + γ 2 qi + γ 3qiWCi + pi H i′β 3 + ε i

where wi is the worker i’s wage rate, α is a constant term, H is a vector of personal

characteristic variables for worker i, X is a vector of job characteristic variables for

worker i, pi is the fatality risk associated with worker i’s job, qi is the nonfatal injury risk

associated with worker i’s job, WCi is the workers’ compensation benefits payable for a

job injury suffered by worker i, and εi is the random error reflecting unmeasured factors

influencing worker i’s wage rate. The terms α, β1, β2, β3, γ1, γ2, and γ3 represent

parameters estimated through regression analysis.

        The personal characteristic variables represented by Hi often include a variety of

human capital measures, such as education and job experience, as well as other individual



                                                     8
measures, such as age and union status. The job characteristic variables represented by X

often include indicators for blue-collar jobs, white-collar jobs, management positions, the

worker’s industry, and measures of physical exertion associated with the job. These two

sets of variables reflect both workers’ preferences over jobs as well as firms’ offer curves

for labor. Some studies interact personal characteristics Hi with the fatality risk pi to

capture how the returns to risk may vary with these characteristics, such as age and union

status.



1.2.1 Risk data. An ideal measure of on-the-job fatality and injury risk would reflect

both the worker’s perception of such risk and the firm’s perception of the risk. Because

the market opportunity locus reflects both workers’ preferences over income and risk and

firms’ preferences over costs and safety, information on both sets of beliefs would be

necessary to appropriately characterize the risk premium. However, very few studies

have compiled workers’ subjective preferences regarding risks (Viscusi 1979, Viscusi

and O’Connor 1984, Gerking et al. 1988, and Liu and Hammitt 1999) and there is no

available research on firms’ risk perceptions. If individuals’ and firms’ subjective risk

perceptions closely reflect objective measures of fatality risk, then such objective risk

data could be used instead as a proxy for unobserved subjective risk data.5 The standard

approach in the literature is to use industry-specific or occupation-specific risk measures

reflecting an average of at least several years of observations for fatalities, which tend to

be relatively rare events.6

          Measures of job-related fatality and injury risk have included self-reported risks

based on worker surveys and objective risk measures derived from actuarial tables,




                                               9
workers’ compensation records, and surveys and censuses of death certificates. The

choice of the measure of fatality risk can significantly influence the magnitude of the risk

premium estimated through regression analysis. The nature of the risk measures also

raise questions about possible errors in estimation and the need to correct the econometric

specification to address them.

       Several early papers on compensating differentials used the University of

Michigan Survey of Working Conditions and Quality of Employment Survey data that

include several qualitative measures of on-the-job risk. These measures utilize direct

surveys of workers and their perceptions of their work environment. For example,

Hamermesh (1978), Viscusi (1979, 1980), and Fairris (1989) estimated the hedonic wage

equation with a dichotomous measure of injury risk based on a worker’s perception of

whether his or her job is “dangerous.”7 The survey asked workers if their job exposed

them to physical dangers or unhealthy conditions. These studies estimated statistically

significant coefficients on this “risk” variable in some of the specifications. Duncan and

Holmlund (1983) undertook a similar analysis of compensating differentials with a

“danger” variable in a study of male workers in Sweden.

       Several papers on the U.S. labor market from the 1970s and early 1980s used

actuarial data (Thaler and Rosen 1975, Brown 1980, Leigh 1981, Arnould and Nichols

1983). These studies all employed a job-related risk measure based on data collected by

the Society of Actuaries for 1967. The Society of Actuaries data set provides fatality risk

data for 37 occupations. Across these 37 occupations, the annual risk averaged

approximately 1 in 1,000. This fatality risk exceeds averages from other data sets by

nearly an order of magnitude. To the extent that these data reflect workers in extremely




                                            10
high risk jobs, the estimated wage-risk tradeoffs will suffer from a selection bias. As a

result, one would expect these estimates to be lower than found in more broadly

representative samples, which has in fact proven to be the case.

       Another difficulty is that the Society of Actuaries data do not distinguish fatalities

caused by the job but rather reflect the overall fatality rates of people within a particular

job category. For example, one of the highest risk occupations based on these actuarial

ratings is actors, who typically face few risks other than unfavorable reviews.

       Several studies of U.S. and Canadian labor markets have used workers’

compensation records to construct risk measures (Butler 1983, Dillingham 1985, Leigh

1991, Martinello and Meng 1992, Meng 1991, Cousineau et al. 1992, Lanoie et al. 1995).

Only three studies have used workers’ compensation data to evaluate compensating

differentials in U.S. labor markets, which may reflect the decentralized nature and

differences in information collection associated with state (not Federal) management of

U.S. workers’ compensation programs.8 In contrast, researchers in Canada can obtain

workers’ compensation-based risk data from Labour Canada (the labor ministry for the

Federal government) and the Quebec government.

       For analyses of the United States, the majority of the mortality risk studies have

used data collected by the U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).

About 80 percent of the U.S. nonfatal injury risk studies summarized below used BLS

injury risk data. The BLS has compiled industry-specific fatality and injury risk data

since the late 1960s. Through the early 1990s, BLS collected its data via a survey of

industries, and reported the data at a fairly aggregated level, such as at the 2-digit and 3-

digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code level. The aggregation and sampling




                                              11
strategy have elicited some concerns about measurement error in the construction of the

mortality risk variable (see Moore and Viscusi 1988a).

       Concerns about the BLS fatality risk data led the National Institute of

Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) to collect information on fatal occupational

injuries through its National Traumatic Occupational Fatalities surveillance system

(NTOF) since 1980. NIOSH compiles these data from death certificates managed by

U.S. vital statistics reporting units (NIOSH 2000). These data are reported at the 1-digit

SIC code level by state. Because NIOSH compiles data from a census of death

certificates, it circumvents some of the concerns about sampling in the pre-1990s BLS

approach. Some have raised concerns, however, about the accuracy of reported cause of

death in death certificates (Dorman and Hagstrom 1998).

       Comparing the BLS and NIOSH fatality risk data over time provides some

interesting contrasts. The original NIOSH data set for the fatality census averaged over

1980 – 1985 has a mean fatality risk nearly 50 percent higher than a roughly comparable

BLS data set averaged over 1972 – 1982.9 Moreover, the BLS data had greater variation

(a standard deviation 95 percent greater than its mean) than the NTOF data, although the

NIOSH data also had substantial variation (standard deviation 23 percent greater than its

mean) (Moore and Viscusi 1988a).

       Since 1992, the BLS has collected fatal occupational injury data through the

Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries (CFOI). The BLS compiles information about

workplace fatality including worker characteristics and occupation, circumstances of the

event, and possible equipment involved. The BLS draws on multiple sources such as

death certificates, workers’ compensation records, and other Federal and state agency




                                            12
reports. The BLS reports these fatality data by industry at the 4-digit SIC level. In

contrast to the earlier comparisons of BLS and NIOSH data, more recent years’ data on

fatality risk collected through the CFOI now show that the BLS measure includes

approximately 1,000 more fatalities per year than the NIOSH measure (NIOSH 2000).

Table 1 illustrates the recent national rates of job-related fatalities at the one-digit

industry level for the four-year period in which both NIOSH and CFOI data are publicly

available. In every instance the BLS measure shows a higher risk mortality rate, which in

some cases, such as wholesale trade, is quite substantial.

          [Table 1]

          The risk variables used in several of the non-U.S. studies were based on job-

related accident and mortality data collected by foreign governments. For example, the

data sets used in Shanmugam (1996/7, 1997, 2000, 2001) were from the Office of the

Chief Inspector of Factories in Madras. Several of the United Kingdom studies employ

data provided by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (Marin and

Psacharopoulos 1982, Sandy and Elliott 1996, Arabsheibani and Marin 2000) while

others used unpublished data from the U.K. Health and Safety Executive (Siebert and

Wei 1994). In their study of the South Korean labor market, Kim and Fishback (1999)

obtained their accident data from the Ministry of Labor. Few of these studies indicate

whether the mortality risk data were derived from samples or censuses of job-related

deaths.

          While the large number of studies of labor markets around the world evaluated

the compensating differential for an on-the-job death and/or on-the-job injury, very few

attempted to account for the risk of occupational disease. Lott and Manning (2000) used




                                               13
an alternative data set to estimate the risk premium for jobs with higher cancer risk

associated with occupational exposure to various chemicals (see Section 2).



1.2.2 Wages and related data. Labor market studies of the value of risks to life and

health match these risk measures to data sets on characteristics of wages, workers, and

employment. Some researchers survey workers directly to collect this information, such

as Gegax et al. (1991) for the United States, Lanoie et al. (1995) for Canada, Shanmugam

(1996/7) for India, and Liu and Hammitt (1999) for Taiwan, among others. For the

United States, researchers have also used the University of Michigan’s Survey of

Working Conditions (SWC), the Quality of Employment Survey (QES), the Bureau of

Labor Statistics’ Current Population Survey (CPS), the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID), and decennial census data. Similar types of surveys undertaken in other

countries have also provided the data necessary to undertake hedonic labor market

analysis, such as the General Household Survey in the United Kingdom (e.g., Siebert and

Wei 1994 and Arabsheibani and Marin 2000).

       The dependent variable in virtually all labor market analyses has been a measure

of the hourly wage. With some data sets, researchers have had to construct the wage

measure from weekly or annual labor earnings data. For some data sets, a worker’s after-

tax wage rate is provided, which can put wage and workers’ compensation benefits in

comparable terms. While many studies have included pre-tax wages as the dependent

variable, this would not likely bias the results significantly so long as workers’ income

levels and tax rates do not differ substantially. If the regression model includes workers’

compensation benefits, then both the wage and these benefits should be expressed in




                                            14
comparable terms (both in after-tax or both in pre-tax terms) to ensure proper evaluation

of the benefits’ impacts on wages.10

       Typically, researchers match a given year’s survey data on wages and worker and

employment characteristics with risk data for that year, or preferably, the average over a

recent set of years. Some researchers have restricted their samples to subsets of the

surveyed working population. For example, it is common to limit the analysis to full-

time workers, and many have focused only on male, blue-collar workers. Restricting the

sample in this manner partially addresses the measurement problem with industry-level

risk values common to most risk datasets by including only those workers for whom the

risk data are most pertinent.



1.2.3 Wage vs. log(wage). Most researchers have estimated the wage equation using

linear and semi-logarithmic specifications. Choosing a preferred functional form from

these two specifications cannot be determined on theoretic grounds (see Rosen 1974). To

identify the specification with greatest explanatory power, Moore and Viscusi (1988a)

employed a flexible functional form given by the Box-Cox transformation. The Box-Cox

transformation modifies the dependent variable such that the estimated regression model

takes the form:

              wiλ − 1
                        = α + H i′β1 + X i′β 2 + γ 1 pi + γ 2 qi + γ 3qiWCi + pi H i′β 3 + ε i .
                  λ

       This approach presumes that a λ exists such that this model is normally

distributed, homoskedastic, and linear in the regressors. Note that the case where λ Æ 0

represents the semi-logarithmic functional form and the case where λ Æ 1 represents the

linear functional form. The flexible form under the Box-Cox transformation can test the


                                                     15
appropriateness of these two restrictions on the form of the model. Using maximum

likelihood methods, Moore and Viscusi’s estimate for λ equaled approximately 0.3 for

their data. While this value is more consistent with a semi-logarithmic form than a linear

form, the authors reject both specifications based on a likelihood ratio test. The estimated

value of a statistical life based on the Box-Cox transformed regression model, however,

differed only slightly from the log(wage) specification. Shanmugam (1996/7) replicated

this flexible form evaluation with his evaluation of compensating differentials in India.

His maximum likelihood estimate for λ equaled approximately 0.2. While Shanmugam

rejected the semi-logarithmic and linear models, he found that the semi-logarithmic

functional form also generated results closer to those found with the unrestricted flexible

form.11



1.2.4 Errors in variables problem with risk measures. Every compensating differential

study employs a less than perfect measure of any particular worker’s job-related fatality

risk. The majority of these studies have used fatality risk measures from the BLS

averaged across the entire industry. Such an approach, however, suffers from

measurement error. As noted above, some researchers have found that the pre-1992 BLS

data sets (and NIOSH data sets to a lesser extent) suffer from incomplete reporting. The

industry averages constructed by the BLS do not exactly reflect realized industry

averages. Further, applying industry averages to individuals may result in errors

associated with matching workers to industries due to response error in worker surveys.

Mellow and Sider (1983) evaluated several surveys that asked workers and their

employers to identify the workers’ industry and occupation (among other questions). In




                                            16
their assessment of the January 1977 Current Population Survey, 84 percent of workers

and their employers agreed on industry affiliation at the three-digit SIC code level while

only 58 percent agreed on the three-digit occupational status. Merging a worker

characteristics data set with a risk measure data set based on industry affiliation (or

occupation status) can result in a mismatch of worker characteristics and industry risk.

Mellow and Sider’s statistical analysis of the 16 percent “mismatched” workers by

industry affiliation showed that the errors in matching reduced the compensating

differential for injury risk by about 50 percent in their samples.

       Even with a perfect industry measure of fatality risk and appropriate matching of

workers and their industry, measurement error still exists since some workers bear risk

that differs from their industry’s average. For example, different occupations within an

industry may pose different levels of risk. This measurement error can be characterized

as:

                                        p i = p *i + η i ,

where pi reflects the observed industry average fatality risk, pi* reflects the unobserved

(to the econometrician) fatality risk associated with worker i’s job, and ηi reflects the

deviation of that job’s risk from the industry average. Random measurement error will

result in a downward bias on coefficient estimates, and the least squares estimate of the

coefficient on fatality risk in this example would be inconsistent:

                                                    σ p2     
                                γˆ1,OLS →
                                          p                  γ
                                               σ p2 + σ η2    1
                                                             

where the signal-noise ratio determines the extent of the downward bias towards zero.




                                              17
       In addition to the downward effect on the risk coefficient, applying industry-level

risk data to individual observations may also induce some correlation in the residuals

among individuals within industries. Robust (White) standard errors would not

appropriately correct for this correlation and result in inappropriately small standard

errors. Hersch (1998) and Viscusi and Hersch (2001) employ robust standard errors

correcting for within-group (within-industry) correlation.



1.2.5 Omitted variables bias and endogeneity. Failing to capture all of the determinants

of a worker’s wage in a hedonic wage equation may result in biased results if the

unobserved variables are correlated with observed variables. Dangerous jobs are often

unpleasant in other respects. Omission of non-pecuniary characteristics of a job may bias

the estimated risk premium if an omitted variable is correlated with risk. For example,

one may find a correlation between injury risk and physical exertion required for a job or

risk and environmental factors such as noise, heat, or odor. While some studies have

attempted to control for these unobservables by including industry or occupation dummy

variables (see below), a model may still suffer from omitted variables bias.

       Several studies have explored how omitting injury risk affects the estimation of

mortality risk. Viscusi (1981) found that omitting injury risk resulted in a positive bias in

the mortality risk measure for union affiliated workers. Cousineau et al. (1992) also

found that omitting injury risk may cause a positive bias in the estimation of the

coefficient on mortality risk. The high correlation (collinearity) between injury and

mortality risks, however, can make joint estimation difficult. Some studies have

attempted to estimate regression equations with both types of risk and have found non-




                                             18
significant coefficients on at least one of the measures, including Smith (1976), Leigh

(1981), Dillingham and Smith (1984), and Kniesner and Leeth (1991).

       While including injury risk in a regression model could address concern about one

omitted variable, other possible influences on wages that could be correlated with

mortality risk may not be easily measured. Several papers have investigated this bias.

Garen (1988) notes that “individuals may systematically differ in unobserved

characteristics which affect their productivity and earnings in dangerous jobs and so these

unobservables will affect their choice of job risk” (p. 9). One example Garen offers is

“coolheadedness,” which may make a worker more productive under the stresses of a

dangerous job but may not be relevant in a safe job. In this case, an econometrician

would prefer to include both the mortality risk variable and the interaction or the

mortality risk variable with a variable measuring coolheadedness as regressors in the

hedonic labor market model. Failing to include this interaction term results in biased

least squares estimation. Garen attempts to address this concern with an instrumental

variables technique, although subsequent researchers such as Hwang et al. (1992) have

noted the difficulty in identifying appropriate instruments for his procedure. Employing

this instrumental variables technique, Garen found a mortality risk premium about double

what the standard least squares model produced.

       The significant increase in the risk premium associated with a method to account

for unobserved productivity is consistent with the theoretical and simulation findings in

Hwang et al. (1992). They estimate that for plausible parameter estimates, models that

fail to account for heterogeneity in unobserved productivity may bias estimates of the risk

premium by about 50 percent and could result in incorrectly (negative) signing of the risk




                                            19
variable. With the exception of some non-union samples in several studies (e.g., Dorsey

1983 and Dickens 1984), the empirical literature presents very little evidence of this

wrong signing. Siebert and Wei (1994) have also found that accounting for the

endogeneity of risk can increase the risk premium compared to a standard least squares

approach. Recent theoretical research, however, has also illustrated the potential for

over-estimating the risk premium by failing to control for unobservables (Shogren and

Stamland 2002). They note that workers with the ability to avoid injury select into risky

jobs while those less able to avoid injury (“clumsy” workers) select into less-risky jobs.

They argue that risk premiums could be overestimated by a factor of four with plausible

parameter estimates in their simulations. Whether there will be such biases hinges on the

monitorability of individual’s safety-related productivity. If these differences are

monitorable, as in Viscusi and Hersch (2001), there will be a separating compensating

differential equilibrium for workers of different riskiness.

       Viscusi and Hersch (2001) note that differences in workers’ preferences over risk

can affect the shape of their indifference curves and workers’ safety behavior and, by

affecting firms’ cost to supply safety, can influence firms’ offer curves. They evaluated

the wage-risk (injury) tradeoff of workers with a data set that includes measures of risk

preferences (e.g., smoking status) and measures of workers’ prior accident history. While

smokers work, on average, in industries with higher injury risk than non-smokers,

smokers also are more likely to have a work-related injury controlling for industry risk.

Smokers also are more prone to have had a recent non-work-related accident. As a result,

Viscusi and Hersch find that nonsmokers receive a greater risk premium in their wages




                                             20
than do smokers because the safety effect flattens smokers’ offer curves enough to offset

smokers’ preferences for greater wages at higher risk levels.

       To address potential omitted variable bias arising from differences in worker

characteristics, employing a panel data set could allow one to difference out or dummy

out individual-specific unobservables, so long as these are constant throughout the time

period covered by the panel. Unfortunately, very few data sets exist that follow a set of

workers over a period of several years. Brown (1980) used the National Longitudinal

Study Young Men’s sample over 1966 – 1973 (excluding 1972) with the Society of

Actuaries mortality risk data. While he reported results that were not consistent with the

theory of compensating differentials for a variety of nonpecuniary aspects of

employment, he did estimate a positive and statistically significant coefficient on the

mortality risk variable. Brown noted that his estimate of the risk premium was nearly

three times the size of the estimate in Thaler and Rosen (1975), which first used the

Society of Actuaries mortality risk data.



1.2.6 Compensating differentials for risk or inter-industry wage differentials. Several

recent papers have claimed that estimates of risk premiums in this kind of wage

regression analysis actually reflect industry wage premiums because the fatality risk

variables typically reflect industry-level risk (Leigh 1995, Dorman and Hagstrom 1998).

Both Leigh and Dorman and Hagstrom evaluate the proposition that risk premiums

simply reflect industry premiums by comparing compensating differential models

without dummy variables for industry affiliation of each worker with models that include

such dummy variables.




                                            21
       Their claim that industry premiums mask as risk premiums in these wage

regressions suffers from several deficiencies. First, a large number of studies have

included industry dummy variables in their statistical analyses and found significant

compensating differentials for risk. For example, the first wage-risk tradeoff study by

Smith (1974) employed six industry dummies and yielded a statistically significant

compensating differential for risk. Viscusi (1978a) included 25 industry dummy

variables in his analysis based on the Survey of Working Conditions danger variable (0,

1 variable reflecting a worker’s subjective perception of on-the-job risk), although he

excluded the dummy variables from the analysis based on the industry-level BLS risk

data.12 In both sets of analyses, danger and the BLS risk measure were statistically

significant and generated very similar estimates of the risk premium. Freeman and

Medoff (1981) found a statistically significant risk premium in their analyses that

included 20 industry dummy variables and the BLS injury rate measure. In their

evaluation of the U.K. labor market with an occupational mortality risk variable, Marin

and Psacharopoulos (1982) found a statistically significant risk coefficient while their

SIC code dummies were insignificant. Dickens (1984) estimated regression models with

the BLS fatality risk measure and 20 industry dummy variables (1- and 2-digit SIC code

industries). For the union sample, he found a positive and statistically significant

coefficient on risk. Leigh and Folsum (1984) included 2-digit SIC code industry dummy

variables in their wage regressions, and they found statistically significant coefficients on

mortality risk in all eight mortality risk models reported. Dillingham (1985) estimated

regression models with industry dummy variables (at the 1-digit SIC code level) and

without. In both cases, he found statistically significant and positive coefficients on his




                                             22
measure of mortality risk. Moreover, the coefficients were virtually identical (0.0023 vs.

0.0022), although the standard error was higher for the model with industry dummy

variables (perhaps related to risk-industry dummy variable collinearity). Cousineau et al.

(1992) included 29 industry variables in their evaluation of the Canadian labor market

that estimated statistically significant coefficients on both injury and mortality risks. Lott

and Manning (2000) included 13 industry dummy variables in their evaluation of long-

term cancer risks in U.S. labor markets, and found a statistically significant risk premium

based on industry-level measures of carcinogen exposure.

       Second, inserting industry dummy variables into the regression equation induces

multicollinearity with the risk variable. Previous researchers such as Viscusi (1979) have

noted this as well. Hamermesh and Wolfe (1990) employed dummy variables for five

major industries in their analysis of injury risk on wages. They note that a finer

breakdown by industry could be used. A complete set of dummy variables at the 3-digit

SIC code level, however, would completely eliminate all variation in the injury risk

variable, which is measured at the 3-digit SIC code level (p. S183). While

multicollinearity does not affect the consistency of the parameter estimates, it will

increase standard errors.

       This induced multicollinearity is also evident in the Dorman and Hagstrom results

for the models using NIOSH fatality risk data.13 Dorman and Hagstrom interact the

NIOSH fatality risk measure by a dummy variable for union status (and for non-union

status in the second set of regressions). Contrary to their hypothesis, including industry

dummy variables does not reduce the coefficient in the union-risk interaction models.

Inducing multicollinearity does depress the t-statistics slightly, although not enough to




                                             23
render the coefficients statistically insignificant. The models with the non-union-risk

interaction reflect the induced multicollinearity, as the t-statistics fall below levels

typically associated with statistical significance moving from the standard model to the

industry dummy model. While the coefficients in these industry dummy-augmented

models fall from their levels in the standard models, they are not statistically different

from the standard models’ coefficients. Based on the NIOSH fatality risk data, the

Dorman and Hagstrom results appear to illustrate that including collinear regressors

(industry variables) can increase standard errors but not significantly affect the

magnitudes of the parameter estimates.



2. The value of a statistical life based on U.S. labor market studies

        The value of a statistical life should not be considered a universal constant or

some “right number” that researchers aim to infer from market evidence. Rather, the

VSL reflects the wage-risk tradeoffs that reflect the preferences of workers in a given

sample. Moreover, transferring the estimates of a value of a statistical life to non-labor

market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies

for example, should recognize that different populations have different preferences over

risks and different values on life-saving. If people face continuous safety choices in a

variety of contexts, however, the same individual should exhibit the same risk-money

tradeoff across different contexts, provided the character of the risks is the same.

Researchers have undertaken more than 30 studies of compensating differentials for risk

in the U.S. labor market. Some studies have evaluated the wage-risk tradeoff for the

entire labor force, while others have focused on subsamples such as specific occupations




                                              24
(e.g., police officers in Low and McPheters 1983), specific states (e.g., South Carolina in

Butler 1983), blue-collar workers only (e.g., Dorman and Hagstrom 1998 and Fairris

1989), males only (e.g., Berger and Gabriel 1991), and union members only (e.g.,

Dillingham and Smith 1984). These hedonic labor market studies also vary in terms of

their choice of mortality risk variable, which can significantly influence the estimation of

a value of a statistical life (for comparison of NIOSH and BLS data, refer to Moore and

Viscusi 1988a and Dorman and Hagstrom 1998).

       Table 2 summarizes the estimated VSLs for the U.S. labor market from the

literature over the past three decades.14 Because some studies provided multiple

estimates, in these instances we provide illustrative results based on the principal

specification in the analysis. Table 2 provides a sense of the magnitude and range of U.S.

labor market VSLs and illustrates the influence of factors such as income and the

magnitude of risk exposure as well as specification issues such as including nonfatal

injury risk and worker’s compensation.15

       [Table 2]

       Viscusi (1993) reported that most surveyed studies fall within a $3.8 - $9.0

million range, when converted into year 2000 dollars. 16, 17 While we include more

papers from the United States as well as findings from other countries, the general

conclusion remains unchanged. Half of the studies of the U.S. labor market reveal a

value of a statistical life range from $5 million to $12 million. Estimates below the $5

million value tend to come from studies that used the Society of Actuaries data, which

tends to reflect workers who have self-selected themselves into jobs that are an order of

magnitude riskier than the average. Many of the studies yielding estimates beyond $12




                                             25
million used structural methods that did not estimate the wage-risk tradeoff directly or

were derived from studies in which the authors reported unstable estimates of the value of

a statistical life. Our median estimated VSL from Table 2 is about $7 million, which is in

line with the estimates from the studies that we regard as most reliable. In terms of

methodology, we are more confident in the results presented in Viscusi (1978a, 1979),

which include the most extensive set of non-pecuniary characteristics variables to explain

workers’ wages, and the results presented in Moore and Viscusi (1988a), which include

the NIOSH mortality risk data in lieu of the pre-1992 BLS mortality risk data.

       A salient research issue of policy importance is the effect of income levels on the

wage-risk tradeoff. For example, Hamermesh (1999) notes that as wage inequality has

increased over the last several decades, so have on-the-job mortality risks diverged. He

notes that workplace safety is highly income-elastic. This result is related to the findings

in Viscusi (1978b) that the value of a statistical life is increasing in worker wealth.

Similarly, Viscusi and Evans (1990) have estimated the income elasticity of the value of

statistical job injury risks to be 0.6 to 1.0. The effect of income on the wage-risk tradeoff

is evident in a historical evaluation of employment risks as well. Kim and Fishback

(1993) estimated compensating differentials for mortality risk in the railroad industry

over the period 1893 – 1909 and found implicit values of statistical life on the order of

$150,000 in today’s dollars.18 Our meta-analysis below examines the role of income

differences in generating the variation in VSL estimates.

       While most hedonic labor market studies focus on the risk of accidental death or

accidental injury, several papers have attempted to explore the effect of occupational

disease. Lott and Manning (2000) evaluated the effect of carcinogen exposure on




                                              26
workers’ wages within the context of changing employer liability laws. In lieu of the

standard mortality risk measures, the authors employ the Hickey and Kearney carcinogen

index, which represents worker carcinogen exposure at the 2-digit SIC code level.19

They find that workers’ wages reflect a risk premium for carcinogen exposure. Lott and

Manning convert their results into a value of a statistical life assuming that the index is a

proportional representation of the actual probability of getting occupational-related

cancer, that 10 – 20 percent of all cancer deaths result from occupational exposures, and

that the probability of a worker getting cancer ranges from 0.04 to 0.08 percent per year.

We have modified their reported VSL range to account for a latency period.20 Based on

these assumptions, the authors estimate that the value of a statistical life based on

occupational cancer would range from $1.5 – $3.0 million. Assuming that occupational

cancers, however, comprise a smaller fraction of all cancer deaths would increase the

implicit VSL.21

       Several early papers in the literature did not find statistically significant

compensating differentials for on-the-job mortality risk. For example, Leigh (1981)

estimated a risk premium for injuries but not for fatalities. Dorsey (1983) likewise did

not find a mortality-based risk premium. The Leigh study coupled the Society of

Actuaries mortality data with BLS injury data. The combination of greater measurement

error in the data and the high correlation between injury risks and mortality risks

probably led to the insignificance of the mortality risk variable. The Dorsey study uses

industry-level averages, instead of worker-specific values, as its unit of observation. This

averaging across industry for wages and related explanatory variables may have reduced




                                             27
the variation necessary to discern the effects of job-specific influences on wage, such as

job risk.

        More recent papers by Leigh (1995) and Dorman and Hagstrom (1998) also do

not find compensating differentials in many model specifications. As discussed above,

we do not find their inter-industry wage differential discussion compelling. Nevertheless,

Table 2 includes their results based on the NIOSH data with industry dummy variables.22

        Some of these analyses of U.S. labor markets investigated the potential

heterogeneity in the risk preferences of workers in the labor force in which there is

worker sorting by level of risk. The empirical issue is whether the wage-risk tradeoff

takes a linear or concave shape. A linear form would imply that an incremental increase

of risk in the labor market requires a proportional increase in the wage differential. A

concave form, however, would imply a less than proportional increase in the wage

differential, perhaps reflecting sorting by workers based on their risk preferences.

        To evaluate the shape of this tradeoff, one can modify the wage equation

regression model to include both mortality risk and the square of mortality risk. If the

latter term is not significant, then the wage-risk tradeoff is linear for the range of risks

and wages covered by the study’s sample. If the squared term is significant and negative,

then the wage-risk tradeoff takes a concave form. Viscusi (1981), Olson (1981), Dorsey

and Walzer (1983), and Leigh and Folsum (1984) all found evidence that the risk-wage

tradeoff curve is concave.23 All four studies include regression models with a quadratic

representation of mortality risk.

        Figure 2 illustrates how the value of a statistical life varies with mortality risk for

a sample of six regression models from these four papers. Viscusi (1981; linear) and




                                              28
Leigh and Folsum (L&F 1984; linear) represent regression models where the dependent

variable is the hourly wage while the other four lines represent regression models with

the logarithm of the wage as the dependent variable. All six models include measures of

nonfatal injury risks (probability of a lost-workday accident and, in some cases, duration

of lost-workday accident). The slopes of the risk-VSL lines in this figure are similar

within the wage-specification type where the wage-based models appear to have a steeper

tradeoff than do the logarithm of wage-based models (with the exception of the Dorsey

and Walzer model, although this may reflect the fact that the sample in their study faced

mortality risks 2 to 3 times smaller on average than the samples in the other studies).

Based on these models, populations of individuals who select into jobs with very minor

risks (e.g., on the order of 1 in 100,000) have implicit values of statistical life ranging

from $12 to $22 million. Increasing the risk ten-fold, to levels that are close to the mean

mortality risks in these studies, modestly reduces the VSL into the range of $10 to $18

million. Figure 2 illustrates that very high risks result in small values of statistical lives,

although caution should be exercised when considering extrapolations beyond the

samples’ ranges.

        [Figure 2]



3. Evidence of the value of a statistical life from U.S. housing and product markets

        Housing and product market decisions also reflect individual tradeoffs between

mortality risk and money. The main methodological difference is that economists

typically estimate a hedonic price equation rather than a hedonic wage equation. The




                                               29
underlying theory is essentially the same, as comparison of Rosen (1974) with the wage

equation analysis above will indicate.

        Table 3 presents the results from ten studies that evaluated the price-risk tradeoffs

for seatbelt use, cigarette smoking, home fire detectors, automobile safety, bicycle

helmets, and housing price responses to hazardous waste site risks.24 The studies in

general find an implicit value of a statistical life on the same order of magnitude as the

labor market studies, although they tend to be a little lower.

        [Table 3]

        The lower estimates may reflect several characteristics of these studies that

distinguish them from the labor market studies. First, some product decisions do not

provide a continuum of price-risk opportunities (unlike the labor market that does offer a

fairly continuous array of wage-risk employment options) but rather a discrete safety

decision. For example, Dardis’ (1980) evaluation of smoke detectors represents such a

discrete choice. In such a case, the consumer’s decision to purchase a smoke detector

reveals only the lower bound on the willingness to pay for the reduced risk. Similarly,

the study by Jenkins, Owens, and Wiggins (2001) examines the purchase of bicycle

helmets. It is interesting, however, that their results show VSLs increasing over the first

half of the life cycle.

        Second, the types of products considered in some studies may induce selection

based on risk preferences. For example, the low estimated VSL for cigarette smokers

found by Ippolito and Ippolito (1984) presumably reflects the non-random character of

the smoking population. Their research focuses on cigarette smokers, and they estimate a

VSL lower than from most product market studies. The lower VSL is consistent with the




                                             30
findings in Hersch and Viscusi (1990) and Viscusi and Hersch (2001) who find that

individuals who engage in risky behaviors, such as cigarette smoking and driving without

seatbelts, have lower implicit values for injury than do those who do not engage in such

behavior.

       Third, several studies are based on inferred, instead of observed, price-risk

tradeoffs. Consider the seat belt and child seat studies by Blomquist (1979) and Carlin

and Sandy (1991). In these studies, drivers’ or occupants’ safety is traded off with the

time to secure a seat belt or a child seat. The authors assume a given time cost – for

example, Blomquist assumes that it takes 8 seconds to secure a seat belt. Then this time

is monetized at the individual’s wage rate. Unlike labor market studies where the

monetary value of the attribute in question (job wage) is observed, these studies do not

observe the actual time drivers take to buckle their seat belts. Moreover, they do not

account for other aspects of seat belt use, such as the costs of discomfort of wearing a

seatbelt, which would increase the implicit valuation of a statistical life derived by this

methodology.

       The studies focused on automobile purchases and home purchases do not suffer

from the need to infer the monetary component of the price-risk tradeoff. For example,

Atkinson and Halvorsen (1990) and Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995) evaluate the risk-price

tradeoff for automobiles. They construct hedonic price models very similar to the

hedonic wage models used in labor market analyses. Both studies include car purchase

price (annual average for a given model) as the dependent variable and an array of

automobile attributes as explanatory variables, such as vehicle size, power, reliability,

fuel economy, and safety (fatal accident rate). Just as in the labor market hedonic studies,




                                             31
the coefficient on the safety variable in these automobile price hedonic studies reveals the

price-risk tradeoff. Automobile purchases should be less likely to suffer the selection

bias of the cigarette smoking study or the discreteness in decision of the fire alarm study.

       Gayer, Hamilton, and Viscusi (2000) evaluate the tradeoff between housing prices

and cancer risk associated with hazardous waste sites. The authors develop a housing

hedonic price model, similar in form to the labor market hedonic studies. The dependent

variable is the price of a house sold over a five-year period in the greater Grand Rapids,

MI area, and explanatory variables include house characteristics such as number of

bedrooms and bathrooms, neighborhood characteristics, property tax rates, measures of

proximity to a Superfund hazardous waste site, and calculated cancer risk associated with

exposure from the nearest hazardous site. The VSL interpretation from this study is

analogous to that of Lott and Manning (2000). The hedonic price model generates the

value of avoiding a statistical cancer case, which may not necessarily reflect the value of

a statistical life to the extent that some cancers are treatable. If housing decisions are

made based on the expectation that cancers associated with hazardous waste site exposure

are terminal, then this price-risk tradeoff can be considered comparable to a VSL.25



4. The value of a statistical life based on non-U.S. labor market studies

       While about 25 wage-risk studies of the U.S. labor market were published in the

1970s and 1980s, only three studies on non-U.S. labor markets appeared in the literature

during this period. We have identified another 19 labor market hedonic studies in both

developed and developing countries outside of the U.S. context published since 1990.

The studies presented in Table 4 include evaluations of wage-risk tradeoffs in labor




                                              32
markets in Australia, Austria, Canada, Japan, and the United Kingdom. More recent

work in developing countries has focused on Asia, including analyses of labor markets in

Hong Kong, India, South Korea, and Taiwan.

       [Table 4]

       Marin and Psacharopoulos (1982) undertook the first hedonic labor market

analysis of job risks outside of the United States in their study of the U.K. labor market.

Based on wage and risk data from the 1970s, they found a value of a statistical life of

about $3.5 million. Arabsheibani and Marin (2000) sought to replicate the earlier Marin

and Psacharopoulos analysis for the United Kingdom. By employing a similar

methodology and more recent wage and risk data from the same sources as in the original

study, the authors evaluated the stability of VSL estimates over time. They found,

consistent with other studies of the U.K. labor market during the 1980s, a higher value of

a statistical life than did Marin and Psacharopoulos. While the evaluation of the whole

U.K. labor force yielded a relatively large VSL of about $18 million, regression analyses

of subsamples resulted in VSLs ranging up to $68 million (in this case, for non-manual

workers). While this result qualitatively conforms to the U.S. findings of lower VSLs for

workers in higher risk jobs (see Figure 2), the magnitude of the U.K. compensating

differentials seems implausibly large.

       The results from several of the studies of the United Kingdom reveal

compensating differentials on the order of 10 percent of total worker wage income. One

regression result (with a VSL of $63 million) from Sandy and Elliott (1996) implies a

compensating differential for mortality risk comprising nearly 20 percent of worker

wages. These risk premia are substantially larger than the compensating differentials




                                             33
evident in other developed countries’ labor markets, even those countries with higher per

capita incomes. Moreover, risk levels cannot account for the high wage share of

compensating differentials as the mortality risk is lower than in many U.S. studies. The

large U.K. compensating differentials may reflect correlation between the risk measure

and other unobservables that yield substantial returns to the worker.

       After the United States, no country has been the focus of more hedonic labor

market analyses of wage-risk tradeoffs than Canada. The Canadian studies appear to

produce compensating differentials more in line with the U.S. experience than with the

evidence from the U.K. labor market. With the exception of the Lanoie, Pedro, and

LaTour (1995), most Canadian labor market VSLs fall within the range of $3 – $6

million. The Lanoie et al. findings of a VSL on the order of $18 million – $20 million

may reflect their data collection methodology. They surveyed about 200 workers in the

Montreal area and solicited workers’ perceptions of risk with a risk information ladder

similar to that in Gegax et al. (1991), which suffered from using a truncated job risk scale

that omitted most job risks in the U.S. economy. Analyses by Lanoie et al. with industry

risk measures provided by the Quebec Compensation Board did not yield statistically

significant risk coefficients, while the perceived risk measures generated these large

VSLs. This result contrasts with the findings of Cousineau, Lacroix, and Girard (1992)

who found a statistically significant compensating differential for risk using mortality

risk data from the same source on a sample of more than 30,000 Quebec workers.

       With the exception of some U.K. studies, the compensating differentials estimated

in developed country analyses tend to find risk premiums ranging between 1 – 2 percent

of labor income. These results are broadly consistent with the findings in the Duncan and




                                            34
Holmlund (1983) that used Swedish workers’ perceptions of danger in lieu of measured

industry mortality risks. The authors estimated a statistically significant and positive

compensating wage differential for dangerous jobs on the order of about 2 percent of

wages. Swedish workers’ perceptions of danger yield comparable compensating

differentials to measured industry mortality risk in both U.S. and European studies (see

Viscusi 1979 for an example from the U.S. labor market).

       Researchers have also evaluated the VSL in several of the newly industrialized

countries of Asia, including Hong Kong, South Korea, and Taiwan. Note that these

countries have on-the-job mortality risks three to five times greater than the average in

Australia, the United States, and the United Kingdom. Further, the average worker

earnings are two to four times lower than labor earnings in developed countries.

       Kim and Fishback (1999) examined the South Korean labor market over the 1984

– 1990 period. Unlike many of the studies in developed countries, which employ worker-

level data, their unit of observation is at the industry level. Kim and Fishback estimate a

VSL of approximately $0.5 million. They note that the estimated VSL is about 94 times

the average annual earnings of workers. Siebert and Wei (1998) estimate a VSL for the

Hong Kong workforce that is larger than the Korean estimate by about a factor of three.

The ratio of VSL to average annual earnings for Hong Kong is about 150. These

estimates are of the same order of magnitude as the ratio of VSL to annual earnings

evident in the U.S. labor market.

       Liu, Hammitt, and Liu (1997) and Liu and Hammitt (1999) estimated the wage-

risk tradeoff in Taiwan. The Liu, Hammitt, and Liu study focuses on all non-agricultural

workers while Liu and Hammitt base their analysis on in-person surveys of petrochemical




                                             35
workers. In the former case, the authors use 3-digit industry level risk data, while the

latter paper uses workers’ risk perceptions derived from a survey instrument similar to

that in Gegax et al. (1991). Workers’ risk perceptions in the petrochemical industry yield

a mortality risk rate about 35 percent greater than the rate published by the Taiwan Labor

Insurance Agency, the data source for the Liu, Hammitt, and Liu study.26 While

petrochemical workers face higher average mortality risk (perceived and measured) than

the average for all non-agricultural workers in Taiwan, the higher wages and income

associated with petrochemical workers in 1995 relative to the broader workforce in the

early to mid 1980s probably explains why Liu and Hammitt estimated a VSL about twice

what Liu, Hammitt, and Liu found.

       Estimates for the Indian labor market yield a value of a statistical life greater than

the VSLs in other developing countries despite the fact that per capita income in India is

an order of magnitude smaller than in these countries. Shanmugam (1996/1997, 1997,

2000, 2001) assessed the wage-risk tradeoff in a variety of studies using survey data of

manufacturing workers in Madras, India in 1990. The VSL estimates from these studies

range by nearly a factor of four, even though they reflect the same wage and risk data,

illustrating how a variety of econometric specifications can produce in some cases a

range of results.



5. The implicit value of a statistical injury: U.S. and international estimates

       Complementing the research on the returns to bearing fatal risks in the workplace,

a significant number of studies have evaluated the risk premium associated with bearing

nonfatal job risks. The hedonic labor market studies of nonfatal risk employ the same




                                             36
econometric approach as used for mortality risk. As discussed above, some studies that

attempt to estimate jointly the effects of fatal and nonfatal risks on workers’ wages do not

find significant effects of risk on wages for at least one of the risk measures. Fatal risk is

highly correlated with nonfatal risk, so joint estimation may result in large standard errors

due to collinearity. Omitting one of these variables when estimating the other could

result in an upwardly biased estimate of the return to that type of risk.

       Table 5 summarizes 31 studies from the U.S. labor market (Table 5a) and 7

studies of labor markets outside of the United States (Table 5b) that have found

statistically significant influences of nonfatal job risk on wages. These studies employ

three different measures of nonfatal job risks: the overall injury rate, the rate of injuries

severe enough to result in a lost workday, and the rate of total lost workdays. Studies

using different measures of nonfatal job risks will generate different risk premiums

because the return to the frequency of injuries (the injury rate) will usually differ from the

return to the severity of injuries (lost workdays rate). In two studies with specialized

data, Butler (1983) constructed an injury rate from South Carolina workers’

compensation claims, restricting his risk measure to only the more serious work accidents

and French and Kendall (1992) and French (1990) constructed an injury rate for railroad

workers based on data collected by the Federal Railroad Administration. As an

alternative to these objective measures of risk, Viscusi and O’Connor (1984) and Hersch

and Viscusi (1990) used workers’ own assessments of risk with risk scales based on the

BLS injury rate and the BLS lost workday accident rate, respectively. These authors

estimated comparable wage-risk tradeoffs based on subjective risk perception as the other

studies based on objectively measured industry-level risk.




                                              37
       [Table 5]

       These value of statistical injury studies yield a wide range of estimates, reflecting

both the differences in the risk measures used as well as whether mortality risk is

included in the results. While several studies have very high values of injury, such as

McLean, Wendling, and Neergaard (1978), Leigh and Folsum (1984), and Biddle and

Zarkin (1988), most studies have estimates in the range of $20,000 – $70,000 per injury.

       The value of statistical injury appears to vary with workers’ preferences over risk,

consistent with some of the findings based on the mortality risk literature. As a proxy for

risk attitudes, several studies have used information about workers’ behavior outside of

the workplace, such as smoking status and seatbelt use, to identify the effect of risk

preferences on wage-risk tradeoffs. Hersch and Viscusi (1990), Hersch and Pickton

(1995), and Viscusi and Hersch (2001) all found that smokers have lower injury risk

premiums than do non-smokers. Hersch and Viscusi as well as Hersch and Pickton also

found that individuals who do not wear seatbelts have lower injury risk premiums than do

individuals who regularly wear seatbelts.

       The study by Hersch (1998) is of particular interest because it used gender-

specific risk measures. Many previous studies had focused on male samples only

because estimates using industry-based measures often failed to yield significant risk

premiums for women. Researchers hypothesized that women did not work in risky jobs

that would pose health and safety risks. The estimates by Hersch indicate that the

nonfatal injury risk for women is over two-thirds the size of that for men and that the

wage-injury risk tradeoff rates are similar for men and women.




                                             38
       The evidence outside of the United States, while based on a smaller set of studies,

also indicates significant injury risk premiums. For example, the Cousineau et al. (1992)

result falls within the U.S. range of about $20,000 – $70,000. However, several other

Canadian labor market studies provide some estimates that are lower, such as Martinello

and Meng (1992) and Meng and Smith (1999). The value of statistical injury estimates

for India are much smaller, likely reflecting the effect of per capita income on wage-risk

tradeoffs. The low values of statistical injury are somewhat surprising given that these

same studies generated fairly large values of statistical life.



6. The effects of income on the value of a statistical life

       The review of the VSLs above shows that developing countries tend to have

lower values of statistical life than do developed countries. A variety of factors could

account for such an outcome, such as cultural influences on risk preferences and

variations in labor market institutions. The dominant cause, however, is most likely that

developing countries are poorer, and safety is a normal good, as shown in Viscusi

(1978a). The value of a statistical life should increase with per capita income. To assess

the relationship between the value of a statistical life and income, we first review several

meta-analyses of the wage-risk literature. Second, we provide our estimates of the

income elasticity of the value of a statistical life based on the meta-analysis approaches

employed in four previous studies with a data set we constructed from our review of the

papers presented in Tables 2 and 4. Third, we report income elasticities for a number of

specifications in our preferred meta-analytic approach.




                                              39
       Since wage-risk studies employ a measure of income (usually a function of hourly

or weekly labor earnings) as the dependent variable, an individual study cannot estimate

the effect of income on the premium for bearing mortality risk. The injury risk study of

Viscusi and Evans (1990) used experimental data coupled with market evidence to

estimate income elasticities of injury risk valuations from 0.6 to 1.0. A meta-analysis of

existing VSL studies can facilitate the calculation of the income elasticity for the value of

a statistical life. The type of meta-analysis used in the VSL literature attempts to evaluate

the VSL (the constructed dependent variable) as a function of a number of studies’

characteristics (such as mean income of the sample population, mean mortality risk, and

econometric specification).

       The published meta-analyses on the value of a statistical life literature vary in

terms of their sample construction, explanatory variables, and regression technique. Liu,

Hammitt, and Liu (1997) sampled 17 wage-risk studies surveyed in Viscusi (1993) and

regressed VSL on income and mean risk. The Liu et al. sample comprised primarily

U.S. wage-risk studies. They reported a statistically insignificant income elasticity of

0.53. Miller (2000) developed an international sample including more than 60 wage-risk,

product-risk, and contingent valuation studies. Miller employed a relatively small set of

explanatory variables, including income. For five models, Miller estimated statistically

significant income elasticities ranging from 0.85 to 0.96. Bowland and Beghin (2001)

conducted a meta-analysis with a set of 33 wage-risk and contingent valuation studies

surveyed in Viscusi (1993) and Desvousges et al. (1995). They matched the data on

these studies with a variety of country-specific data on demographics, human capital, etc.

Bowland and Beghin employed robust regression with Huber weights to address concerns




                                             40
about the non-normality in the residuals of their data. Bowland and Beghin reported

statistically significant income elasticities of 1.7 and 2.3. In contrast to the previous three

papers, Mrozek and Taylor (2002) constructed a sample of about 200 observations

reflecting multiple VSL estimates from 33 wage-risk studies (eight of which evaluated

non-U.S. labor markets). They employed the most extensive set of control variables,

including those characterizing a study’s sample, risk measure, specification, and earnings.

For two models, Mrozek and Taylor impute statistically significant estimates of 0.46 and

0.49 for the income elasticity for the value of a statistical life.

        To further explore the relationship between income and WTP, we have conducted

a meta-analysis based on the U.S. and international VSLs reported in this paper. Our

sample includes the VSLs for 49 studies presented in Tables 2 and 4.27 Each study yields

one observation. Refer to the appendix for a description of the explanatory variables and

their summary statistics.

        We replicated the results from the four previous meta-analysis studies with our

wage-risk study sample (see Table 6). For the Liu et al. (1997) model, we replicated their

econometric specification exactly. Miller (2000) reported a number of specifications.

Only model 3 of Miller’s meta-analysis employed per capita incomes converted to US

dollars on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis. Because we constructed all VSLs and

annual incomes based on a PPP basis, we replicated his model 3. Note that dummy

variables for contingent valuation surveys and wage-risk studies are unnecessary since

our data set comprises only wage-risk studies. Bowland and Beghin (2001) reported

results for linear, log-linear, and trans-log specifications. While they presented very

limited information about most of their control variables, we have attempted to replicate




                                               41
their set of controls. We do not have information on the average age of the sample used

in the VSL studies, and we have omitted this variable from our specification. We have

proxied for percent of sample in union-affiliated jobs by accounting for whether the VSL

study includes union membership as a control and whether the VSL is union-based. Our

studies do not provide average educational attainment, so we have proxied these values

with national annual average educational attainment for the over-25 population from

Barro and Lee (1996). We replicated the robust regressions with Huber weights. Our

analyses with log-linear and trans-log specifications, however, yielded insignificant

coefficients on income. We only present the results from the linear robust regression

model with our data. Mrozek and Taylor (2002) reported results from four specification

models. We have focused on their model 2 since model 1 yields virtually identical results

and models 3 and 4 are U.S.-specific. We have included all the control variables that

Mrozek and Taylor report, with the exception of a dummy variable for white collar-based

VSLs. Our sample does not include any white collar-based VSLs.

       [Table 6]

       Three of the four specifications yield statistically significant coefficients on the

relevant income variable. We found a comparable point estimate with much narrower

bounds than Liu et al. with their specification, perhaps reflecting our larger sample, as

their sample is essentially a subset of our sample. We found a smaller coefficient on the

income variable than Miller with his specification, although a very comparable

coefficient on the Society of Actuaries risk data dummy variable (equivalent to Miller’s

variable label “risk beyond workplace” with our data). For comparison with Bowland

and Beghin’s choice of using “marginal willingness to pay” as their dependent variable




                                             42
(apparently equivalent to the VSL expressed in terms of hourly wage instead of annual

labor income), we modified our dependent variable accordingly. Imputing the income

elasticity with the linear income coefficient in this model requires the sample means of

VSL ($3,350 per hour worked, assuming 2000 hours worked per year and $6.7 million

VSL) and income ($26,006). With 23 explanatory variables and only 41 observations,

the Mrozek and Taylor specification yields very few precise coefficient estimates.

       While the reported income elasticities from these four studies vary by a factor of

3, the imputed elasticity point estimates with our data set cover a much smaller range (see

Table 7). With these studies’ specifications, we found income elasticities from about 0.5

to 0.6. The 95 percent confidence interval upper bounds fall below 1.0 for two of the

three statistically significant income elasticities estimated by the specifications outlined

in these four studies. The apparently large variation in income elasticities in this

literature apparently reflects authors’ choices of studies for inclusion more so than

choices over control variables, regression techniques, etc.

       [Table 7]

       To augment the replications of previously published meta-analysis specifications,

we evaluated a large number of specifications. Based on the existing literature, we

focused on two regression techniques, ordinary least squares and robust regression with

Huber weights. We have varied the control variables from as few as 3 to as many as 18,

recognizing that coefficient estimates’ precision will decline with the length of the right-

hand side of the regression equations given our sample size. We chose to include

explanatory variables of the following types: income and mean risk (common to all

specifications), type of risk measure, and specification variables.




                                             43
        The estimated coefficient on the income variable is rather stable across both

regression techniques and for a wide variation in the number of control variables (see

Table 8). For the OLS specifications, the income elasticity varies from 0.49 to 0.60. The

95 percent confidence intervals never range below 0.2 and never exceed 0.95. For the

robust regression specifications, the income elasticity varies from 0.46 to 0.48. The 95

percent confidence intervals never fall below 0.15 and never exceed 0.78.28 The income

coefficients in all specifications are statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

        [Table 8]

        Based on the approximately 50 wage-risk studies from 10 countries, we can

conclude from these results that the income elasticity for the value of a statistical life is

less than 1.0. Across a number of specifications with our data, our point estimates of the

income elasticity range between about 0.5 and 0.6. Note that in none of our

specifications did the income elasticity’s 95 percent confidence interval upper bound

exceed 1.0.

        Current practice by regulatory agencies is effectively in line with these findings.

The U.S. EPA (1999) accounted for income growth into the 22nd century in monetizing

the long-term mortality risk reduction benefits from stratospheric ozone protection.29 In a

regulatory context, the U.S. EPA (2000b) also accounted for income growth over a thirty-

year period in monetizing the mortality risk reduction benefits from reduced particulate

matter pollution associated with the diesel sulfur standard for heavy-duty trucks. In both

these cases, the U.S. EPA employed an income elasticity of 0.4 and conducted sensitivity

analyses with a low-end elasticity of 0.1 and a high-end elasticity of 1.0. If our results of




                                               44
the income elasticity apply over time, the point estimate chosen by the EPA is reasonable,

although more narrow bounds may be appropriate for the sensitivity analysis.

        The meta-analysis regressions can also serve to characterize some of the

uncertainty in value of a statistical life estimates. We constructed the mean predicted

VSL values presented in the last two rows of Table 8 by first using the estimated

coefficients from the meta-analysis regressions to predict the natural logarithm of VSL

for each study. Then we converted each predicted log(VSL) to a predicted VSL. We

averaged these over all studies that were included in each regression model’s sample to

produce the average values reported in the table. We constructed the average 95 percent

confidence intervals by first estimating the prediction error for each study from the meta-

analysis regressions. We then used this prediction error to construct study-specific 95

percent confidence intervals. The values for the lower and upper bounds of these

confidence intervals were then averaged over all the studies in the regression sample.

The U.S. specific results are based on regression samples that include non-U.S. studies;

only the averaging is U.S.-specific.30

        The mean predicted VSLs from the meta-analysis regression models for the whole

sample vary from $5.0 to $6.2 million, and from $5.5 to $7.6 million for the U.S. sample.

An assessment of median predicted VSLs produced very similar results. For most

regression models, the 95 percent confidence interval upper bound is double or more than

the 95 percent confidence interval lower bound. Note that the small number of degrees of

freedom in specifications 3 and 6 yielded very large bounds around the measure of

central tendency. While this analysis can characterize some of the uncertainty around the

value of a statistical life, several caveats are in order. First, the description of uncertainty




                                              45
presumes that the proper VSL meta-analysis model has been specified. Otherwise, the

bounds around the predicted means are not valid. Second, this assessment of uncertainty

regards the value of a statistical life constructed from a sample of wage-risk studies of

prime-aged workers. Policy applications of these VSLs in benefits transfer should

consider appropriate modifications to the VSL point estimate and the distribution around

it.



7. The effects of union affiliation on the value of a statistical life

       Since the U.S. and international evidence from labor markets and other product

markets demonstrate a significant wage-risk tradeoff, numerous researchers have

explored several factors that may influence the compensating differential for risk. The

relationship between union affiliation and the wage-risk tradeoff has received substantial

attention in the literature. Most studies of the U.S. labor market find that union

affiliation is positively correlated with a greater wage-risk tradeoff while the international

evidence is much more mixed.

       Workers in union jobs may enjoy an additional premium for bearing risk greater

than those in nonunion jobs for several reasons. First, if firms face an upward sloping

labor supply curve, then the absence of collective bargaining may result in inefficiently

low level of workplace safety. Viscusi (1980) shows that if the marginal worker’s

valuation of workplace safety differs from the average worker’s valuation, then the firm

would provide a suboptimal level of safety. If the marginal worker is willing to accept

less of a decrease in wage for an incremental improvement in safety than the average

worker, then workplace safety would be too low. If the marginal worker tends to be




                                             46
younger and less experienced while the average worker tends to be older and wealthier,

then the average worker with greater wealth and family obligations may have a greater

preference for workplace safety than the marginal worker. In light of this inefficiently

low provision of safety, unions may bargain over workplace safety in addition to wages

and other benefits on behalf of the inframarginal workers who may place greater value on

risk reduction than the marginal worker.

       A second, and not entirely unrelated phenomenon, is that workplace safety may

be a quasi-public good and suffer the common under-provision associated with such

goods due to free-riding (Dillingham and Smith 1984). If a firm provides some level of

workplace safety (e.g., a fire extinguishing system), then one worker’s consumption of

this safety does not preclude another worker from enjoying the same consumption. Since

safety is quasi-public, a worker lacks the incentive to truthfully reveal his or her

preference for safety, especially since an increase in safety would likely correspond to a

decline in the wage (or some other benefit). Collective action can overcome such free-

riding. In this case, collective bargaining by a union with a firm could reflect all

workers’ true preferences for safety, and result in higher aggregate demand for safety by

workers than what would be expected in a non-union setting. This higher demand would

translate into greater compensating differentials for job-related injury and fatality risk.

       Third, if some workers lack adequate information about the safety at their

workplace, then they may underestimate the actual risks they face. Workers

underestimating their on-the-job risk would demand lower wages than if they held correct

perceptions of risk. Unions potentially could provide workers with more accurate

information about their on-the-job risks (Viscusi 1979, Olson 1981). Unions can take




                                              47
advantage of economies of scale in providing information not available to unorganized

non-union workers (Dillingham and Smith 1984). Unions may also negotiate for

mechanisms that increase worker exposure to safety information. For example, Olson

noted that a 1976 BLS survey showed that 36 percent of all workers covered by a

collective bargaining agreement worked in establishments that sponsored joint firm-

worker safety committees.

       To evaluate the extent to which these factors influence compensating differentials

for on-the-job risk, researchers have taken two estimation approaches (see Table 9).

First, some have split their samples into union and non-union subsamples and estimated

the wage regressions separately for each subsample. Second, others have included an

interaction term, risk variable x union dummy variable, in the wage regression model. In

our review of papers evaluating union effects, only Olson (1981) assessed the union-risk

premium with both the separate sample regression approach and the risk-union

interaction approach. Both approaches yield substantial differences in compensating

differentials for union and non-union members.

       [Table 9]

       Regardless of estimation strategy, most assessments of the U.S. labor market

found higher risk premiums for union workers than for non-union workers (see Table 9a).

Of the ten U.S. labor market value of life studies we reviewed that evaluated the role of

unions in risk premiums, nine found union workers enjoyed greater compensating

differentials for bearing risk than nonunion workers. In contrast to accepted theory,

several of these papers found that non-union workers had insignificant or statistically

significant negative compensating differentials for risk.31




                                             48
       Table 9b summarizes the rather mixed effects of unionization on premiums for

nonfatal risks in the U.S. labor market. In the studies that controlled for fatal risks, the

compensating differential for injury risk for nonunion workers often exceeded the

differential for union workers, even in the same studies where the union fatality risk

premium was greater (e.g., Olson 1981, Dorsey 1983, Dorsey and Walzer 1984). Olson

found that union workers enjoyed a greater positive premium than nonunion workers for

injury incidence but a negative premium for injury duration (number of lost workdays), in

contrast to nonunion workers’ positive premium.

       In regressions that did not include a variable for fatality risk in the estimation

model, the findings reflected the results for fatality risk discussed above. Hamermesh

and Wolfe (1990) found that the extra compensating differential for union workers

reflected injury incidence, while injury duration was insignificant, similar to Olson.

While Freeman and Medoff (1981) could not discern between the statistically significant

injury risk premiums for union and non-union workers, Smith (1983), Biddle and Zarkin

(1988), Fairris (1992), and Hersch and Pickton (1995) all found greater compensating

differentials for nonfatal risks for union than for nonunion workers.

       While the majority of the U.S. research illustrates greater risk premiums for union

workers, the research on labor markets in other countries often reveals a more ambiguous

union impact on risk premiums. Marin and Psacharopoulos (1982) conducted the first

analysis of compensating differentials for risk in the U.K. labor market, and found that

union affiliation had an insignificant impact on the risk premium. In an attempt to

replicate this initial study, Arabsheibani and Marin (2000) also could not find any

evidence supporting a union-risk premium based on membership or union strength. In




                                              49
contrast, Siebert and Wei (1994) found higher union risk premiums when accounting for

potential endogeneity of risk. Subsequent research by Sandy and Elliott (1996) countered

this finding with analysis indicating larger compensating differentials for risk for

nonunion members. These four researchers collaborated in a follow-up study, Sandy et

al. (2001), which concluded with a qualified claim that nonunion workers enjoy greater

risk premiums.

       For the Canadian labor market, several analyses have found little support for a

positive impact of union affiliation on compensating differentials for risk. In a series of

analyses with union x fatality risk interaction terms, Meng (1989, 1991), and Martinello

and Meng (1992) found no significant effect for accident risk, while Meng and Smith

(1990) found a negative statistically significant coefficient that when combined with the

fatality risk coefficient would translate into no compensating differential for union

members (in contrast to the positive risk premium for non-union members). In contrast,

Cousineau et al. (1992) found for a large Quebec sample that union members received

larger premiums for both fatality risk and injury incidence, but a smaller premium for

injury duration, than nonunion members. Further, Lanoie et al. (1995) found significant

positive compensating differentials for perceived risk for the union sub-sample from their

survey of Montreal work establishments.

       Finally, the few analyses of developing country labor markets have also found

mixed effects of union affiliation on a worker’s risk premium. In his analysis of the

Indian labor market, Shanmugam (1996-7) included a union x fatality risk interaction

term, and found that union members alone enjoy a compensating differential for risk. For




                                             50
the South Korean labor market, Kim and Fishback (1999) could not statistically discern

compensating differentials for risk between union and non-union workers.



8. The effects of age on the value of a statistical life

       Evaluating wage-risk tradeoffs in labor markets to estimate the value of a

statistical life raises the important question of whether life expectancy affects the value of

a statistical life. Age affects the duration of life at risk and also may be correlated with

other variables that affect one’s willingness to bear risk, which are not age effects per se

but rather reflect changing preferences over the life cycle. Numerous analyses have

shown that the magnitude of the VSL is a decreasing function of age, whereas the value

of any particular year of life may increase with age (Rosen 1988).32 Wholly apart from

life expectancy effects, accounting for the effect of age in the utility function in terms of

deteriorating health and quality of life would have generated similar results.33

       Using this framework, Rosen undertook several simulations based on his previous

empirical work (Thaler and Rosen 1975). He estimated that the value of a statistical life-

year, which is equal to the expected consumer surplus for another year, for the average-

aged individual in the sample ranges from about $31,000 to $130,000, based on discount

rates ranging from 0 to 12 percent. Using data on life expectancy by age, Rosen

calculated the value of a statistical life for comparable individuals who varied from 36

years to 48 years of age. The 48-year old’s VSL is 10 percent less than the 36-year old’s

VSL.

       Several researchers have undertaken direct empirical estimates of the effect of age

on the return to risk in hedonic labor market analysis. A simple approach to estimating




                                              51
the effect requires interacting the mortality risk and age variables in the regression model.

While some researchers did not identify significant coefficients to this interaction (Meng

and Smith 1990 and Shanmugam 1996/7, 2001), several others found statistically

significant and negative estimates broadly consistent with the theory (see Table 10).

Research by Thaler and Rosen (1975), Viscusi (1979), Arnould and Nichols (1983), and

Moore and Viscusi (1988b) yielded the negative relationship between age and the return

to risk. Within the context of a local housing market, Portney (1981) found that the value

of a statistical life based on trading off mortality risk associated with local air pollution

exposure and housing prices declines significantly with age: an individual under the age

of 45 has a VSL 20 times greater than an individual over the age of 65.

       [Table 10]

       Dillingham, Miller, and Levy (1996) employed a modified approach by focusing

on the willingness to pay to avoid a fully impaired worklife, where death is the extreme

case of impairment. The authors construct a risk variable that reflects injury frequency,

severity, and probability of fatality. They assume that a worklife shortened by a fatal

injury is equivalent to a worklife shortened by a permanently disabling injury. Their

“value of remaining worklife” ranges from $3.1 - $4.7 million for the whole sample,

although it decreases with age. For example, they estimate that a 50-year old values

remaining worklife at half the value held by a 30-year old.

       Some researchers have proposed a value per discounted expected life-year

approach (Moore and Viscusi 1988b). In lieu of a value of a statistical life, one could

adjust the VSL measure for the life expectancy of individuals by essentially annuitizing

the estimated VSL. Based on actuarial tables, one could estimate the life expectancy for




                                              52
the average-aged individual in a study and then develop estimates of the life-year value

(either by assuming a discount rate, or as in several studies, estimating a discount rate

based on revealed preference procedures – see below). Then this life-year could be

applied to other situations where life expectancy would differ from the average in the

study in question. This approach provides an “age-adjusted” or “life expectancy-

adjusted” VSL alternative to the standard VSL. While the life-year approach does

address the concern that values of a statistical life should vary with life expectancy, they

assume that the marginal value of another year is constant across the age spectrum and

across time for a given individual.34

       Accounting for the effects of age on the value of a statistical life through a life-

year approach requires the discounting of future consumer surplus (since, on the margin,

the compensating differential should equal the present discounted value of a worker’s

expected consumer surplus). A variety of papers have imputed workers’ or consumers’

implicit rates of discount (Moore and Viscusi 1988b, 1990a, 1990b, 1990c, Viscusi and

Moore 1989, Dreyfus and Viscusi 1995). While the Moore and Viscusi (1988b) and

Dreyfus and Viscusi papers estimate implicit discount rates and marginal discounted life-

years based on reduced form models, the other three papers develop structural models to

estimate discount rates. Also note that all of these models are based on data from labor

markets, except for the Dreyfus and Viscusi’s automobile hedonic study. Rational

individuals can implicitly discount their health capital at a different rate than what they

face in markets (e.g., real interest rate for a home mortgage) since health status is a non-

traded commodity (one cannot “save” good health at age 25 for consumption at age 75).




                                             53
Despite this possibility, these models estimate discount rates that are broadly consistent

with the real rates of interest typical workers and consumers face (see Table 11).

       [Table 11]



9. The application of the value of a statistical life to public policy decisions

       At least in the countries with a high level of development, governments

recommend or require economic analyses of proposed regulations and public policies.35

Regulatory agencies in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada, have been

most prominent in their use of VSL estimates to value the benefits of proposed

environmental, health, and safety rules. In some cases, regulatory agencies have

modified the VSL to account for distinctive characteristics of the risk and the affected

population. In the United States, some environmental laws preclude the promulgation of

regulations based on benefit-cost analysis. In these cases, analysts have turned to risk-

risk analysis – based in part on an application of the value of a statistical life – to provide

some guidance about whether a proposed policy is in fact risk reducing.



9.1 The use of VSLs in government decision-making around the world



9.1.1 United States. Over the past twenty years in the United States, executive orders by

Presidents Carter, Reagan, and Clinton have mandated economic impact analyses of all

significant Federal regulations (E.O. 12044, E.O. 12291 and E.O. 12866). Beginning

with the Reagan Administration, these executive orders vested with the Office of

Management and Budget (OMB) the responsibility for overseeing and coordinating the




                                              54
review of regulatory impact analyses. OMB has published guidelines for all Federal

agencies, such as its report with respect to the use of “best practices” in these analyses

(U.S. OMB 1996). The guidance recommends the use of a value of a statistical life to

monetize the benefits associated with rules that change the population’s mortality risk.

While OMB does not recommend a specific VSL or set of VSLs, it does provide a

discussion of the issues agencies should consider when choosing a VSL based on the

current state of knowledge.

       Until the 1980s the dominant policy approach to valuing the benefits of reduced

risks of death was based on various human capital measures, such as the present value of

lost earnings and medical expenses. These values are lower than the VSL amounts.

Typical of this approach was the 1982 analysis by OSHA of its proposed hazard

communication regulation. OSHA valued lives saved based on the cost of death, which

was the human capital value, because in its view life was too sacred to value. After OMB

rejected the regulation, claiming that the costs exceeded the benefits, OSHA appealed the

decision to then Vice-President Bush. W. Kip Viscusi was asked to settle the economic

dispute between the two agencies. By valuing life properly using a VSL, the estimated

benefits exceeded the costs. The regulation was approved the day after his analysis

reached the Reagan White House.36 Thus, the historical impetus for the adoption of the

VSL methodology was that these values boosted assessed benefits by roughly an order of

magnitude, improving the attractiveness of agencies’ regulatory efforts.

       The flexibility provided to U.S. agencies in choosing a VSL appropriate to the

population affected by their specific rules has resulted in significant variations in the

selected VSL both across agencies and through time (see Table 12 and Adler and Posner




                                             55
2000). In addition, some regulatory impact analyses have included a range of benefits

reflecting different assumptions about the VSL, often reflecting the age profile of the

affected population by using a VSL adjusted by the number of life-years saved (e.g., the

FDA rule restricting tobacco sales to children, 61 FR 44396, and the EPA rule regulating

the sulfur content of gasoline, 65 FR 6698). The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

(EPA), responsible for more costly Federal rule-makings than any other U.S. agency, has

developed economic guidelines for its regulatory impact analyses (U.S. EPA 2000a).

The EPA guidelines recommend a VSL of $6.2 million (2000US$), reflecting the

arithmetic mean of 26 studies reviewed in Viscusi (1992a).

       In contrast, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (1998) recommends a value

of a statistical life of $3 million in its 2002 economic analyses of regulations.37 This

comparatively low value of life may reflect in part an anchoring effect. The U.S.

Department of Transportation was a leader in valuing mortality risk reductions, but began

doing so in an era in which the present value of lost earnings was the dominant approach.

The agency has slowly increased the value attached to reduced risks of death, but it has

continued to lag behind the estimates in the literature.38

       [Table 12]



9.1.2 United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, the Cabinet Office has likewise provided

guidance for economic analyses for the government’s regulatory and policy-making

agencies (U.K. Cabinet Office 2000, H.M. Treasury 1997). While the guidance does not

specify the value of a statistical life to be used by agencies, it does recommend careful




                                             56
consideration of the challenges in applying values estimated in the economic literature to

potentially different risk and population contexts of the policy or regulation.

        The U.K. Department of the Environment, Transport, and Regions (DETR;

formerly Department of Transport) has employed a willingness-to-pay based value of

preventing a fatality since 1988 in its regulatory and policy analyses (Chilton et al. 1999).

The value of preventing a fatality selected in 1988, $1.2 million (£500,000 in 1987

prices), is still used by the Department. This value reflects contingent valuation-based

estimates of individuals’ willingness-to-pay for risk reduction. The U.K. Health and

Safety Executive uses the DETR value of preventing a fatality as a starting point for its

regulatory impact analyses. The HSE has employed a value of preventing a fatality

double the DETR value for cancer-related fatalities, concluding that individuals’ dread of

the disease significantly outweighs the affects of latency on willingness-to-pay (Andrews

and McCrea 1999).39

        Whereas U.S. agencies rely on market-based VSL estimates, in the U.K. the

emphasis is on contingent valuation estimates. This difference in approach no doubt

stems in part from the different character of the empirical evidence in the two countries.

There have been dozens of studies of U.S. wage-risk tradeoffs, most of which have been

in a reasonable range. There have been far fewer such analyses for the U.K., and the

resulting empirical estimates have been much more unstable.



9.1.3 Canada. In Canada, the Privy Council Office published guidelines for benefit-cost

analysis in 1995. While these guidelines do not specify one or a set of values of a

statistical life, they do note the need for serious consideration of the value of life,




                                              57
determinants of the appropriate VSL, and possible approaches to presenting useful

information for policymakers and the public. The value of a statistical life is left to the

discretion of agencies promulgating regulations, again much like the U.S. and U.K.

approaches.

       Transport Canada reviewed the economic analyses for 145 transportation-related

projects over 1982 – 1993 (Blanchard 1996). The VSL used in these analyses ranged

from $400,000 to $3.2 million. A recent analysis of a Canadian proposed rule on tobacco

products information used a range of the value of a statistical life of $1.7 - $5.7 million,40

with higher values for individuals under age 65 (Hara Associates 2000). A comparable

range and age-based VSL differential was employed in an evaluation of a Canadian

proposal for cleaner vehicles in fuels as well (Lang et al. 1995).



9.1.4 Multinational organizations. The value of a statistical life has also received

attention in multinational contexts. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

(IPCC), established by the United Nations Environment Programme and the World

Health Organization in 1988 to provide technical support to participants in global climate

change negotiations, discussed issues regarding the value of a statistical life in its 1995

and 2001 assessments of the economic and social dimensions of climate change (IPCC

1996, 2001). Moreover, the European Commission (EC) began in 2000 a process to

prepare guidance for benefits analysis to improve benefit-cost analysis procedures within

the EC. The EC effort has focused a substantial amount of time and resources on the

value of a statistical life question (EC 2000).




                                             58
9.2 Issues Pertaining to Benefits Transfers

       The vast majority of the studies reviewed in this paper cover prime-aged workers

who have chosen to bear the risk of accidental, immediate death. Many of the studies

based their quantitative analyses on samples from the 1970s and 1980s. With the

exception of occupational safety policies, most government regulations affect mortality

risks with different qualitative characteristics or affect populations with characteristics

that differ from those of the samples in these studies. The demographic characteristics of

specific groups and the population at large likely differ today (and will differ in the

future) from what they were 20 to 30 years ago. The risk-money tradeoffs of those

affected by government policy may differ from those values estimated in hedonic market

studies.

       For example, many environmental regulations address carcinogen exposure.

Reduced cancer-related mortality presents several issues that merit consideration when

employing a VSL. First, individuals may be willing to pay more to avoid dying of cancer

than to avoid an instantaneous accidental death. Revesz (1999) hypothesizes that this

“dread” effect of cancer mortality should result in an upward revision to the VSL. This

reasoning apparently underlies the higher VSL used by the UK Health and Safety

Executive for cancer-related fatalities. The EPA’s Science Advisory Board (2000)

recommended against any “dread”-related modification to the value of a statistical life on

the grounds that the current literature did not support any such change. 41 In particular,

contingent valuation estimates of cancer mortality risks have produced values similar to

those observed for accidental deaths.42 The market-based evidence for cancer risks

discussed above is similar to the results for accident risks.




                                              59
       Cancer-related mortality also differs significantly from occupational mortality in

terms of the timing of the death. The long latency period for cancer (and other chronic

health conditions affected by government regulations) should be discounted in the

benefits analysis (Revesz 1999, Science Advisory Board 2000). Given the rough

similarity of the implicit rates of discount discussed in Section 8 to current market

interest rates, a benefit-cost analysis could employ one common discount rate for all

categories of benefits and costs.

       Several researchers have questioned the discounting of benefits of reducing future

risks to life when evaluating public policies. Heinzerling (1998, 1999, 2000) has

criticized the discounting of statistical lives on moral grounds. She claims that a

statistical life cannot be discerned from an actual life, which society would not attempt to

price. This concern pertains to both current and future risk reductions and is not a

discounting argument per se. While Heinzerling expresses significant concerns with the

concept of statistical lives and in their discounting, individuals make private risk-income,

risk-time, and risk-risk tradeoffs every day, as evidenced by the literature surveyed in this

paper, as well as by simple casual observation.43 Further, as the studies presented in

Table 11 illustrate, individuals value risks in the future less than they value

commensurate risks they face today. Both Revesz and Heinzerling raise concerns about

discounting statistical lives in future generations (also see Arrow et al. 1996 for a survey

of intergenerational discounting).

       Failure to discount creates potentially fundamental paradoxes (see Keeler and

Cretin 1983). Suppose that the cost structure for reducing risks to life is unchanged over

time. Then it is always desirable to defer any life saving policy and invest the money that




                                             60
would have been spent on risk reduction. Indeed, continual postponement of a life saving

effort is always desirable if future benefits are never discounted but the money spent on

these policies continues to grow at the rate of interest.

        Similarly, suppose that future life saving benefits are not discounted. If, however,

one converts the cost allocations to a terminal value rather than discounting the benefits

back to a present value, the effect will be identical in terms of whether the policy passes a

benefit-cost test. What the discounting critics generally fail to grasp is that what is being

discounted are not lives but rather society’s willingness to pay for these future risks to

life.

        The differences in the age of the population in labor market studies and of the

population affected by a regulation should also affect the value of a statistical life. While

fewer studies have focused on the effects of age on the return to risk, those that have tend

to find that the value of a statistical life declines with age, consistent with the theoretical

work. Since these labor hedonic studies include samples where age usually ranges no

higher than about 60 years, it may be difficult to extrapolate these results for older

populations. This is a significant issue in benefits transfer, since many environment and

public health policies (as opposed to worker safety programs) deliver benefits to the

elderly. For example, recent air quality regulations promulgated by the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency disproportionately benefit older individuals as

illustrated by the average increase in life expectancy of less than 15 years (U.S. EPA

1999, Science Advisory Board 1999a). In response to this, the EPA’s Science Advisory

Board (SAB) has questioned the appropriateness of EPA’s choice of a VSL for this

population. The SAB notes that it “question[s] the application of a WTP estimate for




                                              61
prime-aged individuals to a population of older individuals and people who are in poor

health” (p. 6). The SAB (1999b) has recommended that the EPA revise its VSL in light

of this concern.

        Several agencies already employ age-adjusted VSLs. As noted above, the

economic analysis of a Canadian tobacco regulation employed a smaller VSL for

individuals older than 65. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration regularly employs the

value of statistical life-years, instead of VSLs, as a way to monetize the health benefits of

their proposed rules. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has reluctantly

conducted benefit-cost analyses with the value of statistical life-years approach. The

clear findings in the theory and existing empirical evidence support such age adjustments.

Future empirical research should further refine age-specific estimates of the value of a

statistical life for use in regulatory analyses.



9.3 The role of risk-risk analysis

        While the value of a statistical life can be used to monetize the benefits for risk

policy evaluation, most laws do not require that agencies undertake such balancing and

some laws in the United States actually preclude the consideration of benefit-cost

analysis in setting standards. For example, the courts have interpreted the Clean Air Act

such that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency cannot base ambient air quality

standards on benefit-cost analysis or an assessment of the costs.44 Even if a benefit-cost

test cannot be applied, policies that on balance harm individual health presumably should

not be adopted. Several forms of risk-risk analysis can account for these various risk

effects of policies in an effort to ascertain whether risk regulations on balance are risk




                                               62
reducing. While risk-risk analysis cannot determine if a policy improves societal welfare,

it can identify the policies that clearly do not improve societal welfare because they result

in a net increase in mortality risk.

        Four types of risk-risk tradeoffs could influence the net effect of a policy or

regulation on a population’s risk exposure. First, a policy may reduce risks of one type

while increasing risks of another type. For example, the U.S. Food and Drug

Administration considered banning saccharin, the artificial sweetener, in response to an

animal study finding that it may be a potential human carcinogen. However, banning

saccharin would likely increase the risks associated with obesity. In this case, the U.S.

Congress allowed the use of saccharin in foods subject to a warning label on products

containing the sweetener (Viscusi 1994b).

        Second, policies to reduce risks may create incentives for individuals to undertake

less individual effort to reduce their exposure to risks (moral hazard). These behavioral

responses will offset some of the risk reduction of the policy, and could potentially

increase net risks. For example, Peltzman (1975) described how drivers responded to

mandated safety devices in automobiles by changing their driving behavior. Drivers in

“safer cars” drove more recklessly than before. The empirical evidence showed that

while the safety measures reduced fatalities among automobile occupants, these gains

have been offset at least in part by increases in pedestrian deaths and nonfatal accidents.

        Third, risk-reduction policies may result in regulatory expenditures that directly

increase fatalities. For example, policies to remove asbestos from buildings may increase

asbestos exposure by workers and use of excavation equipment at Superfund hazardous

waste sites may result in construction-related injuries and fatalities (Graham and Wiener




                                             63
1995). Viscusi and Zeckhauser (1994) illustrate through an input-output analysis the

total direct and indirect injury and fatality risks associated with expenditures by industry.

Regulations that require a reallocation of resources to industries with higher risks, for

example towards construction to build new wastewater treatment facilities or to install

pollution control technologies would result in an offsetting increase in mortality risk.

          Fourth, the costs of risk-reduction policies decrease income available to finance

other health and safety expenditures. Wildavsky (1980, 1988) noted that the costs of

risk-reduction policies reduce national income, some of which would otherwise be used

to promote health and safety. This argument focuses on the correlation between income

and health, evident in both international cross-sectional data and U.S. time-series data

(Viscusi 1983, 1994b, Graham et al. 1992, Lutter and Morrall 1994; see Smith et al. 1994

for a critique of the international evidence).45 These analyses illustrate that wealthier

countries have lower mortality rates associated with greater health and safety

investments. Graham et al. (1992) extended the previous analyses on the mortality-

income relationship by focusing on the effect of permanent income. They conclude that:

“If government regulation reduces the level (or the rate of growth) of permanent income,

it is likely to cause smaller health investments and an eventual decline in health status

compared to what would have occurred without the economic burdens of regulation” (p.

336).46

          Keeney (1990, 1994, 1997) formalized Wildavsky’s proposition and found that

some expensive regulations aimed at reducing mortality risks actually increase mortality

risks by reducing national income. Keeney’s model yields various estimates for the

induced-expenditure associated with an additional fatality that depend on the distribution




                                              64
of the burden of the policy costs. Based on the mortality-income relationships estimated

by Kitawaga and Hauser (1973) and Frerichs et al. (1984), Keeney estimates that between

$13.6 million and $15.2 million of expenditures would induce a fatality, assuming costs

are borne proportional to income.47, 48 This research inspired a legal opinion of an OSHA

regulation in the early 1990s.49 U.S. Federal Appeals Court Judge Steven F. Williams

wrote that regulations that do not pass a risk-risk analysis would be counterproductive.

The U.S. Office of Management and Budget then suggested to OSHA that it consider

risk-risk analysis in conducting its regulatory impact analyses.

          While the research on the income-mortality relationship influenced several policy

discussions in the early 1990s in the United States, the results from these studies point

towards a peculiar inconsistency. For the studies with expenditure-induced fatalities on

the order of $5 million per fatality, the expenditure associated with a loss of one life is on

par or perhaps below what individuals are willing to pay to reduce the risk of one fatality

in the population based on the labor market hedonic studies (Viscusi 1994b). Moreover,

the mortality-income studies also suffer several other potential problems. Some of these

do not appropriately account for the simultaneity in the data – higher incomes allow

individuals to invest more in health, but poor health often draws down an individual’s

income (Chapman and Hariharan 1994).50 Some of these studies also may suffer from

omitted variable bias resulting in misidentifying the relationship between income and

health.

          As an alternative to deriving the income-mortality relationship from aggregate

data, Viscusi (1994a) illustrates how to generate an estimate for the expenditure-induced




                                              65
fatality rate based on the value of a statistical life and the marginal propensity to spend on

health. Viscusi shows that

                                                         value of a statistical life
marginal expenditure per statistical life lost =                                          .
                                                   marginal propensity to spend on health

This approach requires an estimate of the value of a statistical life and an estimate of the

marginal propensity to spend on health. The literature surveyed in previous sections

provides estimates for the numerator. For the marginal propensity to spend on health,

Viscusi estimated this based on an analysis of 24 OECD countries over the 1960 – 1989

period and a time-series analysis for the United States over the same period (Viscusi

1992b, 1994a, 1994b). Over an array of specifications for both data sets, the marginal

propensity to spend on health ranged from 0.08 to 0.12. This implies that for every dollar

increase in national income, an additional 8 to 12 cents are spent on health care.

Assuming a marginal propensity to spend on health of 0.1 and a VSL of about $6 million,

the marginal expenditure per statistical life lost would be about $60 million.51

       Lutter, Morrall, and Viscusi (1999) extended Viscusi’s (1994a) model to account

for the effect of income to influence risky behaviors (such as smoking, drinking, and poor

diet) as well as the consumption of health care. Their statistical analyses illustrate that

higher incomes promote better health habits, including reduced excessive drinking and

cigarette smoking and increased exercise. Including the effects of income on risky health

behavior reduces the estimated marginal expenditure per statistical life lost from the

Viscusi (1994a) by more than a factor of 3 to $17 million. Lutter et al. note that policies

that increase national income would reduce one fatality for every $17 million increase.

The authors also note that since many regulations have costs per life saved of $100

million or more, the expenditures may be wasteful and counterproductive.52


                                              66
       If a regulation directly reduces mortality risk with regulatory-induced

expenditures yielding a high cost per life saved ratio, then the indirect increase in

mortality risk may exceed the direct decrease in risk resulting in an aggregate increase in

societal mortality risk. The existing literature varies in terms of a preferred value for the

amount of induced expenditures associated with an additional mortality. However, some

regulations would clearly not pass a risk-risk analysis with any plausible value for an

induced-expenditure mortality. For example, the 1986 OSHA regulation limiting

asbestos occupational exposure cost about $250 million per normalized life saved, and

the 1987 OSHA regulation limiting formaldehyde occupational exposure cost about $290

billion per normalized life saved (Viscusi, Hakes, and Carlin 1997).

       While the risk-risk literature has focused on mortality risks, many environment

and safety regulations provide other kinds of benefits, such as reduced morbidity and

injury as well as non-human health related effects such as improved visibility and

ecosystem health (Lutter and Morrall 1994, Portney and Stavins 1994). A regulation that

primarily delivers non-mortality benefits could fail a risk-risk analysis but still pass a

benefit-cost analysis. One approach could be to convert the morbidity effects into

mortality risk equivalents. Alternatively one could focus on policies whose primary

intent is to reduce mortality risks. Recognizing this criticism, Hahn, Lutter, and Viscusi

(2000) conducted risk-risk analysis on a number of major environment, health, and safety

regulations over the 1986 – 1998 period whose primary benefits were reduced mortality

risk (see Table 13).53 Their analysis focuses on 24 regulations promulgated by the U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban

Development (HUD), U.S. Department of Labor (OSHA), and U.S. Consumer Products




                                              67
Safety Commission (CPSC). Thirteen of 24 regulations designed primarily to reduce

mortality risks actually increased mortality risks based on the Lutter et al. work finding

that $15 million of expenditures induces a fatality. Ten of these thirteen rules failing a

risk-risk analysis had at least ten times more expenditure-induced fatalities than lives

saved.54

       [Table 13]



10. Conclusion

       For nearly thirty years, economists have attempted to infer individuals’

preferences over mortality and morbidity risk and income in labor and product markets.

The substantial literature that has developed over that time has confirmed Adam Smith’s

intuition about compensating differentials for occupational hazards in a significant and

growing number of countries. In addition to evaluating various international labor

markets, the literature has expanded to address a variety of econometric issues, morbidity

risk premiums, and factors influencing mortality risk premiums such as union affiliation

and age.

       While the tradeoff estimates may vary significantly across studies, the value of a

statistical life for prime-aged workers has a median value of about $7 million in the

United States. Our meta-analysis characterizes some of the uncertainty in estimates of

the value of a statistical life, and finds that 95 percent confidence interval upper bounds

can exceed the lower bounds by a factor of two or more. Other developed countries

appear to have comparable VSLs, although some studies of the United Kingdom have

found much larger risk premiums. Consistent with the fact that safety is a normal good,




                                             68
developing countries labor markets also have significant, but smaller, values of statistical

life. Overall, our point estimates of the income elasticity of the value of a statistical life

range from 0.5 to 0.6. Union members in U.S. labor markets appear to enjoy greater risk

premiums than non-members, while the evidence in other developed countries is rather

mixed. The theoretical and empirical literature indicates that the value of a statistical life

decreases with age.

        The estimates of the value of a statistical life can continue to serve as a critical

input in benefit-cost analyses of proposed regulations and policies. Refining VSLs for

the specific characteristics of the affected population at risk remains an important priority

for the research community and the government agencies conducting these economic

analyses. Improving the application of VSLs in this way can result in more informed

government interventions to address market failures related to environmental, health, and

safety mortality risks.




                                              69
References

Adler, M.D. and E.A. Posner. (2000). “Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When
Preferences Are Distorted,” Journal of Legal Studies 29, 1105-1148.

Andrews, R.M. and P. McCrea. (1999). “UK Health and Safety Executive Approach to
Exposure Limit Setting.” In Proceedings of the OECD Workshop on the Integration of
Socio-Economic Analysis in Chemical Risk Management Decision Making, London,
January 7-9, 1998. Paris: Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, pp.
193-202.

Arabsheibani, G.R. and A. Marin. (2000). “Stability of Estimates of the Compensation
for Danger,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 20(3), 247-269.

Arnould, R.J. and L.M. Nichols. (1983). “Wage-Risk Premiums and Workers'
Compensation: A Refinement of Estimates of Compensating Wage Differential,”
Journal of Political Economy 91(2), 332-340.

Arrow, K.J., W.R. Cline, K.-G. Maler, M. Munasinghe, J.E. Stiglitz, and R. Squitieri.
(1996). “Intertemporal Equity and Discounting.” In J.P. Bruce, H. Lee, and E. Haites
(eds.), Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 125-144.

Aten, B., R. Summers, and A. Heston. (2001). The Penn World Table Mark 6.
Philadelphia, PA: The Center for International Comparisons at the University of
Pennsylvania. Internet: http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu.

Atkinson, S.E. and R. Halvorsen. (1990). “The Valuation of Risks to Life: Evidence
from the Market for Automobiles,” Review of Economics and Statistics 72(1), 133-136.

Barro, R.J. and J.W. Lee. (1996). “International Measures of Schooling Years and
Schooling Quality,” American Economic Review 86(2), 218-223.

Berger, M.C. and P.E. Gabriel. (1991). “Risk Aversion and the Earnings of U.S.
Immigrants and Natives,” Applied Economics 23, 311-318.

Biddle, J.E. and G.A. Zarkin. (1988). “Worker Preference and Market Compensation for
Job Risk,” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(4), 660-667.

Blanchard, G. (1996). Highway Benefit-Cost Analysis: A Review of Evidence. Transport
Canada, Economic Analysis, Special Infrastructure Project. Report no. TP12790E.
Ottawa, Ontario.

Blomquist, G. (1979). “Value of Life Saving: Implications of Consumption Activity,”
Journal of Political Economy 87(3), 540-558.




                                           70
Bowland, B.J. and J.C. Beghin. (2001). “Robust Estimates of Value of a Statistical Life
for Developing Economies,” Journal of Policy Modeling 23, 385-396.

Brown, C. (1980). “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 94(1), 113-134.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. (n.d.). Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries. Washington,
DC: Department of Labor. Internet: http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.htm.

Butler, R.J. (1983). “Wage and Injury Rate Responses to Shifting Levels of Workers'
Compensation.” In J.D. Worrall (ed.), Safety and the Workforce: Incentives and
Disincentives in Workers' Compensation. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, pp. 61-86.

Carlin, P.S. and R. Sandy. (1991). “Estimating the Implicit Value of a Young Child's
Life,” Southern Economic Journal 58(1), 186-202.

Chapman, K.S. and G. Hariharan. (1994). “Controlling for Causality in the Link from
Income to Mortality,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 85-94.

Chilton, S., J. Covey, L. Hopkins, M. Jones-Lee, G. Loomes, N. Pidgeon, and A.
Spencer. (1999). “Annex: New Research Results on the Valuation of Preventing Fatal
Road Accident Casualties.” In Health Costs Due to Road Traffic-related Air Pollution:
Economic Evaluation, Prepared for the WHO Ministerial Conference on Environment
and Health, London, June 1999. Bern, Switzerland: Federal Department of Environment,
Transport, Energy and Communications, Bureau for Transport Statistics.

Council of Economic Advisers. (2002). Economic Report of the President. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office.

Cousineau, J-M., R. Lacroix, and A-M. Girard. (1992). “Occupational Hazard and Wage
Compensating Differentials,” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(1), 166-169.

Cutler, D.M. and E. Richardson. (1997). “Measuring the Health of the U.S. Population,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics vol. 1997, 217-271.

Dardis, R. (1980). “The Value of Life: New Evidence from the Marketplace,”
American Economic Review 70(5), 1077-1082.

Desvousges, W.H., F.R. Johnson, H.S. Banzhof, R.R. Russell, E.E. Fries, K.J. Dietz, and
S.C. Helms. (1995). Assessing the Environmental Externality Costs for Electricity
Generation. Research Triangle Park, NC: Triangle Economic Research.

Dickens, W.T. (1984). “Differences Between Risk Premiums in Union and Nonunion
Wages and the Case for Occupational Safety Regulation,” American Economic Review
74(2), 320-323.




                                          71
Dillingham, A.E. (1985). “The Influence of Risk Variable Definition on Value-of-Life
Estimates,” Economic Inquiry 23(2), 277-294.

Dillingham, A.E., T. Miller, and D.T. Levy. (1996). “A More General and Unified
Measure for Valuing Labour Market Risk,” Applied Economics 28, 537-542.

Dillingham, A.E. and R.S. Smith. (1984). “Union Effects on the Valuation of Fatal
Risk.” In Dennis, B.O. (ed.), Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research
Association 36th Annual Meeting, San Francisco, CA, December 28 – 30, 1983.
Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research Association, pp. 270-277.

Dorman, P. and P. Hagstrom. (1998). “Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work
Revisited,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(1), 116-135.

Dorsey, S. (1983). “Employment Hazards and Fringe Benefits: Further Tests for
Compensating Differentials.” In J.D. Worrall (ed.), Safety and the Workforce: Incentives
and Disincentives in Workers' Compensation. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, pp. 87-102.

Dorsey S. and N. Walzer. (1983). “Workers' Compensation, Job Hazards, and Wages,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36(4), 642-654.

Dreyfus, M.K. and W.K. Viscusi. (1995). “Rates of Time Preference and Consumer
Valuations of Automobile Safety and Fuel Efficiency,” Journal of Law and Economics
38(1), 79-105.

Duncan, G.J. and B. Holmlund. (1983). “Was Adam Smith Right After All? Another
Test of the Theory of Compensating Wage Differentials,” Journal of Labor Economics
1(4), 366-379.

European Commission. (2000). Workshop on the Value of Reducing the Risk of Ill-
Health or a Fatal Illness. Proceedings, November 13, 2000, Brussels, Belgium. Internet:
http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/enveco/others/proceedings_of_the_workshop.pdf.

Fairris, D. (1989). “Compensating Wage Differentials in the Union and Nonunion
Sectors,” Industrial Relations 28(3), 356-372.

Fairris, D. (1992). “Compensating Payments and Hazardous Work in Union and
Nonunion Settings,” Journal of Labor Research 13(2), 205-221.

Fishback, P.V. and S.E. Kantor. (1992). “`Square Deal’ or Raw Deal? Market
Compensation for Workplace Disamenities, 1884-1903,” Journal of Economic History
52(4), 826-848.

Freeman, R.B. and J.L. Medoff. (1981). “The Impact of the Percentage Organized on
Union and Nonunion Wages,” Review of Economics and Statistics 63(4), 561-572.




                                           72
French, M.T. (1990). “Estimating the Full Cost of Workplace Injuries,” American
Journal of Public Health 80(9), 1118-1119.

French, M.T. and D.L. Kendall. (1992). “The Value of Job Safety for Railroad
Workers,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5(2), 175-185.

Frerichs, R.R., J.M. Chapman, P. Nourjah, and E.F. Maes. (1984). Cardiovascular
Diseases in Los Angeles, 1979 – 1981. Los Angeles: American Heart Association –
Greater Los Angeles Affiliate, Inc.

Gaba, A. and W.K. Viscusi. (1998). “Differences in Subjective Risk Thresholds:
Worker Groups as an Example,” Management Science 44(6), 801-811.

Garbacz, C. (1989). “Smoke Detector Effectiveness and the Value of Saving a Life,”
Economics Letters 31, 281-286.

Garber, A.M. and C.E. Phelps. (1997). “Economic Foundations of Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis,” Journal of Health Economics 16, 1-31.

Garen, J. (1988). “Compensating Wage Differentials and the Endogeneity of Job
Riskiness,” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(1), 9-16.

Gayer, T., J.T. Hamilton, and W.K. Viscusi. (2000). “Private Values of Risk Tradeoffs
at Superfund Sites: Housing Market Evidence on Learning About Risk,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 82(3), 439-451.

Gegax, D., S. Gerking, and W. Schulze. (1991). “Perceived Risk and the Marginal
Value of Safety,” Review of Economics and Statistics 73(4), 589-596.

Gerdtham, U. and M. Johannesson. (2002). “Do Life-Saving Regulations Save Lives?”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 24(3), 231-249.

Gerking, S., M. de Haan, and W. Schulze. (1988). “The Marginal Value of Job Safety:
A Contingent Valuation Study,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1(2), 185-199.

Ghosh, D., D. Lees, and W. Seal. (1975). “Optimal Motorway Speed and Some
Valuations of Time and Life,” Manchester School Economics and Social Studies 43(2),
134-143.

Graham, J.D., B.-H. Chang, and J.S. Evans. (1992). “Poorer is Riskier,” Risk Analysis
12(3): 333-337.

Graham, J.D. and J.B. Wiener. (1995). Risks vs. Risks: Tradeoffs in Protecting Health
and the Environment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




                                          73
Griliches, Z. (ed.). (1971). Price Indexes and Quality Change. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Hahn, R.W., R.W. Lutter, and W.K. Viscusi. (2000). Do Federal Regulations Reduce
Mortality? Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies.

Hamermesh, D.S. (1978). “Economic Aspects of Job Satisfaction.” In O. Ashenfelter
and W. Oates (eds.), Essays in Labor Market Analysis. New York: John Wiley and
Sons, pp. 53-72.

Hamermesh, D.S. (1999). “Changing Inequality in Markets for Workplace Amenities,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(4), 1085-1123.

Hamermesh, D.S. and J.R. Wolfe. (1990). “Compensating Wage Differentials and the
Duration of Wage Loss,” Journal of Labor Economics 8(1), S175-S197.

Hammitt, J.K. (2002). “Commentary on: What Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2), 271-273.

Hara Associates Inc. (2000). Benefit/Cost Analysis of Proposed Tobacco Products
Information Regulations. Prepared for Health Canada and Consulting and Audit Canada.
Ottawa, Ontario. June 5, 2000.

Heinzerling, L. (1998). “Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,” Yale Law Journal
107, 1981-2070.

Heinzerling, L. (1999). “Discounting Life,” Yale Law Journal 108, 1911-1915.

Heinzerling, L. (2000). “The Rights of Statistical People,” Harvard Environmental Law
Review 24, 189-207.

Hersch, J. (1998). “Compensating Differentials for Gender-Specific Job Injury Risks,”
American Economic Review 88(3), 598-627.

Hersch, J. and T. S. Pickton. (1995). “Risk-Taking Activities and Heterogeneity of Job-
Risk Tradeoffs,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 11(3), 205-217.

Hersch, J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1990). “Cigarette Smoking, Seatbelt Use, and Differences
in Wage-Risk Tradeoffs,” Journal of Human Resources 25(2), 202-227.

Herzog Jr., H.W. and A.M. Schlottmann. (1990). “Valuing Risk in the Workplace:
Market Price, Willingness to Pay, and the Optimal Provision of Safety,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 72(3), 463-470.

H.M. Treasury. (1997). “The Green Book”: Appraisal and Evaluation in Central
Government, Treasury Guidance. London: Her Majesty’s Stationary Office



                                          74
Hwang, H.-S., W.R. Reed, and C. Hubbard. (1992). “Compensating Wage Differentials
and Unobserved Productivity,” Journal of Political Economy 100(4), 835-858.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (1996). Climate Change 1995:
Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2001). Climate Change 2001:
Mitigation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ippolito, P.M. and R.A. Ippolito. (1984). “Measuring the Value of Life Saving from
Consumer Reactions to New Information,” Journal of Public Economics 25, 53-81.

Jenkins, R.R., N. Owens, and L.B. Wiggins. (2001). “Valuing Reduced Risks to
Children: The Case of Bicycle Safety Helmets,” Contemporary Economic Policy 19(4),
397-408.

Jones-Lee, M.W. (1976). The Value of Life: An Economic Analysis. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Jones-Lee, M.W., M. Hammerton, and P.R. Phillips. (1985). “The Value of Safety:
Results of a National Sample Survey,” Economic Journal 95, 49-72.

Keeler, E.B. and S. Cretin. (1983). “Discounting of Life-Saving and Other
Nonmonetary Effects,” Management Science 29(3), 300-306.

Keeney, R.L. (1990). “Mortality Risks Induced by Economic Expenditures,” Risk
Analysis 10(1), 147-159.

Keeney, R.L. (1994). “Mortality Risks Induced by the Costs of Regulation,” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 95-110.

Keeney, R.L. (1997). “Estimating Fatalities Induced by the Economic Costs of
Regulation.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 14(1), 5-24.

Kim, S-W. and P.V. Fishback. (1993). “Institutional Change, Compensating
Differentials, and Accident Risk in American Railroading, 1892-1945,” Journal of
Economic History 53(4), 796-823.

Kim, S-W. and P.V. Fishback. (1999). “The Impact of Institutional Change on
Compensating Wage Differentials for Accident Risk: South Korea, 1984-1990,” Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty 18(3), 231-248.




                                          75
Kitawaga, E.M. and P.M. Hauser. (1973). Differential Mortality in the United States of
America: A Study in Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Kniesner, T.J. and J.D. Leeth. (1991). “Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal
Injury Risk in Australia, Japan, and the United States,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
4(1), 75-90.

Krupnick, A. (2002). “Commentary on: What Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2), 275-282.

Lang, C., G. Yarwood, F. Lalonde, and R. Bloxam. (1995). Environmental and Health
Benefits of Cleaner Vehicles and Fuels. Prepared for Canadian Council of Ministers of
the Environment, Task Force on Cleaner Vehicles and Fuels. October 5, 1995.

Lanoie, P., C. Pedro, and R. Latour. (1995). “The Value of a Statistical Life: A
Comparison of Two Approaches,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 10, 235-257.

Leigh, J.P. (1981). “Compensating Wages for Occupational Injuries and Diseases,”
Social Science Quarterly 62(4), 772-778.

Leigh, J.P. (1987). “Gender, Firm Size, Industry, and Estimates of the Value of Life,”
Journal of Health Economics 1, 331-344.

Leigh, J.P. (1991). “No Evidence of Compensating Wages for Occupational Fatalities,”
Industrial Relations 30(3), 382-395.

Leigh, J.P. (1995). “Compensating Wages, Value of a Statistical Life, and Inter-Industry
Differentials,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 28(1), 83-97.

Leigh, J.P. and R.N. Folsom. (1984). “Estimates of the Value of Accident Avoidance at
the Job Depend on the Concavity of the Equalizing Differences Curve,” Quarterly
Review of Economics and Business 24(1), 56-66.

Liu, J-T., J. Hammitt, and J-L. Liu. (1997). “Estimating Hedonic Wage Function and
Value of Life in a Developing Country,” Economics Letters 57, 353-358.

Liu, J-T. and J.K. Hammitt. (1999). “Perceived Risk and Value of Workplace Safety in
a Developing Country,” Journal of Risk Research 2(3), 263-275.

Lott, J.R. and R.L. Manning. (2000). “Have Changing Liability Rules Compensated
Workers Twice for Occupational Hazards? Earnings Premiums and Cancer Risks,”
Journal of Legal Studies 29, 99-130.

Low, S.A. and L.R. McPheters. (1983). “Wage Differentials and the Risk of Death: An
Empirical Analysis,” Economic Inquiry 21, 271-280.



                                           76
Lutter, R. and J.F. Morrall. (1994). “Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate
Health and Safety Regulation,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 43-66.

Lutter, R., J.F. Morrall, and W.K. Viscusi. (1999). “The Cost-Per-Life-Saved Cutoff for
Safety-Enhancing Regulations,” Economic Inquiry 37(4), 599-608.

Magat, Wesley, W. Kip Viscusi, and Joel Huber. (1996). “A Reference Lottery Metric
for Valuing Health,” Management Science 42(8), 1118-1130.

Marin, A. and H. Psacharopoulos. (1982). “The Reward for Risk in the Labor Market:
Evidence from the United Kingdom and a Reconciliation with Other Studies,” Journal of
Political Economy 90(4), 827-853.

Marsh, Suzanne M. and Larry A. Layne. (2001). Fatal Injuries to Civilian Workers in
the United States, 1980 - 1995. DHHS/NIOSH pub. no. 2001-129s. July. Washington,
DC: Department of Health and Human Services.

Martinello, F. and R. Meng. (1992). “Workplace Risks and the Value of Hazard
Avoidance,” Canadian Journal of Economics 25(2), 333-345.

McLean, R.A., W.R. Wendling, and P.R. Neergaard. (1978). “Compensating Wage
Differentials for Hazardous Work: An Empirical Analysis,” Quarterly Review of
Economics and Business 18(3), 97-107.

McNeill, W.H. (1976). Plagues and Peoples. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press.

Mellow, W. and H. Sider. (1983). “Accuracy of Response in Labor Market Surveys:
Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Labor Economics 1(4), 331-344.

Meng, R. (1989). “Compensating Differences in the Canadian Labour Market,”
Canadian Journal of Economics 22(2), 413-424.

Meng, R. (1991). “Compensating Wages for Long-Term Job Hazards in Canadian
Industry,” Economics Letters 36(3), 331-336.

Meng, R.A. and D.A. Smith. (1990). “The Valuation of Risk of Death in Public Sector
Decision-Making,” Canadian Public Policy - Analyse de Politiques 16(2), 137-144.

Meng, R. and D.A. Smith. (1999). “The Impact of Workers' Compensation on Wage
Premiums for Job Hazards,” Applied Economics 31(9), 1101-1108.

Miller, P., C. Mulvey, and K. Norris. (1997). “Compensating Differentials for Risk of
Death in Australia,” Economic Record 73(223), 363-372.




                                          77
Miller, T.R. (1990). “The Plausible Range for the Value of Life – Red Herrings Among
the Mackerel,” Journal of Forensic Economics 3(3), 17-39.

Miller, T.R. (2000). “Variations between Countries in Values of Statistical Life,”
Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 34(2), 169-188.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1988a). “Doubling the Estimated Value of Life: Results
Using New Occupational Fatality Data,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
7(3), 476-490.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1988b). “The Quantity-Adjusted Value of Life,”
Economic Inquiry 26, 369-388.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1990a). Compensation Mechanisms for Job Risks.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1990b). “Discounting Environmental Health Risks:
New Evidence and Policy Implications,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 18, S51-S62.

Moore, M.J. and W.K. Viscusi. (1990c). “Models for Estimating Discount Rates for
Long-Term Health Risks Using Labor Market Data,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 3,
381-401.

Morrall, J. (1986). “A Review of the Record,” Regulation (Nov/Dec), 25-34.

Mrozek, J.R. and L.O. Taylor. (2002). “What Determines the Value of Life? A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21(2), 253-270.

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). (2000). Worker Health
Chartbook, 2000. Report no. 2000-127. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Internet: http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/pdfs/2000-127.pdf.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (1995).
Recommendation of the Council of the OECD on Improving the Quality of Government
Regulation. Report OCDE/GD(95)95. Paris: OECD.

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2001). OECD
Environmental Outlook. Paris: OECD.

Olson, C.A. (1981). “An Analysis of Wage Differentials Received by Workers on
Dangerous Jobs,” Journal of Human Resources 16(2), 167-185.

Peltzman, S. (1975). “The Effects of Automobile Regulation,” Journal of Political
Economy 83(4), 677-726.




                                           78
Privy Council Office, Canada. (1995). Benefit/Cost Analysis Guide for Regulatory
Programs. Ottawa, Ontario. Internet:
http://www.pco-bcp.gc.ca/raoics-srdc/ProcGuides/cbgcntents_e.htm.

Portney, P.R. (1981). “Housing Prices, Health Effects, and Valuing Reductions in Risk
of Death,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 8, 72-78.

Portney, P.R. and R.N. Stavins. (1994). “Regulatory Review of Environmental Policy:
The Potential Role of Health-Health Analysis,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1),
111-122.

Ramsberg, J.A.L. and L. Sjoberg. (1997). “The Cost-Effectiveness of Lifesaving
Interventions in Sweden,” Risk Analysis 17(4), 467-478.

Revesz, Richard L. (1999). “Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the
Discounting of Human Lives,” Columbia Law Review 99, 941-1017.

Rosen, S. (1974). “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition,” Journal of Political Economy 82, 34-55.

Rosen, S. (1986). “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In O. Ashenfelter and R.
Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 641-
692.

Rosen, S. (1988). “The Value of Changes in Life Expectancy,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 1, 285-304.

Sandy, R. and R.F. Elliott. (1996). “Unions and Risk: Their Impact on the Level of
Compensation for Fatal Risk,” Economica 63(250), 291-309.

Sandy, R., R.F. Elliott, W.S. Siebert, and X. Wei. (2001). “Measurement Error and the
Effects of Unions on the Compensating Differentials for Fatal Workplace Risks,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 23(1), 33-56.

Schelling, T.C. (1968). “The Life You Save May Be Your Own.” In S.B. Chase (ed.),
Problems in Public Expenditure and Analysis. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution,
pp. 127-162.

Science Advisory Board. (1999a). Advisory Letter to Administrator Browner Regarding
the Clean Air Act Amendments Section 812 Prospective Study of Costs and Benefits.
October 29, 1999. Internet: http://www.epa.gov/sab/coua0002.pdf.

Science Advisory Board. (1999b). Final Advisory Letter to Administrator Browner
Regarding the Clean Air Act Amendments Section 812 Prospective Study of Costs and
Benefits. November 19, 1999. Internet: http://www.epa.gov/sab/coua0003.pdf.




                                          79
Science Advisory Board. (2000). SAB Report on EPA’s White Paper “Valuing the
Benefits of Fatal Cancer Risk Reduction.” Transmitted to the EPA by letter to
Administrator Browner. July 27, 2000. Internet: http://www.epa.gov/sab/eeacf013.pdf.

Shanmugam, K.R. (1996/7). “The Value of Life: Estimates from Indian Labour
Market,” Indian Economic Journal 44(4), 105-114.

Shanmugam, K.R. (1997). “Value of Life and Injury: Estimating Using Flexible
Functional Form,” Indian Journal of Applied Economics 6(3), 125-136.

Shanmugam, K.R. (2000). “Valuations of Life and Injury Risks,” Environmental and
Resource Economics 16, 379-389.

Shanmugam, K.R. (2001). “Self Selection Bias in the Estimates of Compensating
Differentials for Job Risks in India,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 22(3), 263-275.

Shepard, D.S. and R.J. Zeckhauser. (1982). “Life-Cycle Consumption and Willingness-
to-Pay for Increased Survival.” In M.W. Jones-Lee (ed.), The Value of Life and Safety.
Amsterdam: North Holland.

Shepard, D.S. and R.J. Zeckhauser. (1984). “Survival Versus Consumption,”
Management Science 30(4), 423-439.

Shogren, J.S. and T. Stamland. (2002). “Skill and the Value of Life,” Journal of
Political Economy 110(5), 1168-1173.

Siebert, W.S. and X. Wei. (1994). “Compensating Wage Differentials for Workplace
Accidents: Evidence for Union and Nonunion Workers in the UK,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 9(1), 61-76.

Siebert, W.S. and X. Wei. (1998). “Wage Compensation for Job Risks: The Case of
Hong Kong,” Asian Economic Journal 12(2), 171-181.

Smith, A. (1776). The Wealth of Nations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1976
edition.

Smith, R.S. (1974). “The Feasibility of an `Injury Tax’ Approach to Occupational
Safety,” Law and Contemporary Problems 38(4), 730-744.

Smith, R.S. (1976). The Occupational Safety and Health Act: Its Goals and Its
Achievements. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.

Smith, R.S. (1979). “Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A Review,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 32(3), 339-352.




                                           80
Smith, V.K. (1983). “The Role of Site and Job Characteristics in Hedonic Wage
Models,” Journal of Urban Economics 13, 296-321.

Smith, V.K., D.J. Epp, and K.A. Schwabe. (1994). “Cross-Country Analyses Don’t
Estimate Health-Health Responses,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 67-84.

Smith, V.K. and C.C.S. Gilbert. (1984). “The Implicit Valuation of Risks to Life: A
Comparative Analysis,” Economics Letters 16, 393-399.

Smith, V.K. and C.C.S. Gilbert. (1985). “The Valuation of Environmental Risks Using
Hedonic Wage Models.” In M. David and T. Smeeding (eds.), Horizontal Equity,
Uncertainty, and Economic Well-Being. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 359-
385.

Summers, R. and A. Heston. (1991). “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded
Set of International Comparisons, 1950 – 1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106,
327-368.

Tengs, T.O., M.E. Adams, J.S. Pliskin, D.G. Safran, J.E. Siegel, M.C. Weinstein, and
J.D. Graham. (1995). “Five-Hundred Life-Saving Interventions and Their Cost-
Effectiveness,” Risk Analysis 15(3), 369-390.

Thaler, R. and S. Rosen. (1975). “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor
Market.” In N.E. Terleckyj (ed.), Household Production and Consumption. New York:
Columbia University Press, pp. 265-300.

U.K. Cabinet Office. (2000). Good Policy Making: A Guide to Regulatory Impact
Assessment. London: Cabinet Office Regulatory Impact Unit. Internet:
http://www.cabinet-office.gov.uk/regulation/2000/riaguide/default.htm.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (1999). The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air
Act 1990 to 2010. Report 410-R-99-001. Washington, DC: Office of Air and Radiation,
USEPA. Internet: http://www.epa.gov/oar/sect812/copy99.html.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2000a). Guidelines for Preparing Economic
Analyses. Report 240-R-00-003. Washington, DC: Office of the Administrator, USEPA.
Internet: http://yosemite1.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/pages/guidelines.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2000b). Regulatory Impact Analysis: Heavy-
Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control
Requirements. Report 420-R-00-026. Washington, DC: Office of Air and Radiation,
USEPA.

U.S. Federal Aviation Administration. (1998). Economic Values for Evaluation of
Federal Aviation Administration Investment and Regulatory Program. Report no. FAA-




                                          81
APO-98-8. Washington, DC: Department of Transportation. June. Internet:
http://www.api.faa.gov/economic/TOC.PDF.

U.S. Office of Management and Budget. (1992). Guidelines and Discount Rates for
Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs. Circular A-94. Washington, DC: The White
House. Internet: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a094/a094.pdf.

U.S. Office of Management and Budget. (1996). Economic Analysis of Federal
Regulations Under Executive Order 12866. Washington, DC: The White House.
Internet: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/riaguide.html.

U.S. Office of Management and Budget. (2001). Making Sense of Regulation: 2001
Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on
State, Local, and Tribal Entities. Washington, DC: The White House. Internet:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/costbenefitreport.pdf.

Viscusi, W.K. (1978a). “Labor Market Valuations of Life and Limb: Empirical
Evidence and Policy Implications,” Public Policy 26(3), 359-386.

Viscusi, W.K. (1978b). “Wealth Effects and Earnings Premiums for Job Hazards,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 60(3), 408-416.

Viscusi, W.K. (1979). Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market Performance.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (1980). “Union, Labor Market Structure, and the Welfare Implications of
the Quality of Work,” Journal of Labor Research 1(1), 175-192.

Viscusi, W.K. (1981). “Occupational Safety and Health Regulation: Its Impact and
Policy Alternatives.” In J.P. Crecine (ed.), Research in Public Policy Analysis and
Management. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, vol. 2, 281-299.

Viscusi, W.K. (1983). Risk by Choice: Regulating Health and Safety in the Workplace.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (1992a). Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (1992b). Wealth, Health Investments, and the Value of Life. Report
prepared for the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC.

Viscusi, W.K. (1993). “The Value of Risks to Life and Health,” Journal of Economic
Literature 31, 1912-1946.

Viscusi, W.K. (1994a). “Mortality Effects of Regulatory Costs and Policy Evaluation
Criteria,” RAND Journal of Economics 25(1), 94-109.



                                           82
Viscusi, W.K. (1994b). “Risk-Risk Analysis,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 5-
17.

Viscusi, W.K. (1998). Rational Risk Policy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Viscusi, W.K. (2000). “The Value of Life in Legal Contexts: Survey and Critique,”
American Law and Economics Review 2(1), 195-222.

Viscusi, W.K. and W. Evans. (1990). “Utility Functions that are Dependent on One’s
Health Status: Estimates and Economic Implications,” American Economic Review 80,
353-374.

Viscusi, W.K., J.K. Hakes, and A. Carlin. (1997). “Measures of Mortality Risks,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 14(3), 213-233.

Viscusi, W.K. and J. Hersch. (2001). “Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 83(2), 269-280.

Viscusi, W. K. and M.J. Moore. (1989). “Rates of Time Preference and Valuations of
the Duration of Life,” Journal of Public Economics 38, 297-317.

Viscusi, W.K. and C.J. O'Connor. (1984). “Adaptive Responses to Chemical Labeling:
Are Workers Bayesian Decision Makers?” American Economic Review 74(5), 942-956.

Viscusi, W.K. and R.J. Zeckhauser. (1994). “The Fatality and Injury Costs of
Expenditures,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8(1), 19-41.

Weiss, P., G. Maier, and S. Gerking. (1986). “The Economic Evaluation of Job Safety:
A Methodological Survey and Some Estimates for Austria,” Empirica 13(1), 53-67.

White, H. (1980). “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica 48(3), 817-830.

Wildavsky, A. (1980). “Richer is Safer,” The Public Interest 60, 23-39.

Wildavsky, A. (1988). Searching for Safety. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.




                                          83
Figures and Tables




                     84
                                           Figure 1
                        Market Process for Determining Compensating
                                        Differentials
                                                                  EU1
                                                                        EU2
    Wage
w1(p2)



                                                                              w(p)

                                                                                     OC2

w2(p2)

                                    EU2

                                                           OC1
w1(p1)

         EU1



               w(p)                         OC2

                      OC1

                                    p1                       p2                        Risk

                                                      85
                                      Figure 2
            The Value of Statistical Life as a Function of Mortality Risk



           25


           20

  Value of
Statistical 15
   Life
 (millions, 10
2000 US$)

            5


            0
                 0.01   0.05   0.09   0.13   0.17    0.21   0.25   0.29   0.33    0.37
                           Annual Occupational Mortality Risk per 1,000 Workers

        Viscusi (1981; linear)        Viscusi (1981; log)          L&F (1984; linear)
        L&F (1984; log)               Olson (1981; log)            D&W (1983; log)



                                                86
Table 1. U.S. Occupational Fatality Rates by Industry, 1992 – 1995 National Averages
                                           Fatality Rate per 100,000 Workers
              Industry                   NIOSH (NTOF)             BLS (CFOI)
Agriculture, Forestry, & Fisheries             17.0                  23.9
Mining                                         24.5                  26.3
Construction                                   12.8                  13.4
Manufacturing                                    3.6                  3.8
Transportation & Utilities                     10.4                  10.6
Wholesale Trade                                  3.5                  5.4
Retail Trade                                     2.8                  3.6
Finance, Insurance, & Real Estate                1.1                  1.5
Services                                         1.5                  1.8
Sources: Rates constructed by authors based on Marsh and Layne (2001) and BLS (n.d.).




                                                               87
Table 2. Summary of Labor Market Studies of the Value of a Statistical Life, United States
                                                                                                         Workers'      Average      Implicit VSL
                                                                                        Nonfatal Risk
     Author (Year)               Sample                Risk Variable        Mean Risk                     Comp      Income Level   (millions, 2000
                                                                                         Included?
                                                                                                        Included?    (2000 US$)         US$)
Smith (1974)            Current Population Survey Bureau of Labor Statistics 0.000125       Yes,           No          $29,029           $9.2
                        (CPS) 1967, Census of     (BLS) 1966, 1967                       significant
                        Manufactures 1963, U.S.
                        Census 1960,
                        Employment and Earnings
                        1963


Thaler and Rosen (1975) Survey of Economic       Society of Actuaries 1967 0.001             No            No         $34,663           $1.0
                        Opportunity 1967
Smith (1976)            CPS 1967, 1973           BLS 1966, 1967, 1970       0.0001        Yes, not         No         $31,027           $5.9
                                                                                         significant
Viscusi (1978a, 1979)   Survey of Working        BLS 1969, subjective risk 0.0001           Yes,           No         $31,842           $5.3
                        Conditions, 1969-1970    of job (SWC)                            significant
                        (SWC)
Brown (1980)            National Longitudinal    Society of Actuaries 1967 0.002             No            No         $49,019           $1.9
                        Survey of Young Men
                        1966-71, 1973
Viscusi (1981)          Panel Study of Income    BLS 1973-1976              0.0001          Yes,           No         $22,618           $8.3
                        Dynamics (PSID) 1976                                             significant

Olson (1981)            CPS 1978                 BLS 1973                   0.0001          Yes,           No         $36,151           $6.7
                                                                                         significant
Arnould and Nichols     U.S. Census 1970         Society of Actuaries 1967 0.001             No           Yes           NA           $0.5, $1.3
(1983)
Butler (1983)           S.C. Workers'           S.C. Workers'               0.00005          No           Yes         $22,713           $1.3
                        Compensation Data 1940- Compensation Claims
                        69                      Data




                                                                         88
                                                                                                          Workers'      Average      Implicit VSL
                                                                                        Nonfatal Risk
     Author (Year)               Sample                Risk Variable        Mean Risk                      Comp      Income Level   (millions, 2000
                                                                                         Included?
                                                                                                         Included?    (2000 US$)         US$)
Low and McPheters       International City       Constructed a risk          0.0003          No             No          $33,172           $1.4
(1983)                  Management Association   measure from DOJ/FBI
                        1976 (police officer     police officers killed data
                        wages)                   1972-75 for 72 cities

Dorsey and Walzer (1983) CPS May 1978            BLS 1976                   0.000052        Yes,           Yes         $21,636       $11.8, $12.3
                                                                                         significant
Leigh and Folsom (1984) PSID 1974; Quality of    BLS                        0.0001          Yes,            No         $29,038,      $10.1-$13.3
                        Employment Survey                                                significant                   $36,946
                        (QES) 1977
Smith and Gilbert (1984, CPS 1978                BLS 1975                       NA           No             No           NA              $0.9
1985)

Dillingham and Smith    CPS May 1979             BLS industry data 1976, 0.000082           Yes,            No         $29,707        $4.1-$8.3
(1984)                                           1979; NY Workers' Comp                 significant in
                                                 Data 1970                                  some
                                                                                        specifications
Dillingham (1985)       QES 1977                 BLS 1976; NY Workers'      0.000008,        No             No         $26,731      $1.2, $3.2-$6.8
                                                 Compensation data 1970     0.00014


Leigh (1987)            QES 1977; CPS 1977       BLS                            NA           No            No            NA             $13.3
Moore and Viscusi       PSID 1982                BLS 1972-1982, NIOSH       0.00005,         No            Yes         $24,931        $3.2, $9.4
(1988a)                                          National Traumatic         0.00008
                                                 Occupational Fatality
                                                 (NTOF) Survey 1980-
                                                 1985




                                                                          89
                                                                                                          Workers'      Average      Implicit VSL
                                                                                        Nonfatal Risk
     Author (Year)               Sample                Risk Variable        Mean Risk                      Comp      Income Level   (millions, 2000
                                                                                         Included?
                                                                                                         Included?    (2000 US$)         US$)
Moore and Viscusi       QES 1977                 BLS, discounted expected 0.00006            No             Yes         $31,092           $9.7
(1988b)                                          life years lost; subjective
                                                 risk of job (QES)

Garen (1988)            PSID 1981-1982           BLS 1980, 1981             0.000108        Yes,            No         $29,865          $17.3
                                                                                         significant
Viscusi and Moore (1989) PSID 1982               NIOSH NTOF Survey,      0.0001              No             No         $24,611          $10.0
                                                 Structural Markov Model

Herzog and Schlottman   U.S. Census 1970         BLS 1969                   0.000097         No             No         $48,364          $11.7
(1990)

Moore and Viscusi       PSID 1982                NIOSH NTOF Survey,         0.0001           No             No         $24,611          $20.8
(1990b)                                          Structural Life Cycle
                                                 Model
Moore and Viscusi       PSID 1982                NIOSH NTOF Survey,         0.0001           Yes           Yes         $24,611          $20.8
(1990c)                                          Structural Integrated Life
                                                 Cycle Model
Kniesner and Leeth (1991) CPS 1978               NIOSH NTOF Survey          0.0004          Yes,           Yes         $33,627           $0.7
                                                 1980-1985                              significant in
                                                                                            some
                                                                                        specifications
Gegax, Gerking, and     Authors' mail survey 1984 Workers' assessed fatality 0.0009          No             No         $41,391           $2.1
Schulze (1991)                                    risk at work 1984

Leigh (1991)            QES 1972-3, QES 1977, BLS 1979, Workers'            0.000134         No             No         $32,961        $7.1-$15.3
                        PSID 1974, 1981,       Compensation data from
                        Longitudinal QES 1973- 11 states 1977-1980
                        1977, CPS January 1977




                                                                         90
                                                                                                                  Workers'        Average        Implicit VSL
                                                                                               Nonfatal Risk
      Author (Year)                 Sample                  Risk Variable         Mean Risk                        Comp        Income Level     (millions, 2000
                                                                                                Included?
                                                                                                                 Included?      (2000 US$)           US$)
Berger and Gabriel (1991) US Census 1980              BLS 1979                    0.00008-           No             No            $46,865,        $8.6, $10.9
                                                                                  0.000097                                        $48,029
Leigh (1995)               PSID 1981, CPS January BLS 1976, 79-81 and             0.00011-           No             No            $29,587         $8.1-$16.8
                           1977, QES 1977         NIOSH 1980-85                   0.00013

Dorman and Hagstrom        PSID 1982                  BLS 1979-1981, 1983,        0.000123-         Yes             Yes           $32,243         $8.7-$20.3
(1998)                                                1985, 1986; NIOSH           0.0001639
                                                      NTOF 1980-1988
Lott and Manning (2000) CPS March 1971 and            Hickey-Kearney                  NA             No             No            $30,245      $1.5, $3.0 ($2.0,
                        March 1985                    carcinogenic exposure                                                                         $4.0)†
                                                      1972-1974, NIOSH
                                                      National Occupational
                                                      Exposure Survey 1981-
                                                      1983


† Lott and Manning (2000) estimate represents the value of avoiding a statistical fatal cancer case with an assumed latency period of 10 years (discounted at 3
percent). The reported values from their paper without discounting of this latency period are presented in parentheses.




                                                                               91
Table 3. Summary of Value of a Statistical Life Studies Based on Tradeoffs Outside the Labor Market, United States
                                                                            Component of the Monetary         Average Income        Implicit VSL (millions,
           Author (Year)                    Nature of Risk, Year
                                                                                   Tradeoff                   Level (2000 US$)            2000 US$)
Blomquist (1979)                      Automobile death risks, 1972      Estimated disutility of seat belts         $38,395                   $1.0

Dardis (1980)                         Fire fatality risks without smoke Purchase price and maintenance               NA                      $0.77
                                      detectors, 1974-1979              costs of smoke detectors

Portney (1981)                        Mortality effects of air pollution, Property values in Allegheny               NA                      $1.03
                                      1978                                County, PA
Ippolito and Ippolito (1984)          Cigarette smoking risks, 1980 Estimates monetary equivalent of                 NA                      $0.90
                                                                          effect of risk information

Garbacz (1989)                        Fire fatality risks without smoke Purchase price of smoke detectors            NA                      $2.56
                                      detectors, 1968-1985

Atkinson and Halvorson (1990)         Automobile accident risks, 1989 Prices of new automobiles                      NA                      $5.13

Carlin and Sandy (1991)               Fatality risks with use of        Purchase price of car seats plus          $24,737                    $0.84
                                      children's car seats, 1985        time to buckle children, 10 Indiana
                                                                        cities
Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995)            Automobile safety, 1988           Prices of automobiles                        NA                    $3.8-$5.4

Gayer, Hamilton, and Viscusi (2000) Superfund sites' cancer risks,   Property values in Greater Grand                NA             $3.2-$3.7 ($4.3-$5.0)†
                                    1988 - 1993                      Rapids, MI
Jenkins, Owens, and Wiggins (2001) Bicycle-related fatal head injury Purchase price of bicycle helmets               NA             $1.4-$2.9 (5-9 year olds)
                                    risks, 1997                                                                                    $1.2-$2.8 (10-14 year olds)
                                                                                                                                   $2.1-$4.3 (20-59 year olds)
† Gayer et al. (2000) estimate represents the value of avoiding a statistical cancer case with an assumed latency period of 10 years (discounted at 3 percent). The
reported values from their paper without discounting of this latency period are presented in parentheses.




                                                                                92
Table 4. Summary of Labor Market Studies of the Value of a Statistical Life, International
                                                                                                  Nonfatal Workers' Average Income Implicit VSL
  Author (Year)      Country           Sample                  Risk Variable         Mean Risk      Risk     Comp       Level     (millions, 2000
                                                                                                 Included? Included? (2000 US$)        US$)
Marin and          UK          General Household        OPCS Occupational            0.0001         No        No       $14,472          $4.2
Psacharopoulos                 Survey 1975              Mortality Decennial Survey
(1982)                                                  1970-72
Weiss, Maier, and Austria      Austrian Microcensus      Austrian Social Insurance      NA         Yes       No         $12,011      $3.9, $6.5
Gerking (1986)                 File of Central Bureau of Data on job-related
                               Statistics 1981           accidents 1977 - 1984

Meng (1989)        Canada      National Survey of Class Labour Canada and Quebec     0.00019       No        No         $43,840       $3.9-$4.7
                               Structure and Labour     Occupational Health and
                               Process 1981             Safety Board 1981

Meng and Smith     Canada      National Election Study Labour Canada and Quebec      0.00012       No        No         $29,646      $6.5-$10.3
(1990)                         1984                    Occupational Health and
                                                       Safety Board 1981-83

Kniesner and Leeth Japan       Two-digit manufacturing Yearbook of Labor             0.00003       Yes       No         $44,863         $9.7
(1991)                         data 1986 (Japan)       Statistics (Japan)

Kniesner and Leeth Australia   Two-digit manufacturing Industrial Accidents,         0.0001        Yes       Yes        $23,307         $4.2
(1991)                         data 1984-85 (Australia, Australia Bureau of
                               by state)                Statistics 1984 - 1986
Cousineau, Lacroix, Canada     Labor, Canada Survey     Quebec Compensation          0.00001       Yes       No         $29,665         $4.6
and Girard (1992)              1979                     Board

Martinello and     Canada      Labour Market Activity Labour Canada and              0.00025       Yes       No         $25,387       $2.2-$6.8
Meng (1992)                    Survey 1986            Statistics Canada 1986




                                                                            93
                                                                                                   Nonfatal Workers' Average Income Implicit VSL
   Author (Year)      Country           Sample                  Risk Variable         Mean Risk      Risk     Comp       Level     (millions, 2000
                                                                                                  Included? Included? (2000 US$)        US$)
Kim and Fishback South          Ministry of Labor's      Ministry of Labor's          0.000485       Yes       Yes       $8,125          $0.8
(1993)           Korea          Report on Monthly Labor Analysis for Industrial
                                Survey and Survey on Accidents
                                Basic Statistics for the
                                Wage Structures


Siebert and Wei     UK          General Household        Health and Safety            0.000038      Yes       No         $12,810       $9.4-$11.5
(1994)                          Survey 1983              Executive (HSE) 1986-88

Lanoie, Pedro, and Canada       Authors' in-person       Quebec Workers'              0.000126      Yes       No         $40,739       $19.6-$21.7
Latour (1995)                   survey 1990              Compensation Board 1981-
                                                         1985
Sandy and Elliott   UK          Social Change and        OPCS Occupational            0.000045      No        No         $16,143       $5.2-$69.4
(1996)                          Economic Life Initiative Mortality Tables Decennial
                                Survey (SCELI) 1986      Supplement 1979/80-
                                                         1982/3
Shanmugam           India       Author's survey of blue Administrative Report of      0.000104      No        No          $778         $1.2, $1.5
(1996/7)                        collar manufacturing    Factories Act 1987-1990
                                workers, Madras, India
                                1990
Liu, Hammitt, and Taiwan        Taiwan Labor Force       Taiwan Labor Insurance       0.000225-     No        No     $5,007 - $6,088    $0.2-$0.9
Liu (1997)                      Survey 1982-1986         Agency 1982-1986             0.000382

Miller, Mulvey, and Australia   Australian Census of   Worksafe Australia,            0.000068      No        No         $27,177       $11.3-$19.1
Norris (1997)                   Population and Housing National Occupational
                                1991                   Health and Safety
                                                       Commission 1992-93
Siebert and Wei     Hong Kong Hong Kong Census 1991 Labour Department                 0.000139      No        No         $11,668          $1.7
(1998)




                                                                            94
                                                                                                          Nonfatal Workers' Average Income Implicit VSL
  Author (Year)     Country           Sample                  Risk Variable             Mean Risk           Risk     Comp       Level     (millions, 2000
                                                                                                         Included? Included? (2000 US$)        US$)
Liu and Hammitt    Taiwan     Authors' survey of       Workers' assessed fatality       0.000513            Yes       No       $18,483          $0.7
(1999)                        petrochemical workers    risk at work 1995
                              1995
Meng and Smith     Canada     Labour Market Activity   Ontario Workers'                 0.00018            Yes       Yes        $19,962       $5.1-$5.3
(1999)                        Survey 1986              Compensation Board
Arabsheibani and   UK         General Household        OPCS Occupational                0.00005            Yes       No         $20,163        $19.9
Marin (2000)                  Survey (1980s)           Mortality Decennial Survey
                                                       1979-83
Shanmugam (2000) India        Author's survey of blue Administrative Report of          0.000104           Yes       No          $778        $1.0, $1.4
                              collar manufacturing    Factories Act 1987-1990
                              workers, Madras, India
                              1990
Shanmugam (2001) India        Author's survey of blue Administrative Report of          0.000104           Yes       No          $778           $4.1
                              collar manufacturing    Factories Act 1987-1990
                              workers, Madras, India
                              1990
Sandy, Elliott,    UK         SCELI 1986               OPCS 79/80 - 82/3, HSE       0.000038, 0.000045     No        No         $16,143      $5.7, $74.1
Siebert, and Wei                                       1986 - 88
(2001)




                                                                           95
Table 5a. Summary of Labor Market Studies of the Value of Statistical Injury, United States
                                                                                              Workers'    Average Income
   Author                                                        Mean         Fatal Risk                                    Implicit Value of a Statistical Injury
                        Sample             Risk Variable                                       Comp             Level
   (Year)                                                     Injury Risk     Included?                                                 (2000 US$)
                                                                                             Included?       (2000 US$)
Smith (1974) Current Population Survey Bureau of Labor           NA         Yes,           No            $29,029         -$30,934
             (CPS) 1967, Census of     Statistics (BLS)                     significant
             Manufactures 1963, U.S. 1966, 1967
             Census 1960, Employment
             and Earnings 1963

Smith (1976) CPS 1967, 1973            BLS 1966, 1967,           NA         Yes,           No            $31,027            nonfatal injury coefficient not significant
                                       1970                                 significant


Viscusi       Survey of Working        BLS non-fatal injury    0.032        Yes,           No            $31,842            $25,693-$49,442
(1978a, 1979) Conditions, 1969-1970    rate 1969 (pre-                      significant
              (SWC)                    OSHA)

Viscusi      SWC 1969-1970             BLS non-fatal injury    0.032        No             No            $32,675            $61,537-$63,241
(1978b)                                rate 1969 (pre-
                                       OSHA)

McLean,      Wisconsin Census 1970     Wisconsin Workers'      0.05         No             No            $34,414            $141,659
Wendling,                              Compensation
and                                    accident data 1970
Neergaard
(1978)

Viscusi      Panel Study of Income     BLS non-fatal injury    0.032        Yes,           No            $22,618            $59,238
(1981)       Dynamics (PSID) 1976      rate 1976                            significant

Olson (1981) CPS 1978                  BLS total lost          0.035        Yes,           No            $36,151            $24,009-$32,304
                                       workday accident                     significant
                                       rate 1973




                                                                               96
                                                                                             Workers'    Average Income
   Author                                                       Mean         Fatal Risk                                    Implicit Value of a Statistical Injury
                        Sample            Risk Variable                                       Comp            Level
   (Year)                                                    Injury Risk     Included?                                                   (2000 US$)
                                                                                            Included?      (2000 US$)
Freeman and CPS May 1973 - 1975        BLS mean lost       0.701           No             No            NA              Not reported -- can't calculate (positive
Medoff                                 workdays per worker                                                              and statistically significant)
(1981)                                 1972 - 1974


Leigh (1981) PSID 1974, QES 1977       BLS injury rates         NA         Yes, not       No            NA                 Not reported -- can't calculate (positive
                                       1974                                significant                                     and statistically significant)



Butler (1983) S.C. Workers'           S.C. Workers'             .061       No             Yes           $22,713            $936/day or $16,848 for an 18-day injury
              Compensation Data 1940- Compensation            (claims
              69                      Claims Data              rate)

Dorsey and   CPS May 1978              BLS nonfatal lost      0.03         Yes, some      Yes           $21,636            $60,581, $69,235
Walzer                                 workday injury                      specifications
(1983)                                 incidence rate 1976

Smith (1983) CPS 1978                  BLS Work Injury        0.078        No             No            $32,488            $35,485
                                       Rate

Dorsey       Employers' Expenditures BLS                      0.036        Yes, not       Yes, in some $33,019             $102,360
(1983)       for Employee                                                  significant    specifications
             Compensation survey 1977,
             BLS May 1978, BLS May
             1979

Leigh and    PSID 1974; Quality of   BLS nonfatal injury      0.074,       Yes            No            $29,038, $36,946   $99,431-$114,663
Folsom       Employment Survey (QES) rate                     0.066
(1984)       1977

Viscusi and Author's chemical worker   Workers' assessed      0.1          No             No            $37,642            $17,707-$22,773
O'Connor    survey, 1982               injury and illness
(1984)                                 rate




                                                                              97
                                                                                               Workers'     Average Income
   Author                                                         Mean         Fatal Risk                                       Implicit Value of a Statistical Injury
                        Sample              Risk Variable                                       Comp            Level
   (Year)                                                      Injury Risk     Included?                                                    (2000 US$)
                                                                                              Included?      (2000 US$)
Dickens      CPS May 1977               BLS industry data         NA         Yes            No            NA                 Not reported -- can't calculate
(1984)                                  1977

Viscusi and QES 1977                    BLS lost workday       0.038,        No             Yes           $43,503            $70,650 lost workday accident; $27,950
Moore (1987)                            injury rate, BLS total 0.097                                                         for nonpecuniary loss-lost workday
                                        injury rate                                                                          accident; $45,400 per accident



Biddle and QES 1977                     BLS nonfatal lost       0.037        No             No            $42,170            $168,603 (willingness to accept),
Zarkin (1988)                           workday injury                                                                       $155,582 (willingness to pay)
                                        incident rate, 1977

Garen (1988) PSID 1981-1982             BLS nonfatal injury       NA         Yes            No            $29,865            $26,953
                                        rate, 1980-1981

Moore and    QES 1977                   BLS annual             0.047         Yes,           Yes           $31,092            $36,818, $48,349
Viscusi                                 incidence rate of lost               significant
(1988b)                                 workday cases 1973-
                                        1976

Hersch and   Authors' survey in Eugene, Workers' assessed       0.059        No             No (one state) $21,897           $72,429 (whole sample); $39,468
Viscusi      OR, 1987                   injury rate using                                                                    (smokers); $118,277 (seat belt users)
(1990)                                  BLS lost workday
                                        incidence rate scale

Viscusi and Viscusi and O'Connor        Utility function        0.1          No             No            $37,802            $23,781 (marginal risk change); $37,030
Evans (1990) chemical worker survey     estimates using                                                                      (certain injury)
                                        assessed injury and
                                        illness rate




                                                                                98
                                                                                                Workers'    Average Income
   Author                                                          Mean         Fatal Risk                                    Implicit Value of a Statistical Injury
                        Sample              Risk Variable                                        Comp            Level
   (Year)                                                       Injury Risk     Included?                                                   (2000 US$)
                                                                                               Included?      (2000 US$)
Hamermesh PSID 1981                     BLS 1980, 1981          incidence: No                Yes           NA              Not reported -- can't calculate (positive
and Wolfe                                                         0.0476;                                                  and statistically significant)
(1990)                                                           duration:
                                                                  0.1571

Kniesner and CPS 1978                   BLS lost workday         0.055        Yes            Yes           $33,627            $60,624
Leeth (1991)                            injury rate


French and   CPS 1980 (railroad industry Federal Railroad        0.048        No             No            $46,284            $48,928
Kendall      only)                       Administration
(1992)                                   Injury Rate

Fairris (1992) SWC 1969-1970            BLS 1969 industry        0.032        No             No            $33,850            $49,290
                                        injury frequency rate


Hersch and   National Medical           BLS total lost      0.702†            No             No            $26,345            $120,709 (whole sample); $155,453
Pickton      Expenditure Survey 1987    workdays per worker                                                                   (nonsmoker-seat belt users); $83,186
(1995)                                  per year 1987                                                                         (smoker-nonseat belt users)




Dillingham, QES 1977                    constructed a risk         NA         Yes            No            $24,267            $155,435-$242,671 WTP to avoid one
Miller, and                             measure                                                                               year of worklife impairment
Levy (1996)


Dorman and PSID 1982                    BLS 1981                 0.052        Yes            Yes           $32,243            Nonfatal injury coefficient not significant
Hagstrom
(1998)




                                                                                99
                                                                                            Workers'     Average Income
   Author                                                        Mean       Fatal Risk                                     Implicit Value of a Statistical Injury
                       Sample                Risk Variable                                   Comp              Level
   (Year)                                                     Injury Risk   Included?                                                  (2000 US$)
                                                                                           Included?        (2000 US$)
Hersch       CPS March 1994              BLS 1993 (number        0.029 No                No             $28,004         $22,810-$33,723 (females); $12,146-
(1998)                                   of cases of days        whole                                                  $36,192 (males)
                                         away from work)        sample;
                                                                 0.022
                                                                females
Viscusi and National Medical                BLS 1987 injury rate injury rate: No           No              $31,651             $47,476-$59,144 (nonsmokers); $20,755-
Hersch      Expenditure Survey 1987         and lost workdays       0.042                                  (nonsmokers);       $31,028 (smokers)
(2001)                                      rate                 nonsmoker;                                $28,316 (smokers)
                                                                     0.49
                                                                   smoker
† Note that the measure used in the Hersch and Pickton study – probability of losing 1 workday due to injury per worker per year – differs from the measure used
in most other studies – probability of a lost workday injury per worker per year.




                                                                            100
Table 5b. Summary of Labor Market Studies of the Value of Statistical Injury, International
                                                                                                        Workers'   Average         Implicit Value of a
                                                                              Mean Injury Fatal Risk
Author (Year)    Country           Sample                Risk Variable                                   Comp Income Level          Statistical Injury
                                                                                 Risk     Included?
                                                                                                       Included? (2000 US$)           (2000 US$)
Cousineau,      Canada     Labor, Canada Survey    Quebec Compensation            NA         Yes          No       $29,665              $38,104
Lacroix, and               1979                    Board
Girard (1992)
Martinello and Canada      Labour Market Activity Labour Canada and              0.063       Yes         No       $25,387     $10,815-$14,456 for injury;
Meng (1992)                Survey 1986            Statistics Canada 1986                                                      $161,210-$191,027 for
                                                                                                                              severe injury

Siebert and Wei UK         General Household       Health and Safety             0.0143      Yes         No       $12,810     coefficient on injury risk not
(1994)                     Survey 1983             Executive (HSE) 1986-88                                                    significant in all
                                                   data                                                                       specifications

Lanoie, Pedro, Canada      Authors' in-person      Quebec Workers'               0.099       Yes         No       $40,739                $8,148
and Latour                 survey 1990             Compensation Board
(1995)                                             1981-1985
Liu and        Taiwan      Authors’ survey of      Workers’ assessed injury      0.0109      Yes         No       $18,483               $49,717
Hammitt (1999)             petrochemical workers   risk at work 1995
                           1999
Meng and        Canada     Labour Market Activity Ontario Workers'               3.01 --     Yes         Yes      $19,962        $423 per work day lost
Smith (1999)               Survey 1986            Compensation Board           workdays
                                                                                lost per
                                                                                worker
Shanmugam       India      Author's survey of blue Administrative Report of      0.0729      Yes         No        $778                $150-$560
(2000)                     collar manufacturing    Factories Act 1987-1990
                           workers, Madras, India
                           1990




                                                                           101
Shanmugam   India   Author's survey of blue Administrative Report of     0.0729   Yes   No   $778   $350
(2001)              collar manufacturing    Factories Act 1987-1990
                    workers, Madras, India
                    1990




                                                                   102
Table 6. Replication of Published Meta-Analyses with Viscusi-Aldy Data
                 Viscusi-Aldy      Viscusi-Aldy          Viscusi-Aldy       Viscusi-Aldy Version
                 Version of Liu   Version of Miller   Version of Bowland-    of Mrozek-Taylor
   Variable       et al. (1997)   (2000) Model 3         Beghin (2001)         (2002) Model 2
                   Equation 2                            Linear Model
                        (1)             (2)                   (3)                   (4)
  Dependent        log(VSL)          log(VSL)          VSL (Expressed in         log(VSL)
   Variable                                             Per Hour Terms)
log(Income)            0.51*            0.53*
                                                               -                     -
                      (0.15)           (0.17)

Income                                                      0.078**
                       -                  -                                          -
                                                           (0.031)

Hourly Wage                                                                       0.040
                       -                  -                    -
                                                                                 (0.026)

Mean Risk             -0.015*                             -19.34**               -0.16***
                                          -
                      (0.0057)                             (8.56)                (0.075)

Mean Risk                                                                         0.0019
                       -                  -                    -
Squared                                                                          (0.0015)

Union x                                                                           0.22***
                       -                  -                    -
Mean Risk                                                                        (0.11)

Dillingham                                                                       -0.32
                       -                  -                    -
Risk                                                                             (0.58)

Society of                             -1.29*
                       -                                       -                     -
Actuaries Risk                         (0.28)

BLS Risk                                                 1445.18**
                       -                  -                                          -
                                                         (591.47)

NIOSH Risk                                                                        0.27
                       -                  -                    -
                                                                                 (0.40)

Education                                                -157.14
                       -                  -                                          -
Level                                                    (192.32)

Unemployment                                                                      0.045
                       -                  -                    -
Rate                                                                             (0.048)

U.S. National                                                                     0.31
                       -                  -                    -
Data                                                                             (0.82)

Non-U.S.                                                                         -0.0048
                       -                  -                    -
Study                                                                            (0.81)

Union VSL                                                2995.05*                -0.42
                       -                  -
                                                        (1086.09)                (0.90)

Union Dummy                                              1000.76                  0.43
                       -                  -
Variable                                                 (638.37)                (0.40)



                                                103
                  Viscusi-Aldy      Viscusi-Aldy          Viscusi-Aldy       Viscusi-Aldy Version
                  Version of Liu   Version of Miller   Version of Bowland-    of Mrozek-Taylor
   Variable        et al. (1997)   (2000) Model 3         Beghin (2001)         (2002) Model 2
                    Equation 2                            Linear Model
                         (1)             (2)                   (3)                   (4)
  Dependent         log(VSL)          log(VSL)          VSL (Expressed in         log(VSL)
   Variable                                              Per Hour Terms)

Male Only                                                 -588.20
                        -                  -                                          -
Sample                                                    (600.82)

Blue Collar                                               -812.78                 -0.68
                        -                  -
Sample                                                    (644.54)                (0.49)

Quadratic Risk                                                                     0.54
                        -                  -                    -
                                                                                  (0.33)

Morbidity                                                                          0.11
Variable                -                  -                    -                 (0.32)
Included

log(Dependent                                                                     -0.24
                        -                  -                    -
Variable)                                                                         (0.36)

Regional                                                  -757.70                  0.16
Dummy                   -                  -              (601.16)                (0.35)
Variable

Urban Dummy                                                -65.91                  0.12
                        -                  -
Variable                                                  (804.50)                (0.41)

Workers’                                                                           0.10
                        -                  -                    -
Compensation                                                                      (0.45)

Wage in After                                                                     -0.29
                        -                  -                    -
Tax Terms                                                                         (0.50)

Industry                                                                           0.081
Dummy                   -                  -                    -                 (0.27)
Variable

Occupation                                                                         0.0039
Dummy                   -                  -                    -                 (0.20)
Variable

No Occupation                            0.48
Dummy                   -               (0.33)                  -                     -
Variable

Job                                                                               -0.021
Characteristics                                                                   (0.51)
                        -                  -                    -
Dummy
Variable

Constant              10.56*             9.80*            1935.54                 15.68*
                      (1.49)            (1.78)           (1506.92)                (1.39)


                                                 104
                   Viscusi-Aldy         Viscusi-Aldy            Viscusi-Aldy          Viscusi-Aldy Version
                   Version of Liu      Version of Miller     Version of Bowland-       of Mrozek-Taylor
     Variable       et al. (1997)      (2000) Model 3           Beghin (2001)            (2002) Model 2
                     Equation 2                                 Linear Model
                          (1)                 (2)                    (3)                       (4)
  Dependent          log(VSL)              log(VSL)           VSL (Expressed in             log(VSL)
   Variable                                                    Per Hour Terms)

R2                        0.37                0.27                      -                    0.83

n                           46                    49                    45                       41
Specifications (1), (2), and (4) estimated with ordinary least squares.
Specification (3) estimated with robust regression with Huber weights.
Robust (White) standard errors are presented in parentheses for specifications (1), (2), and (4).
Asymptotic standard errors presented in parentheses for specification (3).
* Indicates statistical significance at 1 percent level.
** Indicates statistical significance at 5 percent level.
*** Indicates statistical significance at 10 percent level.




                                                     105
Table 7. Income Elasticity of Willingness-to-Pay to Reduce Mortality Risk
                                   Reported Elasticity in
         Paper (Model)                                        Viscusi-Aldy Version
                                      Authors’ Papers
Liu et al. (1997)                          0.53                         0.51*
(Equation 2)                                                        (0.21 – 0.80)

Miller (2000)                                  0.89*                          0.53*
(Model 3)                                                                 (0.20 – 0.86)

Mrozek and Taylor (2002)                       0.46**                          0.52
(Model 2)                                                                 (-0.18 – 1.22)

Bowland and Beghin (2001)                     1.66*                            0.61**
(Linear Model)                                                              (0.11 – 1.10)
* Indicates elasticity is based on coefficient that is statistically significant at 1 percent
level.
** Indicates elasticity is based on coefficient that is statistically significant at 5 percent
level.
Ranges in parentheses represent the 95 percent confidence interval around the point
estimate for the income elasticity.




                                              106
Table 8. Regression Models for Viscusi-Aldy Meta-Analysis
        Variable              (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)            (6)
       Regression                                                         Robust with     Robust with     Robust with
                             OLS             OLS             OLS
       Technique                                                         Huber weights   Huber weights   Huber weights
 log(Income)                 0.51*        0.49*             0.60*            0.48*         0.46*             0.47*
                            (0.15)       (0.13)            (0.16)           (0.12)        (0.11)            (0.15)

 Mean Risk                  -0.015**     -0.053*           -0.045*          -0.029*      -0.090*            -0.11*
                            (0.0057)     (0.011)           (0.015)          (0.0061)     (0.018)            (0.029)

 Mean Risk Squared             -          0.00022*          0.00016*           -          0.00065*           0.0010**
                                         (0.000052)        (0.000055)                    (0.00019)          (0.00035)

 Society of Actuaries          -               -            0.50               -               -           dropped
 Risk                                                      (0.87)

 NIOSH Risk                    -               -            0.50               -               -             0.56
                                                           (0.41)                                           (0.41)

 Subjective                    -               -           -0.69               -               -            -0.16
                                                           (0.78)                                           (0.98)

 Union Dummy                   -               -            0.44               -               -             0.50
 Variable                                                  (0.32)                                           (0.30)

 Male Only Sample              -               -            0.24               -               -             0.36
                                                           (0.36)                                           (0.34)

 Blue Collar Sample            -               -           -0.016              -               -            -0.23
                                                           (0.31)                                           (0.33)

 Quadratic Risk                -               -            0.092              -               -             0.20
                                                           (0.27)                                           (0.34)

 Morbidity Variable            -               -            0.55***            -               -             0.62**
 Included                                                  (0.30)                                           (0.30)

 log(Dependent                 -               -            0.17               -               -             0.13
 Variable)                                                 (0.31)                                           (0.41)

 Regional Dummy                -               -           -0.16               -               -             0.16
 Variable                                                  (0.25)                                           (0.31)

 Urban Dummy                   -               -            0.38               -               -             0.087
 Variable                                                  (0.29)                                           (0.39)

 Workers’                      -               -           -0.57               -               -            -0.28
 Compensation                                              (0.33)                                           (0.38)

 Industry Dummy                -               -           -0.46               -               -            -0.37
 Variable                                                  (0.27)                                           (0.28)

 Occupation Dummy              -               -           -0.45               -               -            -0.24
 Variable                                                  (0.31)                                           (0.33)

 Constant                  10.56*          11.22*           9.58*          11.05*           11.83*          11.22*
                           (1.49)          (1.30)          (1.82)          (1.23)           (1.12)          (1.68)

 R2                          0.37            0.55           0.72               -               -               -

 n                            46              46              46              45              45              44
 Income Elasticity           0.51            0.49            0.60            0.48            0.46            0.47
 (95% Confidence         (0.21 – 0.80)   (0.23 – 0.75)   (0.27 – 0.94)   (0.23 – 0.73)   (0.24 – 0.69)   (0.15 – 0.78)
 Interval)
 Mean Predicted VSL,          5.0             5.4             5.9             5.5             5.9              6.2
 Full Sample (millions    (3.4 – 7.4)     (3.7 – 7.8)    (2.7 – 13.9)     (4.1 – 7.5)     (4.4 – 8.1)     (2.5 – 15.7)
 2000 US$) (95%
 Confidence Interval)
 Mean Predicted VSL,          5.5             5.8             6.9             6.1             6.3              7.6
 U.S. Sample (millions    (3.8 – 8.1)     (4.1 – 8.3)    (3.1 – 16.2)     (4.6 – 8.2)     (4.8 – 8.4)     (3.0 – 19.4)
 2000 US$) (95%




                                                          107
       Variable                (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)
      Regression                                                               Robust with      Robust with      Robust with
                              OLS              OLS               OLS
      Technique                                                               Huber weights    Huber weights    Huber weights
 Confidence Interval)
Dependent variable: log(VSL)
Robust (White) standard errors presented in parentheses for specifications 1 – 3.
Asymptotic standard errors presented in parentheses for specifications 4 – 6.
* Indicates statistical significance at 1 percent level.
** Indicates statistical significance at 5 percent level.
*** Indicates statistical significance at 10 percent level.
Note: Estimation with robust standard errors clustered by wage data source yields same significance levels, with the
exception of Mean Risk in (1) and (3) and Mean Risk Squared in (3), which are all significant at the 2 percent level, and the
industry dummy variable in (3) which is significant at the 8 percent level.




                                                              108
Table 9a. Summary of Union Effects in Value of a Statistical Life Studies, United States
                                                                                                                        Union Implicit    Nonunion
                                                                             Nonfatal        Workers'       Average
                                                                                                                              VSL        Implicit VSL         Specification of
 Author (Year)          Sample                 Risk Variable   Mean Risk       Risk           Comp       Income Level
                                                                                                                        (millions, 2000 (millions, 2000        Union Status
                                                                            Included?       Included?     (2000 US$)
                                                                                                                             US$)            US$)
Thaler and       Survey of Economic    Society of Actuaries    0.001            No             No          $34,663        $1.7-$1.9        Negative       Risk x union interaction
Rosen (1975)     Opportunity 1967      1967
Viscusi (1980) SWC 1969-1970           BLS 3-digit industry    0.000118         Yes            No          $31,842        $5.5-$15.2    Not significant Risk x union interaction
                                       data for 1969
Olson (1981)     CPS 1978              BLS 1973                0.0001          Yes,            No          $36,151       $30.6-$44.2       $5.7-$5.8      Risk x union interaction
                                                                            significant                                                                   and separate regressions
                                                                                                                                                          by union status


Dorsey (1983)    Employers' Expenditures BLS                   0.000071        Yes,     Yes, in some       $33,019           $9.6          Negative       Risk x union interaction
                 for Employee                                               significant specifications
                 Compensation survey
                 1977, BLS May 1978,
                 BLS May 1979


Dorsey and       CPS May 1978          BLS 1976                0.000052        Yes,           Yes          $21,636       $11.8, $12.3      Negative       Separate regressions by
Walzer (1983)                                                               significant                                                                   union status
Dillingham and CPS May 1979            BLS industry data 1976, 0.000082        Yes,            No          $29,707        $6.1, $6.6         $3.1         Separate regressions by
Smith (1984)                           1979; NY Workers'                   significant in                                                                 union status
                                       Comp Data 1970                          some
                                                                           specifications

Garen (1988)     PSID 1981-1982        BLS 1980, 1981          0.000108        Yes,            No          $29,865       Insufficient    Positive, but    Risk x union interaction
                                                                            significant                                  information     smaller than
                                                                                                                         provided to      union VSL
                                                                                                                           calculate

Gegax, Gerking, Authors' mail survey   Workers' assessed       0.0009           No             No          $41,391           $2.7       Not significant Separate regressions by
and Schulze     1984                   fatality risk at work                                                                                            union status
(1991)                                 1984




                                                                               109
                                                                                                                     Union Implicit    Nonunion
                                                                               Nonfatal    Workers'      Average
                                                                                                                           VSL        Implicit VSL         Specification of
 Author (Year)          Sample               Risk Variable       Mean Risk       Risk       Comp      Income Level
                                                                                                                     (millions, 2000 (millions, 2000        Union Status
                                                                              Included?   Included?    (2000 US$)
                                                                                                                          US$)            US$)
Kim and         Interstate Commerce     ICC Fatality Data 1890   0.0006 -       Yes          No           NA          No statistical                   Risk x union interaction
Fishback (1993) Commission data 1893 - - 1945                    0.0018                                                difference
                1909, 1926 - 32, 1934 –                                                                              between union
                45                                                                                                   and nonunion
                                                                                                                        members

Dorman and       PSID 1982             BLS 1979-1981, 1983,      0.000123 -     Yes         Yes         $32,243          $18.1            $8.7         Risk x union interaction
Hagstrom                               1985, 1986; NIOSH         0.0001639
(1998)                                 NTOF 1980-1988




                                                                               110
Table 9b. Summary of Union Effects in Value of Statistical Injury Studies, United States
                                                                                                                     Union Implicit Nonunion Implicit
                                                                                      Workers'
                                                              Mean       Fatal Risk             Average Income         Value of a         Value of a       Specification of Union
   Author (Year)         Sample          Risk Variable                                  Comp
                                                              Risk       Included?              Level (2000 US$)    Statistical Injury Statistical Injury          Status
                                                                                      Included?
                                                                                                                      (2000 US$)         (2000 US$)
Biddle and Zarkin QES 1977            BLS nonfatal lost       0.037         No           No         $42,170             $319,678            $56,832       Risk x union interaction
(1988)                                workday injury
                                      incident rate, 1977


Freeman and        CPS May 1973 –     BLS mean lost           0.701*        No           No           NA              No statistical                       Separate regressions by
Medoff (1981)      1975               workdays per                                                                 difference between                      union status
                                      worker 1972 - 1974                                                                union and
                                                                                                                   nonunion members


Smith (1983)       CPS 1978           BLS Work Injury         0.078         No           No    $38,138 (males); $74,368 (males); $46,528 (males); Risk x union interaction
                                      Rate                                                     $25,672 (females) $59,815 (females) $25,672 (females)


Fairris (1992)     SWC 1969-1970      BLS 1969 industry       0.032         No           No         $33,850            $246,449          Not significant   Separate regressions by
                                      injury frequency                                                                                                     union status
                                      rate
Hamermesh and      PSID 1981          BLS 1980, 1981        incidence:      No          Yes           NA              Insufficient        Positive, but    Risk x union interaction
Wolfe (1990)                                                  0.0476;                                                 information       smaller than union
                                                            duration:                                                 provided to        value of injury
                                                              0.1571                                                    calculate

Hersch and Pickton National Medical BLS total lost            0.702*        No           No         $26,345            $222,448              $99,478       Risk x union interaction
(1995)             Expenditure Survey workdays per
                   1987               worker per year
                                      1987

*Lost workdays per 100 full-time workers.




                                                                                        111
Table 9c. Summary of Union Effects in Value of a Statistical Life Studies, International
                                                                                                                     Union Implicit   Nonunion
                                                                                               Workers'    Average
                                                                              Nonfatal Risk                                VSL       Implicit VSL      Specification of
 Author (Year)    Country        Sample         Risk Variable   Mean Risk                       Comp    Income Level
                                                                               Included?                             (millions, 2000   (millions,       Union Status
                                                                                              Included? (2000 US$)
                                                                                                                          US$)        2000 US$)
Marin and      UK           General Household OPCS                0.0001           No            No        $14,472     No statistical               Risk x union
Psacharopoulos              Survey 1975       Occupational                                                              difference                  interaction
(1982)                                        Mortality                                                               between union
                                              Decennial                                                               and nonunion
                                              Survey 1970-72                                                             members

Meng (1989)      Canada     National Survey of Labour Canada      0.00019          No            No        $43,840     No statistical               Risk x union
                            Class Structure and and Quebec                                                              difference                  interaction
                            Labour Process      Occupational                                                          between union
                            1981                Health and                                                            and nonunion
                                                Safety Board                                                             members
                                                1981
Meng and Smith Canada       National Election Labour Canada       0.00012          No            No        $29,646     No statistical               Risk x union
(1990)                      Study 1984          and Quebec                                                              difference                  interaction
                                                Occupational                                                          between union
                                                Health and                                                            and nonunion
                                                Safety Board                                                             members
                                                1981-83
Meng (1991)      Canada     Labour Market       Labour Canada   0.00023 for        No            No        $25,387         $1.9          $4.2       Risk x union
                            Activity Survey     and Workers'     accidents,                                                                         interaction
                            1986                Compensation    0.00012 for
                                                Boards            disease

Cousineau,       Canada     Labor, Canada     Quebec              0.00001         Yes            No        $29,665         $4.4          $2.0       Separate regressions
Lacroix, and                Survey 1979       Compensation                                                                                          by union status
Girard (1992)                                 Board
Martinello and   Canada     Labour Market     Labour Canada       0.00025         Yes            No        $25,387     No statistical               Risk x union
Meng (1992)                 Activity Survey   and Statistics                                                            difference                  interaction
                            1986              Canada 1986                                                             between union
                                                                                                                      and nonunion
                                                                                                                         members




                                                                                  112
                                                                                                                      Union Implicit   Nonunion
                                                                                                Workers'    Average
                                                                               Nonfatal Risk                                VSL       Implicit VSL      Specification of
 Author (Year)    Country        Sample           Risk Variable   Mean Risk                      Comp    Income Level
                                                                                Included?                             (millions, 2000   (millions,       Union Status
                                                                                               Included? (2000 US$)
                                                                                                                           US$)        2000 US$)
Siebert and Wei UK          General Household Health and           0.0000379       Yes            No        $12,810        $11.5           $9.4      Separate regressions
(1994)                      Survey 1983       Safety Executive                                                                                       by union status
                                              (HSE) 1986-88
Lanoie, Pedro,   Canada     Authors' in-person Quebec              0.000126        Yes            No        $40,739     $19.6, $21.7        Not      Separate regression
and Latour                  survey 1990        Workers'                                                                                  significant equations
(1995)                                         Compensation
                                               Board 1981-
                                               1985
Sandy and Elliott UK        Social Change and OPCS                4.4831E-05        No            No        $16,143        $69.0           $69.4     Risk x union
(1996)                      Economic Life      Occupational                                                                                          interaction
                            Initiative Survey Mortality Tables
                            (SCELI) 1986       Decennial
                                               Supplement
                                               1979/80-1982/3

Shanmugam        India      Author's survey of   Administrative    0.000104         No            No           $778         $0.6            Not      Risk x union
(1996)                      blue collar          Report of                                                                               significant interaction
                            manufacturing        Factories Act
                            workers, Madras,     1987-1990
                            India 1990

Kim and         South       Ministry of Labor's Ministry of        0.000485        Yes           Yes         $8,125     No statistical               Risk x union
Fishback (1999) Korea       Report on Monthly Labor's Analysis                                                           difference                  interaction
                            Labor Survey and for Industrial                                                            between union
                            Survey on Basic Accidents                                                                  and nonunion
                            Statistics for the                                                                            members
                            Wage Structures




                                                                                   113
                                                                                                                    Union Implicit   Nonunion
                                                                                              Workers'    Average
                                                                             Nonfatal Risk                                VSL       Implicit VSL      Specification of
 Author (Year)    Country        Sample        Risk Variable   Mean Risk                       Comp    Income Level
                                                                              Included?                             (millions, 2000   (millions,       Union Status
                                                                                             Included? (2000 US$)
                                                                                                                         US$)        2000 US$)
Arabsheibani     UK         General Household OPCS             reported as       Yes            No        $20,163     No statistical               Risk x union
and Marin                   Survey (1980s)    Occupational       -0.006                                                difference                  interaction
(2000)                                        Mortality                                                              between union
                                              Decennial                                                              and nonunion
                                              Survey 1979-83                                                            members

Sandy, Elliott, UK          SCELI 1986       OPCS 79/80 -       0.000038,         No            No        $16,143     $5.7, $44.8      $36.1, $74.1 Risk x union
Siebert, and Wei                             82/3, HSE 1986     0.000045                                                                            interaction
(2001)                                       - 88




                                                                                 114
 Table 10. Summary of Age-Risk Interaction Effects in Value of a Statistical Life Studies, United States
                                                     Average Age
    Author (Year)               Sample                                        Risk Variable          Age x Risk Variable Coefficient
                                                      of Sample
Thaler and Rosen    Survey of Economic                   41.8      Society of Actuaries 1967        Significant (5%), negative
(1975)              Opportunity 1967
Viscusi (1979)      Survey of Working Conditions,        39.7      BLS 1969, subjective risk of Significant (1%), negative
                    1969-1970 (SWC)                                job (SWC)
Portney (1981)      Property values in Allegheny          NA       Air pollution annual mortality VSL by age females (males): less
                    County, PA 1978                                rate data, EPA                   than 45: $1.5 (1.0) million; 45-
                                                                                                    64: $0.3 (0.12) million; over 65:
                                                                                                    $0.05 (0.05) million
Arnould and Nichols U.S. Census 1970                      NA       Society of Actuaries 1967        Significant (1%), negative
(1983)
Moore and Viscusi QES 1977                               38.1      Expected life years lost (=BLS Significant (1%), positive
(1988b)                                                            fatality risk x discounted       (implies risk premium increases
                                                                   remaining life)                  with life expectancy, decreases
                                                                                                    with age, ceteris paribus)
Meng (1989)         National Survey of Class             39.9      Labour Canada and Quebec         Significant (10%), negative
                    Structure and Labour Process                   Occupational Health and
                    1981                                           Safety Board 1981
Meng and Smith      National Election Study 1984         NA        Labour Canada and Quebec         Insignificant
(1990)                                                             Occupational Health and
                                                                   Safety Board 1981-83
Dillingham, Miller, QES 1977                             36.5      Constructed a risk measure       Declining scale of WTP to avoid
and Levy (1996)                                                                                     impaired worklife as function of
                                                                                                    age




                                                                115
                                                      Average Age
   Author (Year)                 Sample                                    Risk Variable         Age x Risk Variable Coefficient
                                                       of Sample
Shanmugam (1996/7) Author's survey of blue collar         34.1    Administrative Report of       Insignificant
                   manufacturing workers,                         Factories Act 1987-1990
                   Madras, India 1990


Shanmugam (2001)     Author's survey of blue collar      34.1         Administrative Report of   Insignificant
                     manufacturing workers,                           Factories Act 1987-1990
                     Madras, India 1990




                                                                116
Table 11. Summary of Imputed Discount Rate Studies, United States
                                                                       Implicit
  Year   Author (Year)      Type of Study          Sample
                                                                    Discount Rate
1988     Moore and       Labor Hedonic with QES 1977                9.6%-12.2%
         Viscusi         Reduced Form
         (1988b)         Discounting Model
1989     Viscusi and Labor Hedonic with PSID 1982                      10.7%
         Moore (1989) Structural Markov
                      Model
1990     Moore and       Labor Hedonic with PSID 1982                   2%
         Viscusi         Structural Life Cycle
         (1990b)         Model
1990     Moore and       Labor Hedonic with PSID 1982               1.0%-14.2%
         Viscusi         Structural Integrated
         (1990c)         Life Cycle Model
1995     Dreyfus and Automobile Hedonic 1988 Residential             11%-17%
         Viscusi (1995)                 Transportation Energy
                                        Consumption Survey




                                        117
Table 12. Values of Statistical Life Used by U.S. Regulatory Agencies, 1985 – 2000*
                                                                                               Value of a
Year          Agency                                  Regulation                             Statistical Life
                                                                                            (millions, 2000 $)
1985    Federal Aviation       Protective Breathing Equipment (50 Federal Register                 $1.0**
        Administration         41452)
1985    Environmental          Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives; Gasoline Lead                $1.7
        Protection Agency      Content (50 FR 9400)
1988    Federal Aviation       Improved Survival Equipment for Inadvertent Water                    $1.5**
        Administration         Landings (53 FR 24890)
1988    Environmental          Protection of Stratospheric Ozone (53 FR 30566)                      $4.8
        Protection Agency
1990    Federal Aviation       Proposed Establishment of the Harlingen Airport Radar                $2.0**
        Administration         Service Area, TX (55 FR 32064)
1994    Food and Nutrition     National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast              $1.7, $3.5**
        Service (USDA)         Program (59 FR 30218)
1995    Consumer Product       Multiple Tube Mine and Shell Fireworks Devices (60                   $5.6**
        Safety Commission      FR 34922)
1996    Food Safety            Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and Critical                     $1.9
        Inspection Service     Control Point Systems (61 FR 38806)
        (USDA)
1996    Food and Drug          Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of                 $2.7**
        Administration         Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children
                               and Adolescents (61 FR 44396)
1996    Federal Aviation       Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training,                     $3.0**
        Administration         Testing, and Checking and at Training Centers (61 FR
                               34508)
1996    Environmental          Requirements for Lead-Based Paint Activities in                      $6.3
        Protection Agency      Target Housing and Child-Occupied Facilities (61 FR
                               45778)
1996    Food and Drug          Medical Devices; Current Good Manufacturing                          $5.5**
        Administration         Practice Final Rule; Quality System Regulation (61 FR
                               52602)
1997    Environmental          National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone (62                 $6.3
        Protection Agency      FR 38856)
1999    Environmental          Radon in Drinking Water Health Risk Reduction and                    $6.3
        Protection Agency      Cost Analysis (64 FR 9560)
1999    Environmental          Control of Air Pollution from New Motor Vehicles:                $3.9, $6.3
        Protection Agency      Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions Standards and
                               Gasoline Sulfur Control Requirements (65 FR 6698)
2000     Consumer Product Portable Bed Rails; Advance Notice of Proposed                            $5.0**
         Safety Commission Rulemaking (65 FR 58968)
* This table augments a similar presentation of values of a statistical life used in U.S. regulatory analyses in
Adler and Posner (2000) by including more regulations and presenting VSLs in constant year dollars.
** The published summaries of the regulatory impact analyses for these rules do not specify the year in
which the reported dollars are denominated. We have assumed that the dollar year corresponds to the date
of rule publication for purposes of converting all values into 2000 dollars. Note that the CPSC reported a
VSL of $5 million in both its 1995 and 2000 regulations; the difference in values reflects our deflating to
2000 dollars.




                                                     118
Table 13. Evaluation of Risk-Risk Tradeoff for 24 U.S. Regulations, 1986 – 1998
                                                           Discounted          Fatalities     Net Lives
             Regulation                  Year   Agency   Statistical Lives Induced by Cost    Saved by
                                                              Saved         of Regulations   Regulations
Toxicity characteristics to determine    1990    EPA           0.048              -23            23
hazardous wastes
Underground storage tanks: technical     1988    EPA           1.1              -22              24
requirements
Manufactured home construction and       1994   HUD            1.5              -3.2             4.7
safety standards on wind standards

Process safety management of highly      1992    DOL          220               -42             260
hazardous chemicals

Regulations restricting the sale and  1996       HHS          4,700            -140            4,900
distribution of cigarettes and
smokeless tobacco to protect children
and adolescents

Medicare and Medicaid programs:          1998    HHS          710               9.2             700
hospital conditions of participation;
identification of potential organ,
tissue, and eye donors; and transplant
hospitals' provision of transplant-
related data


Quality mammography standards            1997    HHS           75               1.4              74

Food labeling regulations                1993   HHS           520               10              510
Childproof lighters                      1993   CPSC          95                2.9             92
Standard for occupational exposure to    1987   DOL           4.4               1.8             2.6
benzene
Occupational exposure to methylene       1997    DOL           12               5.9              6.2
chloride
Occupational exposure to 4,4'            1992    DOL           0.7             0.71             -0.01
methylenedianiline
Asbestos: manufacture, importation,      1989    EPA           3.9              4.3             -0.41
processing, and distribution in
commerce -- prohibitions (total)

National primary and secondary           1991    EPA           44               63              -19
water regulations -- phase II:
maximum contaminant levels for 38
contaminants

Occupational exposure to asbestos        1994    DOL           13               20              -7.1

Hazardous waste management system 1990           EPA          0.29             0.83             -0.55
-- wood preservatives




                                                 119
                                                            Discounted          Fatalities     Net Lives
              Regulation                  Year   Agency   Statistical Lives Induced by Cost    Saved by
                                                               Saved         of Regulations   Regulations
Sewage sludge use and disposal            1993    EPA           0.24               2.6           -2.3
regulations, 40 CFR pt. 503

Land disposal restrictions for "third     1990    EPA           2.8              30              -27
third" scheduled wastes

Hazardous waste management                1986    EPA            1               12              -11
system: final solvents and dioxins
land disposal restrictions rule

Occupational exposure to                  1987    DOL          0.21              4.8             -4.5
formaldehyde
Prohibit the land disposal of the first   1988    EPA           2.9              66              -63
third of scheduled wastes ("second
sixth" proposal)

Land disposal restrictions -- phase II:   1994    EPA          0.16              8.3             -8.2
universal treatment standards and
treatment standards for organic
toxicity, characteristic wastes, and
newly listed wastes


Drinking water regulations, synthetic     1992    EPA         0.0061             3.4             -3.4
organic chemicals -- phase V

Solid waste disposal facility criteria,   1991    EPA         0.0049             10              -10
40 CFR pt. 257 and pt. 258

Source: Hahn, Lutter, and Viscusi (2000).




                                                  120
Appendix

Table A. Description of Variables Used in Viscusi-Aldy Meta-Analyses
                                                                                     Summary Statistic,
      Variable                                  Description
                                                                                     Viscusi-Aldy data
VSL                    Value of a statistical life (millions, 2000 US$)                 $6.7 ($5.6)
Income                 Annual labor income (2000 US$)                                $26,006 ($12,002)
Mean Risk              Average mortality risk of sample                               0.0002 (0.0003)
Hourly Wage            Hourly wage or hourly equivalent of weekly income (2000        $13.00 ($6.00)
                       US$)
Union VSL              VSL for union members only (dummy variable)                         4/49
Dillingham Risk        VSL based on Dillingham (1985) constructed New York                 1/49
                       workers compensation-based fatality risk measure (d.v.)
Society of Actuaries   VSL based on Society of Actuaries 1967 mortality risk data          2/49
Risk                   (d.v.)
BLS Risk               VSL based on BLS mortality risk measure (d.v.)                      16/49
NIOSH Risk             VSL based on NIOSH mortality risk measure (d.v.)                    5/49
Subjective             VSL based on self-reported measure of mortality risk (d.v.)         1/49
Education Level        Barro-Lee average educational attainment for population >         9.6 (2.0)
                       25 by country (in years)
Unemployment Rate      Annual unemployment rate by year of wage data                     7.6 (4.6)
U.S. National Data     VSL based on national U.S. worker sample (d.v.)                     24/49
Non-U.S. Study         VSL based on non-US wage-risk study (d.v.)                          22/49
Male Only Sample       VSL based on male only sample (d.v.)                                21/49
Blue Collar Sample     VSL based on blue collar only sample (d.v.)                         15/49
Quadratic Risk         VSL based on econometric specification quadratic in                 7/49
                       mortality risk (d.v.)
Morbidity Variable     VSL based on study that included an injury risk measure             25/49
Included               (d.v.)
log(Dependent          VSL derived from specification with natural logarithm of            44/49
Variable)              dependent variable (d.v.)
Union D.V.             VSL based on specification that included dummy variable             32/49
                       for union affiliation (d.v.)
Regional D.V.          VSL based on specification with regional dummy variables            24/49
                       (d.v.)
Urban D.V.             VSL based on specification with urban/MSA dummy                     13/49
                       variable (d.v.)
Workers’               VSL based on specification with workers’ compensation               11/49
Compensation           variable (d.v.)
Wage in After Tax      VSL based on specification with income expressed in after-          10/49
Terms                  tax terms (d.v.)
Industry D.V.          VSL based on specification with industry dummy variables            21/49
                       (d.v.)
Occupation D.V.        VSL based on specification with occupational dummy                  20/49
                       variables (d.v.)
No Occupation D.V.     Study does not include occupational dummy variables                 29/49
                       (dummy variable)



                                                   121
                                                                                   Summary Statistic,
      Variable                                 Description
                                                                                   Viscusi-Aldy data
Job Characteristics     VSL based on specification with variables describing job        10/49
D.V.                    characteristics (d.v.)
Means (standard deviations) reported for continuous variables.
Share of studies in which variable equals 1 reported for dummy variables.
n =49




                                                  122
Notes
1
  Past reviews of this literature include Smith (1979), Miller (1990), and Viscusi (1992, 1993, 2000).
Several researchers have conducted meta-analyses of this literature, including Liu, Hammitt, and Liu
(1997), Miller (2000), Bowland and Beghin (2001), and Mrozek and Taylor (2002). See Hammitt (2002)
and Krupnick (2002) for commentaries on the Mrozek and Taylor paper.
2
  For more extensive discussion of hedonic analysis, see Griliches (1971), Rosen (1974, 1986), Thaler and
Rosen (1975), Smith (1979), and Viscusi (1979).
3
  For a discussion of irrational behavior in the presence of mortality risk inconsistent with expected utility
theory, refer to Viscusi 1998.
4
  Individual risk neutrality or risk aversion, i.e., U'', V'' ≤ 0 is required to ensure a global maximum.
5
  Gaba and Viscusi (1998) compared qualitative and quantitative subjective measures of on-the-job
accident risk. They find that for a given level of quantitative risk, a college-educated individual is more
likely to report that risk as “dangerous” than an individual with less than college education. For example,
for those workers who report their quantitative risk as comparable to an annual injury risk of less than 1 in
20, half of the college-educated described their job risk as “dangerous” while only 19 percent of the less-
than-college educated reported their job risk as such. This differences in the “danger” cutoff biases
estimates of risk premiums in wages, and this bias has implications distinct from typical measurement
error. Gaba and Viscusi find that subjective quantitative measures of risk yielded wage premiums more
consistent with estimates based on objective risk measures (BLS). Analysis of the qualitative risk measure
(a dichotomous 0-1 “is the job dangerous?” variable) produced a much larger risk premium.
6
  Averaging over a period of 5 to 10 years would likely remove any potential distortions associated with
catastrophic accidents in any particular year.
7
  Viscusi (1979, 1980) includes the danger variable in some regressions, although his research focused on
compensating differentials based on BLS measures of injury and fatality risk discussed below.
8
  Leigh’s (1991) analysis with risk data derived from workers’ compensation records in 11 states appears to
be the only U.S. study to aggregate such data from more than one state.
9
  Averaging fatality risk data over several years can reduce the distortion of a catastrophic event in one year
in one industry on the measure of an industry’s risk.
10
   Most hedonic wage-risk studies have not accounted for labor taxes in their construction of the wage
variable or in their interpretation of the value of a statistical life. Exceptions include several papers that
have focused on the effects of workers’ compensation on the compensating differential for occupational
risk (e.g., Moore and Viscusi 1990a). This reflects the more common use of pre-tax wages in the broader
labor market analysis literature.
11
   In the product market context, Atkinson and Halvorsen (1990), Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995), and Gayer,
Hamilton, and Viscusi (2000) employ Box-Cox transformations to evaluate their respective hedonic price
models (the first two focused on automobile prices and the third on housing prices).
12
   Viscusi (1978a) excluded the dummy variables out of concern of inducing multicollinearity between an
industry-level risk measure and industry dummy variables. Refer to the discussion below on
multicollinearity.
13
   We focus our discussion here on their NIOSH data-based results for several reasons. First, we believe
that the NIOSH data are superior to the 1980s BLS fatality risk data as discussed above. Second, the
regression models based on non-NIOSH data in Dorman and Hagstrom have insignificant risk coefficients
for all specifications – without industry dummy variables, with industry dummy variables, and with other
industry characteristics. While we are not certain why they did not find significant risk coefficients with
the BLS risk data as previous researchers had, it seems moot to argue that a coefficient on a risk variable
actually represents an industry effect if that coefficient is not significant.
14
   We selected papers for inclusion in this literature review with a modest set of criteria. First, a study
should be written in English. Second, a study should be published in either an academic journal or a book.
Third, a study should provide enough information to calculate a value of a statistical life. In several cases,
information provided in more recent papers (such as per capita incomes reported for some studies in
Viscusi 1993 and Mrozek and Taylor 2002) has been used with reported coefficient estimates to calculate
the value of a statistical life for a study. Our aim is to characterize as best as possible the universe of wage-
risk studies in the literature, so we have not attempted to purge this assessment of so-called “low quality”
studies or to modify the value of a statistical life estimates from such studies. For some studies, we have



                                                      123
presented a range of the value of a statistical life estimates and for others we have presented an illustrative
point estimate. In the case of the latter, we have focused on the reported results for the whole sample (as
opposed to union-only, blue-collar only, managerial-only, etc. samples) based on the econometric
specification preferred by the studies’ authors.
15
   While these estimates have been adjusted to constant year dollars (2000 US$), they have not been
adjusted for differences in the samples’ income levels. The per capita income data provided in Table 2
coupled with income elasticity estimates in Section 6 can be used to modify the values of a statistical life in
Table 2 so that they reflect a common income level.
16
   In this paper, we present all VSLs in terms of 2000 US$. All domestic values are converted using the
CPI-U deflator series (Council of Economic Advisers 2002 Table B60). International conversions are
made using purchasing power parity exchange rates from the Penn World Table 6.0 (see Summers and
Heston 1991, Aten et al. 2001, and Internet: http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu) and then converted to year 2000
dollars with the CPI-U deflator series.
17
   Viscusi (1993) actually reports $3 – $7 million in December 1990 US$. This has served as a reference
range in several subsequent value of a statistical life studies. Note that we have updated this range to 2000
US$.
18
   Also refer to Fishback and Kantor (1992) for a historical evaluation of compensating differentials for
occupational risk in the late 19th century.
19
   Smith (1983) also used the Hickey and Kearney carcinogen exposure index to complement his
assessment of compensating differentials for injury risk in U.S. labor markets. He found that the index is
significantly positively correlated with wages implying a risk premium for workers’ operating in
environments exposing them to more carcinogens. Further, Smith included a measure of total suspended
particulates (TSP) based on the workers’ locations and found a statistically significant and positive
correlation between TSP and workers’ wages. Since TSP has been linked with various respiratory diseases,
this could illustrate another premium for workers’ bearing long-term risks on the job.
20
   The values we report reflect an assumed latency period of 10 years and a real discount rate of 3 percent.
Note that the VSL estimates in parentheses in Table 2 represent the values reported by Lott and Manning.
Employing a real discount rate of 7 percent, consistent with U.S. Office of Management and Budget (1992)
guidance, over a 10-year period effectively reduces the VSL reported by Lott and Manning in half.
21
   Meng (1991) attempted to account for occupational disease by including a variable that reflected the rate
of heart attacks and industrial disease. However, very modest information about the basis for this variable
is provided. It is difficult to discern whether the variable captures long-term work-related risks or simply a
selection effect that contaminates the data like the Society of Actuaries data set.
22
   The authors also report estimates using the less reliable pre-1992 BLS risk data.
23
   Siebert and Wei (1998) found a concave wage-risk relationship with a risk and risk-squared specification
for their analysis of the Hong Kong labor market. Meng and Smith (1990, 1999) also found the same
relationship in their assessments of the Canadian labor market.
24
   All these studies evaluate risk-income tradeoffs in the United States. In our survey of the literature, we
found only one study focusing on behavior outside of the United States. Ghosh, Lees, and Seal (1975)
study the tradeoff between highway speeds and mortality risk in the United Kingdom. They derive a value
of a statistical life estimate of $0.9 million.
25
   We have discounted the reported VSLs assuming that homeowners perceive a 10-year latency period and
use a 3 percent discount rate in making their housing decisions.
26
   The difference between the mean subjective mortality risk and the objective mortality risk reported by
the Taiwan Labor Insurance Agency is statistically significant at the 1 percent level.
27
   Studies for which we do not have an income measure were omitted.
28
   We also estimated a regression with the Mrozek and Taylor set of control variables, with an important
exception of replacing the hourly earnings variable with the natural logarithm of annual income. With an
OLS specification, we estimated an income elasticity of 0.76 with a 95 percent confidence interval of 0.20
– 1.32 (n=41). In the robust regression with Huber weights specification, we estimated again a point
estimate for the income elasticity of 0.76, but with a much tighter 95 percent confidence interval of 0.73 –
0.79 (n=38). The income variable was statistically significant at the 5 percent level in the OLS regression
and significant at the 1 percent level in the robust regression. The iterative weighting process in robust
regression with this much larger set of control variables effectively eliminated several low-VSL studies
relative to specification 6 in Table 8, which may have resulted in the larger elasticity.


                                                     124
29
   The Science Advisory Board (2000) has supported EPA’s adjustment of the VSL for income growth.
30
   We also calculated the median predicted VSL values for the full and U.S. samples. For the full sample,
the median predicted VSL never exceeded the mean predicted VSL in any of the six regression models by
more than 14 percent, and the mean predicted VSL never exceeded the median predicted VSL by more than
15 percent. For the U.S. sample, the median predicted VSL exceeded the mean predicted VSL in all six
regressions, but never by more than 7 percent.
31
   For example, Dorsey (1983) estimated a statistically significant negative coefficient on the fatality risk
variable and a statistically significant positive coefficient on the union x risk interaction variable. This
combination (with the union x risk coefficient greater in magnitude than the fatality risk coefficient) results
in a positive compensating differential for union workers and a negative differential for non-union workers.
32
   Rosen’s research yields results similar to the Jones-Lee (1976), Jones-Lee et al. (1985), and Shepard and
Zeckhauser (1982, 1984) finding that the value of a statistical life takes an inverted-U shape with respect to
age. Also refer to Garber and Phelps (1997) for an assessment of quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) in
the cost-effectiveness literature. Jenkins et al. (2001) provide some evidence that the value of a statistical
life is increasing over childhood through the pre-retirement years.
33
   Modifying utility functions in this way would be analogous to constructing QALY measures, common to
valuations based on health status in the health economics literature. The QALYs are usually based on
stated preference methods (see Cutler and Richardson 1997).
34
   Based on Rosen’s life cycle model, one would expect that the marginal value of another year is greater
for an elderly person than for a middle-aged person but that the value of all future years declines with age
for a given individual. Accounting for health status may counter the effect of increasing marginal values
for a one-year life extension for an elderly person. If health status is decreasing in age, then it may be
ambiguous whether the marginal value of another year increases with age.
35
   For example, refer to the guidance to improve regulatory decision-making provided by the OECD (1995)
to its member countries.
36
   For a review of the substance of this analysis, see Viscusi (1992a).
37
   Refer to Table E-1 at Internet: http://www.api.faa.gov/economic/EXECSUMM.PDF and
http://www.api.faa.gov/economic/742SECT2.PDF.
38
   The low VSL used by the agency also reflects a political dimension as well. In the early 1990s when
Viscusi prepared the report that was subsequently published as Viscusi (1993) for the Federal Aviation
Administration, that branch of the agency favored a higher value of life than was later mandated for use
throughout the department.
39
   Note that the Science Advisory Board to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency considered the
effects of latency and dread within the context of cancer-related mortality. The SAB (2000) concluded that
the literature does not currently support a modification of the value of a statistical life to reflect dread. In
contrast, the SAB did recommend that economic analyses account for latency by discounting future
mortality to the present time consistent with the approach to other categories of benefits and costs.
40
   The conversion to U.S. dollars for the Hara Associates analysis was based on the annual market
exchange rate reported by the Federal Reserve (refer to Internet:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g5a/current/) because the Penn World Table does not provide
conversions for the most recent years.
41
   While Revesz suggests other adjustments to the value of a statistical life based on the qualitative
characteristics of the risk, such as involuntariness of the risk, the Science Advisory Board (2000) noted that
the existing literature does not justify adjustments for these effects.
42
   See Magat, Viscusi, and Huber (1996).
43
   This discussion implicitly acknowledges an important aspect of most occupational, safety, and
environmental health risks: these risks are relatively small. In cases of certain, or near-certain death, the
empirical economic evidence and this argument are not relevant (see our discussion in Section 1).
44
   For example, the 1997 final rule for the national ambient air quality standard for ozone introduced the
section on the regulatory impact analysis with the following: “As discussed in Unit IV of this preamble, the
Clean Air Act and judicial decisions make clear that the economic and technological feasibility of attaining
ambient standards are not to be considered in setting NAAQS, although such factors may be considered in
the development of State plans to implement the standards. Accordingly, although, as described below, a
Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) has been prepared, neither the RIA nor the associated contractor reports
have been considered in issuing this final rule” (62 FR 38856).


                                                     125
45
   This relationship is also revealed within a cross-section of the U.S. population. Viscusi (1978b) found
that work-related risk exposure decreases with worker wealth.
46
   Portney and Stavins (1994) question whether the income losses from regulations would reduce the
population’s health status. They claim that the nonlinear relationship between income and health and the
modest impact of most regulations on the economy would not likely have a significant effect on health
status. While individual regulations may involve small costs as a share of the economy, it is important to
note that environmental regulations alone cost about 1 – 2 percent of U.S. economic output (U.S. OMB
2001).
47
   We have updated the reported values in Keeney (1990) to 2000 U.S. dollars using the CPI-U deflator.
48
   The Keeney estimates are near the high end of 11 studies cited in Lutter and Morrall (1994) on the
income gains necessary to avert one fatality. They are very similar to Lutter and Morrall’s estimated range
of $11.4 million to $15.2 million for the United States.
49
   Refer to UAW v. OSHA, United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, 89-1559.
50
   A recent paper by Gerdtham and Johannesson (2002) attempts to address this problem by controlling for
initial health status in regressions of mortality risk on income (with other relevant controls) for a study
focusing on Sweden in the 1980s and 1990s. They find that an income loss ranging from $7.5 – $10.8
million would induce an expected fatality in Sweden. The range reflects variation in the progressivity of
the burden of the regulation.
51
   Viscusi (1994a, 1994b) selected a VSL estimate of $5 million (in 1992 US$) because it represented the
midpoint of the basic range for VSLs of $3 million - $7 million in Viscusi 1993. In 2000 US$, the
midpoint would be $6.1 million.
52
   Refer to Morrall (1986) and Tengs et al. (1995) for lists of regulations’ cost-effectiveness for the United
States. Tengs et al. found that for 124 environmental regulations (primarily toxin control), the median cost
per life-year saved is $3.3 million. About 15 percent of the environmental regulations exceeded $100
million per life-year saved. Converting these life-year values to statistical life values would result in a
significant number of regulations with incredibly exorbitant cost-effectiveness measures. Life-saving
regulations in other sectors of the economy (e.g., health care, transportation) had much lower costs per life-
year saved. Refer to Ramsberg and Sjoberg (1997) for an evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of lifesaving
interventions in Sweden.
53
   Hahn, Lutter, and Viscusi only considered regulations with reduced mortality risk benefits comprising at
least 90 percent of total monetized benefits.
54
   Note that the construction of discounted statistical lives saved reflects both an accounting for life-years
saved and discounting for latency.




                                                    126
