NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION,
THE COST OF CAPITAL, AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Peter Blair Henry
Working Paper 9488
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9488
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

This paper was prepared for the session, “Debt, Equity, and Financial Openness” at the American Economic
Association meetings in Washington, D.C. on January 4, 2003. A slightly condensed version will appear in
the American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 2003. I am grateful for financial support from
an NSF CAREER Award and the Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research (SIEPR). I thank Sandy
Darity, John McMillan and Linda Tesar for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Peter Blair Henry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.

Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth
Peter Blair Henry
NBER Working Paper No. 9488
February 2003
JEL No. E0, F0, G0
ABSTRACT
Three things happen when emerging economies open their stock markets to foreign investors. First,
the aggregate dividend yield falls by 240 basis points. Second, the growth rate of the capital stock
increases by an average of 1.1 percentage points per year. Third, the growth rate of output per
worker rises by 2.3 percentage points per year. Since the cost of capital falls, investment booms, and
the growth rate of output per worker increases when countries liberalize the stock market, the
increasingly popular view that capital account liberalization brings no real benefits seems untenable.

Additional information regarding the “Time Series of Major Policy Reforms in LDCs” is available
online: http://www.nber.org/appendices/w9488.appenidx1.pdf

Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Littlefield 277
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
abhenry@stanford.edu

Introduction
Capital account liberalization was once seen as an inevitable step along the path
to economic development for poor countries. Liberalizing the capital account, it was
said, would permit financial resources to flow from capital-abundant countries, where
expected returns were low, to capital-scarce countries, where expected returns were high.
The flow of resources into the liberalizing countries would reduce their cost of capital,
increase investment, and raise output (Fischer, 1998; Summers, 2000). The principal
policy question was not whether to liberalize the capital account, but when— before or
after undertaking macroeconomic reforms such as inflation stabilization and trade
liberalization (McKinnon, 1991). Or so the story went.
In recent years intellectual opinion has moved against liberalization. Financial
crises in Asia, Russia and Latin America have shifted the focus of the conversation from
when countries should liberalize to if they should do so at all. Opponents of the process
argue that capital account liberalization does not generate greater efficiency. Instead,
liberalization invites speculative hot money flows and increases the likelihood of
financial crises with no discernible positive effects on investment, output, or any other
real variable with nontrivial welfare implications (Bhagwhati, 1998; Rodrik, 1998;
Stiglitz 2002).
While opinions about capital account liberalization are abundant, facts are
relatively scarce. This paper tries to increase the ratio of facts to opinions. In the late
1980s and early 1990s a number of developing countries liberalized their stock markets,
opening them to foreign investors for the first time. These liberalizations constitute
discrete changes in the degree of capital account openness, which allow for a positive

2

empirical description of the cost of capital, investment, and growth during liberalization
episodes.
Figure 1 previews the central message that the rest of this paper develops in more
detail. The cost of capital falls when developing countries liberalize the stock market.
Since the cost of capital falls, investment should also increase, as profit maximizing firms
drive down the marginal product of capital to its new lower cost. Figure 2 is consistent
with this prediction. Liberalization leads to a sharp increase in the growth rate of the
capital stock. Finally, as a direct consequence of growth accounting, the increase in
investment should generate a temporary increase in the growth rate of output per worker.
Figure 3 confirms that the growth rate of output per worker rises in the aftermath of
liberalization.
While the figures do no harm to the efficiency view of capital account
liberalization, a number of caveats are in order. For example, it is legitimate to interpret
a fall in the dividend yield (Figure 1) as a decline in the cost of capital, if there is no
change in the expected future growth rate of dividends at the time of liberalization. But
stock market liberalizations are usually accompanied by other economic reforms that may
increase the expected future growth rate of output and dividends (Henry, 2000a,b).
Because liberalizations do not occur in isolation, it is important to think carefully about
how to interpret the data. Neoclassical theory provides a good starting point for framing
the issues.

I. Theory
There are two components to a country’s cost of capital: the risk-free rate and the

3

equity premium. Theory suggests that both will fall when a poor country liberalizes. The
following partial equilibrium, mean variance arguments based on Stulz (1999) make the
central points most succinctly.
Assume a small country whose equity market is completely segmented from
world equity markets. Also assume that all investors in the world have the same constant
relative risk aversion and care only about the expected return and variance of their
investment. Let E[ R% M ] denote the equilibrium required rate of return on the aggregate
domestic stock market before liberalization and let r f denote the domestic risk-free
interest rate. Define the price of risk as follows: the aggregate risk premium, E[ R% M ] − rf ,
divided by the variance of the aggregate return on the market, VAR ( R% M ) . Under our
assumptions, the price of risk in the small country before liberalization is a constant, Τ .
It follows that
E[ R% M ] = rf + ΤVar ( R% M )

(1).

Now consider what happens to the required rate of return when the country opens
its stock market to the rest of the world and also allows its residents to invest abroad.
Assume that the mean and variance of domestic dividends are unaltered by the
liberalization.

Let E[ R% M* ] denote the required rate of return on the market after

liberalization and let E[ R%W ] be the required rate of return on the world equity market.
With completely open capital markets, the world risk-free rate, rf* , becomes the relevant
interest rate. The risk premium on the domestic stock market will now depend on the
following two factors: (1) the beta of the domestic stock market with the world stock
market, β MW , and (2) the world risk premium, E[ R%W ] − rf* . Following liberalization it

4

must be the case that
E[ R% M* ] = rf* + β MW ( E[ R%W ] − rf* )

(2).

Since the liberalizing country is small, adding its stock market to the world
market portfolio has a negligible effect on the variance (and hence the risk premium) of
the world market portfolio. It follows that ( E[ R%W ] − rf* ) = ΤVAR( R%W ) . Using this fact,
the definition of β MW , and a little bit of algebra, one can show that after liberalization the
required rate of return on the domestic stock market is given by:
E[ R% M* ] = rf* + ΤCov( R% M , R%W )

(3).

Subtracting equation (1) from equation (3) gives the difference in the post- and
pre-liberalization required rates of return:
∆E[ R% M ] = (rf* − rf ) + Τ[Cov( R% M , R%W ) − Var ( R% M )]

(4).

Since poor countries have lower capital-to-labor ratios than rich countries, we would
expect that rf > rf* . Hence the first term on the right-hand side of (4) is negative. Next,
consider the change in the equity premium.

For every country in the sample,

Cov( R% M , R%W ) , the covariance of the local market with the world market, is less than
Var ( R% M ) , the variance of the local market (Stulz, 1999). Hence the second term is also
negative. The central result follows: Liberalization reduces the cost of capital.

II. Evidence

Identifying liberalization dates is the first step in determining whether
liberalization reduces the cost of capital in practice. Since markets are forward-looking,
the most important question is when does the market first learn of a credible, impending

5

liberalization? In principle, identifying a liberalization date simply involves finding the
date on which the government declares that foreigners may purchase domestic shares. In
practice, the liberalization process is not so transparent. In many cases, there is no
obvious government declaration or policy decree that one can point to. When there is no
salient liberalization decree, I infer the first date on which foreigners could hold domestic
shares from the first date on which a closed-end country fund was established.1 Table 1
presents a list of the 18 countries in the sample, the date of their first stock market
liberalization, and the means by which they liberalized. For example, the table shows
that the modal means of liberalization occurred through the establishment of a closed-end
country fund.
The establishment of a country fund in particular, and stock market liberalizations
in general, may seem like a narrow way to define capital account liberalization relative to
the broader liberalization indicators that are employed elsewhere in the literature (Edison,
Klein, Ricci, and Sloek, 2002). But it is precisely the narrowness of stock market
liberalizations that make them more useful for the purpose at hand. Studies that use
broad liberalization indicators focus on cross-sectional data, examining the long-run
correlation between average openness and average investment.

Examining the

correlation between average openness and investment tells us whether investment rates
are permanently higher in countries with capital accounts that are more open. The
problem with this approach is that neoclassical theory makes no such prediction.
What the theory does predict is that capital-poor countries will experience a
temporary increase in investment when they liberalize. Hence, the relevant issue is not

1

See Henry (2000a) and Bekaert and Harvey (2000) for further details on dating liberalizations.

6

whether countries with open capital accounts have higher investment rates, but whether
investment increases in the immediate aftermath of liberalizations. The most transparent
way of testing the prediction is to compare investment rates during liberalization episodes
with investment rates during non-liberalization periods. Because they constitute a radical
shift in the degree of capital account openness, stock market liberalizations provide ideal
natural experiments for confronting the theory with data.

A. Cost of Capital

Having identified dates on which liberalizations occur, the key question is how to
detect empirically whether the cost of capital falls. The cost of capital is the equilibriumrequired rate of return on the stock market. Therefore, if liberalization reduces the cost of
capital, we should see a one-time revaluation of stock prices when liberalizations occur
(Henry, 2000a). For the descriptive exercise here, it is more convenient to use annual
dividend yields.
Again, Figure 1 is consistent with the view that liberalization reduces the cost of
capital. The figure plots the average aggregate dividend yield across the 18 liberalizing
countries in event time (year [0] is the year of liberalization). The average dividend yield
falls by roughly 240 basis points—from an average level of 5.0 percent in the 5 years
prior to liberalization to an average of 2.6 percent in the five years following
liberalization.
Figure 1 is, of course, also consistent with other interpretations. Recall that the
dividend yield equals the required rate of return on equity minus the expected growth rate
of dividends:

7

D
= E[ R% M ] − g
P

(5).

Section I explains why liberalization reduces E[ R% M ] . Here, the variable under scrutiny
is g , the expected growth rate of dividends. If g does not change when liberalizations
occur, then a fall in the dividend yield implies a fall in the cost of capital. Because
liberalizations are part of a general process that involves substantial macroeconomic
reforms, however, there is a strong possibility that they are associated with changes in g .
Economic reforms do have significant effects on the stock market (Henry, 2002). But the
financial effects of liberalization remain statistically and economically significant, after
controlling for contemporaneous reforms (Henry 2000a, Bekaert and Harvey, 2000).

B. Investment

If liberalizations reduce the cost of capital then we should also see more
investment.

Figure 2 shows that the growth rate of the capital stock rises by 1.1

percentage points in the aftermath of liberalizations— from an average of 5.4 percent per
year in the pre-liberalization period to an average of 6.5 percent in the post-liberalization
period— but Figure 2 is subject to the same criticism as Figure 1. Does investment
increase because liberalization reduces the cost of capital? Or, is the entire effect driven
by a reform-induced rise in g ? Investment does increase following major reforms, but
the effect of liberalization on investment remains significant, after controlling for reforms
(Henry, 2000b).

C. Growth

8

Since the growth rate of the capital stock increases, the growth rate of output per
worker should also rise. Figure 3 confirms that the growth rate of output per worker rises
by 2.3 percentage points— from an average of 1.4 percent per year in the preliberalization period to an average of 3.7 percent per year in the post-liberalization
period. On the one hand, there is nothing surprising about Figure 3. Whereas Figures 1
and 2 document behavioral responses of prices and quantities of capital to liberalization,
Figure 3 simply provides a mechanical check of the standard growth accounting equation:

Yˆ = Aˆ + α Kˆ + (1 − α ) Lˆ

(6)

Where a circumflex over a variable denotes the change in the natural log of that variable.
The interesting point about Figure 3 is that the increase in the growth rate of
output per worker is too large to be explained by the increase in investment. A few
simple calculations illustrate the point. The elasticity of output with respect to capital,

α , is typically around 0.33. So, based on Figure 2, we would expect the growth rate of
output per worker in the post-liberalization period to be about 0.363 (0.33 times 1.1)
percentage points higher. But Figure 3 displays a 2.3 percentage point increase in the
growth rate of output per worker. All else equal, a 1.1 percentage point increase in the
growth rate of the capital stock can produce a 2.3 percentage point increase in the growth
rate of output per worker only if the elasticity of output with respect to capital is on the
order of 2!
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lumsdaine (2001) find that the increase in growth due to
liberalization is slightly larger than 1 percentage point after controlling for a number of
variables. Nevertheless, their finding still requires an elasticity of output with respect to
capital that is greater than 1. Their paper does not address the inconsistency of their

9

finding with standard production theory. I do so here.
The missing piece is, of course, Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth.
Equation (6) shows that any increase in the rate of growth of output that is not accounted
for by an increase in the growth rate of capital and labor must be the result of an increase
in Â , the growth rate of technology. In the current context, it is important to remember

that the pure theory of capital account liberalization focuses exclusively on capital
accumulation.

Technological change and TFP growth do not enter into the story.

Therefore, one cannot automatically claim that liberalization is also responsible for the
increase in TFP growth.
Now, it is true that if liberalization increases the allocative efficiency of domestic
investment, it will also raise TFP growth without any need for technological change.
However, it is not obvious why capital account liberalization, a policy change directed at
increasing international allocative efficiency, would have any effect on domestic
allocative efficiency (Chari and Henry, 2002a; Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2002). But if
theories of capital account liberalization cannot explain the increase in TFP growth, what
can?

III. Open Questions

The simplest answer is that the economic reforms, which make it difficult to
interpret the fall in the dividend yield as a decrease in the cost of capital, are also
responsible for the increase in TFP growth. While we typically interpret Â as the growth
rate of technological progress, any economic reform that raises the efficiency of a given

10

stock of capital and labor will also increase Â , even in the absence of technological
change.
The argument is not that capital account liberalization-based theories are utterly
incapable of explaining increases in TFP growth.

To the contrary, one can tell

augmented stories in which capital account liberalization does induce technological
change.

For example, liberalization may ease binding capital constraints, thereby

enabling firms to adopt technologies that they could not finance prior to the liberalization.
It is also possible that increased risk sharing encourages investment in riskier, higher
growth technologies in the spirit of Obstfeld (1994).
The point is that the developing countries in this sample may have increased their
rate of adoption of new production technologies during the late 1980s and early 1990s
but, if that is the case, it is not immediately apparent from aggregate data (Figures 1
through 3). In contrast, aggregate data are completely consistent with the preponderance
of readily observable evidence that the countries engaged in substantial economic reform.
Occam’s razor argues for the simple, reform-driven explanation of TFP growth over
more elaborate capital-account-liberalization- based stories.
Having said that, the only way to completely resolve the issue is to confront it
with data that are capable of distinguishing between competing theories. Recent studies
of liberalization that move from aggregate to firm-level data show the way forward. For
example, Chari and Henry (2002b) provide evidence that liberalization does increase risk
sharing. Examining whether the increase in risk sharing induces firms to adopt new
production technologies would provide a direct test of capital-account-liberalizationbased explanations of TFP growth.

11

IV. Conclusion

When developing countries liberalize the stock market, their cost of capital falls,
investment booms, and the growth rate of output per worker increases. While these facts
cast doubt on the view that capital account liberalization brings no real benefits, there are
many important questions to which the evidence does not speak. For some of these
questions, such as do liberalizations cause crises, aggregate data may yet prove useful.
For other questions, aggregate data are simply too coarse to provide precise answers.
Moving the technological frontier to firm-level data should enhance our general
understanding of the process by which the effects of liberalization are transmitted to the
real economy.

12

References
Bekaert, Geert and Harvey, Campbell. “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity
Markets,” Journal of Finance, 2000, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 565-613.
Bekaert, Geert; Harvey, Campbell and Lundblad, Christian. “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 8245, 2001.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. “The Capital Myth,” Foreign Affairs, May/June 1998, pp. 7-12.
Chari, Anusha and Henry, Peter Blair. “Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative
Efficiency or Animal Spirits.” NBER Working Paper No. 8908, 2002a.
Chari, Anusha and Henry, Peter Blair. “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence From
a Natural Experiment.” Stanford University Working Paper, 2002b.
Edison, Hali; Klein , Michael; Ricci, Luca and Sloek, Torsten. “Capital Account
Liberalization and Economic Peformance: Survey and Synthesis.” NBER WP# 9100,
2002.
Fischer, Stanley. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” Princeton
Essays in International Finance 207, 1998, pp. 1-10.
Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Jeanne, Olivier. “On the Benefits of Capital Account
Liberalization. Princeton University Working Paper, 2002.
Henry, Peter Blair. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, 2000a, Vol. 55, No. 2, pp. 529-64.
Henry, Peter Blair. “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?”
Journal of Financial Economics, 2000b, Vol. 58, Nos. 1-2, pp. 301-334.
Henry, Peter Blair. “Is Disinflation Good for the Stock Market?” Journal of Finance,
2002, Vol. LVII, No. 4, pp. 1617-1648
Kim, E. H., Singal, V. “Stock Market Openings: Experience of Emerging Economies,”
Journal of Business, 2000, 73, 25-66.
McKinnon, Ronald I. The Order of Economic Liberalization. Johns Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, 1991.
Obstfeld, Maurice. “Risk-taking, global diversification, and growth,” American
Economic Review 84, 1994, pp. 1310-29.
Rodrik, Dani. “Who needs capital account convertibility?” Princeton Essays in
International Finance 207, 1998, pp. 55-65.

13

Stiglitz, Joseph. Globalization and Its Discontents. W.W. Norton, New York, (2002).
Stulz, René M. "Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital." NYSE
Working Paper 99-02, 1999.
Summers, Lawrence H. “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and
Cures,” American Economic Review, 2000, Vol. 90, No.2, pp. 1-16.

14

Table 1. Country Stock Market Liberalization Dates

Country

Year of
Liberalization

Means of
Liberalization

Argentina

1989

Policy Decree

Brazil

1988

Country Fund

Chile

1987

Country Fund

Colombia

1991

Policy Decree

India

1986

Country Fund

Indonesia

1989

Policy Decree

Jordan

1995

Policy Decree

Korea

1987

Country Fund

Malaysia

1987

Country Fund

Mexico

1989

Policy Decree

Nigeria

1995

Policy Decree

Pakistan

1991

Policy Decree

Philippines

1986

Country Fund

Taiwan

1986

Country Fund

Thailand

1987

Country Fund

Turkey

1989

Policy Decree

Venezuela

1990

Policy Decree

Zimbabwe

1993

Policy Decree

Notes: The liberalization dates in this table are based on those in Henry (2000a), Bekaert and Harvey
(2000), Kim and Singal (2000), and Levine and Zervos (1996). For a detailed discussion about the
difficulties involved in selecting liberalization dates See Henry (2000a).

15

Dividend Yield (Percent)

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

-5

-4

-2

0

1

Year Relative to Liberalization

-1

2

3

Figure 1. The Cost of Capital Capital Falls When Countries Liberalize the Capital Account.

-3

4

5

Growth Rate of the Capital Stock (Percent)

0.04

0.045

0.05

0.055

0.06

0.065

0.07

0.075

-5

-4

-2

0

1

Year Relative to Liberalization

-1

2

Figure 2. Investment Booms When Countries Liberalize the Capital Account .

-3

3

4

5

17

Growth Rate of Output Per Worker (Percent)

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

0.05

-5

-3

-2

0

1

Year Relative to Liberalization

-1

2

3

Figure 3. The Growth Rate of Output Per Worker Increases When Countries Liberalize

-4

4

5

18

