NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSTITUTIONS DON’T RULE:
DIRECT EFFECTS OF GEOGRAPHY
ON PER CAPITA INCOME
Jeffrey D. Sachs
Working Paper 9490
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9490
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

Director, The Earth Institute at Columbia University. All data are available from the author upon request.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Jeffrey D. Sachs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given to the source.

Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita Income
Jeffrey D. Sachs
NBER Working Paper No. 9490
February 2003
JEL No. O11, P16, P51, R11
ABSTRACT
In a series of papers, my colleagues and I have demonstrated that levels of per capita income,
economic growth, and other economic and demographic dimensions are strongly correlated with
geographical and ecological variables such as climate zone, disease ecology, and distance from the
coast. Three recent papers purport to show that the role of geography in explaining cross-country
patterns of income per capita operates predominantly or exclusively through the choice of
institutions, with little direct effect of geography on income after controlling for the quality
institutions. This note shows that malaria transmission, which is strongly affected by ecological
conditions, directly affects the level of per capita income after controlling for the quality of
institutions.

Jeffrey D. Sachs
Columbia University
314 Low Library
535 West 116th Street, MC4327
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sachs@columbia.edu

Introduction
In a series of papers, my colleagues and I (Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger, 1998, 2000;
Gallup and Sachs, 2001; Sachs and Malaney, 2002) have demonstrated that levels of per capita
income, economic growth, and other economic and demographic dimensions are strongly
correlated with key geographical and ecological variables, such as climate zone, disease ecology,
and distance from the coast. Several recent papers have explored this link between geography
and development, testing whether the effects of geography on economic activity work mainly
through various direct channels (e.g. through effects on productivity, population growth, trade
and investment) or indirect channels (e.g. through effects on the choice of political and economic
institutions). Of course, both kinds of channels may be present simultaneously, and Gallup,
Sachs, and Mellinger (1998) offer a theoretical illustration as to why a disadvantageous physical
environment may be conducive to the adoption of less productive institutional arrangements as
well.
Three papers in particular (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001; Easterly and
Levine, 2002; and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbis, 2002) purport to show that the role of
geography in explaining cross-country patterns of income per capita operates predominantly or
exclusively through the choice of institutions, with little direct effect of geography on income.
This would indeed be a surprising conclusion, since many of the reasons why geography seems
to have affected institutional choices in the past (e.g. the suitability of locations for European
technologies, the disease environment and risks to survival of immigrants, the productivity of
agriculture, the transport costs between far-flung regions and major markets) are indeed based on
direct effects of geography on production systems, human health, and environmental
sustainability, and many of those very same channels would still be likely to apply today. Thus,

2

the logic of the geography-institutions linkage is also the logic of a direct geography-productivity
linkage.
Fortunately, these three papers propose a testable – and refutable – hypothesis that
geography matters only through institutions, based on the following cross-country regression
model:
(1)

ln(Yi) = β0 + β1 QIi + β2’ Zi

+ εi

The log of income per capita of country i, ln(Yi) , is specified to be a function of the “quality of
institutions,” according to an index QIi , and one or more other variables Zi, which may include
geographical, historical or policy variables. Since income is affected by geography (Z), the
argument suggests that Z works only through QI, with no direct effects once QI is entered into
the regression equation. Specifically, the papers advance the null hypothesis that the coefficient
vector β2’ is zero, so geographical (and other “non-institutional”) variables have no additional
explanatory power beyond their possible indirect role in affecting the quality of institutions:
(2) H0 : β2’ = 0
In the empirical test of H0 in the three recent papers, the income variable is purchasing-powerparity adjusted GNP per capita in 1995 and the institutions variable is a proxy measure of
institutional quality.
This current note shows that the null hypothesis in (2) is rejected when the Zi variable is a
measure of malaria transmission. In other words, I provide evidence that malaria transmission
directly impacts the level of per capita income after controlling for institutional quality. The
likely reasons for this linkage are described in Gallup and Sachs, 2001, and Sachs and Malaney,
2002.

Before proceeding to the statistical test, however, it is important to stress that the model

in (1) is worryingly oversimplified in any case (and thus is certainly not the model of choice that

3

I would specify or prefer to test). No reliable conclusions about the primacy of institutions over
other variables should. The first obvious specification problem is one of statics versus dynamics.
Economic theory suggests that the determination of per capita income should be specified as a
dynamic process (e.g. Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1997), in which the growth of income during a
time interval [0,T] is a function of the income level at the start of the period and some kind of
average of the values of the “forcing variables” during the time interval [0,T]:
(3) (1/T)ln(YiT/Yi0) = β0 + β1 QIi[0,T] + β2 ’ Zi[0,T] + β3 ln(Yi0) + εi
It is much more likely that the quality of institutions in a given time period will affect the growth
rate of the economy during that period (controlling for initial income), as opposed to the
contemporaneous level of national income. It is also very doubtful that a process as complex as
economic development can possibly be explained by two or three variables alone, much less the
particular “geography” variables stressed by AJR and RST. Distance from the equator, the
centerpiece of testing in RST, is an exceedingly poor choice for a serious test of geographical
variables.1 It is at best a proxy, and a poor one at that, for climate or possibly for distance from
major markets, and should not be used as the basis of the bulk of the tests in the RST paper when
much better alternatives are available. In any event, most geographical analyses stress several
factors (climate, geographical isolation, disease environment), so that testing these variables one
at a time is subject to extreme risk of left-out-variable error.
The purpose of this note, however, is to show that even within narrow confines of
equation (1) the null hypothesis is easily refuted. I focus on one particular variable, malaria risk.
It is easy to show that highly malarious regions of the world (i.e. regions where there is a high

1

I have made this point elsewhere in Sachs (2000). It is interesting in this regard that when this variable was
introduced by Hall and Jones (1999), it was taken to be a proxy for European settlement, not a proxy for geography
per se. It is, incidentally, a fairly miserable measure for European settlement as well, another case in which much
more direct measures are readily available.

4

risk of malaria transmission) have lower per capita income that non-malarious regions,
controlling for the quality of government institutions. Moreover, since malaria transmission is
strongly related to ecological conditions (specifically the type of mosquito vectors and the
climate conditions) there is an excellent instrumental variable that can be used for malaria
prevalence to help us to test the proposition that malaria “causes” poverty rather than vice versa.

Malaria Risk
As the main measure of malaria risk, I use an indicator based on the 1994 WHO world
map of malaria risk. By overlaying the world map of malaria risk with a map of world
population, my colleagues and I have calculated the proportion of each country’s population that
live with risk of malaria transmission, labeled MAL94P. An alternative measure, introduced in
Gallup and Sachs (1998), and used in AJR and RST, multiplies the MALP94 index by an
estimate of the proportion of national malaria cases that involve the fatal species, Plasmodium
falciparum, as opposed to three largely non-fatal species of the malaria pathogen (P. vivax, P.
malariae, and P. ovale). This index is called MALFAL. Sub-Saharan Africa has a very high
proportion of malaria cases that are falciparum malaria, whereas in the Americas, Europe, and
much of Asia, a higher proportion of malaria vivax cases is found.
Neither measure is a completely satisfactory index of the intensity of disease transmission
or the burden of the disease in terms of morbidity and mortality. The basic problem is that the
number of cases of malaria reported annually to WHO is a tiny fraction of the total number of
malaria cases in a given year. That is why we rely on a measure of population at risk rather than
actual infections. Most malaria cases in Africa are self treated if they are treated at all. Even
deaths due to malaria are often unreported or are not classified by cause of death. There are also

5

deep clinical issues in the attribution of cause of death in the case of malaria. Two kinds of
errors can occur. Some deaths may occur due to other causes but be attributed to malaria since
the individual may simultaneously be infected by malaria. Alternatively, some deaths attributed
to other causes may indeed have malaria as a co-factor, but not the sole or even principle cause.
Also, multiplying MALP94 by the share of falciparum introduces one error while correcting
another. It is important to distinguish countries burdened by falciparum from those suffering
mainly or solely from non-fatal variants. On the other hand, in a case where falciparum is, say,
50% of all clinical cases, it may still be true that 100% of the public is at risk of falciparum
infection. It would be best to make an index of percent of population at risk of falciparum
infection, but we don’t have data of that sort available.
Malaria is intrinsically a disease of warm environments because a key part of the life
cycle of the parasite (sporogony) depends on a high ambient temperature. This is, in essence,
why malaria is a disease of the tropics and the sub-tropics. Falciparum malaria requires even
higher temperatures than vivax malaria. Malaria also depends on adequate conditions for
mosquito breeding, mainly pools of clean water, usually due to rainfall ending up in puddles,
cisterns, discarded tires, and the like. As a result, malaria has a distinct seasonality in the subhumid tropics, where wet and dry seasons alternate, and mosquito breeding and hence malaria
follows the rainy season. Additionally, the intensity of malaria transmission depends on the
specific mosquito vectors that are present. All malaria is transmitted by mosquitos of the genus
anopheles. Some anopheles species, especially those in sub-Saharan Africa, show a high
preference for taking their blood meals from humans (anthropophagy) as opposed to animals
such as cattle. These human-biting vectors lead to much more intensive transmission of the
disease.

6

The temperature, mosquito abundance, and vector specificity can be combined into a
single measure of Malaria Ecology (ME), an ecologically-based variable that is predictive of
malaria risk. (Kiszewski et. al., forthcoming). The basic formula for ME includes temperature,
species abundance, and vector type. The underlying index is measured on a highly disaggregated
sub-national level, and then is averaged for the entire country. Because ME is built upon
climatological and vector conditions on a country-by-country basis, and is therefore exogenous
to public health interventions and economic conditions, ME provides an ideal instrumental
variable for malaria risk.2

Estimation Strategy
The key is to estimate equation (1), in order to test whether malaria risk helps to explain
cross-country patterns of national income after controlling for the quality of institutions. In
order to do this, both the institutional quality and the malaria prevalence variables should be
instrumented. I use three instruments.
KGPTEMP. This variable measures the share of a country’s population in
temperate ecozones, based on the Koeppen-Geiger ecozone classification system.
(Mellinger, Gallup, and Sachs, 2000).
LOGMORT. This variable, created by AJR based on a range of source materials,
is an estimate of mortality rates of British soldiers and other populations in the
early 19th century, and has been used as an instrumental variable for institutional
quality in all three papers.
ME. This variable, described above, provides an instrument for malaria risk that
controls for the fact that causation may run not only from malaria to income but
also from income to malaria.
Since the AJR sample of ex-colonies covers only 64 countries, it is convenient to use KGPTEMP
as an additional instrument for institutional quality in order to estimate (1) for a larger sample of
2

This variable was generated together with colleagues of mine at the Harvard Center for International Development.

7

countries in the AJR and RST data sets.3 Institutional quality is strongly positively correlated
with the percentage of the population living in temperate-zone ecologies, so that KGPTEMP is a
useful instrument.4
The left-hand-side variable in each case is GNP per capita, PPP adjusted, in 1995. Each
paper uses a slightly different version of this variable, so I use the same definition as in the
original paper. Each paper also uses a distinct measure of institutional quality, and again, I use
the same variable as in the respective papers.
The regression results are shown in Table 1. Each regression uses two-stage-leastsquares to estimate the log income in 1995 as a function of institutional quality and malaria risk.
For the large sample of countries, we use two instruments (KGPTEMP and ME), while for the
smaller set of countries in the AJR and EL papers, LOGMORT is added as an instrument. For
each of the three papers there are four regressions, based on the two malaria variables, and the
smaller or larger set of instruments.
The results are strong and robust. In every single regression, both the quality of
institutions and the malaria risk variables are statistically significant at the 0.05 percent level, and
in most cases at the 0.01 percent level. The null hypothesis is decisively rejected in all three data
sets, both for the larger number of countries (using KGPTEMP and ME as instruments) and for
the smaller number of countries (using all three instrumental variables).
In Table 2, I add an additional right-hand-side geographical variable, the share of the
national population living within 100km of the coast. For a variety of reasons, including
overland transport costs, we should expect that countries with coastal populations should enjoy

3

In the EL paper, the quality of institutions variable is defined only for 62 countries in any event.
The positive relationship between institutional quality and KGPTEMP may be due to the fact that European settlers
preferred to settle in familiar temperate-zone settings, as suggested by AJR, though many alternative hypotheses are
also possible.

4

8

higher per capita incomes than countries with substantially hinterland or even landlocked
populations. We see that this is true in the large sample of countries (using AJR and RST) but is
not evident in the smaller sample of countries in the EL data set.

Conclusions
The chief strength of the AJR, EL, and RST papers is that a clear null hypothesis is
advanced. As Karl Popper taught many years ago, the failure to reject a null hypothesis on one
set of data does not imply the correctness of the hypothesis more generally. This paper shows,
indeed, that the null hypothesis may be readily rejected using an alternative geographical
variable: malaria risk. A more complete model of development, however, will require that we
move beyond the simple specifications tested in the three papers reviewed in this note. There is
good theoretical and empirical reason to believe that the development process reflects a complex
interaction of institutions, policies, and geography.

9

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: an Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review, vol. 91,
no. 5, December 2001.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Technological Diffusion, Convergence, and
Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 2, no.1, March 1997, pgs. 1-26.
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. “Tropics, Germs and Crops: How Endowments Influence
Economic Development.” NBER Working Paper 9106, August 2002.
Gallup, John Luke, and Jeffrey Sachs D. with Andrew D. Mellinger. "Geography and Economic
Development." in Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 1998 (April), The
World Bank: Washington, DC.
Gallup, John Luke and Jeffrey D. Sachs. “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” The Supplement
to The American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene. Vol. 64, no. 1, 2, January/February
2001.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. “Why do some countries produce so much more output per
worker than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 83-116, February
1999.
Kiszewski, Anthony, Andrew Mellinger, Pia Malaney, Andrew Spielman, Sonia Ehrlich, Jeffrey
Sachs. “A Global Index of the Stability of Malaria Transmission Based on the Intrinsic
Properties of Anopheline Mosquito Vectors.” Forthcoming.
Mellinger, Andrew D., Jeffrey D. Sachs and John L. Gallup. “Climate, Coastal Proximity, and
Development,” in Oxford Handbook of Economic Geography. Clark, Gordon L., Maryann P.
Feldman, and Meric S. Gertler, eds. Oxford University Press, 2000.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian and Francesco Trebbi. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” NBER Working Paper
9305, October 2002.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Pia Malaney. “The Economic and Social Burden of Malaria.” Nature
Insight, Vol. 415, no. 6872, Feb. 7, 2002.
Sachs, Jeffrey D.. “Tropical Underdevelopment.” prepared for Economic History Association
Annual Meeting, September 2000 and CID Working Paper No. 57, December 2000 available at
http://www.cid.harvard.edu/cidwp/057.htm

10

0.69
59

-1.07
(-2.83)

0.62
73

-1.04
(-2.74)

0.53
(3.06)

(3)
AJR
logpgp95

0.60
59

-0.83
(-2.47)

0.56
(4.12)

(4)
AJR
logpgp95

0.67
62

-1.32
(-2.55)

1.38
(3.40)

(5)
EL
lgdppc95

0.68
62

-1.37
(-2.76)

1.32
(3.60)

(6)
EL
lgdppc95

0.61
62

-1.15
(-2.35)

1.59
(4.24)

(7)
EL
lgdppc95

0.63
62

-1.20
(-2.52)

1.51
(4.45)

(8)
EL
lgdppc95

0.78
133

-1.33
(-4.60)

0.60
(3.45)

(9)
RST
lcgdp95

0.71
69

-1.43
(-4.37)

0.53
(2.74)

(10)
RST
lcgdp95

0.77
133

-1.13
(-4.53)

0.78
(5.60)

(11)
RST
lcgdp95

0.68
69

-1.25
(-4.26)

0.68
(4.01)

(12)
RST
lcgdp95

KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP, KGPTEMP,
ME
ME,
ME
ME,
ME
ME,
ME
ME,
ME
ME,
ME
ME,
LOGMORT
LOGMORT
LOGMORT
LOGMORT
LOGMORT
LOGMORT

0.73
101

-1.43
(-3.99)

0.45
(3.03)

(2)
AJR
logpgp95

11

t-statistics are indicated in parentheses.
All regression equations are estimates with two-stage least squares and include a constant term (not reported).
First-stage regressions and (where relevant) overidentification tests support the use of the instruments in each case.
MALFAL and LOGMORT cover slightly different countries across papers, for consistency the corresponding authors' version of the variable is used.
The sample size in each regression varies slightly compared to the original regressions in AJR, EL and RST, respectively, due to differing coverage of the
malaria and KGPTEMP variables. These minor variations in sample size do not appear to affect the substantive results.

Instruments for variables
above

N

R2

MALFAL

MAL94P

Rule

kk (Institutions Index)

Average protection against
expropriation risk, 1985-1995

0.29
(2.87)

(1)
Paper
AJR
Dependent variable: logpgp95

Independent variable

Table 1

kk (Institutions Index)

Average protection against
expropriation risk, 1985-1995

0.76
101

-1.19
(-3.37)
0.47
(2.73)

0.32
(3.32)

logpgp95

AJR

(1)

0.67
62

-1.31
(-2.23)
0.016
(0.04)

1.39
(3.36)

lgdppc95

EL

(2)

0.79
133

0.60
(3.60)
-1.25
(-4.59)
0.34
(2.51)

lcgdp95

RST

(3)

corresponding authors' version of the variable is used

12

POP100KM cover slightly different countries across papers, for consistency the

First-stage regressions and support the use of the instruments in each case.

All regressions include KGPTEMP and ME as instruments for the dependent variables except pop100km

t-statistics are indicated in parentheses.

N

R2

pop100km

mal94p

RULE

Paper

Dependent variable:

Independent variable

Table 2

