                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MONETARY POLICY FOR INATTENTIVE ECONOMIES

                                             Laurence Ball
                                          N. Gregory Mankiw
                                             Ricardo Reis

                                          Working Paper 9491
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9491


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




We are grateful to Jeffrey Fuhrer, Charles Goodhart and Yves Nosbusch for helpful comments. Reis is
grateful to the Fundacao Ciencia e Tecnologia, Praxis XXI for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Laurence Ball, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies
Laurence Ball, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 9491
February 2003
JEL No. E5

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper is a contribution to the analysis of optimal monetary policy. It begins with a critical
assessment of the existing literature, arguing that most work is based on implausible models of
inflation-output dynamics. It then suggests that this problem may be solved with some recent
behavioral models, which assume that price setters are slow to incorporate macroeconomic

information into the prices they set. A specific such model is developed and used to derive optimal

policy. In response to shocks to productivity and aggregate demand, optimal policy is price level
targeting. Base drift in the price level, which is implicit in the inflation targeting regimes currently
used in many central banks, is not desirable in this model. When shocks to desired markups are
added, optimal policy is flexible targeting of the price level. That is, the central bank should allow

the price level to deviate from its target for a while in response to these supply shocks, but it should
eventually return the price level to its target path. Optimal policy can also be described as an elastic
price standard: the central bank allows the price level to deviate from its target when output is

expected to deviate from its natural rate.



Laurence Ball                          N. Gregory Mankiw               Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics                Department of Economics         Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University               Harvard University              Harvard University
Baltimore, MD 21218                    Littauer 223                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                               Cambridge, MA 02138             reis@fas.harvard.edu
lball@jhu.edu                          and NBER
                                       ngmankiw@harvard.edu
1     INTRODUCTION
What policy rule should a central bank follow? Recent years have seen a resurgence of
theoretical research on this classic question. Most of this work has built on “new Keynesian”
models of the output-inflation trade-oﬀ derived from forward-looking models of staggered
price adjustment. Unfortunately, these models make implausible predictions about the eﬀects
of monetary policy: for example, they imply that a policy change that gradually reduces
inflation causes an output boom. There is therefore good reason to be skeptical about what
the literature tells us about the eﬀects of alternative policies.
    This paper tries to make progress toward determining which policies are optimal by
studying this question in a model that more closely fits the facts about monetary policy.
In particular, we draw on recent behavioral models of the output-inflation trade-oﬀ based
on the assumption that agents are slow to incorporate information about macroeconomic
conditions, even if the information is publicly available. Recent work has shown that such
models capture the inertia that is central to inflation dynamics in modern economies. These
models should provide more reliable insights into the policy choices facing central banks.
    Section 2 of this paper briefly reviews the two literatures on which our work builds, the
work on optimal monetary policy and the work on behavioral macroeconomics. Section 3
presents a specific model, which builds on the “sticky information” model of Mankiw and
Reis (2002), and Section 4 discusses the determinants of welfare in this model. Sections 5,
6 and 7 derive the optimal policy rules in the model. Section 8 compares our results with
those obtained from the standard new Keynesian Phillips curve. Section 9 concludes.
    Our central result is that price level targeting is the optimal policy in the model. In-
flation targeting — the currently popular policy of allowing base drift in the price level —
is suboptimal. When the economy is hit by shocks to aggregate demand or productivity,
strict price level targeting is optimal: policymakers should return the price level to a pre-
determined path as quickly as possible. However, if there are persistent shocks to firms’
markups, the optimal rule allows temporary deviations from the long-run price target. In
this way, the prescriptions of our model are similar to the practice of many central banks,
which allow temporary deviations from policy rules in response to “supply shocks.” One can


                                               1
also describe optimal policy as the elastic price standard proposed by Hall (1984). Under
this policy, the price level can deviate from target as long as output is expected to deviate
from its natural rate.



2     MOTIVATION
This paper arises from two recent literatures — one on optimal rules for monetary policy and
one on behavioral approaches to the Phillips curve. We believe that the second may hold
the hope of remedying some deficiencies in the first. The natural place to start our analysis
is with a brief overview of these two broad literatures.


2.1    The Sorry State of Monetary Policy Analysis

In recent research on policy rules, a canonical approach has emerged. The researcher sets
up a model based on monopolistically competitive producers, with monetary nonneutrality
arising because of some friction in price setting. Policymakers are assumed to choose policy
to minimize a loss function, which is either assumed or derived as an approximation to agents’
utility functions. With this framework in hand, the researcher can derive the optimal policy
rule and evaluate policy proposals, such as targeting inflation or the price level. Goodfriend
and King (1997) have referred to this literature as the New Neoclassical Synthesis, while
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999) have called it the New Keynesian Science of Monetary
Policy. Whatever the label, there is no doubt that this approach to monetary-policy analysis
is large and growing.
    Yet policymakers should be wary of the prescriptions that this literature has yielded. The
results in any such analysis depend crucially on the assumed model of the Phillips curve,
which determines how inflation is related to output movements and expectations. The results
should be believed only if the assumed Phillips curve is credible. Unfortunately, that is rarely
the case.
    The most common approach is to use the new Keynesian Phillips curve. This model
is based on the assumption of time-contingent price adjustment and is derived from the
seminal papers of Taylor (1980), Rotemberg (1982), and Calvo (1983). The model’s appealing

                                               2
microeconomic foundations have made it the workhorse of much of the modern literature on
monetary policy. The papers by Goodfriend and King (1997) and Clarida, Gali, and Gertler
(1999) are two examples.
   There is, however, a problem with this approach: Because the new Keynesian Phillips
curve lacks any source of inflation inertia, it makes absurdly counterfactual predications
about the eﬀects of monetary policy. According to this model, disinflations can result in
booms rather than recessions (Ball, 1994). Similarly, the model fails to explain why monetary
policy shocks have a delayed and gradual eﬀect on inflation (Mankiw, 2001). One should
be suspect of policy recommendations arising from any model that is patently inconsistent
with both the econometric evidence and the views of central bankers about their influence
over the economy.
   An alternative approach to using the new Keynesian Phillips curve is to use a more
traditional accelerationist Phillips curve. This approach, which can be justified with the
assumption of backward-looking expectations, has the advantage that it is consistent with
the conventional wisdom about the eﬀects of monetary policy and with standard empirical
analyses of inflation (e.g., Gordon, 1997; Staiger, Stock, and Watson, 1997). For these
reasons, Ball (1999) and Svensson (1997) take an accelerationist Phillips curve as a starting
point for their analyses.
   Yet this approach is also problematic. Although inflation inertia is a feature of the U.S.
monetary regime of the past several decades, this was not true when the economy operated
under a gold standard. (Barsky, 1987; Alogoskoufis and Smith, 1991). When analyzing
alternative policy rules, it is imperative that expectations be allowed to adjust to the new
regime. Regardless of how well it fits the recent data, the accelerationist Phillips curve is
a suspect tool for monetary-policy analysis. When analyzing alternative monetary policy
rules, ignoring the Lucas critique is not just an aesthetic faux pas; it produces results that
are, literally, incredible.
   The problems with both the new Keynesian and the accelerationist Phillips curves are
increasingly understood. This has led some authors to suggest a compromise. According
to the so-called “hybrid” Phillips curve, a subset of agents have backward-looking inflation
expectations and the rest have rational expectations (e.g., Gali and Gertler, 1999). Yet this


                                              3
compromise may yield the worst of both worlds. Like the new Keynesian Phillips curve, the
hybrid model yields an immediate jump in inflation in response to monetary policy shocks
(unless all agents are backward looking). Like the accelerationist Phillips curve, the hybrid
model fails to explain the absence of inflation inertia under earlier monetary regimes (unless
no agents are backward looking). That is, by taking a weighted average of two flawed models,
the hybrid model of the Phillips curve ends up with the flaws of each.


2.2    The Promise of Behavioral Models

Behavioral economics might oﬀer a way out of this conundrum. Behavioral economics is,
broadly defined, the growing subfield that incorporates into economic theory the flaws in
human decision-making that are ignored in the standard model of rational man. It finds its
roots in Herbert Simon’s suggestion that people are “satisficers” rather than rational maxi-
mizers. Many economists have suggested that departures from rationality may be important
for issues in macroeconomics (Akerlof, 2002; Sargent, 1993). In particular, several recent
papers on the microfoundations of the Phillips curve have proposed that monetary nonneu-
trality arises because people are slow to process widely available macroeconomic information.
   When Milton Friedman (1968) introduced the natural rate hypothesis in his AEA presi-
dential address, he proposed a theory of monetary nonneutrality that, to modern ears, sounds
remarkably behavioral. According to Friedman, when the money supply rises unexpectedly,
the price level rises, pushing down the real wage. Employers hire more because the cost of
labor has fallen. Employees are willing to work more because they focus on the nominal wage
and infer (incorrectly) that the reward for working has risen. Friedman did not explain this
asymmetry in information between firms and workers. For him, it seemed natural to assume
that workers lacked full information about macroeconomic conditions. This ignorance was
the centerpiece of Friedman’s proposed explanation for the short-run Phillips curve.
   Work that followed on Friedman’s ideas tried to incorporate rational economic man into
the story. The task has proved diﬃcult. Lucas (1973) suggested a model in which producers
observe the prices of what they sell but not of what they buy and, as a result, need to solve
signal-extraction problems to infer relative prices. Critics of the Lucas model wondered why
a rational man would fail to use the widely available information on the consumer price

                                              4
index, which is published monthly. Fischer (1977) told a version of Friedman’s story in
which workers were locked into long-term contracts setting the nominal wage. Critics of the
Fischer model wondered why a rational man would ever agree to such an ineﬃcient contract
ex ante or fail to renegotiate it ex post.
   In recent years, there have been several attempts to come up with better models of
inflation dynamics by returning to Friedman’s idea that some people fail to incorporate
all available macroeconomic information into their decision-making. According to the new
Keynesian Phillips curve, prices are sticky, but inflation can respond instantly to changes in
monetary policy. In practice, inflation responds sluggishly. This fact suggests that, for some
reason, price setters aren’t quite awake or smart or informed enough to process all available
information about monetary policy and react immediately to it.
   One approach to modeling this inattentiveness is to use the tools of information theory,
as exposited, for instance, in the textbook by Cover and Thomas (1991). Drawing on these
tools, Sims (2001) suggests modeling humans as having a limited channel for absorbing
information. That is, the human brain is imperfect in the same way as a computer with
a slow internet connection would be. Woodford (2001) uses this idea to build a model of
inflation-output dynamics. In his model, because price setters learn about monetary policy
through a limited-information channel, it is as if they observe monetary policy with a random
error and have to solve a signal-extraction problem along the lines of Lucas (1973).
   Ball (2000) proposes another approach to the problem. He suggests that when forming
expectations of any variable, people optimally use all information in the past values of that
variable, but fail to incorporate information from other variables. That is, expectations are
based on optimal univariate forecasts. Ball shows that this approach can explain why the
accelerationist Phillips curve fits the recent data well, while the earlier data conform more
closely to a classic Phillips curve.
   Mankiw and Reis (2002), like Ball and Woodford, impose a constraint on the information
that people use when forming expectations. They assume that in each period there is a fixed
probability that a person updates his information set; otherwise, he continues to set prices
based on outdated information. Mankiw and Reis compare this sticky-information model
with the standard new Keynesian Phillips curve and conclude that it is more consistent with


                                              5
standard views about the eﬀects of monetary policy. The Mankiw-Reis model has strong
formal ties to the earlier eﬀorts of Lucas and Fischer, but its bald informational assumption
rejects the attempt to reconcile the Phillips curve with the axiom of rationality.
    A weakness of all three of these approaches is that they fail to explain why people do
not incorporate widely available news about monetary policy into their plans. In reality,
it is easy to find out what the central bank is doing, but it is often hard to figure out
what it means. That is, the real problem is not obtaining information but processing it.
Unfortunately, economists do not have the tools to model imperfect information processing.
The approaches of Woodford, Ball, and Mankiw and Reis are all based on the hope that a
model of imperfect information acquisition may serve as a rough substitute.
    A strength of all three approaches is that they can explain inflation inertia. In these
models, when monetary policy changes, most price setters are unaware of it, so they keep
marking up prices as if no policy change had occurred. That is, all three models generate
inflation inertia by positing a type of inattentiveness on the part of price setters. Because
these models of inattention fit the most basic facts about inflation dynamics, they hold out
the greatest promise for delivering credible advice for monetary policy.
    In this paper, the specific model we use is the sticky-information model proposed by
Mankiw and Reis. One reason is tractability. A nice feature of the Mankiw-Reis model
is that, given the dates when people get their information, they have conventional rational
expectations. This feature allows the use of rational-expectations tools to solve for the
resulting equilibrium. That is, we can use many standard and powerful modeling techniques,
while making the behavioral assumption that price setters are inattentive.



3     THE MODEL
We begin our analysis by presenting the model, including agent’s objectives, market struc-
ture, price setting, and the role of aggregate-demand policy.




                                              6
3.1    Agents and Market Structure

We assume a simple variation on the standard “yeoman farmer economy” studied by authors
such as Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) and Woodford (2002, chapter 6). The economy
contains a continuum of agents indexed by i, with i distributed uniformly on the unit interval.
Each agent uses his own labor to produce a diﬀerentiated good, sells his good to other agents,
and buys goods to consume.
   The utility of agent i in period t is given by

                                           Cit1−σ − 1  L1+ψ
                                   Uit =              − it ,                                 (1)
                                            1−σ        1+ψ

where Lit is the agent’s labor supply in period t and Cit is a CES aggregator of the agent’s
consumption of diﬀerent goods

                                         ·Z                           ¸ γ−1
                                                                         γ
                                                1   ¡    j¢ γ
                                                           γ−1
                                 Cit =                  Cit      dj           ,              (2)
                                            0


where Cij is agent i’s consumption of the good produced by agent j. The parameters measur-
ing risk aversion (σ) and the marginal disutility of labor supply (ψ) are non-negative, while
the elasticity of substitution between diﬀerent goods (γ) is larger than one. The agent’s
production function is


                                           Yit = At Lit ,                                    (3)


where Y is his level of output and A is an aggregate productivity shifter that follows an
arbitrary stochastic process.
   As is well-known (e.g., Woodford, 2002, chapter 2), utility maximization with this form
of utility implies that the demand for each good depends on aggregate spending and the
good’s relative price. In logs, the demand function is


                                     yit = yt − γ(pit − pt ),                                (4)


where yi is the log of output by farmer i, y is the log of aggregate output, pi is the log of the

                                                         7
price charged for good i, and p is the log of the price index for the aggregate consumption
good C.
   We assume that a government levies a proportional sales tax τ t on all goods, which
follows some stationary stochastic process. The tax revenues are used to finance equal lump
sum rebates to all agents.
   These assumptions determine the price for good i that maximizes farmer i’s utility:


                                     p∗it = pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut ,                           (5)


where α = (ψ +σ)/(1+γψ), y N is the natural level of output, and u reflects random variation
in taxes. The natural level of output is defined as the level when prices are flexible (so pi = p∗i
for all i) and the tax rate is at its average level τ̄ . It is given by:
                                                              ³                  ´
                                                                      γ
                                     (1 + ψ) log(At ) − log       (1−γ)(1−τ̄ )
                             ytN =                                                   .         (6)
                                                    ψ+σ

Note that y N varies with the productivity shock A. Finally, the shock u is given by u =
log((1 − τ̄ )/(1 − τ ))/(1 + γψ). This result is derived in the Appendix. The intuition is
simple: as in standard macro models with imperfect competition (e.g., Romer, 2001, chapter
6), an agent’s desired price increases one-for-one with the aggregate price level and depends
positively on total spending in the economy. The price decreases with a positive shock to
productivity and the natural rate (y N ) and increases with a rise in indirect taxation (u).
   We introduce random taxation because it causes variation in farmer’s “markups” — the
gap between the desired price and the marginal cost of producing output. The key feature of
these shocks is that they change the equilibrium level of output under flexible prices without
changing the eﬃcient level of output — that is, they cause variation in the level of distortions.
In this way, the shocks diﬀer from productivity shocks, which cause changes in equilibrium
output that are eﬃcient. Markup shocks are becoming a standard feature of models used to
analyze monetary policy (e.g., Woodford, 2002; Clarida, Gali and Gertler, 2002; Steinsson,
2002). Shifts in markups can be justified diﬀerent ways — for example, there can be shifts
in the degree of collusion in an industry, or shifts in the aggressiveness of wage bargainers


                                                    8
in models with a labor market. We introduce variable taxation because it is the simplest
way to generate time-varying markups. However, one can interpret our results as applying
to markup variations arising from other sources as well.1
       Finally, we again follow Woodford and assume the existence of complete financial markets.
This implies perfect risk-sharing in consumption across all agents. The consumption level
of all agents is the same (Cit is the same for all i), although the levels of labor supply and
output can vary.


3.2       Price Setting and Sticky Information

Here we follow Mankiw and Reis (2002). Each period, a fraction λ of farmers, chosen
randomly, receives complete information on the state of the economy. Prices are perfectly
flexible in the sense that prices are adjusted by all farmers in each period. However, prices
are set based only on the last information received by each farmer. We take a first-order
approximation to optimal price-setting, which yields certainty-equivalent behavior. Thus,
when farmer i sets his price in period t, he sets it equal to his expectation of the optimal
price:


                                             pkit = Et−k p∗it ,                                       (7)


where t − k is the last period when the farmer received information.
       Again taking a first-order approximation, we measure the log of the price level, p, by the
average of the individual prices pi . Thus p is the average of prices set based on information
at all past dates, weighted by the proportion of firms that last received information in each
period. Mankiw and Reis aggregate the rule for individual price setting, (5), to derive the
behavior of the price level in the absence of markup and productivity shocks. The Appendix
to this paper extends their analysis to include these shocks, which is straightforward. The
bottom line can be expressed as an equation either for the price level, or for aggregate

   1
    In Ball and Mankiw (1995), for example, supply shocks arise from the interaction of menu costs and
asymmetries in the distribution of relative shocks. The key eﬀect of these shocks, however, is to change
average markups, because firms with positive relative shocks respond more or less than firms with negative
shocks.


                                                     9
inflation π t = pt − pt−1 :

            ∞
            X              £                       ¤
   pt   = λ   (1 − λ)j Et−j pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut                                        (8)
              j=0

           αλ               λ         X∞
                                                         £                            ¤
                     N
   πt   =     (yt − yt ) +     ut + λ     (1 − λ)j Et−1−j π t + α(∆yt − ∆ytN ) + ∆ut ) (9)
          1−λ              1−λ        j=0


These equations show that the price level and its rate of change depend on current output
and the shocks in the model, as well as past expectations of prices, output, and shocks at
the various times farmers receive information. Not surprisingly, an adverse technology shock
or a rise in the desired markup raises the current price level.
   The second version of the equation is the sticky information Phillips curve that Mankiw
and Reis propose as a replacement for the new Keynesian Phillips curve arising from the
Calvo model of staggered price adjustment. Mankiw and Reis show that their model performs
better at fitting the stylized facts about the output-inflation trade-oﬀ than does the new
Keynesian equation. In particular, it captures the fact that a monetary contraction that
gradually reduces inflation also reduces output, whereas the Calvo model implies that gradual
disinflations are expansionary.


3.3     The Demand Side and Policy

The equation for the price level, (8), summarizes the supply side of the model. We close the
model with the simplest possible demand side: the quantity equation. That is, we assume a
cash-in-advance constraint that implies that nominal spending is proportional to the money
supply, or


                                        yt = mt − pt ,                                  (10)


where m is the log of the money supply.
   We assume that policymakers control the money supply up to a white-noise control error.




                                              10
In every period t, they choose a money-supply target m̂, and


                                             mt = m̂t + et ,                                       (11)


where et is a serially uncorrelated control error. m̂t is set in period t − 1, before the pro-
ductivity and markup shocks for t are observed. These assumptions capture the facts that
policy decisions aﬀect the economy with a lag and that there are exogenous shifts in ag-
gregate demand that policy cannot oﬀset contemporaneously. We interpret the monetary
control error as standing in for other kinds of demand shocks, such as shifts in fiscal policy
or in confidence.
      In principle, one can solve for the optimal money-supply rule in this model. A diﬀerent
way of analyzing the problem is more appealing, however. Using equations (8)-(11), the
Appendix derives a reduced form for the price level pt as a linear function of the target
money supply, m̂t , variables determined before t, and shocks at t (the monetary control
error and the unexpected component of the productivity and markup shocks). Since the
shocks are unforecastable, this implies a linear relation between m̂t and the expectation of
the price level Et−1 pt , given the predetermined variables. Thus the choice at t − 1 of a target
money supply is implicitly a choice of the expected price level at t, that is, a price-level target.
We can therefore interpret Et−1 pt as the policy instrument, and solve for the optimal rule
for this target as a function of all information through period t − 1. One can use the result
in the Appendix to find the money-supply rule that implements the optimal price-targeting
rule, but we will not emphasize this form of policy.
      Note that our model of the demand side is simpler than those in most recent work
on policy rules. It is common to assume that policymakers control an interest rate, and
to relate the interest rate to output through an IS or aggregate-spending equation. If we
added such an equation to our model, we could still interpret the expected price level as the
policy instrument; a rule for the price target would implicitly define an interest rate rule
that implements it. We choose not to introduce an IS curve because there is currently no
consensus about the right specification.2

  2
      The debate about the IS curve parallels the debate about the Phillips curve, with some authors ad-


                                                   11
4     WELFARE
The next step is to consider welfare in our model, which will provide the foundation for the
policy analysis in the next section.


4.1     Woodford’s Approximation

We define welfare in a period as the average level of utility across all farmers. We assume
the discount factor approaches one, so policymakers seek to minimize the unconditional
expectation of welfare.3 Following similar steps to Woodford (2002), the Appendix shows
that a second-order approximation of farmers’ utility functions is


                           −V ar(yt − ytN ) − χE[V ari (yit − yt )] + t.i.p.,                          (12)


where χ = (ψ + γ −1 )/(ψ + σ) and t.i.p stands for terms independent of policy.
    The two terms in this expression are intuitive. The first is the variability of output
around the natural level. (Note that the natural level of output is not eﬃcient, because of
the distortion caused by the average markup. However, variability around y N diﬀers from
variability around eﬃcient output only by a constant independent of policy.) The second
term captures the cross-sectional variability of output across diﬀerent firms. Variability at
the firm level is ineﬃcient because it creates variability in labor supply around the eﬃcient
level. Throughout our analysis we define the “optimal” monetary policy as the one that
minimizes the expression in equation (12).
    Another way of writing the objective function is useful. The demand equation (4) implies
that a farmer’s output yi is proportional to his relative price pi − p. Thus the variance of yi

vocating forward-looking specifications and others advocating backward-looking specifications. Gabaix and
Laibson’s (2001) work on lagged consumption responses to the stock market suggests that applying the
sticky-information assumption to spending decisions and thus the IS curve may be a fruitful line of pursuit.
In the model we consider here, however, the stickiness of information aﬀects only the yeoman farmer’s price
setting decision.
    3
      While the assumption that the discount factor approaches one simplifies the exposition, most of our
results can be obtained with a discount factor smaller than one.




                                                    12
is proportional to the variance of pi − p. Thus we can write welfare as


                         −V ar(yt − ytN ) − ωE[V ari (pit − pt )] + t.i.p.,              (13)


where ω = χγ 2 . That is, welfare depends on the variance of the output gap and the cross-
sectional variance of relative prices.


4.2       Welfare with Mankiw-Reis Price-Setting

To analyze the model, we need to determine how the terms in the loss function depend on
aggregate variables. Here is the first point at which our results for the sticky-information
model depart from those for the Calvo model. In the Calvo model, Woodford (2002) shows
that the cross-sectional variability of prices is determined by current and lagged values of
inflation squared. In contrast, the following result gives an expression for cross-sectional
price variability in terms of aggregate variables in our model:

Lemma 1

                                                 X
                                                 ∞
                           V ari (pit − pt ) =         η j (pt − Et−j (pt ))2 ,          (14)
                                                 j=1


where:
                                  µ                                         ¶
                                                λ(1 − λ)j
                           ηj ≡
                                      (1 − (1 − λ)j ) (1 − (1 − λ)j+1 )




Thus the variance of relative prices depends on the squared deviations of the price level from
the levels expected at all past dates. The weights η j decline as j increases.
   This result is derived in the Appendix. The intuition is straightforward. Surprises in the
aggregate price level create micro price variability because prices for a given period are set
based on information at various times in the past. In period t, surprises since t − j aﬀect
the prices of agents who have received information since then, but not the prices of other
agents.

                                                  13
    The bottom line, therefore, is that welfare is approximated by a weighted average of
equation (14) and the variance of (y − y N ). In the analysis below, we experiment with
various weights on these two terms. Fortunately, the results are not very sensitive to the
weights we assume. In particular, most of our analysis holds even if the weight on (14) is
zero, so that the loss function is V ar(y − y N ), the simple loss function assumed in much
work on optimal monetary policy.



5       OPTIMAL POLICY WITH DEMAND AND
        PRODUCTIVITY SHOCKS
We now turn to our central question: what is the optimal policy rule in the model? In
this section, we simplify things by eliminating the markup shock u from the model. In
this case, the model has two shocks, the productivity shock and the demand shock (i.e.,
monetary control error). The optimal policy rule turns out to be very simple. The next
section discusses the complications arising from the introduction of markup shocks.


5.1     Results

Recall that we can describe policy as a rule for the price target, Et−1 pt . In our model,

Proposition 1 With only productivity and demand shocks, the set of optimal policies is the
set of rules Et−1 pt = Kt , where Kt follows a deterministic path known at the beginning of
time.

To interpret this result, note first that one optimal policy is the one in which Kt is a constant.
In this case, policy targets a fixed price level, the purest form of “price level targeting.”
According to the Proposition, however, it is optimal also to allow the target to change over
time, as long as the changes are deterministic. The target price level could grow at a constant
rate or follow some more complicated (but predictable) path.
    Proposition 1 is proved in the Appendix. We note here that it is not surprising that any
deterministic path for the price level is as good as any other. In the model, the non-neutrality


                                               14
of monetary policy arises from surprises that it creates that are not observed immediately by
all price setters. A deterministic price path creates no surprises and thus has no real eﬀects.
    Having shown what policies are optimal, it is easy to point out some that are not optimal:

Corollary 1 Inflation targeting — a policy that sets Et−1 π t equal to a constant — is subop-
timal. So is nominal income targeting — a policy that sets Et−1 (pt + yt ) equal to a constant.

This result follows from the facts that only price-level targeting is optimal, and that infla-
tion and nominal-income targeting diﬀer from price-level targeting. It is well-known that
inflation targeting allows “base drift”: it means that the target for the price level is adjusted
one-for-one with past shocks to the price level. Thus the price target does not follow a deter-
ministic path, as required by Proposition 1. Nominal income targeting would be equivalent
to price-level targeting if there were only demand shocks. However, in the case of productiv-
ity shocks, nominal income targeting implies that the shocks have persistent eﬀects on both
the price level and output, so the expected price level is not deterministic. It is optimal for
output alone to respond to a productivity shock, as this keeps output in line with its natural
level ytN .


5.2      Discussion

These results are significant in light of the current practice of policymaking. There is a
strong trend in the world towards inflation targeting, with dozens of countries adopting
some version of this policy since the early 1990s. Many observers suggest that U.S. policy is
close to inflation targeting, although the target is not explicit. In our model, however, this
popular policy is sub-optimal. Welfare is higher if policymakers target the price level rather
than the inflation rate - that is, if they eliminate base drift in prices.
    To understand this result, it is useful to compare the dynamic eﬀects of shocks under
price-level and inflation targeting. We focus here on demand shocks; the story for pro-
ductivity shocks is similar, since demand and productivity shocks have symmetric eﬀects
on the output gap y − y N . Figure 1 shows the responses of the aggregate price level and
aggregate output to a unit demand shock under the two policies, assuming α = 0.1 and
λ = 0.25, the baseline values in Mankiw and Reis. The Figure also shows the response of the

                                               15
cross-sectional variance of prices. In the period when a shock occurs, all the eﬀects are the
same under price-level and inflation targeting, reflecting the fact that policy cannot respond
contemporaneously to shocks. After the initial period, price targeting implies that all the
eﬀects disappear completely. In contrast, the eﬀects on both output and relative prices die
out slowly under inflation targeting. This persistence in the eﬀects of shocks increases both
components of the social loss function, the variance of the output gap and the variance of
relative prices.
   To understand these results, suppose the economy starts in a steady state in which all
prices are zero, the output gap is zero, and this situation is expected to continue forever.
A demand shock occurs in period zero; it inevitably raises output at zero and it raises the
price level as well because firms who receive information in that period adjust their current
prices. But these eﬀects disappear in subsequent periods under price-level targeting. In these
periods, some prices are set by firms who have not observed the shock, and therefore are fixed
at zero. Price-level targeting means the monetary authority must induce informed firms to
set prices of zero as well, so the aggregate price level returns to zero. In this case relative-
price variability is eliminated, since informed and uninformed firms set the same prices. In
addition, to induce the informed firms to choose the same price as the uninformed, monetary
policy must produce an output gap of zero, since only a zero output gap implies a desired
relative price of zero. Thus price targeting eliminates the output eﬀects of the shock after
period zero as well as the relative-price eﬀects.
   In contrast, inflation targeting means the price level must remain at a positive level after
the shock raises it in period zero. Because the uninformed still choose prices of zero in
subsequent periods, the monetary authority must induce the informed to choose positive
prices to keep the aggregate price level positive. This creates variability across the prices of
informed and uninformed firms, and it requires a positive output gap to induce the informed
to set positive relative prices.
   Underlying these results is the fact that demand shocks aﬀect real variables in the sticky
information model by creating surprises in the price level. These surprises create both
relative price variability (see equation (14)) and output movements (note from (8) that the
output gap is zero if the price level equals the level expected in all previous periods). To


                                              16
stabilize the economy, the monetary authority needs to minimize price surprises. It does so
by reversing deviations of the price level from its expected path as quickly as possible. It
should not exacerbate uncertainty about the price level by allowing base drift.



6       OPTIMAL POLICY WITH MARKUP SHOCKS
The optimal policy is more complicated in the presence of markup shocks. In this case,
strict price level targeting is no longer optimal. Instead, policymakers must make special
accommodations for markup shocks, the nature of which depends on the serial correlation
of the shocks.
    We assume the markup shock follows an arbitrary stationary process with MA represen-
           P
tation ut = ∞j=0 ρj εt−j , where εt is a white-noise innovation. Given this notation, we have


Proposition 2 With productivity, demand, and markup shocks, the set of optimal policies
is the set of rules:

                                                    X
                                                    ∞
                                  Et−1 pt = Kt +          φj εt−j ,                        (15)
                                                    j=1


where

                                                   ρj
                                   φj ≡             (1−λ)j+1
                                                                ,
                                          α2 ω +   1−(1−λ)j+1


and Kt is again deterministic.

This Proposition is proved in the Appendix.
    To interpret Proposition 2, consider first the case of white-noise markup shocks. In this
case all the ρj ’s are zero, so all the φj ’s are zero: the optimal policy is strict price level
targeting as before. If the markup shock is serially correlated, however, then the price target
is adjusted in response to past shocks. If all the ρj ’s are positive, then an increase in the
markup raises the price target for awhile. However, as long as the markup is stationary, the
price level is also stationary: it eventually returns to the target path given by Kt .


                                              17
   Figure 2 illustrates this result for particular parameterizations of the model. The Figure
shows how the price level responds to a unit shock to the innovation ε. In this simulation,
again we set α = 0.1 and λ = 0.25. We assume the markup shocks follow an AR(1) process
with a coeﬃcient of ρ̄ so ρj = ρ̄j . We experiment with two values for ρ̄, 0.8 and 0.4. Finally,
we set the parameter ω equal to one, which means that output variance and relative-price
variance have the same weight in the social loss function.
   In Figure 2, the price level jumps up at the time of the markup shock, which is inevitable
since policy cannot respond contemporaneously. In contrast to the cases of demand and
productivity shocks, the price level remains high after the initial period; it either follows a
hump-shaped pattern (for ρ̄ = 0.8) or falls monotonically (for ρ̄ = 0.4). In either case, the
price level eventually converges back to its long-run target.
   The optimal response to markup shocks reflects a trade-oﬀ between the goals of stabilizing
relative prices and stabilizing output. As with demand and productivity shocks, relative-
price variance is minimized by a strict price level target, as this causes informed firms to set
prices at the same level as uninformed firms. Such a policy requires a large fall in output,
however: a higher markup means firms desire higher relative prices for a given output level,
so low output is needed to induce firms to choose a zero relative price. Given this trade-oﬀ,
optimal policy allows output to fall somewhat but not enough to stabilize relative prices
fully. It induces informed firms to set positive prices as long as the shock persists.
   Our model implies that the optimal response to markup shocks depends on the serial
correlation of the shocks. Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to calibrate this serial correlation.
Like other authors, we would like to interpret markup shifts as metaphors for the “supply
shocks” that influence real-world inflation, but there is no consensus about the nature of
these shocks. If we interpret the model literally, so markup shocks arise from tax changes,
it is natural to interpret these changes as highly persistent. Similarly, if markup shocks are
interpreted as changes in union aggressiveness, it is plausible to assume persistence in union
attitudes. However, some kinds of real-world supply shocks may have more transitory eﬀects
on desired prices. We need a better understanding of supply shocks to make progress on
designing optimal policies.
   Our model suggests that policymakers should treat price-level movements in a special


                                              18
way if they arise from certain kinds of supply shocks. In this respect, the model’s prescrip-
tions match policymaking in many countries. It is common for inflation targeters to allow
deviations from their normal targets when supply shocks occur. Sometimes, this is accom-
plished by explicit “caveats” to policy, as in New Zealand. More often, policymakers allow
temporary deviations from the target by focusing on an “underlying” or “core” measure of
inflation that strips out the eﬀects of supply shocks. Our analysis suggests that policymakers
are on the right track in making exceptions to their policies for supply shocks — although
the basic policy target should be the price level, not inflation as in current practice.



7        A SIMPLE DESCRIPTION OF OPTIMAL
         POLICY
So far, we have described optimal policy as a function of the exogenous driving variables.
There is, however, a simpler description of optimal policy in terms of the endogenous vari-
ables:

Proposition 3        For an economy that experiences shocks to demand, productivity, and
markups, optimal monetary policy can be described as:

                                                     1
                                  Et−1 pt = Kt −       Et−1 (yt − ytN ).                              (16)
                                                    αω




That is, monetary policy commits to a deterministic path for the price level, represented here
by Kt , and allows the expected price level to deviate from the target path only if output is
expected to deviate from its natural rate.4

    4
    Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999, p. 1704) derive an equation for optimal policy that closely resembles
this proposition in an analysis based on the Calvo model of price adjustment. This similarity of optimal
policies under Calvo and Mankiw-Reis price setting is not robust, however. The result of Clarida, Gali
and Gertler is based on the assumption that the monetary authority can set the money supply based on
contemporaneous information. Yet if policymakers can aﬀect the economy only with a lag (that is, if there
are control errors), as we have assumed, then optimal monetary policy in the Calvo model can no longer be
described by such a simple rule. In the next section, we explore more fully the similarities and diﬀerences
between the two models.

                                                    19
    This proposition encompasses our previous results. In the case of shocks to demand or
productivity, discussed in Section 4, optimal policy has the property that Et−1 (yt − ytN ) = 0.
Thus, Proposition 3 includes Proposition 1 as a special case. In the case of shocks to the
markup, the expected price level varies as a complicated function of the shocks, as shown in
Proposition 2, but it does so in a way that precisely parallels the expected output gap. This
can be seen in Figure 2, where the paths of output and the price level after period zero are
reflections of each other.
    One remarkable fact about Proposition 3 is that it closely resembles the monetary policy
rule proposed by Hall (1984), who dubbed it an “elastic price standard.” Hall does not
present a formal model to back up his proposal, but his informal and intuitive arguments
are consistent with the model we have explored here. One diﬀerence is that Hall advocates
a constant target (Kt ), whereas in our model a rising target for the price level would serve
equally well. In either case, the expected output gap determines how much the central bank
can allow the price level to deviate from its target.



8     COMPARISON TO THE NEW KEYNESIAN PHILLIPS
      CURVE
We have argued that the sticky-information Phillips curve of Mankiw and Reis is a better
tool for monetary-policy analysis than the popular new Keynesian Phillips curve, because
it has more realistic implications about the interactions of output and inflation. But does
the choice of a Phillips curve make a diﬀerence for our results about optimal policy? To
address this issue, we now reconsider our policy problem using the new Keynesian Phillips
curve - the relation derived from Calvo’s (1983) model of staggered price adjustment with
full information. As is well known, this Phillips curve (with no discounting) is


                             π t = Et π t+1 + κ(yt − ytN ) + u0t ,   κ > 0,                (17)


where u0t is proportional to the markup shock ut . As discussed by Mankiw and Reis (2002),
a critical diﬀerence between this equation and the Phillips curve arising from the sticky-


                                                   20
information model is the timing of expectations. Rather than past expectations of current
inflation, it is the current expectation of next period’s inflation that enters the new Key-
nesian specification. This feature of the model is mainly responsible for its counterfactual
predictions.


8.1    Implications for the Welfare Function

Note first that the choice of a Phillips curve aﬀects the determinants of aggregate welfare. As
shown in Section 3, the canonical model of monopolistic competition yields an approximate
loss function with two terms, the variance of the output gap and the variance of relative
prices. This result is robust, but the determinants of the variance of relative prices depends
on the specification of price adjustment. In the Mankiw-Reis model, the variance of relative
prices depends on the variance of unexpected changes in the price level (see equation (14)).
In the Calvo model, it is determined by current and lagged values of inflation squared. Thus
the two models produce loss functions that have one term in common, the variance of the
output gap, and one term that diﬀers across models. Thus one would expect the models
to deliver diﬀerent results about optimal policies. However, the main diﬀerences discussed
below do not depend on the diﬀerence in loss functions. The diﬀerences in results arise even
when the weight on the variance of relative prices in the loss function is zero, so that the
loss function is simply the variance of the output gap in both models.


8.2    Implications for Base Drift

We now consider optimal policy in a model that is identical to ours except that the Calvo
sticky-price assumption replaces the Mankiw-Reis sticky-information assumption, so that
the Phillips curve becomes equation (17) above. The following result shows a key diﬀerence
between the normative implications of the two models:

Proposition 4 With Calvo price adjustment, the optimal policy rule when there are demand
or productivity shocks is: Et−1 π t = δπt−1 , where 0 < δ < 1 .

That is, the Calvo model supports flexible inflation targeting rather than price level targeting.


                                               21
Put diﬀerently, allowing base drift in the price level in response to demand and productivity
shocks is optimal with Calvo price setting, while it is not with Mankiw-Reis price setting.
The proof of the proposition is in the Appendix.
   Proposition 4 implies not only a unit root in the price level but also persistence in
inflation. In particular, the inflation rate is AR(1) with parameter δ. We believe that the
following intuition explains the optimality of inflation persistence in the Calvo model: When
the economy experiences a positive demand shock, output and the price level both rise.
If the monetary authority responds to this shock by committing to higher inflation in the
future, then price setters will respond to the shock by raising their prices more aggressively.
This more aggressive price response implies a smaller initial output response, keeping the
economy closer to its natural rate. In the long run, however, the only eﬀect of inflation is
relative price variability, so optimal policy always returns to zero inflation.
   As in our main model, the nature of optimal policy is more complicated when there are
persistent markup shocks. Just as in our model, optimal policy involves a gradual adjustment
of the price level in response to a shock. Yet now the price level is non-stationary: it remains
forever higher after a shock that raises prices.
   The result that inflation rather than price-level targeting is optimal under Calvo pricing
may appear surprising in light of the previous literature. A number of authors study models
that include the Calvo Phillips curve and conclude that a price level target is optimal. The
discrepancy between our results and previous ones are explained by diﬀerences in the policy
problem being solved. There are two main diﬀerences.
   First, some previous authors, such as King and Wolman (1999), study models in which
it is feasible to stabilize the price level perfectly. That is, there is a perfect relation between
a policy instrument and the current price level; there is no such thing as a demand shock
that policy cannot oﬀset contemporaneously, as with our assumption of monetary control
errors. In the King-Wolman model, the policy of keeping the price level absolutely constant
is optimal given the types of shocks they assume. A perfectly constant price level can be
interpreted as implementing either a constant price-level target or a zero inflation target.
That is, there is no meaningful distinction between price and inflation targeting if there are



                                                22
no shocks that raise the possibility of base drift.5
        Vestin (1999) compares price and inflation targeting in versions of the Calvo model in
which these policies are diﬀerent, and concludes that price targeting is optimal. The problem
he solves, however, is that of the optimal policy rule under “discretion.” That is, he asks
whether it is optimal to appoint a policymaker whose objective function is the variance
of prices or the variance of inflation, given that the policymaker cannot precommit to his
preferred policy because it is not dynamically consistent. In contrast, we study optimal
policy under commitment: we assume that policymakers can implement any rule they want
and ask which rule maximizes social welfare.6


8.3        Implications for Trend Inflation

A final diﬀerence between our results and those for the Calvo model concern the welfare
consequences of trend inflation. As shown above, trend inflation is neutral in our model,
and so optimal policy can take the form of an increasing price level target rather than a
constant target. In contrast, the optimal inflation target in the Calvo version of the model
must be zero. That is, moving from Calvo to Mankiw-Reis price setting means introducing
the possibility of trend inflation as well as eliminating base drift in the price level. Here, the
diﬀerence in loss functions in the two models is crucial. In the Calvo model, welfare depends
on the variance of inflation around zero rather than around some mean level, so that zero
inflation is optimal. This reflects the fact that even steady inflation causes ineﬃcient relative-
price variability under Calvo’s assumption of sticky prices.



9         CONCLUSION
According to the model developed here, optimal monetary policy can be described as flexible
targeting of the price level. The central bank should announce a target path of the price

    5
     By contrast, Goodfriend and King (1997) briefly consider the issue of imperfect control in a model with
staggered price setting. Their analysis confirms our conclusion that base drift in the price level is optimal
in this type of model.
   6
     Like Vestin, Svensson’s (1999) well-known paper on inflation versus price level targeting emphasizes the
case of discretion rather than commitment, but with a diﬀerent specification for the Phillips curve.


                                                     23
level and then commit itself to returning to this path in response to shocks. In response to
shocks to demand or productivity, it should return the price level as quickly as possible to
its target. In response to shocks to markups, which here reflect a type of supply shock, the
central bank should return the price level to its target more gradually over time. Described
diﬀerently, optimal policy allows the price level to deviate from its target only if output is
expected to deviate from its natural rate.
   The optimality of targeting the price level rather than the inflation rate is a common
theme in the recent literature on monetary policy. For example, Hall (1984) and Hall and
Mankiw (1994) argue that a price level target would aid personal financial planning by
making the cost of living far in the future more predictable. Svensson (1999) and Vestin
(1999) argue for price level targeting on the grounds that it would help solve some of the time-
inconsistency problems associated with discretionary monetary policy. Cover and Pecorino
(2001) claim that a price target is stabilizing because any inflationary shock automatically
causes a decrease in expected inflation and thus an increase in the real interest rate. The
analysis in this paper is very diﬀerent. Our households have no money illusion in financial
planning, our monetary policymaker can commit to a policy rule, and we omit the eﬀect
of expected inflation on aggregate demand. Nonetheless, the bottom line for policy is the
same: central banks should target the price level, not the inflation rate.
   These results leave open an intriguing question: Why have central banks adopted inflation
targeting if price level targeting has all these desirable properties? One possible answer is
that central bankers know something about the world that is missing in these theories of
optimal policy. But another possibility is that central bankers have been misled by assuming,
incorrectly, that some features of the recent monetary regime are structural, while in fact
these features would change if policy did.
   Price dynamics are the natural place to look for such a mistaken assumption. The recent
data are well described by a backward-looking Phillips curve. If this equation for price
dynamics were invariant to policy, then inflation targeting would be optimal, and price level
targeting would be unattractive. (Ball, 1999). But a radical change in the monetary policy
rule, such as a target for the price level, would most likely alter the reduced-form equation for
the Phillips curve. Whether the particular behavioral model we have examined in this paper


                                               24
correctly captures the shift that would occur is open to debate. But the results presented
here suggest the issue is well worth pursuing, for the implications for monetary policy could
not be more profound.




                                             25
   Appendix
   In this appendix, we derive the many results alluded to in the main text.

   The model

   Our notation and approach builds on Woodford (2002). Each agent’s problem is to
maximize the expected value of the sum of discounted utility:
                                                 Ã                                 !
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X
                                              E0 (1 − β)                  β t Ut                       (A1)
                                                                    t=0


where the utility function Ut is defined in (1) and β is the discount factor. (Later we will
focus on the case when β goes to 1). This must be subject to the budget constraint:
           Z       1
                       Citj Pjt dj + Mit + Et [Qt+1 Vit+1 ] = (1 − τ t )Pit Yit + Tt + Mit−1 + Vit .
               0


Agents spend their wealth purchasing the diﬀerent varieties Cij for consumption, and ac-
quiring money balances Mt . They receive income from selling their product of specialization
Yi for the price Pi , paying a share τ of sales revenue to the government. Tax revenues are
instantly returned to consumers by lump-sum transfers T, which also include monetary in-
jections into the economy. Mt−1 units of money are brought forward from the last period.
The assumption of complete financial markets means agents can insure themselves against
idiosyncratic uncertainty. We let Vt stand for the total nominal value of the portfolio of
financial assets brought into period t. In order to acquire a bond portfolio at t which re-
turns Vt+1 in the next period, the agent must expend an amount given by the conditional
expectation Et [Qt+1 Vit+1 ], where Qt+1 is the stochastic discount factor between t and t + 1.
   The agent faces two further constraints: the production function in (3); and a cash in
advance constraint: Pt Cit ≤ Mit .
   Optimization with respect to Cij leads to the demand function in (4), where the aggregate
price index is defined as:

                                                     ·Z    1               ¸ 1−γ
                                                                              1


                                              Pt =             Pit1−γ di           .                   (A2)
                                                       0


                                                               26
   Since agents are all ex ante identical and there are complete financial markets, they will
all have the same ex post wealth. Thus, they will make the same consumption decisions and
the common level of consumption is denoted by Ct . An Euler equation links the stochastic
discount factor to consumption. We assume that Et (Qt+1 ) is always strictly smaller than
one, which can be ensured by for example having a suﬃciently high deterministic growth in
output. This ensures that money has a lower return than a riskless bond, which in turn leads
to the cash in advance constraint holding as an equality as another optimality condition.
   Finally, agents decide what price they desire to charge Pit∗ given the demand function in
(4). The first-order condition is:

                                    Pit∗          γ         Ctσ Lψit
                                         =                           .                    (A3)
                                    Pt     (γ − 1)(1 − τ t ) At

The first fraction on the right hand side is the markup, given by the standard monopoly
markup γ/(γ − 1) divided by the tax wedge (1 − τ ). The second fraction is the real marginal
cost of production, given by the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
labor (the shadow cost of labor supply) C σ Lψi , divided by the marginal product of labor A.
   Having established all the optimality conditions, we determine the equilibrium by impos-
ing the market clearing conditions: C = Y , Ci = Yi . Substituting out for Lit in (A3) using
the production function (3), and then using the demand function (4) to substitute out for
Yi , we obtain (after taking logs):

                                   (1 + ψ) log(At ) log(1 − τ t ) log(γ/(1 − γ))
               p∗it = pt + αyt −                   −             +                        (A4)
                                       1 + γψ         1 + γψ          1 + γψ

where α = (ψ + σ)/(1 + γψ).
   The natural level of output is defined in the text by the conditions: (i) pi = p∗i for all i
(prices are flexible) and (ii) τ = τ̄ (no markup shocks). Since the right hand side of (A4) is
the same for all i, pi = p. These conditions and (A4) lead to the natural level of output in
(6). Using this result to substitute A out from (A4) gives equation (5).
   We work with a linearized version of the price index in (A2). A first-order Taylor ap-
proximation around the point where all products’ prices are the same, gives the approximate



                                                   27
                                                          R1
price index, as the simple arithmetic average: pt =        0
                                                               pit di. Given the arrival rate of λ of
new information for each firm, there is a share λ(1 − λ)k of firms that last adjusted their
price plan k periods ago. The price index therefore becomes:

                                           ∞
                                           X
                                    pt = λ   (1 − λ)k Et−k (p∗it )
                                           k=0


Using the expression for p∗it in (5), leads to equation (8) in the text.
   Equation (8) can be re-written as:

                                           ∞
                                           X                  £                      ¤
     pt = λ(pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut ) + λ     (1 − λ)j+1 Et−1−j pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut .         (A5)
                                           j=0


Subtracting the analogue of equation (8) for pt−1 from this expression above, we obtain an
expression for the inflation rate:

                                             ∞
                                             X                £                           ¤
   π t = λ(pt + α(yt −    ytN )   + ut ) + λ   (1 − λ)j Et−1−j ∆pt + α(∆yt − ∆ytN ) + ∆ut
                                            j=0
                 ∞
                 X                £                      ¤
               2
            −λ     (1 − λ)j Et−1−j pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut .
                 j=0


Now, equation (A5) can be rearranged to show that:

             λ2                           X      ∞
                                                             £                       ¤
      λpt −     (α(yt − ytN ) + ut ) = λ2     (1 − λ)j Et−1−j pt + α(yt − ytN ) + ut
            1−λ                           j=0


Using this to replace for the last term in the previous expression, and rearranging gives the
Phillips curve in equation (9).
   Since from optimality the cash in advance constraint holds as an equality, taking logs
and using the market clearing condition to replace c by y, we obtain equation (10).
   Replacing for y in the equation for the price level (8) using the demand side equation




                                                     28
(10), we obtain an equation for the price level:


             (1 − λ(1 − α)) pt = αλ(2 − λ)m̂t + λ(αet − αytN + ut )
                                           £                                    ¤
                                 +λ(1 − λ) (1 − α)Et−1 pt + Et−1 ut − αEt−1 ytN
                                    X∞
                                                    £                              ¤
                                 +λ    (1 − λ)j Et−j (1 − α)pt + α(m̂t − ytN ) + ut .
                                      j=2


Taking expectations of this expression at time t − 1 gives:


    (1 − λ(2 − λ)(1 − α)) Et−1 pt = αλ(2 − λ)m̂t + λ(2 − λ)(Et−1 ut − αEt−1 ytN )
                                       X∞
                                                       £                              ¤
                                    +λ    (1 − λ)j Et−j (1 − α)pt + α(m̂t − ytN ) + ut .
                                            j=2


The policymaker controls the first term in the right hand side, and observes all the other
terms in the right hand side. Therefore, it can set Et−1 pt at whatever level it desires.
Conversely, for any given value of Et−1 pt , the equation above determines the corresponding
m̂t .

        The welfare approximation

        We approximate the utility function around the equilibrium point when there are no
real disturbances, so we set all shocks at their means. As Woodford (2002) emphasizes, it
is important for the accuracy of the approximation that this equilibrium is close to being
                                               γ
eﬃcient. One assumption that ensures it is E( γ−1 (1 − τ )) = 1, so the expected markup is 1.
The point of linearization is then:

                                                 (1 + ψ)āt
                                         ȳt =              ,
                                                   ψ+σ

where āl = log(Āt ).
        We approximate:
                                                  Z       1
                                    e(1−σ)yt                  e(1+ψ)(yit −at )
                               Ut =          −                                 di,
                                     1−σ              0          1+ψ



                                                  29
where the production function was used to replace for Lit and market clearing to replace
consumption by output. A second order Taylor approximation gives:
                       µ            ¶                   Z 1µ                                ¶
            (1−σ)ȳt          1−σ 2    (1+ψ)(ȳt −āt )            1+ψ 2
    Ul ≈ e              ŷt +    ŷ − e                     ŷit +    ŷit − (1 + ψ)ŷit ât di + t.i.p,
                               2 t                       0          2



where ŷt = yt − ȳt , ât = at − āt , ŷit = yit − ȳt and additive terms that are independent of
                                                                                     R
policy are collected in t.i.p. Defining the cross-sectional mean as Ei (ŷit ) = ŷit di and the
cross-sectional variance as V ari (ŷit ) = Ei (ŷit2 ) − Ei (ŷit )2 , we can re-write this expression as:
            µ            ¶                    µ                                                                     ¶
 (1−σ)ȳt          1−σ 2     (1+ψ)(ȳt −āt )               1+ψ ¡                           2
                                                                                              ¢
e            ŷt +    ŷ − e                   Ei (ŷit ) +       V ari (ŷit ) + Ei (ŷit ) − (1 + ψ)ât Ei (ŷit ) + t.i.p.
                    2 t                                      2



A second order approximation of the CES aggregator in equation (2), around ȳt yields:

                                                               1 − γ −1
                                          ŷt ≈ Ei (ŷit ) −            V ari (ŷit ).
                                                                  2

Using this expression to substitute for Ei (ŷit ) in the previous expression, and dropping third
or higher stochastic order terms, we obtain:
                   µ               ¶                   µ                                                     ¶
        (1−σ)ȳt             1−σ 2    (1+ψ)(ȳt −āt )        1 + ψ 2 γ −1 + ψ
Ut ≈ e                 ŷt +    ŷ − e                  ŷt +      ŷt +       V ari (ŷit ) − (1 + ψ)ât ŷt + t.i.p.
                              2 t                               2         2



Now, realize that from the definition of ȳt : (1 − σ) ȳt = (1 + ψ) (ȳt − āt ). Combining the two
terms in brackets we obtain:
                                              µ                                                ¶
                            (1−σ)ȳt σ   +ψ      2     (1 + ψ)           γ −1 + ψ
                Ut ≈ −e                        ŷt − 2         ât ŷt +          V ari (ŷit ) + t.i.p.
                                         2              σ+ψ               σ+ψ

Next, recall the definition of the natural rate in (6) to replace for the second term inside
                                  ¡ ¢2
the brackets, and add a term in ŷtN to the expression which is valid since this is a t.i.p.




                                                               30
Dropping the proportionality factor, which is beyond the control of the policymaker, gives:

                                                 γ −1 + ψ
                      −Ut ≈ (ŷt −   ŷtN )2   +          V ari (ŷit − ŷt ) + t.i.p.
                                                  σ+ψ

We include ŷt inside the cross-sectional variance since this term does not vary with i. Next,
note that we can drop all the hats from the output variables as they all share the same point
of approximation ȳt . Finally, note that given our assumption that the expected markup is
one, to a first-order approximation E(yt ) ≈ E(ytN ), so we can re-write the expression as:

                                                           γ −1 + ψ
               −U l ≈ (yt − ytN − E(yt − ytN ))2 +                  V ari (yit − yt ) + t.i.p.
                                                            σ+ψ

Using this expression, we can take the unconditional expectation of (A1) to obtain equation
(12) in the text. If the discount factor β approaches one, the expectation of the sum of
discounted utility over time equals this expression.

   Proof of the lemma

   We start the proof by introducing some useful notation. We use Λk to denote the fraction
of price setters that has updated their information by k periods after an event:

                                                    k
                                                    X
                                        Λk = λ        (1 − λ)j .                                  (A6)
                                                     j=0


We denote the deviation of the price level from its expected value j periods ago by: ptpj =
pt − Et−j (pt ). Finally, we will denote the deviation of the optimal price set by group j of
price-setters relative to the overall price index in the economy by: p∗tpj = Et−j (p∗t ) − pt .
   We now prove the main lemma through a sequence of other lemmas.

   Lemma A.1:

                                                  ptpi − ptpi−1
                                     p∗tpi−1 =                  + p∗tpi
                                                       Λi−1




                                                      31
   Proof. From the definition of ptpi :


                               ptpi = pt − Et−i (pt )

                                     = ptpi−1 + Et−i+1 (pt ) − Et−i (pt ).                           (A7)


From the supply equation in (8) and using the law of iterated expectations:

                                                                ∞
                                                                X
                                         i−1
                        Et−i (pt ) = Λ         Et−i (p∗t )   +λ   (1 − λ)j Et−j (p∗t ) .             (A8)
                                                                 j=i


Using this and its equivalent for i-1, we obtain:


                      Et−i (pt ) − Et−i+1 (pt ) = Λi−1 (Et−i (p∗t ) − Et−i+1 (p∗t ))

                                                     = Λi−1 (p∗tpi − p∗tpi−1 ).


Replacing this result in (A8) gives the desired result.

   Lemma A.2:

               XT µ           ¶                                                   X∞
                      1     1   2    p2tpT +1     ∗                 T +1 ∗2
V ari (pit ) =        i−1
                          − i ptpi +      T
                                              + 2ptpT +1 ptpT +1 + Λ ptpT +1 + λ       (1 − λ)j p∗2
                                                                                                 tpj ,
               i=1
                    Λ      Λ           Λ                                         j=T +2
for all T ≥ 1.


   Proof. From the definition of the cross-sectional variance:

                                         T +1
                                         X                     ∞
                                                               X
                                                     j ∗2
                        V ari (pit ) = λ      (1 − λ) ptpj + λ   (1 − λ)j p∗2
                                                                           tpj ,
                                          j=0                          j=T +2


so all we have to show is that:

     XT µ             ¶                                                       T +1
                                                                              X
            1     1      2     p2tpT +1     ∗                 T +1 ∗2
            i−1
                −   i
                        ptpi +      T
                                        + 2p      p
                                            tpT +1 tpT +1 + Λ     ptpT +1 = λ      (1 − λ)j p∗2
                                                                                             tpj .   (A9)
     i=1
          Λ       Λ              Λ                                            j=0


We prove that this is true for any T≥1 by induction.




                                                         32
   For T=1, note that the right hand side of (A9) equals:


                            λp∗2              ∗2            2 ∗2
                              tp0 + λ(1 − λ)ptp1 + λ(1 − λ) ptp2
                              ³p           ´2
                                 tp1
                          = λ        + ptp1 + λ(1 − λ)p∗2
                                        ∗                             2 ∗2
                                                        tp1 + λ(1 − λ) ptp2
                                Λ0

where the second line comes from using Lemma A.1 to replace for p∗tp0 . Calculating the square, and
collecting terms this equals:

                                  p2tp1
                                        + 2p∗tp1 ptp1 + Λ1 p∗2            2 ∗2
                                                            tp1 + λ(1 − λ) ptp2
                                  Λ0

Next, use Lemma A.1 again to now replace for p∗tp1 , which leads to, after taking squares and
cancelling some terms:

                              µ             ¶
                    p2tp1       ptp2 − ptp1          (ptp2 − ptp1 )2
                          + 2                 ptp1 +                 + 2p∗tp2 ptp2 + Λ2 p∗2
                                                                                         tp2
                    Λ0              Λ1                     Λ1

Combining the second and third term gives:

                              µ             ¶
                                  1    1                  p2tp2
                                   0
                                     − 1        p2tp1 +         + 2p∗tp2 ptp2 + Λ2 p∗2
                                                                                    tp2
                                  Λ   Λ                   Λ1

which shows (A9) holds when T=1.
   Continuing the proof by induction, we now show that if (A9) holds for T-1, then it will also
hold for T. From the definition of the cross-sectional variance and since (A9) holds for T-1, we
know that:

               XT                 T −1 µ
                                  X                 ¶
                          j ∗2             1    1      2      p2tpT
             λ     (1 − λ) ptpj =         i−1
                                              −   i
                                                      ptpi +   T −1
                                                                    + 2p∗tpT ptpT + ΛT p∗2
                                                                                        tpT ,
               j=0                i=1
                                         Λ      Λ            Λ

which implies that:

XT µ            ¶                                                        X∞
       1     1     2     p2tpT +1     ∗                 T +1 ∗2
       i−1
           −  i
                  ptpi +      T
                                  + 2p      p
                                      tpT +1 tpT +1 + Λ     ptpT +1 + λ       (1 − λ)j p∗2
                                                                                        tpj − V ari (pit ) =
i=1
     Λ       Λ             Λ                                            j=T +2




                                                          33
                              p2tpT +1 − p2tpT
    −λ(1 − λ)T +1 p∗2
                   tpT +1 +                    + 2p∗tpT +1 ptpT +1 − 2p∗tpT ptpT + ΛT +1 p∗2        T ∗2
                                                                                          tpT +1 − Λ ptpT .
                                     ΛT
                                                                                                       (A.10)

Now, from lemma A.1:

                           p2tpT +1 − p2tpT   ¡ ∗      ∗
                                                              ¢
                                            =  ptpT − ptpT +1   (ptpT +1 + ptpT ) ,
                                  ΛT

so the right hand side of (A.10) becomes:

                       ¡ ∗            ¢
−λ(1 − λ)T +1 p∗2               ∗                            ∗                  ∗
               tpT +1 + ptpT − ptpT +1 (ptpT +1 + ptpT ) + 2ptpT +1 ptpT +1 − 2ptpT ptpT + Λ
                                                                                            T +1 ∗2
                                                                                                ptpT +1 − ΛT p∗2
                                                                                                              tpT .




Cancelling terms and rearranging, this equals:


                         (ptpT +1 − ptpT )(p∗tpT + p∗tpT +1 ) − ΛT (p∗2     ∗2
                                                                     tpT − ptpT +1 ).



But using Lemma A.1 for i=T+1, this equals zero. Looking back at (A.10), this shows that (A9)
holds for T, which completes the proof by induction, and also the proof of the lemma.

   Lemma A.3:

                                                 X∞ µ          ¶
                                                        1    1
                                  V ari (pit ) =       i−1
                                                           − i p2tpi
                                                 i=1
                                                      Λ     Λ

   Proof. Since lemma A.2 holds for all T, we can take limits as T→ ∞, to obtain:

                               X∞ µ          ¶
                                      1    1       p2tp∞
                V ari (pit ) =       i−1
                                         − i ptpi + ∞ + 2p∗tp∞ptp∞ + Λ∞ p∗2
                                               2
                                                                         tp∞ .
                               i=1
                                    Λ     Λ        Λ

                             P∞
Next, realize that Λ∞ = λ       j=0 (1   − λ)i = 1. Also, from (A8) at i= ∞, Et−∞ (pt ) = Et−∞(p∗t ),
so it follows that p∗tp∞ = −ptp∞ . Using these results in the expression above, proves the lemma.

   Finally, starting from lemma A.3 and using the definition of ptpi and the fact that from
the properties of geometric series Λi = 1 − (1 − λ)i+1 proves the main lemma.

   Time 0 impact of shocks

                                                     34
   Since policy is pre-determined at the time of a shock, its contemporaneous impact is
the same regardless of policy. This is determined by the system of two equations in the
deviations of p and y from their pre-shock levels (denoted by a ~over the variable):

                                        ¡                           ¢
                                 p̃t = λ p̃t + α(ỹt − ỹtN ) + ũt

                            p̃t + ỹt = ẽt .


Solving this gives the time 0 impact of a unit shock to demand or to the (negative of the)
natural rate: p̃t = αλ/(1 − λ(1 − α)) and ỹt − ỹtN = (1 − λ)/(1 − λ(1 − α)), and the impact
of a unit shock to markups: p̃t = −ỹt = λ/(1 − λ(1 − α)).

   Proof of Proposition 1

   Under the proposed policy, since Kt is deterministic, Et−j pt = Kt for all j ≥ 1. Taking
expectations at t − 1 of the equation for the price level (8) we obtain:

                                                ∞
                                                X              ¡         ¢
                       0 = Et−1 (yt − ytN ) +     (1 − λ)j Et−j yt − ytN
                                                j=1


This diﬀerence equation has the solution Et−1 (yt − ytN ) = 0, so any shocks at t − 1 or before
have no eﬀect on the first term in the welfare function. Policy is therefore minimizing the
variance of (yt − ytN ), which varies only with shocks at time t, which policy can do nothing
about.
   From lemma 1 and given the proposed policy:


                                                ∞
                                                X
                        V ari (pit − pt ) =           η j (pt − Kt )2
                                                j=1
                                                                    Ã∞             !
                                                                2
                                                                     X
                                         = (pt − Et−1 pt )                    ηj       .
                                                                        j=1


It then follows that the cross-sectional dispersion of prices is minimized, since unanticipated
changes in the price level occur only with respect to innovations at time t, and policy, which
is set at t − 1, can do nothing about these. Thus with respect to the second term in the

                                                 35
welfare function, policy is also reaching the optimum. Thus, Kt minimizes the full welfare
function and so it is the optimal policy.

   Proof of Propositions 2 and 3

   The proof of propositions 2 and 3 with respect to demand and natural rate shocks follows
immediately from proposition 1. With markup shocks, we represent policy in reaction to
                                                                               P
a shock as the set of coeﬃcients φj in the general representation: Et−1 (pt ) = ∞j=1 φj εt−j .
                                                       P∞
Similarly, we represent output by the set of ϕj in yt = j=1 ϕj εt−j . From the supply curve
in (8), then:

                       ∞
                       X                  ∞
                                          X       ¡                             ¢
                              φj εt−j =         Λj φj εt−j + αϕj εt−j + ρj εt−j
                        j=1               j=1


Since this expression must hold for all possible realizations of εt−j , it then follows that:
                                                 µ                 ¶
                                            1        1 − Λj
                                       ϕj =                 φj − ρj .                        (A11)
                                            α          Λj

                               Pi−1
Noting that pt −Et−i (pt ) =     j=0   φj εt−j and using lemma A.3, we can then write the objective
function as:
                          "∞                ∞ µ           ¶X      #
                           X               X      1     1
                                                           i−1
                                   ϕ2j + ω        i−1
                                                      − i      φ2j σ 2 ,                     (A12)
                               j=1         i=1
                                                Λ      Λ j=0


where σ 2 is the variance of εt . Minimizing (A12) subject to (A11), gives the optimal policy

                                                           1
                                       φj =                 (1−λ)j+1
                                                                        ρj .
                                                α2 ω   +   1−(1−λ)j+1

                                 P∞
(A key step is to realize that     i=j+1   (1/Λi−1 − 1/Λi ) = 1/Λj − 1.) This proves proposition 2.
As for proposition 3, we can use the solution above to solve for the output coeﬃcients using
(A11). We find that the relation between output and the price level coeﬃcients is given by
ϕj = −αωφj , which proves proposition 3 when there are markup shocks.

   Proof of Proposition 4

                                                       36
   Here we solve for the optimal policy with Calvo pricing, when there are only demand
shocks. The problem with natural rate shocks is precisely the same, so we set the ytN to zero
for the proof. The problem facing the policymaker is to minimize:
                                      (                                                 )
                                                             ∞
                                                             X           £          ¤
                                                                       t
                                 E        (1 − β)                  β yt2 + ωπ t   2
                                                                                            ,
                                                             t=0


where for now we allow for discounting (β ≤ 1), but will then take the limit as β approaches
1. The minimization is subject to the constraints given by the quantity theory (10) and the
Phillips Curve:


                                 π t = βEt π t+1 + κ(yt − ytN ) + ut                                           (A.13)


which corresponds to equation (17). As in our analysis with the sticky information Phillips
curve, we can see policy as perfectly choosing Et−1 pt , or equivalently Et−1 π t , by using the
quantity theory equation.
   Following the approach in Aoki (2002), we can find the optimal policy under commitment
by minimizing the Lagrangian function:
                      (                                                                                )
                                ∞
                                X             £                                                    ¤
                                          t
                  E   (1 − β)         β           (yt2   +   ωπ 2t )   + 2ψ t (π t − βπ t+1 − κyt )        ,
                                t=0


where the ψ t are Lagrange multipliers. The necessary conditions describing the optimum
(taking into account that π t is set conditional on t − 1 information) are:


                                                     yt = κψ t

                                      ωπ tpt−1 = ψ t−1 − ψ tpt−1 ,


for all t ≥ 0, with the initial condition ψ −1 = 0, and introducing the notation: π tpt−1 =
Et−1 π t . Combining the two first-order conditions we obtain:


                                              κωπ t+1pt = yt − yt+1pt .                                        (A.14)



                                                                   37
This gives us an expression for expected inflation, which we can use in the Phillips curve in
(A.13) to get:


                               κωπ t = β(yt − yt+1pt ) + κ2 ωyt .


Taking expectations of this at t − 1, using (A.14) lagged one period, and rearranging yields:


                         βyt+1pt−1 − (1 + β + κ2 ω)ytpt−1 + yt−1 = 0.


This stochastic diﬀerence equation can be shown to have one root:
                                               q
                             1+β+κ ω−  2
                                                   (1 + β + κ2 ω)2 − 4β
                        δ=                                                ,
                                                   2β

which is positive and smaller than one, and another root given by 1/δβ which is larger than
one. An explosive representation for output cannot be optimal, since then the variance of
output would be infinity. Thus we can exclude the root which is larger than one. The
solution to the diﬀerence equation then is:


                                     yt+jpt−1 = δ j+1 yt−1 ,                          (A.15)


for any j ≥ 0.
   Combining this result with (A.14) gives the equation:


                                    κωπ t+1pt = (1 − δ)yt .                           (A.16)


We can use this in the Phillips curve (A.13) to obtain:

                                           β(1 − δ) + κ2 ω
                                  πt =                     yt .                       (A.17)
                                                κω




                                                38
   Using the quantity theory equation (10) we can derive:


                                yt − ytpt−1 = et − π t + πtpt−1 .


Combining the results in (A.15) and (A.16) with this last expression gives:

                                                        1−δ
                              yt − δyt−1 = et − π t +       yt−1 .
                                                         κω

Finally, we can replace for all the terms in output using (A.17) and rearrange to get the final
solution:

                                               β(1 − δ) + κ2 ω
                            πt = δπ t−1 +                        et .
                                            β(1 − δ) + κω(1 + κ)

Taking expectations of this expression conditional on t − 1 information and taking the limit
as β approaches 1, proves Proposition 4.




                                                39
References
 [1] Akerlof, George (2002) “Behavioral Macroeconomics and Macroeconomic Behavior,”
    American Economic Review, vol. 92 (3), pp. 411-433.

 [2] Alogoskoufis, George and Ron Smith (1991) “The Phillips Curve, the Persistence of
    Inflation and the Lucas Critique: Evidence from Exchange Rate Regimes,” American
    Economic Review, vol. 81 (5), pp. 1254-1275.

 [3] Aoki, Kosuke (2002) “Optimal Commitment Policy Under Noisy Information,” CEPR
    Discussion Paper No. 3370.

 [4] Ball, Laurence (1994) “Credible Disinflation with Staggered Price Setting,” American
    Economic Review, vol. 84, pp. 282-289.

 [5] Ball, Laurence (1999) “Eﬃcient Rules for Monetary Policy,” International Finance, vol.
    2 (1) , pp. 63-83.

 [6] Ball, Laurence (2000) “Near Rationality and Inflation in Two Monetary Regimes,”
    NBER Working Paper No. 7988.

 [7] Ball, Laurence and N. Gregory Mankiw (1995) “Relative-Price Changes as Aggregate
    Supply Shocks,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (1), pp. 161-193.

 [8] Barsky, Robert (1987) “The Fisher hypothesis and the forecastability and persistence
    of inflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 19, pp. 3-24.

 [9] Calvo, Guillermo A. (1983) “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12, pp. 383-398.

[10] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999) “The Science of Monetary Policy:
    A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37, pp. 1661-1707.

[11] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (2002) “A Simple Framework for Inter-
    national Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 49 (5), pp.
    879-904.

                                             40
[12] Cover, James P. and Paul Pecorino (2001) “Price and Output Stability Under Price
    Level Targeting,” University of Alabama working paper WP01-05-01.

[13] Cover, Thomas M., and Joy A. Thomas (1991) Elements of Information Theory, New
    York: John Wiley and Sons.

[14] Fischer, Stanley (1977) “Long-term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
    Money Supply Rule,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (1), pp.191-205.

[15] Friedman, Milton (1968) “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review,
    vol. 58, pp. 1-17.

[16] Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson (2001) “The 6D Bias and the Equity Premium
    Puzzle,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

[17] Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999) “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric
    Model,” Journal of Monetary Economy, vol. 44 (2), pp. 195-222.

[18] Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King (1997) “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
    Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 231-283.

[19] Gordon, Robert (1997) “The Time-Varying NAIRU and Its Implications for Monetary
    Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter, pp. 11-32.

[20] Hall, Robert E. (1984) “Monetary Strategy with an Elastic Price Standard,” in Price
    Stability and Public Policy: A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
    Kansas City.

[21] Hall, Robert E. and N. Gregory Mankiw (1994) “Nominal Income Targeting,” in N. G.
    Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy, Chicago University Press, Chicago.

[22] King, Robert G. And Alexander L. Wolman (1999) “What Should Monetary Policy
    Do If Prices Are Sticky?”, pp. 349-404 in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules,
    University of Chicago Press, Cambridge, MA.

[23] Lucas, Robert E. (1973) “Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Trade-oﬀs,”
    American Economic Review, vol. 63, pp. 326-334.

                                           41
[24] Mankiw, N. Gregory (2001) “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoﬀ Between Inflation
    and Unemployment,” Economic Journal, col. 111, pp. C45-C61.

[25] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002), “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices:
    A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, vol 117 (4).

[26] Romer, David (2001) Advanced Macroeconomics. Second edition. McGraw-Hill.

[27] Rotemberg, Julio (1982) “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Re-
    view of Economic Studies, vol. 44, pp. 517-531.

[28] Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1997) “An Optimization-Based Economet-
    ric Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
    pp. 297-346.

[29] Sargent, Thomas (1993) Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
    versity Press.

[30] Sims, Christopher A. (2002) “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Mone-
    tary Economics, forthcoming.

[31] Staiger, Douglas, James Stock and Mark Watson (1997) “The NAIRU, Unemployment,
    and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 11 Winter 1997, pp. 33-
    51.

[32] Steinsson, Jon (2002) “Optimal Monetary Policy in an Economy with Inflation Persis-
    tence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

[33] Svenssson, Lars E. O. (1997) “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Moni-
    toring Inflation Targets,” European Economic Review, vol. 41, pp. 1111-1146.

[34] Svensson, Lars E. O. (1999) “Price Level Targeting vs. Inflation Targeting: A Free
    Lunch?”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 31, pp. 277-295.

[35] Taylor, John B. (1980) “Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,” Journal of
    Political Economy, vol 88, pp. 1-22.

                                           42
[36] Vestin, David (1999) “Price Level Targeting versus Inflation Targeting in a Forward
    Looking Model”, unpublished, Stockholm University.

[37] Woodford, Michael (2001) “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects of Monetary
    Policy,” Princeton University, forthcoming in Knowledge, Information, and Expectations
    in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, P. Aghion, R. Frydman,
    J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds.

[38] Woodford, Michael (2002) Interest and Prices, in preparation for Princeton University
    Press.




                                           43
Figure 1. Impact of a demand shock with price-level or inflation targeting

                 Price-Level Targeting                               Inflation Targeting


                        Price level                                        Price level
 0.05                                                0.05

 0.04                                                0.04

 0.03                                                0.03

 0.02                                                0.02

 0.01                                                0.01


            2      4     6      8    10    12   14              2     4     6      8    10    12   14




                            Output                                             Output
   1                                                   1

 0.8                                                 0.8

 0.6                                                 0.6

 0.4                                                 0.4

 0.2                                                 0.2


            2      4    6      8     10    12   14              2     4    6      8     10    12   14




         Cross-sectional variability of prices               Cross-sectional variability of prices
 0.008                                               0.008


 0.006                                               0.006


 0.004                                               0.004


 0.002                                               0.002



             2      4    6      8     10   12   14               2     4    6      8     10   12   14
            Figure 2. Impact of a markup shock under the optimal policy

       If serial correlation of shock is 0.8                If serial correlation of shock is 0.4


                     Price level                                          Price level
   3                                                    3

 2.5                                                  2.5

   2                                                    2

 1.5                                                  1.5

   1                                                    1

 0.5                                                  0.5


             5     10    15      20     25     30                 5     10    15      20     25     30




                        Output                                               Output
             5     10     15       20    25     30                5     10     15       20    25     30

-0.1                                                 -0.1


-0.2                                                 -0.2


-0.3                                                 -0.3


-0.4                                                 -0.4




        Cross-sectional variability of prices                Cross-sectional variability of prices


   1                                                    1

 0.8                                                  0.8

 0.6                                                  0.6

 0.4                                                  0.4

 0.2                                                  0.2


             5     10    15      20     25     30                 5     10    15      20     25     30
