NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION TAXES AND ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY
IN A STOCHASTIC OLG ECONOMY
Shinichi Nishiyama
Kent Smetters
Working Paper 9492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9492
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

Helpful comments were received from Ken Judd and participants at the Stanford Institute for Theoretical
Economics, July 2002. The analysis and conclusions expressed in them are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Shinichi Nishiyama and Kent Smetters. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice, is given
to the source.

Consumption Taxes and Economic Efficiency in a Stochastic OLG Economy
Shinichi Nishiyama and Kent Smetters
NBER Working Paper No. 9492
February 2003
JEL No. H0, H2, H3
ABSTRACT
Fundamental tax reform is examined in a heterogeneous overlapping-generations (OLG) model in
which agents face idiosyncratic earnings shocks and uncertain life spans. Following Auerbach and
Kotlikoff (1987), a Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority is used to rigorously examine efficiency
gains over the transition path. A progressive income tax is replaced with a flat consumption tax (for
example, a value-added tax or a national retail sales tax). If shocks are insurable (that is, no risk),
this reform improves (interim) efficiency, a result consistent with the previous literature. But if,
more realistically, shocks are uninsurable, this reform reduces efficiency, even though national
wealth and output increase over the entire transition path. This efficiency loss, in large part, stems
from reduced intragenerational risk sharing that was previously provided by the progressive tax
system.
Shinichi Nishiyama

Kent Smetters

Congressional Budget Office

The Wharton School & NBER

Ford House Office Building, 4th Floor

3641 Locust Walk, CPC 302

Second and D Streets, SW

Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218

Washington, DC 20515-6925

and NBER

shinichi.nishiyama@cbo.gov

smetters@wharton.upenn.edu

1 Introduction
The potential economic benefits from replacing the current income tax system with a flat
(proportional) consumption tax system have generated a considerable amount of attention
in recent years. Examples of a flat consumption tax include a value-added tax (VAT) in
many European nations as well as a national retail sales tax that is gaining attention in the
United States as a possible substitute tax base. Replacing the current income tax system
with a revenue-neutral flat consumption tax would (i) flatten tax rates, (ii) tax consumption
rather than wage and capital income, and (iii) eliminate all tax-base reductions (preferences)
contained in current law. In all likelihood, this reform would significantly increase national
saving and output over the long run (Altig and others, 2001), a result that we confirm. This
paper examines whether this reform actually improves economic efficiency.
Judging the economic efficiency of a particular policy reform has always been important to economists, but it is important to remind ourselves why. Many different policy reforms can, for example, increase the welfare of people born in a long-run steady state, but
those gains might simply represent losses to intermediate generations. (Indeed, this point
has gained a considerable amount of attention in the recent debate on Social Security privatization.) If there is no economic gain after fully compensating intermediate generations
who otherwise lose from reform, then judgments over a reform must be made purely on a
philosophical a priori basis1 or based on subjective intragenerational and intergenerational
distribution choices.2 To be sure, economists contribute in important ways to these debates,
especially on distributional issues. For example, economists have estimated the impact that
a particular tax system has on the distribution of income or wealth within generations (Auerbach and Hassett, 2001) or between generations (Auerbach, Gokhale, and Kotlikoff, 1994).
Economists have also derived the implied optimal tax schedules under an assumed social
welfare function that weights the utility of different people in a particular way (Mirrlees,
1971). But economists are not particularly better qualified in making philosophical or moral
1

For example, the philosopher Thomas Hobbes argued that it is a priori “wrong” to tax estates on the basis
that wealth was already taxed when earned. Others have argued that it is a priori “wrong” for the government to
take money from one generation to give to another.
2
For example, in terms of intragenerational distribution, the philosopher John Rawls argued that social welfare
must be judged on the basis of the utility of the worse-off person in society.

1

judgments than noneconomists. Ultimately, what economists bring to the table in policy
debates is our insight about efficiency, interpreted here in the Pareto sense.
The point of departure of our paper is that previous analyses of fundamental tax reform
have not incorporated the intragenerational risk-sharing benefits of the current progressive
income tax system. Our main finding is that this risk sharing is important for determining the
efficiency changes associated with tax reform, even at modest levels of risk aversion. When
idiosyncratic earnings shocks are assumed to be fully insurable so that each agent faces no
risk, moving to a flat consumption tax increases efficiency, a common result in the literature.
However, when wages are uninsurable, efficiency is reduced by moving to a flat consumption
tax, even though national wealth and output increase over the entire transition path.3

1.1 The Ramsey Model
The simplest way to analyze the impact that a revenue-neutral tax reform has on economic
efficiency is with the Ramsey infinite-horizon representative-agent model, which assumes
that households are Ricardian. Since, in general, efficiency changes are always calculated
relative to compensated changes, the presence of a single agent in the Ramsey model dramatically simplifies these calculations. In particular, calculating efficiency changes does not
require redistributing resources across agents in order to compensate those who would otherwise lose from reform. As a result, one can often derive the most efficient long-run tax
structure analytically (see the reviews by Judd, 1999, and Auerbach and Hines, 2001). But
the Ramsey model is less suitable for capturing the intragenerational risk-sharing benefits of
a progressive income tax system, which is the focus of the current paper.4
3

This paper examines policy changes rather than attempting to derive optimal progressive tax schedules in
the Mirrlees tradition where a social welfare function must be assumed. However, our results on the importance
of risk sharing would also be relevant to that literature, which, thus far, has found little cause for progressive tax
schedules. Although computational considerations limit our ability to derive optimal progressive tax schedules
in our model, this extension could prove useful in the future as computers become more powerful.
4
Well-known complications arise when attempting to model multiple infinite-horizon agents. If agents have
identical time preferences (which, realistically, is a measure of zero), then there is an infinite number of wealth
distributions compatible with a steady state. If, more realistically, agents have nonidentical time preferences,
then the wealth distribution becomes trivial (one agent owns everything). Incorporating progressive tax rates
creates additional problems.

2

1.2 The Stochastic OLG Model with Finite Horizons
Instead, this paper uses a calibrated overlapping-generations (OLG) life-cycle model with
uninsurable idiosyncratic earnings shocks, uncertain life spans, and elastic labor supply to
examine the efficiency gains associated with adopting a revenue-neutral flat consumption tax.
The multiplicity of agents, though, complicates the efficiency calculations since tax reform
redistributes resources across different households. To deal with this problem, we follow
the pioneering work done by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), who developed the first largescale OLG model without uncertainty. Like theirs, our model incorporates a “Lump-Sum
Redistribution Authority” (LSRA) that calculates the overall efficiency gains or losses of a
policy change, by restoring the utility of the agents alive at the time of the reform to their
prereform levels through lump-sum redistributions both across and within generations. We
believe that our model is the first large-scale stochastic OLG model to rigorously calculate
efficiency gains associated with a fiscal policy reform.
A heuristic technique for calculating efficiency gains that is more common in the literature simply sums welfare changes across households (discounted if across time); a policy is
then deemed to increase [decrease] efficiency if the net sum is positive [negative]. This latter
approach implicitly assumes that lump-sum transfers are made across households in order
to compensate the losers of policy reform with some of the gains of the winners. But this
approach fails to capture the price effects associated with these lump-sum transfers.

1.3 Progressive Consumption Taxes
While flattening tax rates receives the bulk of the attention in the tax reform debate, consumptionbased taxes can also be progressive. In particular, allowing firms to deduct their full investment expenses at the time of purchase from their tax payments (“full expensing”) would
effectively produce a consumption tax.5 This approach would also allow for some progressivity through either a standard deduction, as in the “flat tax” plan (Hall and Rabushka, 1995),
and/or progressive tax rates, as in the “X tax” plan (Bradford, 1986). The “flat tax” and “X
tax” plans also protect housing wealth. By maintaining progressive tax rates, the “X tax,”
in particular, could increase efficiency in our model. Moreover, additional social safety net
5

In fact, a flat consumption tax produces the same outcomes as a flat income tax with full expensing.

3

programs could potentially substitute for insurance contained in the prereform progressive
income tax system to maintain efficiency along with growth effects.
The current paper, though, focuses mainly on a flat consumption tax for several reasons.
First, we are more interested in understanding the risk-sharing properties of the current income system than in analyzing specific reform proposals. Second, the computation requirements of our model are already significant. In order to capture the differential tax treatment
of various capital items under the “flat tax” and the “X tax,” we would have to include housing wealth and other types of capital under separate capital categories. While this addition
is possible in deterministic models (Fullerton and Rogers, 1993; Jorgenson and Yun, 2001),
adding housing wealth to our stochastic model would alone increase the computation time
by two orders of magnitude, requiring about three months to solve a single simulation on a
two-gigahertz Pentium IV computer. So we leave this innovation to future research. Third, a
national retail sales tax is gaining considerable attention in the United States.
Later in the paper, we do, however, consider a simple progressive consumption tax in the
form of a national sales tax with a rebate of the first $20,000 of consumption per household.
This reform is similar to the “flat tax” proposal except that we don’t protect existing housing
wealth; our version of the “flat tax,” therefore, creates more potential for efficiency gains.

1.4 Outline
The outline of our paper is as follows. Section 2 gives a primer on the economic factors
associated with moving to a flat consumption tax using a simple two-period model. Section
3 outlines our large-scale model that we use to simulate the introduction of a revenue-neutral
flat consumption tax. Section 4 summarizes the calibration of the baseline economy. Section
5 explains the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. Section 6 outlines a deterministic version of our model that allows us to make comparisons with the stochastic version. Section 7
reports the results of policy experiments. Section 8 concludes. The appendix describes the
computational algorithm in detail.

4

2 A Primer on Tax Reform
This section uses a simple partial-equilibrium model to present a brief overview of tax reform
in an OLG economy. We first consider tax reform in which the prereform income tax system
is linear and the economy is deterministic. We then expand the discussion to the presence
of nonlinear taxes in the prereform economy, and then finally to uncertainty in the form of
idiosyncratic wage shocks and life spans. We do not consider the effects of removing tax
preferences; this issue and others are addressed in our larger-scale model, which is presented
in the next section.

2.1 No Uncertainty, Linear Taxes
2.1.1 The Prereform Economy
Consider a simple two-period model in which agents work during the first period and retire
in the second period. During the first period, an agent born in time t earns pretax wages
w1,t , pays a wage tax at rate τtw , consumes c1,t , and saves the remainder as assets, a2,t+1 ,
in order to afford second-period consumption. During period two at time t + 1, the agent’s
consumption, c2,t+1 , is equal to a2,t+1 plus net interest paid at time t + 1, rt+1 , after paying
a capital income tax at rate τtr . The agent’s budget constraints, therefore, are as follows:
c1,t + a2,t+1 = (1 − τtw ) w1,t ,

£
¡
¢
¤
r
rt+1 a2,t+1 .
c2,t+1 = 1 + 1 − τt+1

A linear income tax, τty , is created by setting τtr = τtw = τty . Assuming that there are
no borrowing constraints (or, alternatively, a2,t+1 ≥ 0), the household’s lifetime budget

constraint equals

c
¡ 2,t+1
¢
¤ = (1 − τtw ) w1,t .
c1,t + £
r
1 + 1 − τt+1 rt+1

(1)

We can rewrite equation (1) as

or

c1,t
c2,t+1
¡
¢
¤
= w1,t
+£
w
r
1 − τt
1 + 1 − τt+1 rt+1 (1 − τtw )
¡

c
1 + τ̃1,t

¢

¢
¡
c
c2,t+1
1 + τ̃2,t+1
c1,t +
= w1,t ,
(1 + rt+1 )
5

(2)

1+rt+1
− 1. Hence, a system of linear
r
[1+(1−τt+1
)rt+1 ](1−τtw )
wage taxes, capital income taxes, and income taxes can be represented in terms of equivalent

c ≡
where τ̃1,t

1
1−τtw

c
− 1 and τ̃2,t+1
≡

age-indexed effective consumption tax rates, τ̃ c . (The tilde [~] superscript is used to denote
effective rates.) Both tax systems collect the same lifetime present value of taxes from each
agent and offer the same incentives.
r
> 0, that is, a positive
Notice that if tax rates are stationary then τ̃2c > τ̃1c when τt+1

capital income tax increases the effective consumption tax rate over the life cycle. By the
inverse-elasticity rule of the optimal tax literature, this increasing tax rate is a potential source
of inefficiency unless the price elasticity of second-period consumption is lower relative to
first-period consumption, a result that is not an implication of most specifications of household preferences. A key motivation for tax reform, as discussed below, is to remove this
potential distortion.
Government revenue each period finances a fixed level of spending, Ḡ:
τtw w1,t + τtr rt a2,t = Ḡ,

(3)

where the population size is assumed to be stationary.6
2.1.2 Postreform Economy: A Revenue-Neutral Consumption Tax
Now suppose that the government introduces a consumption tax, τtc , at time t to replace the
income tax. The private budget constraints become
(1 + τtc ) c1,t + a2,t+1 = w1,t ,
¡

¢
c
1 + τt+1
c2,t+1 = [1 + rt+1 ] a2,t+1 ,

which produces the following lifetime budget constraint:
¢
¡
c
c2,t+1
1 + τt+1
c
= w1,t .
(1 + τt ) c1,t +
(1 + rt+1 )

(4)

The government’s budget constraint equals
τtc (c1,t + c2,t ) = Ḡ.
6

Equation (3) could also be represented in terms of the effective consumption tax rates shown above. However, when analyzing a tax reform, which changes the present value of taxes paid by each generation, equation (3)
is needed in its current form because second-period agents alive at the reform did not actually face the effective
consumption tax τ̃1c during their first period of life.

6

2.1.3 Primary Tax Effects of Adopting a Revenue-Neutral Consumption Tax
When the prereform tax system is linear, the adoption a revenue-neutral consumption tax can
be decomposed into two sequential steps:
i. Replace the linear income tax with a linear wage tax, thereby removing the tax on
capital income.
ii. Replace this new linear wage tax with a consumption tax, thereby imposing a lumpsum tax on existing assets.
Since we regard the second step as occurring immediately after the first step, the ageasset profile in the prereform economy is the one that is relevant for determining the impact
of the lump-sum tax on existing assets.7
i) Removing the Tax on Capital Income. Comparing equations (1) and (4), notice that
this tax reform generates uniform consumption tax rates across the life cycle in a stationary economy since capital income is no longer taxed. As a result, the intertemporal price
distortion is removed, encouraging saving. If labor supply were also elastic, an increase in
after-tax interest rates would encourage more labor supply and saving earlier in the life cycle
since asset values would accumulate more quickly.
However, this good news does not come for free. The assets that have already been accumulated by generation (t − 1) at time t, which would have been taxed under the original

income tax, will not be taxed after the reform. So generation (t − 1) receives a lump-sum

transfer (negative tax) equal to τtr rt a2,t , which must be paid by future workers in the form of
wage taxes in order to make up the lost revenue.8 Moreover, because the wage base is smaller

than the income base, tax rates increase. Since tax distortion increases with the square of the
tax rate, a smaller tax base will produce more distortions. In the finite-horizons OLG model,
7

In static models with one or two periods (and no bequests), one could alternatively distinguish between the
tax reform’s “substitution effect” and “income effect.” However, this distinction is substantially more cumbersome in a model with more than two periods where some agents have accumulated wealth by the time of the
reform and will also live for more than one additional period after the reform. See Gravelle (2002) for a detailed
critique of intertemporal models.
8
Our simple two-period model, though, somewhat exaggerates this point by taxing capital income only at the
beginning of the second period. With multiple periods, asset holders will have already paid some taxes on capital
income before the tax reform.

7

these new distortions could, in theory, outweigh the gains associated with removing the intertemporal price distortion. In fact, in their simulation analysis using a multiple-period
deterministic model with elastic labor supply, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) find that replacing a linear income tax with a linear wage tax reduces long-run output and welfare.9
ii) Imposing a Lump-Sum Tax on Existing Wealth. As demonstrated by Summers (1981),
adopting a consumption tax also imposes a lump-sum tax on older people. In particular, the
consumption by generation (t − 1) in their second period of life is inelastic at time t since

their consumption is based on previous saving. Hence, when the government changes the
tax system at time t, these agents face a lump-sum tax equal to τtc c2,t , which, under revenue
neutrality, accrues as reduced taxes paid by future workers.10
In fact, the lump-sum tax on generation (t − 1) accrues as a reduced tax liability to all

future generations. To demonstrate this fact, suppose that agents only consume during the
second period of their lives (that is, c1,t = 0) and taxes on interest are zero (τ r = 0) so that
only wages are taxed.11 Under these assumptions, wage and consumption taxes are lump sum
for all generations, allowing for easy illustration. Now suppose that the government switches
tax bases from wages to consumption at time t. Generation (t − 1), which is in their second

period of life when the tax reform occurs, is charged a wealth levy equal to Ḡ. Clearly, they
are worse off – they paid Ḡ during their first period of life under the previous wage tax,
and now they must pay it again during their second period under the new consumption tax.
Now consider generation t, which is in their first period of life when taxes are reformed.
Under the former wage tax, generation t would have paid Ḡ during their first period of life.
Instead, they now pay Ḡ in their second period, reducing the present value of their lifetime
´
³
Ḡ
, or rḠ/ (1 + r). Similarly, every future generation s (s > t) receives a
taxes by Ḡ − 1+r

present-value reduction in their tax liability equal to rḠ/ (1 + r), calculated with respect to
their generation index, s. The present value sum of tax saving across all future generations,
∞ rḠ/(1+r)
P
(
)
= Ḡ. In other words, the present value
calculated at time t, therefore, equals
(1+r)i
i=0

9

In contrast, the optimal long-run tax rate on capital income is zero in the Ramsey model.
10
As noted in the previous section, a flat consumption tax produces the same outcomes as a flat income tax
with full expensing. Under expensing, the lump-sum tax on existing wealth takes the form of a fall in Tobin’s q,
as old capital becomes less valuable relative to new capital.
11
See also Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987, pp. 58 - 59).

8

of the tax reduction to future generations exactly equals the loss to the initial elderly.
This intergenerational transfer has a very powerful impact on long-run output and welfare. Auerbach and Kotlikoff find that replacing a linear income tax with a flat consumption
tax increases long-run output and welfare. Why are the results so different in the AK model
relative to the wage tax base discussed above? The reason is the wealth levy on the existing
capital held by generation (t − 1) that occurs with a consumption tax but not with a wage

tax; in fact, this wealth levy is the only difference between those two tax bases. In the case of
a consumption tax, this wealth levy extracts enough resources to reduce future tax burdens,
producing a long-run gain. In fact, over 100 percent of the long-run gain in the AK model
stems from this wealth levy (Engen, Gravelle, and Smetters, 1997).
2.1.4 Total Efficiency Gains
It is important, though, to distinguish between redistribution and efficiency. In the previous
two-period example, replacing the linear wage tax with a consumption tax would produce a
sizable long-run increase in the capital stock and output. But this entire gain comes off the
backs of generation (t − 1). In other words, if generation (t − 1) were to receive a lump-sum
rebate equal to Ḡ so that its utility is held fixed, future generations would no longer benefit

from tax reform. Hence, the efficiency gain is exactly zero despite the large long-run gains.
Recall, though, two key assumptions that we made: (i) agents lived for only two periods, and
(ii) all taxes were effectively lump-sum for all generations. Not surprisingly, therefore, tax
reform produces zero efficiency gains.
In a more realistic setting with more than two periods and with consumption in each period, replacing a linear income tax with a consumption tax would probably produce efficiency
gains. To be sure, removing the tax on capital income alone has an unclear impact on efficiency since the benefit from removing the intertemporal price distortion must be balanced
against the higher tax rate. However, the lump-sum tax on existing assets is likely to lead
to sizable efficiency gains inside a multiperiod model. The reason is that, after controlling
for intergenerational redistribution, agents with assets who are alive at the time of the reform
benefit from replacing some of their own future distorting taxes with the lump-sum taxes that

9

they pay today in the form of a wealth levy.12 Accounting for these different effects requires
simulation analysis. Auerbach and Kotlikoff find that efficiency is increased by replacing
a linear income tax with a linear consumption tax in a deterministic framework. Within
the Ramsey model, many previous papers have also found positive gains from adopting a
consumption tax (see the review in Stokey and Rebelo, 1995).

2.2 No Uncertainty, Nonlinear Taxes
2.2.1 Prereform Economy
With nonlinear tax rates in the prereform economy, the agent’s budget constraints are
c1,t + a2,t+1 = w1,t − Ttw (w1,t ) ,
r
(rt+1 a2,t+1 ) ,
c2,t+1 = (1 + rt+1 ) a2,t+1 − Tt+1

where the T (·) functions represent total taxes paid. The average wage tax rate equals
Ttw (w1,t ) /w1,t , which is smaller than the marginal wage tax rate, ∂Ttw (w1,t ) /∂w1,t . Simir (r
larly, the average and marginal tax rates on capital income are Tt+1
t+1 a2,t+1 ) / (rt+1 a2,t+1 )
r (r
and ∂Tt+1
t+1 a2,t+1 ) /∂ (rt+1 a2,t+1 ), respectively.

With a stationary population size, the government’s budget constraint is
r
(rt+1 a2,t+1 ) = Ḡ.
Ttw (w1,t ) + Tt+1

2.2.2 Primary Tax Effects of Adopting a Revenue-Neutral Consumption Tax
The budget constraints in the postreform economy with a revenue-neutral proportional consumption tax are the same as shown earlier. The introduction of progressive income taxes
into the prereform economy, however, alters somewhat the two steps described above, and
also adds a third step:
i. Replace the progressive income tax with a progressive wage tax, thereby removing the
tax on capital income.
12

We benefited from a helpful conversation with Alan Auerbach on this point.

10

ii. Replace this new progressive wage tax with a progressive consumption tax, thereby
imposing a lump-sum tax on existing assets.13
iii. Replace this new progressive consumption tax with a proportional consumption tax,
thereby flattening tax rates.
We again think of each step as occurring immediately after the previous step.
i) Removing the Tax on Capital Income. Much of the debate about whether to adopt a
consumption tax focuses on removing distortions caused by progressive tax rates. Indeed,
progressive tax rates tend to magnify intertemporal distortions. First, even with inelastic
labor supply, saving decisions are distorted more with progressive taxes since the future
marginal tax rate that a person faces on capital income is now directly affected by their
saving decisions. Removing the tax on capital income, therefore, encourages even more
saving when the prereform income tax is progressive. Second, allowing for elastic labor
supply tends to enhance this result. Marginal income tax rates tend to peak at middle age
when labor productivity is high and after a fair amount of assets have been accumulated
for retirement. So agents tend to shift their labor supply away from high-tax years in the
middle years of life toward lower-tax years later in life. Since more labor income is now
earned later in life, less saving is needed earlier in life to smooth consumption. Removing
the tax on capital income, therefore, would eliminate those distortions, which tend to be more
significant when the prereform income tax is progressive.
As with the linear income tax considered before, however, one must also account for
the government’s budget constraint. Increasing wage tax rates to make up lost revenue now
creates more distortions than in the linear tax case considered earlier. Distortions increase
the most if the progressive wage tax schedule is increased in a progressive manner in order to
protect the poor. But even if the additional tax burden is distributed in a proportional manner,
distortions will rise faster relative to the linear case considered earlier.
13

In practice, this could be achieved with full expensing, discussed in Section 1. An equivalent progressive
VAT or sales tax could also be implemented, but would be substantially more cumbersome to administer.

11

ii) Imposing a Lump-Sum Tax on Existing Wealth As noted earlier, in a multiple-period
model, the efficiency gains produced by a lump-sum tax on existing wealth depend on the
extent to which lump-sum taxes replace future distorting taxes of those alive at the time of the
reform. The more assets held by younger and middle-aged workers at the time of the reform,
the more likely the wealth levy produces efficiency gains. Whether, for a given capitaloutput ratio,14 these cohorts hold a larger share of capital under progressive taxes depends
on the exact model parameters.15 Still, the efficiency gains associated with moving to a
consumption tax are likely to be much larger when the prereform income tax is progressive
since this tax system is more distorting, increasing the value of the substitute lump-sum tax.
iii) Flattening Tax Rates The effect of moving from a progressive consumption tax to a
flat consumption tax produces two competing major effects (and a couple minor effects that
we’ll ignore). First, it removes an important price distortion across the life cycle. Specifically, consumption increases over the life cycle when the interest rate exceeds the rate of
time preference.16 As a result, marginal consumption tax rates also increase over the life
cycle, similar to the pattern produced by a capital income tax considered earlier. A shift to
a proportional tax, therefore, creates a uniform tax rate on consumption, removing this intertemporal distortion. Second, this reform gives many asset holders at the time of the reform
a lump-sum transfer (negative tax), reducing efficiency.
2.2.3 Total Efficiency Gains
On net, there are likely to be sizable efficiency gains from adopting a flat consumption tax
when the original income tax system is progressive. Both Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987),
using the OLG model, as well as Jorgenson and Yun (2001), who use the Ramsey model
14
When comparing across models, one should always solve for the deep parameters that generate the same
observable economy, including the capital-output ratio. In this way, you ensure that the predictions are not being
generated by different calibrations.
15
Younger workers tend to face lower tax rates under a progressive system, giving them more resources to save.
But they also face increasing marginal tax rates in the future as their human capital returns increase, decreasing
their incentive to save. Older people, except those who have accumulated lots of wealth, also have a few more
resources to reinvest under a progressive tax system. But the intertemporal shift in their labor supply described
earlier in the text tends to reduce their saving. Hence, the remaining share held by middle-aged workers also
depends on the parameters.
16
This effect cannot happen in the infinite-horizon model since the interest rate equals the time preference rate
in a steady state.

12

described in Section 1, find large efficiency gains. Later in this paper, we verify this result
using a deterministic version of our model introduced in Section 3.

2.3 Wage and Life-Span Uncertainty, Nonlinear Taxes
We now consider the addition of wage and life-span uncertainty into the prereform and
postreform economies. The budget constraints for the prereform economy are the same as
those shown in the previous subsection. Moreover, the budget constraints in the postreform
economy do not change either. Adding wage and life-span uncertainty also does not change
the three steps of tax reform discussed above. But the addition of uncertainty does influence
the analysis associated with each step. We consider each step in turn.
2.3.1 Primary Tax Effects of Adopting a Revenue-Neutral Consumption Tax
i) Removing the Tax on Capital Income. The addition of wage uncertainty tends to reduce the importance of price distortions over the life cycle. With inelastic labor supply,
agents would hedge their earnings uncertainty by saving in a precautionary manner.17 As a
result, household saving becomes less responsive to an increase in the after-tax interest rate
following a shift to a consumption tax base.18 To be sure, with elastic labor supply, the need
to save in a precautionary manner is reduced somewhat since agents can, for example, work
multiple low-paying jobs in order to replace a former higher-paying job. But since utility
is concave in leisure and the maximum leisure time is bounded, the ability to vary working
hours cannot eliminate precautionary saving altogether. As a result, saving will be less sensitive to changes in the after-tax interest rate relative to the case without uncertainty. Labor
supply, which now serves as partial insurance against bad shocks, also becomes less sensitive
to changes in interest rates.
When fair annuities are not available, adding life-span uncertainty produces two competing effects. On the one hand, life-span uncertainty should lead to greater precautionary
saving, which decreases the interest elasticity of saving. On the other hand, the horizon of
agents is effective “longer” since a prudent agent will plan for a time period longer than
17

Precautionary saving is positive if the third derivative of the agent’s felicity function is positive, a condition
which holds in our model.
18
This point was emphasized in Engen and Gale (1996) and Engen, Gravelle, and Smetters (1997).

13

average. This longer time period might enhance price sensitivity somewhat.19 The presence of a Social Security system in our large-scale model (Section 3) will tend to reduce the
importance of both of those effects.
ii) Imposing a Lump-Sum Tax on Existing Wealth. While the lump-sum tax on existing
wealth following the adoption of a consumption tax has a large impact on efficiency, the
introduction of wage and life-span uncertainty itself produces two competing effects. On
the one hand, the asset-age profile for the average person is relatively less “hump-shaped”
due to greater precautionary saving both earlier in the life cycle (mostly due to earnings
uncertainty20 ) and later in the life cycle (due to life-span uncertainty). As a result, for a given
capital-output ratio, the wealth levy on the young is higher, reducing their future distorting
taxes by more than without uncertainty. As noted earlier, the main source of efficiency gains
from imposing a lump-sum tax on existing wealth stems from replacing some of the future
distorting taxes of agents alive at the time of the reform with lump-sum taxes. The more
of a nation’s wealth that is held by the young, therefore, the larger the potential efficiency
gains. As a result, the introduction of uncertainty into the analysis could potentially increase
the efficiency gains after tax reform, provided that the share of assets that are now held by
elderly has not increased too much relative to the case without uncertainty. On the other
hand, the value of a lump-sum tax on wealth is not as large as without uncertainty due to
the reduced importance of distortions, discussed above. Simulation analysis, therefore, is
required for determining the net effect.
19
The interaction of life-span uncertainty with wage uncertainty, though, complicates matters. For example,
if in the extreme, agents lived forever with certainty, we would be back in the infinite-horizons world where
we would want to focus on a single agent. In this case, Aiyagari (1995) demonstrates that the optimal tax
rate on capital income would actually be positive when the infinitely lived agent faces uninsurable idiosyncratic
earnings shocks. Intuitively, elastic labor supply prevents the government from employing confiscatory wage
taxes to replicate full insurance. As a result, precautionary saving drives the interest rate below the agent’s rate
of time preference, generating too much capital in the economy relative to the modified golden rule. A positive
capital income tax brings the economy’s level of capital back to the efficient level. The Aiyagari motive for a
positive capital income tax rate, though, is not present in a stochastic finite-horizon OLG model—not even as an
approximation—unless precautionary saving produces enough capital so that the economy becomes dynamically
inefficient. Whereas dynamic inefficiency is guaranteed in Aiyagari’s model (where the actual level of capital is
compared against the modified golden rule level of capital), it is not in a finite-horizon OLG model (where the
comparison is made with the golden rule level of capital).
20
Since labor supply is now partly a self-insurance mechanism, people are also less likely in the prereform
economy to take advantage of falling future marginal tax rates by postponing their labor supply, thereby generating more saving earlier in life.

14

iii) Flattening Tax Rates. When uncertainty is added to the model, flattening the tax rates
reduces risk sharing within generations. The reason is that the prereform progressive tax
system shares idiosyncratic earnings shocks. A switch to a flat tax system reduces (but does
not eliminate21 ) this risk sharing, generating an increase in precautionary saving following
tax reform. Indeed, it is ambiguous a priori whether the addition of uncertainty reduces or
increases the saving response to tax reform when the prereform tax system is progressive,
even though uncertainty reduces the saving response to changes in the after-tax interest rate.
By reducing risk sharing, flattening tax rates might represent a nontrivial source of efficiency losses. In fact, if labor supply were completely inelastic (or perfectly observable by
the government, as with first-best taxes) then all agents in identical states (that is, same assets; same current-period wage income; same age; and so on) would want to fully share future
wage shocks. In this case, the most efficient tax on consumption would be extremely progressive: consumption levels above these individuals’ expectation (that is, state-contingent
expectation) would be taxed at 100 percent while consumption below average would be taxed
at a negative rate (subsidized) so that it equaled the expected outcome.
In reality, of course, the most efficient second-best progressive tax system will not fully
share all future risks. First, labor supply is obviously not completely inelastic. In essence,
agents with greater-than-expected wage realizations will distort their future labor supply in
order to partially “renege” on the previous risk-sharing “agreement.” Since this incentive
is understood ex ante, the optimal tax schedule cannot fully share risks ex post. Second,
in realistic tax systems, taxes paid by any agent in a given year depend only on the agent’s
current state and not on that agent’s state in previous years. As a result, a progressive tax
system will redistribute resources in the future across agents at different states today. With
elastic labor supply, this “extra” redistribution is a source of (interim) inefficiency.22
21

To some extent, even a linear tax shares risks since people with higher earnings realizations pay more taxes.
But progressive taxes share those risks even more.
22
In our analysis, we focus on “interim” efficiency, where the expected remaining lifetime utility of living
agents is calculated conditional on their current state at the time of reform, and the expected utility of future
generations is calculated conditional on the initial state into which they are “born” as independent economic
actors. If we instead measured expected utility across all possible states (the so-called “ex ante” position), our
results regarding the importance of risk sharing would only be strengthened.

15

2.3.2 Total Efficiency Gains
The remainder of this paper examines the importance of wage and life-span uncertainty when
analyzing tax reform. Since closed-form solutions are not possible in assessing these different competing forces, we use simulation analysis to help determine the impact on efficiency
from replacing a progressive income tax system with a flat consumption tax. The next section
lays out the computation model that we use.

3 Model
The economy consists of three main sectors: heterogeneous households with elastic labor
supply; a perfectly competitive representative firm with constant-returns-to-scale production
technology; and a government with a full commitment technology.23

3.1 The Household Sector
Households are heterogeneous with respect to age i, working ability ei (measured by its
hourly wage), beginning-of-period wealth holding ai , and average historical earnings bi that
is used to determine Social Security benefits. Every year, a large number (normalized to
unity) of new households of age 20 enter into the economy.24 A household of age i observes
idiosyncratic working ability shock, ei , at the beginning of each year and chooses its optimal
consumption ci , working hours hi , and end-of-period wealth holding ai+1 , taking the government’s policy schedule and a series of factor prices and the government’s policy variables
as given.25 At the end of each year, a fraction of households die. Households are alive at
most up to 109 years old, and the mortality rate at the end of age 109 is one. Tables 1 and 2
show the main variables and functions used in the household’s problem.
23

As is standard in the optimal tax literature, we assume that the government can commit to future policies,
thereby ignoring time-consistency issues.
24
The population of this economy is normalized by the constant population growth rate ν.
25
Because there are no aggregate shocks in the present model, the policy variables and factor prices of rational
expectation are actually ones of perfect foresight. But agents do not know their own future wages and life spans.

16

Table 1: Main Variables and Functions in the Model
Individual state: si = (i, ei , ai , bi )
i
∈ I = {20, ..., 109}
ei
∈ E = £[emin , emax ]¤
ai
∈ A = amin , amax
bi
∈ B = [bmin , bmax ]

Age
Working ability (hourly wage) (a)
Beginning-of-period wealth (a)
Average historical earnings (AIME×12) (a)

Aggregate state: St = (xt (si ), Wg,t )
xt (si )
Wg,t

Joint distribution of households (b)
Beginning-of-period government wealth (c)

Policy schedule and rule: Ψt = {Wg,s+1 , Cg,s , τI,s (.), τP,s (.), τC,s , trSS,s (.)}∞
s=t
Wg,s+1
End-of-period government wealth (c)
Cg,s
Government consumption (c)
τI,s (.)
Federal income tax function (d)
τP,s (.)
Payroll tax function (d)
τC,s
Consumption tax rate
trSS,s (.)
Social Security benefit function (d)
Household decision rules: d(si , St ; Ψt ) = (ci (.), hi (.), ai+1 (.))
Consumption (a)
ci (.)
hi (.)
Working hours
ai+1 (.)
End-of-period wealth (a)
Main parameters and other variables
β
∈ R+
φi
∈ [0, 1]
µ
∈R
ν
∈R
wt
∈ R+
rt
∈R
qt
∈ R+

Time preference (e)
Survival rate at the end of age i
Labor augmenting productivity growth rate
Population growth rate
Wage rate (1.0 in the baseline)
Interest rate
Bequests per surviving working-age household (a)

(a) These variables are adjusted by the steady-state (per capita) economic growth rate.
(b) The measure of households is adjusted by the steady-state population growth rate.
(c) The government’s net wealth and most aggregate variables (shown below) are adjusted by the steady-state
economic growth rate and population growth rate.
(d) The arguments of these functions are adjusted by the steady-state economic growth rate. Time invariant
tax and benefit functions imply that the actual schedules are adjusted so that there is no real bracket creep
whenever the economy is on the balanced growth path.
(e) The time preference parameter is adjusted by the steady-state economic growth rate. The adjustment
depends on the specification of the utility function.

17

Table 2: Other Aggregate Variables in the Model
Wt
Lt
Kt
Yt
TI,t
TP,t
TC,t
T rSS,t

National wealth
Total labor supply
Capital stock
Gross national product
Federal income tax revenue
Federal payroll tax revenue
Federal consumption tax revenue
Total OASDI benefits

∈ R+
∈ R+
∈ R+
∈ R+
∈R
∈R
∈R
∈R

Note: All aggregate variables are adjusted by the steady-state economic growth and population growth; that is,
these variables in the model stay at the same level when the economy is on the balanced growth path.

3.1.1 The Household’s Problem
Let si denote the individual state vector of an age i household, let St denote the aggregate
state vector at the beginning of year t, and let Ψt denote the series of government policy
rules known at the beginning of year t,
si = (i, ei , ai , bi ) ,

(5)

St = (xt (.) , Wg,t ) ,

(6)

Ψt = {Wg,s+1 , Cg,s , τI,s (.) , τP,s (.) , τC,s , trSS,s (.)}∞
s=t .

(7)

Then, the value function of a household is
v (si , St ; Ψt ) =

max

ci ,hi ,ai+1

ui (ci , hi ) + β φi E [v (si+1 , St+1 ; Ψt+1 ) | ei ]

(8)

subject to
ai+1 =

1
{wt ei hi + (1 + rt )ai − τI,t (wt ei hi , rt ai , trSS,t (i, bi ))
1+µ
−τP,t (wt ei hi ) + trSS,t (i, bi ) − (1 + τC,t ) ci } ≥ amin ,

and a20 = 0, a110 ≥ 0.26
26

(9)

Alternatively, we can use Ψt for Ψt+1 on the right-hand side of the objective function because Ψt includes
the information of Ψt+1 .

18

Let πi,i+1 (ei+1 | ei ) be the conditional probability for the age i + 1 working ability being

ei+1 when the age i working ability is ei .27 Then,
Z
v (si+1 , St+1 ; Ψt+1 ) πi,i+1 (ei+1 | ei ) d ei+1 . (10)
E [v (si+1 , St+1 ; Ψt+1 ) | ei ] =
E

At the beginning of the next period, the individual state, the aggregate state, and the
government policy rules become
si+1 = (i + 1, ei+1 , ai+1 + qt , bi+1 )

with πi,i+1 (ei+1 | ei ) ,

(11)

St+1 = (xt+1 (.) , Wg,t+1 ) ,

(12)

Ψt+1 = {Wg,s+1 , Cg,s , τI,s (.) , τP,s (.) , τC,s , trSS,s (.)}∞
s=t+1 ,

(13)

where Wg,t+1 is determined by the government budget constraint. A household’s retrospective average earnings for Social Security purposes are



0
if i ≤ 24


wt
1
max )} if 25 ≤ i ≤ 59
bi+1 =
i−24 {(i − 25)bi wt−1 + min (wt ei hi /2, weht



 (1 + µ)−1 b
if i ≥ 60,
i

(14)

where wehmax
is the threshold, which is $80,400 in 2001. For simplicity, we assume that the
t
highest 35 years of earnings correspond to those years of age between 25 and 59.28
The decision rule of an age i household in year t is a function of its individual state si ,
the aggregate state St , and the government policy rules Ψt , and is shown as
d (si , St ; Ψt ) = {ci (si , St ; Ψt ) , hi (si , St ; Ψt ) , ai+1 (si , St ; Ψt )} .

(15)

3.2 The Measure of Households
Let xt (si ) denote the measure of households, and let Xt (si ) be the corresponding cumulative measure. The measure of households is adjusted by the population growth rate. The
27

Since ei+1 is a random variable with conditional probability distribution πi,i+1 (ei+1 | ei ), si+1 = (i +
1, ei+1 , ai+1 , bi+1 ) is a random vector. Hence, ei is a realized number and si is a realized vector.
28
Social Security benefits in the United States are computed on the basis of the highest 35 years of earnings,
adding an additional state variable to our model. Earnings before age 60 are wage indexed, and earnings after
age 60 are price indexed. The approximation of AIME by the average historical earnings follows previous Social
Security literature, for example, Huggett and Ventura (1999) and De Nardi and others (1999).

19

population of age 20 households is normalized to be unity in the baseline economy on the
balanced growth path, that is,
Z
dXt (20, e20 , 0, 0) = 1.

(16)

E

Let 1[a=y] be an indicator function that returns 1 if a = y and 0 if a 6= y. Then, the law of
motion of the measure of households is, for i ∈ I = {20, ..., 109} ,
Z
φi
1
xt+1 (si+1 ) =
1 + ν E×A×B [ai+1 =ai+1 (si ,St ;Ψt )+qt ]

(17)

×1[bi+1 =bi+1 (wt ei hi (si ,St ;Ψ),bi )] πi,i+1 (ei+1 | ei ) dXt (si ) .
For simplicity, accidental bequests due to uncertain life span are captured by the government
and distributed equally to all surviving working-age households in a lump-sum manner. The
accidental bequests per household at the end of year t is
R
P109
i=20 (1 − φi ) E×A×B ai+1 (si , St ; Ψt ) dXt (si )
.
qt =
R
P64
i=20 φi E×A×B dXt (si )

(18)

The steady-state condition is

(19)

St+1 = St
for all t and si ∈ I × E × A × B.

3.3 The Firm’s Problem
National wealth Wt is the sum of total private wealth and government net wealth Wg,t . Total
labor supply Lt is measured in efficiency units.
Wt =
Lt =

109 Z
X

i=20 E×A×B
109 Z
X

ai dXt (si ) + Wg,t ,

(20)

ei hi (si , St ; Ψt ) dXt (si ) .

(21)

i=20 E×A×B

There is a perfectly competitive firm in this economy. In a closed economy, the capital
stock is equal to national wealth, that is,
(22)

Kt = Wt ,
20

and gross national product Yt is determined by constant-returns-to-scale production,
(23)

Yt = F (Kt , Lt ).
The profit-maximizing condition of the firm is
rt + δ = FK (Kt , Lt ),

(24)

0
) = FL (Kt , Lt ),
wt (1 + τP,t

(25)

0 is the marginal payroll tax rate.29
where δ is the depreciation rate of capital and τP,t

3.4 The Government’s Policy Rules
Government tax revenue consists of federal income tax TI,t , payroll tax for Social Security
TP,t , and consumption tax TC,t . These revenues equal:
109 Z
X

TI,t =

τI,t (wt ei hi (si , St ; Ψt ), rt ai , trSS,t (i, bi )) dXt (si ) ,

(26)

i=20 E×A×B

TP,t = 2 ×
TC,t =

109 Z
X

τp,t (wt ei hi (si , St ; Ψt )) dXt (si ) ,

(27)

i=20 E×A×B

109 Z
X

τC,t ci (si , St ; Ψt ) dXt (si ) .

(28)

i=20 E×A×B

Total Social Security benefits T rSS,t equals
T rSS,t =

109 Z
X

trSS,t (i, bi ) dXt (si ) .

(29)

i=20 E×A×B

The law of motion of the government wealth (normalized by productivity growth and population growth) is
Wg,t+1 =

1
{(1 + rt ) Wg,t + (TI,t + TP,t + TC,t ) − T rSS,t − Cg,t } , (30)
(1 + µ) (1 + ν)

where Cg,t is government consumption.
29

U.S. payroll taxes are divided equally between firms and employees. While the incidence of the tax does
not depend on this division, our model explicitly includes the division for calibration purposes. In doing so,
we ignore the small fraction of the representative firm’s workforce whose wages exceed the payroll tax ceiling.
However, the ceiling is enforced on the worker’s share, as shown earlier.

21

3.5 Recursive Competitive Equilibrium
Definition Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (Steady State): Let si = (i, ei , ai , bi ) be
the individual state of households and Ψ be the time-invariant government policy rules,
Ψ = {Wg , Cg , τI (.), τP (.), τC , trSS (.)} .
Factor prices (r, w); accidental bequests q; the policy variables (Wg , Cg , τC , trLS ); the
parameters ϕ of policy functions (τI (.), τP (.), trSS (.)); the value function of households,
v (si ; Ψ) ; the decision rule of households,
d(si ; Ψ) = {ci (si ; Ψ), hi (si ; Ψ), ai+1 (si ; Ψ)};
and the measure of households, x (si ), are in a steady-state recursive competitive equilibrium
if, in every period, each household solves the utility maximization problem (5) – (9) taking Ψ
as given; the firm solves the profit maximization problem, and the capital and labor markets
clear, that is, (20) – (25) hold; the government policy rules satisfy (26) – (30); and, the
measure of households is constant, that is, (19) holds.
Definition Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (Equilibrium Transition Path): Let si =
(i, ei , ai , bi ) be the individual state of households, St = (xt (si ), Wg,t ) be the aggregate state
of the economy, and Ψt be the government policy rules known at the beginning of year t,
Ψt = {Wg,s+1 , Cg,s , τI,s (.), τP,s (.), τC , trSS,s (.)}∞
s=t .
A series of factor prices, accidental bequests, the policy variables, and the parameters of
policy functions,
Ω ={rs , ws , qs , Wg,s+1 , Cg,s , τC,s , ϕs }∞
s=t ;
the value function of households,{v (si , Ss ; Ψs )}∞
s=t ; the decision rule of households,
∞
{d(si , Ss ; Ψs )}∞
s=t = {ci (si , Ss ; Ψs ), hi (si , Ss ; Ψs ), ai+1 (si , Ss ; Ψs )}s=t ;

and a series of the measure of households, {xs (si )}∞
s=t , are in a recursive competitive equi-

librium if, in every period s = t, ..., ∞, each household solves the utility maximization
22

Table 3: Parameters
Time preference parameter
Share parameter for consumption
Coefficient of relative risk aversion
Capital share of output
Depreciation rate of capital stock
Long-term real growth rate
Population growth rate
Total factor productivity

β
α
γ
θ
δ
µ
ν
A

0.986
0.473
2.0
0.32
0.046
0.018
0.010
0.983

problem (5) – (9) taking Ψt as given; the firm solves the profit maximization problem, and
the capital and labor markets clear, that is, (20) – (25) hold; and, the government policy rules
satisfy (26) – (30).

4 Calibration
Table 3 summarizes the parameter choices. For the baseline economy on a balanced growth
path, the degree of time preference β is chosen so that the capital-output ratio is 2.8; total
factor productivity A is chosen so that the wage rate equals unity; and, the consumption share
parameter α is chosen so that the average annual working hours of married couples between
the ages of 20 and 64 are consistent with U.S. data. As explained below, a Cobb-DouglasCRRA utility function and a Cobb-Douglas production function are also used.30
The following sections describe the choice of functional forms and parameter values.

4.1 Households
Utility Function. Like the recent paper by Conesa and Krueger (1999) that focuses on
Social Security reform, our model has elastic labor supply. We use the following CobbDouglas utility function with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA), which is compatible
with the existence of a steady state:
o1−γ
n
1−α
((1 + ni /2)−ζ ci )α (hmax
−
h
)
i
i
,
u(ci , hi ) =
1−γ
30

The calibration basically follows that of the four-period model in Nishiyama (2002) but extends it significantly to a 90-period setting.

23

Table 4: Number of People Under 18 Years of Age in a Married Household
Age cohorts
20-24
25-29
30-34
35-39
40-44

Number of people
under age 18
0.895
1.149
1.617
1.905
1.649

Age cohorts
45-49
50-54
55-59
60-64
65-plus

Number of people
under age 18
1.011
0.445
0.188
0.094
0.000∗

Source: Authors’ calculations using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
1993 Family Data.
∗ The number 0.000 for ages 65-plus is an assumption and not from PSID data.

where γ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ni is the number of dependent children, ζ
is the maximum working hours.31 The
is the consumption adjustment parameter, and hmax
i
coefficient of relative risk aversion is assumed to be 2.0. The number of dependent children
by age cohort is calculated using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) 1993 Family
Data (see Table 4). The consumption adjustment parameter is assumed to be 0.6.
The annual working hours in the model are the sum of the working hours of a husband
and a wife. The average working hours of married households between ages 20 and 64 are
3,368 hours in the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). The maximum working hours
are set at 8,760, which equals two persons times 12 hours times 365 days. In this calibration,
the parameter α is chosen to be 0.473 so that the average working hours of households
between age 20 and age 64 equal 3,368 hours in the steady-state baseline economy.
Working Ability. The working ability in this calibration corresponds to the hourly wage
(labor income per hour) of each household in the 1998 SCF. The average hourly wage of a
married couple (family members #1 and #2 in SCF) used for the calibration is calculated by
Hourly Wage =

Regular and Additional Salaries (#1 + #2) + Welfare or Assistance
.
Working Hours (#1 + #2)

To capture the earnings risk a household is exposed to more precisely, unemployment or
worker’s compensation, TANF, food stamps, and other forms of welfare or assistance are
added to the salaries before calculating the hourly wage. Failing to include these transfers
31

In this setting, the growth-adjusted β becomes β(1 + µ)α(1−γ) , which is 0.977 in the calibration.

24

Table 5: Working Abilities of a Household (in U.S. Dollars per Hour)
Percentile

e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8

e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8

0-20th
20-40th
40-60th
60-80th
80-90th
90-95th
95-99th
99-100th
Percentile
0-20th
20-40th
40-60th
60-80th
80-90th
90-95th
95-99th
99-100th

20-24
3.83
7.07
8.68
10.67
14.05
18.20
28.43
36.81

25-29
5.42
8.64
10.91
14.01
17.52
22.48
32.64
46.09

50-54
5.48
11.53
16.16
23.44
32.14
43.01
78.61
314.59

55-59
3.52
10.06
14.26
21.28
30.93
44.10
85.29
379.44

Age cohorts
30-34
35-39
5.42
6.93
9.76
11.28
13.46
15.01
18.08
19.96
27.17
25.27
33.71
33.38
54.11
52.16
167.15 186.47
Age cohorts
60-64
65-69
0.00
0.00
4.54
0.00
11.18
2.82
18.16
10.37
28.56
19.48
59.36
27.68
96.22
59.34
421.55 299.25

40-44
6.12
11.36
15.59
22.09
30.89
48.59
76.13
221.34

45-49
6.59
12.70
17.22
23.22
31.58
44.31
86.50
301.99

70-74
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.81
12.57
29.03
64.91
195.73

75-79
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.96
14.25
146.14

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1998 SCF data.

would tend to lead to an overestimate of the risk-sharing benefits of the current federal income tax system. Table 5 shows the eight discrete levels of working abilities of five-year
age cohorts.32 Taking a five-year moving average of these numbers, we obtain the working
ability of each age cohort. According to Bureau of Labor Statistics data, the average hourly
earnings of production workers have increased by 16.7 percent during the years from 1997
to 2001. In the calibration, the numbers in the table are multiplied by 1.167 to convert the
hourly wages in 1997 into those in 2001.
Markov Transition Matrix. The Markov transition matrix, Γ, of working ability is calculated from the hourly wage of people ages 30-39 in 1991 in the PSID individual data. To
make the working ability process more persistent, the matrix is calculated as the transition
32

Here, the hourly wage of a household that works less than 520 hours (10 hours a week per couple) is assumed
to be zero. In the real economy, some households have fairly high working ability but choose not to work (for
example, because of schooling). One observation of the age 20-24 cohort, which has an hourly wage of $193.01,
is ignored.

25

from the average of years 1989 and 1990 to the average of years 1990 and 1991.












Γ=










0.7674

0.2049

0.0183

0.0045

0.0049

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.1810

0.6033

0.1844

0.0129

0.0000

0.0086

0.0046

0.0052

0.0388

0.1517

0.6768

0.1220

0.0011

0.0046

0.0050

0.0000

0.0126

0.0361

0.1039

0.7210

0.0980

0.0139

0.0145

0.0000

0.0000

0.0081

0.0332

0.2360

0.6306

0.0676

0.0145

0.0100

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0582

0.3224

0.5303

0.0891

0.0000

0.0007

0.0000

0.0000

0.0354

0.0000

0.2827

0.6433

0.0379

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.0000

0.3553

0.6447

where Γ(j, k) = π(ei+1 = eki+1 | ei = eji ).













,










Population Growth and Mortality. The population growth rate ν is assumed to be 1.0
percent per year. The survival rates φi at the end of age i = {20, ..., 109} are the weighted

average of males and females in 1998 from Social Security Administration data (2001). The
survival rates at the end of age 109 are replaced by zero.

4.2 The Firm
Production Function. Production takes the Cobb-Douglas form,
.
F (Kt , Lt ) = At Ktθ L1−θ
t
To compute GNP, we use the sum of working hours in efficiency units as total labor supply
Lt . The capital share of output θ is chosen by
θ =1−

Compensation of Employees + (1 − θ) × Proprietors’ Income
.
National Income + Consumption of Fixed Capital

The average of θ in 1996-1998 is 0.32. The annual growth rate µ is assumed to be 1.8 percent.
The annual population growth rate ν is assumed to be 1.0 percent. Total factor productivity
A is chosen to be 0.983 so that the wage per unit of efficient labor is normalized to be unity.

26

Table 6: Survival Rates in the United States (Weighted Average of Males and Females)
Age

Survival
Rate

Age

Survival
Rate

Age

Survival
Rate

Age

Survival
Rate

Age

Survival
Rate

20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

0.999113
0.999066
0.999037
0.999028
0.999032
0.999043
0.999049
0.999041
0.999014
0.998970
0.998919
0.998865
0.998804
0.998735
0.998660
0.998573
0.998475
0.998368
0.998250
0.998122

40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59

0.997978
0.997820
0.997654
0.997465
0.997267
0.997044
0.996797
0.996534
0.996258
0.995960
0.995626
0.995247
0.994823
0.994352
0.993826
0.993231
0.992570
0.991857
0.991094
0.990263

60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79

0.989365
0.988361
0.987195
0.985840
0.984324
0.982631
0.980851
0.979101
0.977433
0.975763
0.973892
0.971745
0.969406
0.966856
0.964033
0.960839
0.957219
0.953175
0.948673
0.943665

80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99

0.938048
0.931804
0.924980
0.917566
0.909481
0.900623
0.890904
0.880258
0.868650
0.856070
0.842518
0.828007
0.812554
0.796181
0.778913
0.761457
0.744011
0.726790
0.710031
0.693980

100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109

0.676941
0.658846
0.639629
0.619216
0.597532
0.574495
0.550021
0.524022
0.496402
0.467066

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical Supplement
(2001). In the calibration, the survival rate at the end of age 109 is set to zero.

Fixed Capital and Private Wealth. The fixed capital Kt for the calibration is obtained
by “fixed reproducible tangible wealth” minus “durable goods owned by consumers” in the
Survey of Current Business (1997). In 1990-1996, fixed capital accounted for 89.7 percent
of fixed reproducible tangible wealth, and the capital-GDP ratio is approximately 2.8.
To connect the total private wealth with the fixed capital, it is assumed that all of the
private capital is owned by households and that part of the government-owned fixed capital
is effectively owned by households in the form of government bonds.
Private Wealth (Excluding Durables) = Fixed Capital
− Government-Owned Fixed Capital
+ Government Bonds Owned by Private Sector.

27

In the model, fixed capital is the sum of private wealth (excluding durables) and net
government wealth. Based on the data from 1990 to 1996, net government wealth in the
baseline economy is assumed to be 6.5 percent of total private wealth.
The Depreciation Rate of Fixed Capital. The depreciation rate of fixed capital δ is chosen
by
δ=

Total Gross Investment
− µ − ν.
Fixed Capital

In 1997-2000, gross private domestic investment accounted for, on average, 17.5 percent
of GDP, and gross government investment (federal and state) accounted for 3.2 percent of
GDP. When the capital-output ratio is 2.8, the ratio of gross investment to fixed capital is 7.4
percent. Subtracting the productivity and population growth rates, the annual depreciation
rate is assumed to be 4.6 percent.

4.3 Taxes and Transfers
Income Taxes. For the federal income tax, the model uses the following tax function in
Gouveia and Strauss (1994),
³
´
Federal Income Tax = φ0 y − (y −φ1 + φ2 )−1/φ1 × φadj ,
where y is the taxable income (in thousands of dollars) of a household, which includes the
taxable portion of Social Security benefits. In 2001, the standard deduction for a married
household was $7,600, and the exemption was $2,900 per person. When the parameters are
φ0 = 0.41, φ1 = 0.85, φ2 = 0.015, and φadj = 1.0, this function replicates the statutory
income tax schedule. But because of itemized deductions, the effective tax rate of highincome households is much lower.33 Since in 2000 the ratio of total private income tax to
nominal GDP was 0.102, φadj is assumed to be 0.604 so that income tax revenue is 10.2
percent of GDP in the steady-state equilibrium.
In addition to federal income tax, a 4.0 percent state tax is assumed for income (excluding
Social Security benefits) above the same standard deduction and exemptions.
33

See Gouveia and Strauss (1994) for effective federal tax rates.

28

Social Security. The Social Security system in the United States shares not only longevity
risk among its participants but, due to its progressive formula, lifetime wage uncertainty as
well, which our model captures. The tax rate levied on both employers and employees for
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) is 6.2 percent, and the tax rate for
Medicare (HI) is 1.45 percent. In 2001, employee compensation above $80,400 was not
taxable for OASDI. So, the firm’s profit-maximization problem becomes
w × (1 + Marginal Payroll Tax Rate) = AFL (K, L),
where the marginal payroll tax rate is 0.0765 (equal to 0.062 + 0.0145).
Social Security benefits are based on each worker’s average indexed monthly earnings
(AIME), bi /12, and the replacement rate schedule in the United States. The replacement
rates are 90 percent for the first $561, 32 percent for amounts between $561 and $3,381, and
15 percent for amounts above $3,381. Since we are not able to accommodate health shocks
in addition to our other stochastic variables, Medicare benefits are constant and included
in government consumption. Since, in the policy experiments, government consumption is
held constant relative to population growth and technological change, an increase (decrease)
in Medicare tax revenue after a reform requires less (more) consumption tax revenue.
The Social Security benefits received by retired workers consisted of 69 percent of total OASDI benefits in December 2000.34 The calibration simply assumes that each elderly
household receives other Social Security benefits—those for spouses, children, and disabled
workers—proportionally. Hence, benefits are multiplied by 1.543 so that total OASDI benefits are equal to OASDI tax revenue in the baseline economy.

5 The Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority
In our policy experiments reported below, we measure the pure efficiency gains from a policy change using a Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority, following Auerbach and Kotlikoff
(1987). We extend their analysis to a stochastic OLG model with heterogeneous agents.
Suppose that a new policy is announced at the beginning of period 1. The LSRA first
makes a lump-sum transfer (tax if negative) to each living household to bring its remaining
34

The number is from Social Security Administration (2001), Table 5.A4.

29

expected lifetime utility back to its level in the baseline economy. Since the welfare gain
or loss to each household depends on its own state, these lump-sum transfers (taxes)35 are
shown as trR1 (si ) where si = (i, ei , ai , bi ) such that
v (i, ei , ai + trR1 (si ) , bi , S1 ; Ψ1 ) = v (si , S0 ; Ψ0 ) .
Next, the LSRA makes a lump-sum transfer (tax) to each future household (that is, each
newborn household in periods 2, 3, ...) to make it as well off in the baseline economy,
conditional on its initial state at age 20. These transfers (taxes) are shown as trR2 (s20 , t)
such that, for t = 2, 3, ...,
v (20, e20 , 0 + trR2 (s20 , t) , 0, St ; Ψt ) = v (s20 , S0 ; Ψ0 ) .
Finally, the LSRA makes additional lump-sum transfers (taxes) to the newborn households
in periods 2, 3, ..., so that the net present value across all the LSRA transfers at the beginning
of period 1 is zero. We assume these additional transfers are uniform on a growth-adjusted
basis. With steady-state growth at rate µ, the additional transfers are shown as trR3 , where
X

trR1 (si ) x1 (si ) +

si

∞
X
(1 + µ)t−1
t=2

P

{trR2 (s20 , t) + trR3 } xt (s20 )
= 0.
Qt−1
k=1 (1 + rk )

s20

When trR3 > 0, all of the current households would be as well off as the baseline economy
and all of the future households would be strictly better off; hence, the new policy is Pareto
improving after lump-sum redistributions. When trR3 < 0, the alternative policy is Pareto
inferior after lump-sum redistributions.
The wealth held by the LSRA (normalized by the productivity growth and population
growth), {Wa }∞
t=1 , is derived as
Wa,1 = 0,
Wa,2
Wa,t
35

P
− si trR1 (si ) x1 (si )
,
=
(1 + µ) (1 + ν)
P
(1 + rt−1 )Wa,t−1 − s20 {trR2 (s20 , t) + trR3 } xt (s20 )
=
(1 + µ) (1 + ν)

These lump-sum transfers are negative of the compensating variations in wealth for current households.

30

Table 7: Working Abilities of a Representative Household (In U.S. Dollars per Hour)
Age Cohorts

e1
Age Cohorts

e1

20-24
9.87
50-54
22.98

25-29
12.44
55-59
22.33

30-34
17.58
60-64
20.67

35-39
18.78
65-69
11.34

40-44
21.81
70-74
7.62

45-49
23.80
75-79
2.13

Source: Authors’ calculations from 1998 SCF data.

for t = 3, 4, ..., ∞. National wealth Wt is the sum of total private wealth, government net

wealth Wg,t , and the LSRA wealth Wa,t . So, equation (20) is replaced with
Wt =

109 Z
X

ai dXt (si ) + Wg,t + Wa,t ,

i=20 E×A×B

and the government policy rule is defined as
Ψt = {Wg,s+1 , Wa,s+1 , Cg,s , τI,s (.) , τP,s (.) , τC , trSS,s (.)}∞
s=t .

6 A Deterministic OLG Variant of Our Model
In order to investigate the importance of idiosyncratic wages in our policy simulations reported below, we also consider a deterministic version of our OLG model in which a new
representative household is born at each date, similar to the original Auerbach and Kotlikoff
(1987) model. We assume that the working ability schedule of the representative household
is that shown in Table 7. Those numbers are the weighted average of the values shown in
Table 5. The representative household does not receive any working ability shocks, but there
is still lifetime uncertainty in order to better isolate the risk-sharing role of the prereform
progressive tax system.
Similar to the stochastic OLG economy with heterogeneous agents, the model is calibrated to the U.S. economy so that the capital-output ratio is 2.8 and average working hours
(per couple) of working age households (ages 20-64) are 3,368 hours. Also, the wage rate
(per efficiency unit of labor) is normalized to unity. The obtained parameters are as follows:

31

Table 8: Parameters of the Representative Agent Model
β

α

A

1.019

0.431

0.983

7 Policy Experiments
We now consider the effects of reducing the marginal income tax rates by 10 percent proportionately and raising the consumption tax rate in each year to replace the lost revenue.36 We
first analyze this policy change using the baseline model described above, and we consider
four cases: with and without wage uncertainty (life-span uncertainty is operative in all the
experiments), and, for both of these two cases, without and with the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. We then report how the results change under some alternative model and
reform assumptions.

7.1 In the Baseline Economy
In the baseline economy, recall that the federal income tax function is
³
´
0.41 × y − (y −0.85 + 0.015)−1/0.85 × φadj ,
and the adjustment factor φadj is set to 0.604. In our policy experiment, φadj is lowered by 10
percent to 0.544, thereby reducing marginal income tax rates proportionately by 10 percent.
From the government budget constraint (30), the consumption tax revenue needed to
finance the tax cut is
TC,t = (1 + µ) (1 + ν) Wg,t+1 − (1 + rt )Wg,t − (TI,t + TP,t ) + T rSS,t + Cg,t .
When the aggregate private consumption is
C=

109 Z
X

ci (si , St ; Ψ) dXt (si ) ,

i=20 E×A×B
36
Of course, the complexity of solving a 10 percent replacement of the current income tax system is no different than solving for a full replacement. A partial replacement, however, takes relatively less computer time
to solve since the transition path and final steady state are closer to the initial steady state. The qualitative conclusions reported herein about whether tax reform increases or decreases efficiency under the different scenarios
considered below are not affected by the size of the reform.

32

and a balanced budget is assumed, that is, Wg,t+1 = Wg,t , the consumption tax rate τC,t is
τC,t = {((1 + µ) (1 + ν) − (1 + rt )) Wg,t − (TI,t + TP,t ) + T rSS,t + Cg,t } / C.
7.1.1 With Wage Uncertainty
Tables 9A - 9C show the macroeconomic and welfare results of the tax reform in the stochastic version of our model with heterogeneous households. (The remaining tables are included
at the end of this paper.) We first consider the case without the LSRA and then with it.
Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. The top panel of Table 9A shows
that GNP and national wealth increase throughout the entire rational-expectations transition
path. In the long run, national wealth, which is equal to capital stock in a closed economy,
increases by 2.9 percent from the baseline economy, labor supply increases by 0.6 percent,
and GNP increases by 1.3 percent. The interest rate decreases by 0.18 percentage points and
the wage rate increases by 0.7 percent. To keep the government wealth (debt) at the same
level as that of the baseline, the consumption tax rate increases by 1.3 percentage points.
The top panel of Table 9B shows average welfare changes faced by agents in a particular
birth cohort and the (stochastic) income class they are in at the time of the reform.37 Each
number is the population-weighted average of welfare changes across all households—with
different wealth levels and different average historical earnings—in that birth-productivity
cohort.38 All households over the age 80 in year 1, though, are in the lowest productivity
group, e1 . The numbers are shown in units of $1,000 and are adjusted (deflated) for economic
growth over time.39 So, for example, the table shows that the welfare increases by -3.0—that
is, an average loss of $3,000—for the household who is age 40 and in productivity class e1
in year 1, the year of reform. In words, households in that cohort would be willing to pay
a one-time fee of $3,000, on average, in order to avoid this reform.40 For households that
37

In other words, the household’s prereform and postreform value functions are computed conditional on their
state at the time of reform. The household’s state variables obviously change in future years.
38
Reporting welfare changes conditional on each state variable would be cumbersome. We, therefore, report
the average welfare gain within each birth cohort and income class. In the LSRA calculations reported below,
though, redistribution is conditioned on each state variable.
39
In other words, a household that turns 20 in year t ≥ 1 actually gains s × (1+ µ)t−1 , where s is the amount
shown in the table and µ is the per capita growth rate in the baseline economy.
40
Unlike in the Auerbach and Kotlikoff model, our reported values cannot be expressed as a share of remaining
full lifetime income since that value is stochastic in our model.

33

have not yet reached the age 20 in year 1, the welfare numbers correspond to the amount of
thousand dollars (adjusted for average growth) that they gain at age 20.
Notice that most households alive at the time of the reform are worse off, except for
those in the highest two productivity classes, e7 and e8 . While the gain to classes e7 and
e8 is only a small fraction of their expected remaining lifetime income, it is still interesting
that it is positive. Due to the serial correlation in productivity generated by the Markov
earnings process, the two most productive classes at the time of the reform gain from a
reduction in progressivity, and that gain outweighs the value of the lump-sum levy on their
assets produced by moving to a consumption tax. Those in lower productivity classes at the
time of the reform are, however, often worse off, including those who are only age 20 in
year 1. Evidentially, the intertemporal and labor distortions caused by the prereform income
tax system are less important to less productive agents than the risk sharing value that the
prereform progressive tax system provides.
Most future households (those younger than age 20 in year 1), however, are better off
from this reform. For example, the household who starts in productivity class e2 at age 20
in year 81 gains 1.0 (that is, $1,000), a value that has been adjusted (deflated) for average
growth between year 1 and year 81. Evidentially, the positive long-run general-equilibrium
effects of reform combined with the reduction in distortions outweigh the importance of the
reduction in risk sharing for them.
With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. To evaluate the overall efficiency of this
tax change, the bottom panels of Tables 9A and 9B shows the same set of results with
the LSRA. As without the LSRA, Table 9A shows that GNP and national wealth increase
throughout the entire transition path, although the long-run gains are smaller than without
the LSRA because the LSRA now transfers resources to those who otherwise would lose
from reform in the short run. Government wealth (including the LSRA debt) declines by 2.8
percent as a percentage of GNP in the long run. Table 9B shows that households age 20 and
older at the time of the reform are no better or worse off by construction: the LSRA transfers
the exact amount of resources to hold their welfare unchanged. But all future households

34

lose $3,200, a sizeable reduction in efficiency for this experiment.41 In other words, the
gain by future households from this reform is not enough to compensate the loss of current
households in general equilibrium.
7.1.2 Without Wage Uncertainty
In order to estimate the importance of earnings uncertainty, Tables 10A and 10B show the
results of the same tax reform within the deterministic version of our OLG economy. As
before, we first consider the case without the LSRA and then the case with it.
Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. The top panel of Table 10A shows
that tax reform increases national wealth and GNP throughout the entire transition path. In
the long run, national wealth increases by 3.7 percent relative to the baseline economy. This
increase is larger than that in a stochastic and heterogeneous economy. While precautionary
saving increases in the stochastic version of our model as the risk sharing in the progressive
income tax system is reduced, overall saving is more responsive to changes in after-tax interest rates in our deterministic model with representative households. Labor supply is also
more responsive in the deterministic model, increasing by 1.5 percent in the long run, causing GNP to increase by 2.2 percent. The consumption tax rate increases by 0.8 percentage
points in the long run.
The top panel of Table 10B shows that, without the LSRA, older households lose several
thousand dollars from the reform, in large part from the wealth levy of their accumulated
assets. Younger households, including those age 50 and below at the time of the reform,
however, gain from the reduction in distortions caused by the reform, by as much as $23,000
per household. Households born in the long run gain over $22,000, benefiting from both the
reduction in distortions and larger wages, although they face smaller returns to their saving.
With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority. The bottom panels of Tables 10A and
10B shows the results with the operative LSRA. Table 10A shows that, in contrast to the
stochastic version of our model, the presence of the LSRA now leads to a larger long-run
41

Remember that these numbers correspond to replacing only 10 percent of the progressive income tax system;
full replacement would produce even larger losses.

35

increase in national wealth and output. The reason is that younger households at the time of
the reform gain more than the older households lose. Holding the remaining lifetime utility
of agents alive at the time of the reform at their baseline level, therefore, nets the LSRA a
positive level of resources in the short run.
Table 10B shows that, again, by construction of the LSRA, households alive at the time
of the reform gain $0. But future households are better off by $25,100 per household, a
remarkable difference relative to the stochastic case considered earlier where each future
household lost $3,200.

7.2 Alternative Assumptions
We now report how the results change under three alternative model and reform assumptions
using the stochastic version of our model: (i) a small open-economy; (ii) when the new
consumption tax is progressive; and, (iii) when households are even more risk averse. None
of these modifications, however, lead to positive efficiency gains following tax reform.
7.2.1 Small Open Economy
Tables 11A and 11B show the results of the tax change in a small open economy in which
the interest rate and the wage rate are held fixed at the same levels as those in the baseline
economy. Table 11A shows that both without and with the LSRA, the long-run increase
in national wealth is larger, and the long-run increase in labor supply is smaller, than in a
closed economy (compare with Table 9A). The top panel of Table 11B shows that without the
LSRA, the average welfare loss of current households is smaller than it would be in a closed
economy (compare with Table 9B). Since the interest rate does not fall in the small open
economy after reform, some of the welfare losses by older households are mitigated. The
bottom panel of Table 11B shows that with the LSRA, the welfare loss of current households
is, again, $0 by construction, but future households lose $1,000. This loss is smaller in
magnitude than the $3,200 loss to each household in a closed economy since, in the open
economy, capital deepening no longer generates a decrease in interest rates.

36

7.2.2 Postreform Consumption Tax is Progressive
Tables 12A and 12B show the results of the tax change if a progressive consumption tax
is introduced instead of the proportional consumption tax considered earlier. In this case,
a flat consumption tax is levied on each household’s annual consumption above $20,000.
Both without and with the LSRA, Table 12A shows that national wealth and GNP again
increase throughout the entire transition path, although by slightly smaller amounts than with
a proportional consumption tax, as shown in Table 9A. To keep the government’s wealth at
the same level as in the baseline, the consumption tax rate will have to increase by 1.9 percent
in the long run, compared with 1.3 percent in Table 9A.
Without the LSRA, Table 12B shows that, for households age 50 or over at the time of
the reform (year 1), only households in classes e1 through e3 are better off relative to the proportional consumption tax. The main reason is due to the larger revenue-neutral consumption
tax rate in the progressive system, which levies a larger lump-sum tax on those assets that
have already been accumulated at the time of the reform. The benefit of this lump-sum tax
accrues mainly to future generations. Households born into income classes e1 through e6 in
the long run are generally better off.
With the LSRA, each future household loses $2,800 in welfare, which is smaller in magnitude than the $3,200 loss in the proportional tax case. A key reason for the smaller loss is
that the $20,000 deduction generates a limited amount of risk sharing. However, this deduction is not as powerful of a risk-sharing device as the progressive marginal tax rate schedule
found in the prereform system. For many households, income (and, hence, consumption)
typically fluctuates above the $20,000 deduction level for two reasons. First, unemployment
leads to a drawing down of previous assets in order to support a level of consumption above
the deduction. Second, unemployment insurance income (which is included in our income
measure) provides some income as well. For those households, therefore, a modest decline
in normal labor income produces only a small reduction in their average tax rates and no
reduction in their marginal tax rates under a consumption tax with a deduction.

37

7.2.3 Households Are More Risk Averse
Tables 13A and 13B show the results when the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, equals
4.0 instead of 2.0. Under our choice of constant relative risk aversion utility, a larger value
of γ generates more aversion to risk as well as more precautionary saving. Interestingly,
without the LSRA, Table 13A shows that the long-run increase in national wealth after tax
reform is actually slightly larger than that shown in the benchmark model (see Table 9A).
On one hand, a smaller response might be expected since a household’s saving is now less
sensitive to changes in the after-tax interest rate for two reasons: (i) a greater share of capital
in the prereform economy is now held for precautionary reasons and (ii) the intertemporal
substitution elasticity (equal to 1/γ) is reduced. On the other hand, the risk-sharing provided
by the prereform progressive income tax system is more valuable at a higher value of risk
aversion: tax reform, therefore, generates relatively more precautionary saving in response to
the reduction in risk sharing. Indeed, the LSRA experiment shown in Table 13B demonstrates
that tax reform produces even larger efficiency losses than before, increasing from $3,200 per
future household to a loss of $5,500 per future household.

8 Concluding Remarks
Tax reform has been analyzed in numerous papers. The calculation of the actual efficiency
gains or losses stemming from tax reform, however, has been previously limited to models that assume an infinite-horizon representative agent, making it difficult to analyze the
risk-sharing benefits of progressive taxation in the prereform system. This paper presents a
new finite-horizon OLG model with idiosyncratic earnings and longevity risks. Following
the deterministic OLG model developed by Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987), we construct a
Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority that is used to fix the remaining lifetime expected utilities of agents alive at the time of the tax reform at their prereform levels. The LSRA allows
us to report actual efficiency gains associated with tax reform.
Our results point to the importance of incorporating the risk-sharing aspects of the prereform tax system into the analysis of tax reform. With stochastic wage shocks, replacing just
10 percent of the existing progressive income tax system with a revenue-neutral proportional

38

consumption tax produced a $3,200 loss to each future household under our benchmark parameter settings and model form. But when wage shocks were turned off and the model
was recalibrated to match the same initial economy, future households gained $25,100. The
qualitative nature of these results were shown to be robust to a fairly wide range of parameter
and model assumptions. A key reason for the efficiency loss with stochastic wages is the
reduction in risk sharing relative to the prereform progressive income tax system.

Appendix
A The Discretization of the State Space
The state of a household is si = (i, ei , ai , bi ) ∈ I × E × A × B, where I = {20, ..., 109},
£
¤
E = [emin , emax ], A = amin , amax , and B = [bmin , bmax ]. To compute an equilibrium, the

state space of a household is discretized as b
si ∈ I × Ê × Â× B̂, where Ê = {e1 , e2 , ..., eNe },
Â = {a1 , a2 , ..., aNa }, and B̂ = {b1 , b2 , ..., bNb }.

For all these discrete points, we compute the optimal decision of households, d(b
si , St ; Ψt )

]×A, and the marginal values,
= (ci (.) , hi (.) , ai+1 (.)) ∈ (0, cmax ]×[0, hmax
i

∂
si , St ; Ψt ),
∂a v(b

given the expected factor prices and policy variables.

To find the optimal end-of-period wealth, we use the Euler equation and bilinear interpolation (with respect to a and b) of marginal value functions at the beginning of the next
period. In this paper, Ne , Na , and Nb are 8, 60, and 10, respectively. Since there are 90
different ages, the total number of discrete states is 432,000.

B A Steady-State Equilibrium
The algorithm to compute a steady-state equilibrium is as follows. Let Ψ denote the timeinvariant government policy rules Ψ = (Wg , Cg , τI (.), τP (.), τC , trSS (.)).
1. Set the initial values of factor prices (r0 , w0 ), accidental bequests q 0 , the policy variables (Wg0 , Cg0 , τC0 ), and the parameters ϕ0 of policy functions (τI (.), τP (.), trSS (.))
if these are determined endogenously.42
42

Actually, if we find the capital-labor ratio, both r and w are calculated from the given production function
and depreciation rate.

39

2. Given Ω0 = (r0 , w0 , q 0 , Wg0 , Cg0 , τC0 , ϕ0 ), find the decision rule of a household d(b
si ;
si ∈ I × Ê × Â × B̂.43
Ψ, Ω0 ) for all b

(a) For age i = 109, find the decision rule d(b
s109 ; Ψ, Ω0 ). Since the survival rate
s109 ; .) = 0 for all b
s109 . Compute
φ109 = 0, the end-of-period wealth ai+1 (b

s109 ; .), hi (b
s109 ; .)) and, then, the marginal
consumption and working hours (ci (b
values

∂
s109 ; Ψ, Ω0 )
∂a v(b

for all b
s109 .

∂
(b) For age i = 108, ..., 20, find the decision rule d(b
si ; Ψ, Ω0 ) and ∂a
v(b
si ; Ψ, Ω0 ) for

all b
si , using

∂
si+1 ; Ψ, Ω0 )
∂a v(b

recursively.

i. Set the initial guess of a0i+1 (b
si ; .).

si ; .), compute (ci (b
si ; .), hi (b
si ; .)). Plug these into the Euler
ii. Given a0i+1 (b
equation with

∂
si+1 ; Ψ, Ω0 ).
∂a v(b

si ; .)
iii. If the Euler error is sufficiently small, then stop. Otherwise, update a0i+1 (b
and return to Step ii.
3. Find the steady-state measure of households x(b
si ; Ω0 ) using the decision rule obtained
in Step 2. This computation is done forward from age 20 to age 109. Repeat this step
to iterate q for q1 .
4. Compute new factor prices (r1 , w1 ), the policy variables (Wg1 , Cg1 ), and the parameters
ϕ1 of policy functions.
5. Compare Ω1 = (r1 , w1 , q1 , Wg1 , Cg1 , τC1 , ϕ1 ) with Ω0 . If the difference is sufficiently
small, then stop. Otherwise, update Ω0 and return to Step 2.

C An Equilibrium Transition Path
Let’s assume that the economy is in the initial steady state in period 0, and that the new policy
schedule Ψ1 , which was not expected in period 0, is announced at the beginning of period 1,
b
si ), Wg,1 ) be
where Ψ1 = {Wg,t+1 , Cg,t , τI,t (.) , τP,t (.) , τC,t , trSS,t (.)}∞
t=1 . Let S1 = (x1 (b
43

In the steady-state economy, the decision rule of a household d(b
si ; Ψ, Ω0 ) is not a function of the aggregate
b
state of economy S = (x(b
si ), Wg ). The measure of household x(b
si ) is determined uniquely by the steady-state
condition, and the government’s wealth Wg is determined by the policy rule Ψ.

40

b1
the aggregate state of the economy at the beginning of period 1. The state of the economy S

is usually equal to that of the initial steady state. The algorithm to compute a transition path
to a new steady-state equilibrium (thereafter, final steady-state equilibrium) is as follows.
1. Choose a sufficiently large number, T , such that the economy is said to reach the
new steady state within T periods.44 Set the initial guess, {Ω0t }Tt=1 , on factor prices

0
0 , τ 0 ), and the pa, Cg,t
(rt0 , wt0 ), accidental bequests qt0 , the policy variables (Wg,t+1
C,t

rameters ϕ0t of policy functions for t = 1, 2, ..., T .
0 , C 0 , τ 0 , ϕ0 ), find the final steady-state decision
2. Given Ω0T = (rT0 , wT0 , qT0 , Wg,T
g,T C,t
T

b T ; ΨT ; Ω0 ) and compute marginal values
rule d(b
si , S
T

∂
b T ; ΨT ; Ω0 )
si , S
T
∂a v(b

for all

b×A
b × B.
b (See the algorithm for a steady-state equilibrium.)
b
si ∈ I × E

3. For period t = T − 1, T − 2, ..., 1, based on the guess, Ω0t , find backward the decision
b t ; Ψt ; Ω0t ) and marginal values
rule d(b
si , S

∂
b t ; Ψt ; Ω0t )
si , S
∂a v(b

b × B,
b using the next-period marginal values
A

b×
for all b
si ∈ I × E

∂
b t+1 ; Ψt+1 ; Ω0t+1 )
si , S
∂a v(b

recursively.

b t ; Ψt ; Ω0t ) and compute the
(a) For age i = 109, find the decision rule d(b
s109 , S
marginal values

∂
b t ; Ψt ; Ω0 )
s109 , S
t
∂a v(b

for all b
s109 .

b t ; Ψt ; Ω0t ) and compute
(b) For age i = 108, ..., 20, find the decision rule d(b
si , S

∂
∂
b t ; Ψt ; Ω0t ) for all b
b t+1 ; Ψt+1 ; Ω0t+1 ) previously comsi , S
si , using ∂a
v(b
si+1 , S
∂a v(b

puted.45

i. Set the initial guess of a0i+1 (b
si ; .).
ii. Given a0i+1 (b
si ; .), compute (ci (b
si ; .), hi (b
si ; .)). Plug these into the Euler
equation with

∂
b t+1 ; Ψt+1 ; Ω0 ).
si+1 , S
t+1
∂a v(b

iii. If the Euler error is sufficiently small, then stop. Otherwise, update a0i+1 (b
si ; .)
and return to Step ii.
1
1 , τ 1 , ϕ1 )
, Cg,t
4. For period t = 1, 2, ..., T −1, compute forward Ω1t = (rt1 , wt1 , qt1 , Wg,t+1
t
C,t

44

b t ; Ψt ; Ω0 ) obsi ), using the decision rule d(b
si , S
and the measure of households xt+1 (b
t

b t = (xt (b
si ), Wg,t ) recursively.
tained in Step 3 and using the state of economy S

For this to be the case, the government’s policy rule has to be time-invariant sufficiently before period T ,
that is, Ψs = ΨT for 1 ≤ s < T .
45
∂
b t ; Ψt ; Ω0 ) recursively.
Note that this step does not use ∂a
v(b
si+1 , S
t

41

5. Compare {Ω1t }Tt=1 with {Ω0t }Tt=1 . If the difference is sufficiently small, then stop.

Otherwise, update {Ω0t }Tt=1 and return to Step 2. (If the final steady-state equilibrium

is known, return to Step 3 instead.)

D The Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority
When the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority (LSRA) is assumed, the following computation is added to the iteration process for an equilibrium transition path.
1. [Step 1 in the previous subsection “An Equilibrium Transition Path” (hereafter ETP)]
0 }T
0 T
Add the wealth held by LSRA {Wa,t
t=1 to {Ωt }t=1 and set the initial value.

2. [Steps 2 and 3 in ETP] For period t = T, T − 1, ..., 2, compute the lump-sum transfers

s20 , t) to make those households as much better
to newborn households (age 20) trR2 (b

off as the baseline economy.
b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ) to newborn houses20 , S
(a) Set the initial value of lump-sum transfers trR2 (b
holds.

b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ), find the decision rule of newborn households d(b
s20 , S
s20 ,
(b) Given trR2 (b
b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ).
S

b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ) to make those
(c) Find the compensating variation in wealth ∆trR2 (b
s20 , S

households indifferent from the baseline economy. (Initial wealth of newborn
b t ; Ψt ; Ωt )
s20 , S
households is assumed to be zero.) If the absolute value of ∆trR2 (b

b t ; Ψt ; Ωt )
s20 , S
is sufficiently small, then go to Step (d). Otherwise, update trR2 (b

b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ) and return to Step (b).
s20 , S
by adding ∆trR2 (b

b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ) and additional lump-sum transfers to newborns trR ,
(d) Given trR2 (b
s20 , S
3
b t ; Ψt ; Ωt ).
find the decision rule of newborn households d(b
s20 , S

3. [Step 3 in ETP] For period t = 1, compute the lump-sum transfers to current housesi ) to make those households as much better off as the baseholds (ages 20-109) trR1 (b
line economy.

42

b 1 ; Ψ1 ; Ω1 ) to current house(a) Set the initial value of lump-sum transfers trR1 (b
si , S
holds.

b 1 ; Ψ1 ; Ω1 ), find the decision rule of current households d(b
b1;
si , S
si , S
(b) Given trR1 (b
Ψ1 ; Ω1 ).

(c) Find the compensating variation in wealth to make those households indifferent
b 1 ; Ψ1 ; Ω1 ) as the difference
si , S
from the baseline economy. Compute ∆trR1 (b
b1;
si , S
from current beginning-of-period wealth. If the absolute value of ∆trR1 (b

b 1 ; Ψ1 ; Ω1 )
si , S
Ψ1 ; Ω1 ) is sufficiently small, then stop. Otherwise, update trR1 (b

b 1 ; Ψ1 ; Ω1 ) and return to Step (b).
si , S
by adding ∆trR1 (b

4. [Before Step 4 in ETP] Compute an additional lump-sum transfer trR3 so that the
net present value of all transfers becomes zero. Compute the wealth held by LSRA,
1 }T , which will be used to calculate national wealth.
{Wa,t
t=1
1 }T using new interest rates {r }T .
5. [After Step 4 in ETP] Recompute trR3 and {Wa,t
t t=1
t=1

1 }T
0 T
Compare {Wa,t
t=1 with {Wa,t }t=1 . If the difference is sufficiently small, then stop.

0 }T
Otherwise, update {Wa,t
t=1 and return to Step 2.

43

References
[1] Aiyagari, S. Rao (1995). “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets,
Borrowing Constraints, and Constant Discounting.” Journal of Political Economy, 106:
1158-1175.
[2] Altig, David, Alan Auerbach, Laurence Kotlikoff, Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser
(2001). “Simulating Fundamental Tax Reform in the United States.” American Economic
Review, 91, 3: 574-595.
[3] Auerbach, Alan, Jagadeesh Gokhale, and Laurence Kotlikoff (1994). “Generational Accounting: A Meaningful Way to Evaluate Fiscal Policy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8, 1: 73-94.
[4] Auerbach, Alan and Kevin Hassett (2001). “Tax Policy and Horizontal Equity.” In Kevin
Hassett and R. Glenn Hubbard, Eds., Inequality and Tax Policy. The AEI Press: Washington, D.C.
[5] Auerbach, Alan and James Hines, Jr. (2001). “Taxation and Economic Efficiency.”
NBER Working Paper #8181.
[6] Auerbach, Alan and Laurence Kotlikoff (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge University Press.
[7] Bradford, David (1986). Untangling the Income Tax. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
[8] Bureau of Economic Analysis (1997). “Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the
United States: Revised Estimates for 1993-95 and Summary Estimates for 1925-96.”
Survey of Current Business, September, 37-38.
[9] Conesa, Juan and Dirk Krueger (1999). “Social Security Reform with Heterogeneous
Agents.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 4: 757-795.

44

[10] De Nardi, Mariacristina, Selahattin İmrohoroğlu, and Thomas J. Sargent (1999). “Projected U.S. Demographics and Social Security.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2: 575615.
[11] Engen, Eric and William Gale (1996). “The Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform on
Savings.” In Economic Effects of Fundamental Tax Reform, edited by Henry J. Aaron
and William G. Gale. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution Press.
[12] Engen, Eric, Jane Gravelle, and Kent Smetters (1997). “Dynamic Tax Models: Why
They Do the Things they Do.” National Tax Journal, 50, 3: 657-682.
[13] Fullerton, Don and Diane Lim Rogers (1993). Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
[14] Gouveia, Miguel and Robert P. Strauss (1994). “Effective Federal Individual Income
Tax Functions: An Exploratory Empirical Analysis.” National Tax Journal, 47, 317-339.
[15] Gravelle, Jane (2002). “Behavioral Responses to a Consumption Tax.” In United States
Tax Reform in the 21st Century, George Zodrow and Peter Mieszkowski, Editors. Cambridge University Press.
[16] Hall, Robert E. and Alvin Rabushka (1995). The Flat Tax, 2nd ed. Stanford, Calif.:
Hoover Institution Press.
[17] Huggett, Mark and Gustavo Ventura (1999). “On the Distributional Effects of Social
Security Reform.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2: 498-531.
[18] Jorgenson, Dale and Kun-Young Yun (2001). Lifting the Burden: Tax Reform, the Cost
of Capital, and U.S. Economic Growth, MIT Press.
[19] Judd, Kenneth (1999). “Optimal Taxation and Spending in General Competitive Growth
Models.” Journal of Public Economics, 71 (1): 1-26.
[20] Mirrlees, James (1971). “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.”
Review of Economic Studies, 38: 175-208.

45

[21] Nishiyama, Shinichi (2002). “Bequests, Inter Vivos Transfers, and Wealth Distribution.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5: 892-931.
[22] Social Security Administration (2001). Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical Supplement.
[23] Stokey, Nancy and Sergio Rebelo (1995). “Growth Effects of Flat-Rate Taxes.” Journal
of Political Economy, 103: 519-550.
[24] Summers, Lawrence (1981). “Capital Income Taxation and Accumulation in a Life
Cycle Model.” American Economic Review, 71: 533-544.

46

47

0.0
0.8
0.6
-0.4
-10.0
1.4
0.07
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.7
0.5
0.1
-10.0
1.4
0.06
-0.2
0.0
0.0
1.6

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

1
3

5
10

15

0.6
0.8
0.7
-0.2
-10.0
1.4
0.02
-0.1
0.6
0.0
0.7

1.0
0.7
0.8
0.0
-10.0
1.3
-0.02
0.1
1.1
0.0
1.0
1.8
0.6
1.0
0.4
-10.0
1.3
-0.09
0.4
1.9
0.0
1.7

2.2
0.6
1.1
0.7
-10.0
1.3
-0.13
0.5
2.4
0.0
2.3

0.2
0.7
0.6
0.0
-10.0
1.4
0.05
-0.2
1.1
-2.5
1.8
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.0
-10.0
1.3
0.03
-0.1
1.3
-2.5
1.9

0.7
0.7
0.7
0.2
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
1.7
-2.6
2.1
1.2
0.6
0.8
0.5
-10.0
1.3
-0.05
0.2
2.3
-2.7
2.6

1.6
0.6
0.9
0.6
-10.0
1.3
-0.08
0.3
2.7
-2.8
3.0

20

2.5
0.6
1.2
0.8
-10.0
1.3
-0.15
0.6
2.7
0.0
2.7

1.8
0.6
1.0
0.8
-10.0
1.3
-0.09
0.4
3.0
-2.8
3.3

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

0.3
0.8
0.6
-0.3
-10.0
1.4
0.04
-0.2
0.3
0.0
0.5

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

2

Year

2.0
0.6
1.0
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.11
0.5
3.2
-2.8
3.7

2.8
0.6
1.3
1.0
-10.0
1.3
-0.17
0.7
3.0
0.0
3.1

30

2.1
0.6
1.1
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.12
0.5
3.3
-2.8
3.9

2.8
0.6
1.3
1.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.17
0.7
3.0
0.0
3.3

40

2.1
0.6
1.1
1.0
-10.0
1.3
-0.12
0.5
3.3
-2.8
4.0

2.9
0.6
1.3
1.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.18
0.7
3.1
0.0
3.4

60

2.1
0.6
1.1
1.0
-10.0
1.3
-0.12
0.5
3.3
-2.8
4.0

2.9
0.6
1.3
1.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.18
0.7
3.1
0.0
3.4

80

Table 9A: Income Tax Rates Reduced by 10 Percent Proportionally; Replaced with a Proportional Consumption Tax
Key Assumptions: Stochastic OLG Model; Closed Economy; Gamma = 2.0

2.1
0.6
1.1
1.0
-10.0
1.3
-0.12
0.5
3.3
-2.8
4.0

2.9
0.6
1.3
1.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.18
0.7
3.1
0.0
3.4

120

48
-0.7

0.0

All levels of productivity

-0.7

Productivity Level
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8
Average

-79
100
-29
50

-19
40
-9
30

-6.9
-8.4
-10.6
-13.4
-14.6
-12.9
-3.0
76.2
-9.3
-4.6
-5.5
-6.4
-7.3
-7.5
-7.0
2.7
68.4
-5.0
-3.0
-3.5
-3.8
-3.6
-2.8
-0.7
7.8
50.8
-2.3

-2.0
-2.3
-2.3
-1.8
-0.8
0.5
5.8
30.6
-1.2

0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-7.5

-7.5

0.0

-1.0
-1.7
-1.7
-1.4
-0.9
-0.1
2.3
6.1
-1.1

1
20

-3.2

-0.1
0.1
0.4
1.1
1.8
2.9
5.7
10.0
0.9

11
10
21
0

-3.2

0.2
0.7
1.1
1.9
2.8
3.9
6.8
11.3
1.7

The Year When Age 20 (Top) / the Age in Year 1 (Bottom)
-39
60

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-59
80

-3.2

0.4
1.0
1.4
2.2
3.1
4.3
7.3
11.8
1.9

41
-20

-3.2

0.4
1.0
1.4
2.3
3.2
4.3
7.3
11.8
2.0

61
-40

Table 9B: Welfare Changes Corresponding to Experiment Shown in Table 9A
(Compensating Variations in Wealth ($1,000) per Household in the Shown Productivity Level and Age at Time of Reform)

-3.2

0.4
1.0
1.4
2.3
3.2
4.3
7.3
11.8
2.0

81
-60

49

0.0
2.1
1.4
0.5
-10.0
0.8
0.16
-0.7
0.0
0.0
0.3

0.0
2.4
1.6
0.3
-10.0
0.9
0.19
-0.8
0.0
0.0
1.1

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

1
3

5
10

15

0.7
2.0
1.6
0.8
-10.0
0.8
0.09
-0.4
0.8
0.0
0.8

1.4
1.9
1.7
1.0
-10.0
0.7
0.04
-0.2
1.4
0.0
1.2
2.4
1.7
1.9
1.5
-10.0
0.7
-0.05
0.2
2.6
0.0
2.0

3.0
1.6
2.1
1.9
-10.0
0.6
-0.11
0.4
3.2
0.0
2.7

0.5
2.2
1.6
0.6
-10.0
0.9
0.13
-0.5
-2.4
6.2
1.3
0.9
2.1
1.7
0.8
-10.0
0.9
0.09
-0.4
-2.0
6.2
1.5

1.6
2.0
1.9
1.1
-10.0
0.9
0.03
-0.1
-1.3
6.2
1.7
2.9
1.9
2.2
1.6
-10.0
0.8
-0.08
0.3
0.1
6.1
2.1

3.7
1.8
2.4
1.9
-10.0
0.7
-0.15
0.6
1.0
6.1
2.2

20

3.4
1.6
2.1
2.0
-10.0
0.6
-0.14
0.6
3.6
0.0
3.2

4.3
1.7
2.5
2.2
-10.0
0.7
-0.20
0.8
1.6
6.1
2.1

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

0.4
2.0
1.5
0.6
-10.0
0.8
0.13
-0.5
0.4
0.0
0.5

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

2

Year

4.9
1.6
2.6
2.3
-10.0
0.8
-0.25
1.0
2.3
6.1
1.7

3.7
1.5
2.2
2.2
-10.0
0.7
-0.16
0.7
3.9
0.0
4.0

30

5.1
1.5
2.6
2.4
-10.0
0.8
-0.27
1.1
2.5
6.1
1.3

3.7
1.5
2.2
2.3
-10.0
0.7
-0.16
0.7
3.9
0.0
4.2

40

5.2
1.5
2.6
2.4
-10.0
0.8
-0.28
1.2
2.6
6.0
1.4

3.7
1.5
2.2
2.3
-10.0
0.8
-0.16
0.7
3.9
0.0
4.1

60

5.1
1.5
2.6
2.5
-10.0
0.8
-0.28
1.2
2.6
6.0
1.6

3.7
1.5
2.2
2.3
-10.0
0.8
-0.16
0.7
3.9
0.0
4.1

80

Table 10A: Income Tax Rates Reduced by 10 Percent Proportionally; Replaced with a Proportional Consumption Tax
Key Assumptions: Deterministic OLG Model; Closed Economy; Gamma = 2.0

5.1
1.5
2.6
2.5
-10.0
0.8
-0.28
1.2
2.6
6.0
1.5

3.7
1.5
2.2
2.3
-10.0
0.8
-0.16
0.7
4.0
0.0
4.1

120

50

0.0

-0.4

-79
100
-29
50

-19
40
-9
30

-2.6
10.7

21.0

23.2

0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-3.2

0.0

18.9

1
20

25.1

21.8

11
10
21
0

25.1

22.5

The Year When Age 20 (Top) / the Age in Year 1 (Bottom)
-39
60

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-59
80

Table 10B: Welfare Changes Corresponding to Experiment Shown in Table 10A
(Compensating Variations in Wealth ($1,000) per Household)

25.1

22.3

41
-20

25.1

22.3

61
-40

25.1

22.4

81
-60

51

0.0
1.2
0.8
-0.4
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
1.1
0.8
0.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.4

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

1
3

5
10

15

0.7
1.0
0.9
-0.2
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.7

1.3
0.8
1.0
-0.1
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
1.4
0.0
1.1
2.4
0.6
1.2
0.2
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
2.6
0.0
2.1

3.2
0.4
1.3
0.5
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
3.4
0.0
3.0

0.3
1.1
0.8
-0.1
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
0.7
-1.0
1.5
0.5
1.0
0.8
0.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
1.0
-1.1
1.7

1.0
0.8
0.9
0.1
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
1.5
-1.1
1.9
2.0
0.6
1.0
0.3
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
2.5
-1.2
2.6

2.6
0.5
1.2
0.5
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
3.3
-1.3
3.2

20

3.7
0.3
1.4
0.6
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.0
0.0
3.8

3.1
0.4
1.2
0.6
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
3.8
-1.3
3.8

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

0.4
1.1
0.9
-0.3
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.5

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

2

Year

3.6
0.3
1.4
0.8
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.3
-1.4
4.7

4.3
0.2
1.5
0.9
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.6
0.0
4.8

30

3.8
0.3
1.4
0.9
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.6
-1.4
5.2

4.5
0.2
1.6
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.8
0.0
5.2

40

3.9
0.3
1.4
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.7
-1.4
5.5

4.6
0.2
1.6
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.9
0.0
5.5

60

3.9
0.3
1.4
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.7
-1.4
5.5

4.6
0.2
1.6
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.9
0.0
5.5

80

Table 11A: Income Tax Rates Reduced by 10 Percent Proportionally; Replaced with a Proportional Consumption Tax
Key Assumptions: Stochastic OLG Model; Small Open Economy; Gamma = 2.0

3.9
0.3
1.4
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.7
-1.4
5.5

4.6
0.2
1.6
1.0
-10.0
1.3
0.00
0.0
4.9
0.0
5.5

120

52
-0.6

0.0

All levels of productivity

-0.6

Productivity Level
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8
Average

-79
100
-29
50

-19
40
-9
30

-3.5
-3.8
-3.9
-2.9
-0.6
4.2
22.0
120.7
-0.6

-5.6
-6.6
-8.0
-9.0
-8.0
-1.8
14.9
125.1
-4.9
26.6
97.5
1.7

-2.3
-1.7
0.4
3.5
10.1

-2.4

6.6
14.0
-0.6

18.2
61.4
1.2

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.8
-0.7
0.1
1.2
2.9

-1.7
-1.7
-1.1
0.0
1.7

-1.0

8.0
15.5
0.4

-0.5

-1.0

-1.9
-1.4
0.6
3.7
7.5

11
10

-1.9

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-6.8

-6.8

1
20

21
0

-1.0

8.8
16.3
1.0

-0.1
0.1
0.8
2.0
3.8

-0.2

The Year When Age 20 (Top) / the Age in Year 1 (Bottom)
-39
60

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-59
80

-1.0

9.5
16.9
1.5

0.4
0.6
1.4
2.6
4.4

0.1

41
-20

-1.0

9.6
17.3
1.6

0.5
0.7
1.6
2.7
4.5

0.2

61
-40

Table 11B: Welfare Changes Corresponding to Experiment Shown in Table 11A
Compensating Variations in Wealth ($1,000) per Household in the Shown Productivity Level and Age at Time of Reform

-1.0

9.7
17.3
1.7

0.5
0.8
1.6
2.8
4.6

0.2

81
-60

53

0.0
0.5
0.4
-0.6
-10.0
2.0
0.04
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.5
0.3
-0.3
-10.0
2.0
0.04
-0.2
0.0
0.0
1.9

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

1
3

5
10

15

0.5
0.4
0.5
-0.4
-10.0
2.0
0.00
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.6

0.9
0.4
0.5
-0.2
-10.0
2.0
-0.04
0.2
0.9
0.0
0.9
1.6
0.3
0.7
0.1
-10.0
1.9
-0.10
0.4
1.7
0.0
1.5

2.0
0.3
0.8
0.4
-10.0
1.9
-0.13
0.5
2.1
0.0
1.9

0.2
0.5
0.4
-0.2
-10.0
2.0
0.02
-0.1
1.3
-2.9
2.0
0.3
0.4
0.4
-0.2
-10.0
2.0
0.01
0.0
1.5
-2.9
2.1

0.6
0.4
0.5
0.0
-10.0
2.0
-0.02
0.1
1.8
-3.0
2.3
1.1
0.3
0.6
0.2
-10.0
1.9
-0.06
0.2
2.3
-3.1
2.6

1.4
0.3
0.6
0.4
-10.0
1.9
-0.08
0.3
2.6
-3.1
2.9

20

2.3
0.3
0.9
0.5
-10.0
1.9
-0.15
0.6
2.4
0.0
2.3

1.5
0.3
0.7
0.5
-10.0
1.9
-0.09
0.4
2.8
-3.2
3.1

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

0.3
0.5
0.4
-0.5
-10.0
2.0
0.02
-0.1
0.3
0.0
0.4

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

2

Year

1.7
0.3
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.9
-0.11
0.4
3.0
-3.2
3.5

2.5
0.3
1.0
0.7
-10.0
1.9
-0.17
0.7
2.7
0.0
2.8

30

1.8
0.3
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.9
-0.11
0.5
3.1
-3.2
3.7

2.6
0.3
1.0
0.7
-10.0
1.9
-0.17
0.7
2.7
0.0
3.0

40

1.8
0.3
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.9
-0.11
0.5
3.1
-3.2
3.7

2.6
0.3
1.0
0.7
-10.0
1.9
-0.17
0.7
2.8
0.0
3.0

60

1.8
0.3
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.9
-0.11
0.5
3.1
-3.2
3.7

2.6
0.3
1.0
0.7
-10.0
1.9
-0.18
0.7
2.8
0.0
3.0

80

1.8
0.3
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.9
-0.11
0.5
3.1
-3.2
3.7

2.6
0.3
1.0
0.7
-10.0
1.9
-0.17
0.7
2.8
0.0
3.0

120

Table 12A: Income Tax Rates Reduced by 10 Percent Proportionally; Replaced with a Consumption Tax with a $20,000 Deduction
Key Assumptions: Stochastic OLG Model; Closed Economy; Gamma = 2.0

54
-0.2

0.0

All levels of productivity

-0.2

Productivity Level
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8
Average

-79
100
-29
50

-19
40
-9
30

-2.5
-4.2
-6.3
-9.9
-12.8
-16.5
-13.9
29.2
-6.9

-5.9
-7.7
-10.9
-16.5
-20.7
-24.2
-22.6
27.7
-12.1
-4.3
23.8
-3.2

-2.0
-3.2
-5.1
-6.5
-7.6

-1.0
0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.3
1.4
3.5
0.3

-0.7
-1.2
-2.0
-2.4
-2.7
-0.1
17.1
-1.0

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.3

-0.2

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-7.9

-7.9

1
20

-2.8

4.5
7.1
2.0

1.7
2.0
2.2
2.5
2.9

1.0

11
10
21
0

-2.8

5.6
8.3
2.7

2.3
2.7
3.0
3.4
3.9

1.3

The Year When Age 20 (Top) / the Age in Year 1 (Bottom)
-39
60

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-59
80

-2.8

6.1
8.8
3.0

2.6
3.1
3.4
3.8
4.4

1.5

41
-20

-2.8

6.1
8.9
3.1

2.6
3.1
3.5
3.9
4.4

1.5

61
-40

Table 12B: Welfare Changes Corresponding to Experiment Shown in Table 12A
(Compensating Variations in Wealth ($1,000) per Household in the Shown Productivity Level and Age at Time of Reform)

-2.8

6.2
9.0
3.1

2.6
3.1
3.5
3.9
4.4

1.5

81
-60

55

0.0
0.8
0.5
-0.3
-10.0
1.4
0.06
-0.3
0.0
0.0
0.2

0.0
0.6
0.4
0.2
-10.0
1.4
0.05
-0.2
0.0
0.0
1.6

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

%ch(National Wealth)
%ch(Labor)
%ch(GNP)
%ch(Consumption)
%ch(Income Tax Rates)
ch(Consumption Tax Rate%)
ch(Interest Rate%)
%ch(Wage Rate)
%ch(Private Wealth)
ch(Government Wealth/GDP%)
%ch(Accidental Bequests)

1
3

5
10

15

0.5
0.7
0.7
-0.1
-10.0
1.4
0.02
-0.1
0.5
0.0
0.6

0.9
0.7
0.8
0.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.02
0.1
0.9
0.0
0.9
1.7
0.6
1.0
0.4
-10.0
1.3
-0.08
0.3
1.8
0.0
1.5

2.2
0.6
1.1
0.7
-10.0
1.3
-0.12
0.5
2.3
0.0
2.1

0.1
0.6
0.5
0.1
-10.0
1.4
0.04
-0.2
1.3
-3.2
1.7
0.2
0.6
0.5
0.1
-10.0
1.4
0.03
-0.1
1.5
-3.2
1.8

0.5
0.6
0.5
0.2
-10.0
1.4
0.01
0.0
1.7
-3.3
2.0
0.9
0.6
0.7
0.4
-10.0
1.3
-0.03
0.1
2.3
-3.4
2.4

1.2
0.6
0.8
0.6
-10.0
1.3
-0.05
0.2
2.6
-3.5
2.8

20

2.5
0.6
1.2
0.8
-10.0
1.2
-0.15
0.6
2.7
0.0
2.5

1.4
0.6
0.8
0.7
-10.0
1.3
-0.07
0.3
2.9
-3.5
3.1

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

0.3
0.8
0.6
-0.2
-10.0
1.4
0.04
-0.2
0.3
0.0
0.4

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

2

Year

1.7
0.6
0.9
0.8
-10.0
1.3
-0.09
0.4
3.2
-3.6
3.7

2.9
0.6
1.3
1.0
-10.0
1.2
-0.18
0.7
3.1
0.0
3.2

30

1.8
0.6
1.0
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.09
0.4
3.3
-3.6
4.0

3.1
0.6
1.4
1.1
-10.0
1.2
-0.19
0.8
3.3
0.0
3.5

40

1.8
0.6
1.0
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.10
0.4
3.4
-3.6
4.1

3.1
0.6
1.4
1.1
-10.0
1.3
-0.19
0.8
3.3
0.0
3.6

60

1.9
0.6
1.0
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.10
0.4
3.4
-3.6
4.1

3.2
0.6
1.4
1.2
-10.0
1.3
-0.19
0.8
3.4
0.0
3.6

80

Table 13A: Income Tax Rates Reduced by 10 Percent Proportionally; Replaced with a Proportional Consumption Tax
Key Assumptions: Stochastic OLG Model; Closed Economy; Gamma = 4.0

1.8
0.6
1.0
0.9
-10.0
1.3
-0.10
0.4
3.4
-3.6
4.1

3.2
0.6
1.4
1.2
-10.0
1.2
-0.19
0.8
3.4
0.0
3.6

120

56
-0.9

0.0

All levels of productivity

-0.9

Productivity Level
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e8
Average

-79
100
-29
50

-19
40
-9
30

-4.9
-6.0
-7.1
-8.5
-9.0
-8.6
-0.1
57.5
-6.1

-7.3
-8.9
-11.2
-14.2
-15.6
-13.5
-3.5
70.1
-10.0
3.5
39.6
-3.6

-4.4
-4.8
-5.0
-4.7
-3.0

-3.6

0.5
3.7
-1.8

2.7
22.3
-2.5

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.4
-0.2
0.2
0.8
1.7

-2.2
-2.4
-2.3
-2.1
-1.4

-5.5

3.9
7.6
0.3

-0.2

-0.8

-3.2
-3.4
-3.3
-2.6
-1.5

11
10

-2.6

With the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-8.8

-8.8

1
20

21
0

-5.5

5.5
9.3
1.2

0.5
0.8
1.4
2.1
3.1

0.1

The Year When Age 20 (Top) / the Age in Year 1 (Bottom)
-39
60

Without the Lump-Sum Redistribution Authority

-59
80

-5.5

6.3
10.2
1.8

1.0
1.4
2.0
2.8
3.8

0.2

41
-20

-5.5

6.4
10.4
1.8

1.0
1.4
2.1
2.9
3.9

0.3

61
-40

Table 13B: Welfare Changes Corresponding to Experiment Shown in Table 13A
(Compensating Variations in Wealth ($1,000) per Household in the Shown Productivity Level and Age at Time of Reform)

-5.5

6.4
10.4
1.8

1.1
1.5
2.1
2.9
4.0

0.3

81
-60

