                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PEER EFFECTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION

                                          Gordon C. Winston
                                          David J. Zimmerman

                                          Working Paper 9501
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9501


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




We want to thank Atlantic Philanthropic Services and especially the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for its
continuing support of the Williams Project on the Economics of Higher Education and for making their
unique College and Beyond data set available for this study. Jared Carbone, Al Goethals, Georgi Zhelev, and
Adam Sischy contributed a good deal to the chapter while Caroline Hoxby went way beyond the usual
volume editor in her interest in and contribution to the work. Finally, the participants in Project working
lunches, a Williams Economics Department seminar and the NBER seminar at Bretton Woods – especially
Tom Dee – were very helpful in spotting ambiguities and dubious assertions in an earlier draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Gordon C. Winston and David J. Zimmerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including notice,
is given to the source.
Peer Effects in Higher Education
Gordon C. Winston and David J. Zimmerman
NBER Working Paper No. 9501
February 2003
JEL No. I21

                                           ABSTRACT

In this chapter, we describe the potential significance of student peer effects for the economic
structure of and behavior in higher education. Their existence would motivate much of the restricted
supply, student queuing, and selectivity n and institutional competition via merit aid and honors
colleges n that we see in American higher education; their (appropriate) non-linearity could justify

the resulting stratification of higher education as an efficient way to produce human capital. In

addition, we use data from the College and Beyond entering class of 1989, combined with
phonebook data identifying roommates, to implement a quasi-experimental empirical strategy aimed
at measuring peer effects in academic outcomes. In particular, we use data on individual students’
grades, SAT scores, and the SAT scores of their roommates at three schools to estimate the effect

of roommates' academic characteristics on an individual's grades. The results suggest that, for two
of the three schools used, students in the middle of the SAT distribution do somewhat worse in terms

of grades if they share a room with a student who is in the bottom 15 percent of the SAT
distribution. Students in the top of the SAT distribution appear often not to be affected by the SAT
scores of their roommates. These results are similar to those reported in earlier research using data
from Williams (Zimmerman) and Dartmouth (Sacerdote).

Gordon C. Williams                                    David J. Zimmerman
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Williams College                                      Williams College
gwinston@williams.edu                                 david.j.zimmerman@williams.edu
I. Introduction



        Peer effects have played an important analytical and empirical role in studies of

primary and secondary education since the Coleman Report in 1966 1 -- they have been

used to justify busing and have entered the debates on educational costs, on tracking, and

on the effects of voucher systems.2 But they have been seen as relevant to the economics

of higher education only recently3 and with only a small, if growing, empirical

component.4



        This chapter will address three questions: Why should we care about peer effects

in examining the economics of colleges and universities? What do we know about them?

And what are we learning?

II. Peer Effects in the Economics of Higher Education

        A. What Are Peer Effects?


        To begin at the beginning: Peer effects exist when a person’s behavior is affected

by his or her interaction with one or more other people. And those people have to be




1
  (Coleman, Campbell et al. 1966)
2
  (U.S. Supreme Court 1971; Summers and Wolfe 1977; Hanushek 1986; Robertson and Symons 1996;
Epple and Romano 1998; Lazear 1999; Hoxby 2000).
3
  (Rothschild and White 1995; Winston 1995, 1999; Epple, Romano et al. 2001)
4
   (Zimmerman 1999; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2000; Goethals 2001; Sacerdote 2001).


                                                                                                2
peers – “equals.” So in higher education, peer effects result from interactions between

students.5



         Peer quality is often included as an argument in an educational production

function, but it’s useful to put the matter even more directly as an interaction between

two students,



         (1) B1 = f(B2, C2, X)



where Bi is behavior, Ci is characteristics for students i = 1, 2 and X is a vector of other

things relevant to 1’s behavior.



         Then peer effects exist if the partial derivatives aren’t zero and they are

asymmetric or “non-linear” if those partials differ at different levels of B and C. The

main empirical problem with studying peer effects, of course, is selection; that people

usually choose their peers so similarities in behavior may be the result of peer effects –

influence – or simply selection – choice.



    B. Why Do We Care?



    Peer effects impact the economics of higher education in three ways:




5
 Peer effects among faculty (and administrators) can be important, too, of course, to recruiting, teaching,
and scholarly productivity, but they are not the issue here. (Rosovsky 1990; Kennedy 1997)


                                                                                                              3
      1. They eliminate some large and awkward anomalies in the economic behavior of

          colleges and universities and the economic structure of higher education as an

          industry, if peer effects exist.

      2. They might justify as economically efficient the observed segmentation of student

          quality and resources – the institutional disparities we observe in American higher

          education – if peer effects are appropriately non-linear.

      3. They lead to trade in peer quality in a market inextricably linked – blended – with

          that for educational services. Both of those markets and their interaction are

          essential to understanding pricing, admissions, and competition in higher

          education.6



          In the chapter, we focus on the first of these as most basic – the existence of peer

effects, per se. We will examine the second – efficiency and the asymmetries in peer

effects – but express our frustration because, while they are potentially important, the

empirical evidence so far gives only hints about their nature. And we’ll do little more

than note the third – the blended markets for educational services and peer quality – since

its discussion would require a chapter to itself (but see Winston, 2003).



III. Peer Effects and Anomalies In the Higher Education Industry

          A. Anomalies

          At first blush, higher education looks much like a normal industry that makes a

product (educational services) using purchased inputs (faculty labor, heating oil, etc…)

that it sells to customers (students) for a price (tuition) in a quite competitive market. But
6
    (Rothschild and White 1995; Winston 2002)


                                                                                                 4
      •    Colleges charge a price that fails – significantly – to cover their production costs;

      •    They turn away a majority of potential customers who are willing and able to buy

           their product, if they can;

      •    they don’t expand output to meet persistent excess demand, if they can avoid it;

      •    They lower price to attract one customer, replacing another who’d pay a higher

           price;

      •    They judge institutional quality by how many customers they can turn away and

           they may manipulate sales-admission policies to increase that number;7

      •    They require elaborate application procedures before one is allowed to make a

           purchase;

      •    They often make their customers live together, maximizing their contacts;

      •    They practice extensive price discrimination, not always to increase sales

           revenues but often to redistribute income among their customers;

      •    And so on.



           So colleges and universities don’t fit a familiar industry model – and a bad

analogy can create bad policy (as it has recently, for instance, with the Justice

Department and Congressional Cost Commission8).



           B. Economic Characteristics



7
    On early decision, see (Avery, Fairbanks et al. 2001; Fallows 2001).
8
    (US Court of Appeals 1993; National Commission on the Cost of Higher Education 1998)


                                                                                               5
          But those anomalies disappear and higher education becomes an economically

coherent industry if, in fact, four economic characteristics are typical of colleges,

universities, and higher education:



          1 – If charitable donations significantly augment schools’ commercial (sales,

tuition) revenues,9



          2 – If those donated resources are very unevenly distributed, supporting a

hierarchy of schools based on their independence from sales revenues,



          3 – If colleges and universities are less interested in profits than in a ‘mission’ and

in ‘achieving excellence or prestige,’ and



          4 – If, in higher education, students provide an input critical to its production – if

peer effects are important to educational output.



          So if these characteristics exist in higher education, they save the day – though

they do call for very different economic analysis and policies.10



          C. Evidence of Those Characteristics



          What is the evidence?


9
    (Hansmann 1980).
10
     See (Winston 1999)


                                                                                                   6
           No. 1 - Donations - Non-Commercial Resources

           Certainly the first is now well established – colleges and universities charge prices

that are less, a lot less, than the costs of production. A great deal of time has been spent

with data from individual schools and collectively, with national (IPEDS) data for more

than 2,800 colleges and universities to establish the facts in Table 1.



           The top line describes average data over all American colleges and universities in

both public and private sectors in 1995-6, showing that overall, tuition (sales) revenues

support only a small part of the cost of producing a student’s education, the rest is

covered by donations (past and present, public and private). The price/cost ratio averages

0.32, overall, and ranges from a 0.13 average in the public sector to a 0.45 average

among private schools. In a more complete analysis of IPEDS data that recognized

collegiate saving, too, it appears that in a typical year, 75% of the economic resources

accruing to higher education come from charitable contributions – only 25% are from

commercial sales.11



           No. 2 - The Uneven Distribution of Donations

           The bottom part of Table 1 addresses the second characteristic, indicating how

very unevenly those donations, and hence the student subsidies they support, are

distributed among schools. The average student at a school in the top decile got a

subsidy of $21,000 a year – by paying $6,063 for a $27,054 education – while a typical




11
     (Winston, Carbone et al. 2001).


                                                                                               7
student in a bottom decile school got only $1,700 – paying $6,348 for a $8,084 education.

And decile data hide significant variation within the tails of the distribution.12



         No. 3 - A Non-profit Objective Function

         Though it retains its central microanalytic role, the third economic characteristic –

institutional values or objective function – can’t be supported by data, of course. The

existence, however, of decidedly non-profit behavior like need-blind admissions with

need-based financial aid, along with policies like Berea College’s zero tuition combined

with its family income cap, certainly seem strongly to imply it. And economists –

Hansmann, James, Clotfelter,13 etc… -- have typically specified the objective function for

a college in terms of excellence (or prestige) and mission.



IV. The Existence of Peer Effects

         The fourth characteristic is central to this chapter – if peer effects exist, they

describe the incentive that schools have that leads to the stratification of students and the

resulting concentration of student quality in those schools with the most non-commercial,

donative resources (per student). Stratification, if peer effects exist, is the result of an

efficiency wage14 in the form of student subsidy that’s paid to generate a queue of

applicants for a school from whom the best, in terms of the peer quality input they bring,

are being selected. All schools may value the educational quality that is improved

through peer effects provided by good students, but peer quality is scarce and those

12
   In the bottom decile are for-profit schools whose student subsidies are negative; in the top decile are
those like Williams where an education that costs roughly $75,000 to produce is sold for a sticker price of
$32,470, an average net price of $24,000 and therefore a subsidy of about $51,000 a year.
13
   (James 1978; Hansmann 1980; Clotfelter 1996).
14
   (Akerlof and Yellen 1986)


                                                                                                              8
schools that are able to pay the most for it get the most of it. The uneven distribution of

those non-commercial resources creates a hierarchy that supports the stratification of

student quality and motivates the long run supply restrictions on which that selectivity

rests. So the existence of peer effects – in a world of uneven non-commercial revenues

and institutional devotion to “excellence” – would produce the industry structure we see.



         Other things, though, might motivate the same sort of highly selective structure –

filtering or signaling, students (or parents) getting enhanced personal utility from

selection and exclusivity, per se, the satisfactions of association with the rich and famous,

a marketing strategy in which schools want to emphasize that “those who have choices

chose us,” a self-reinforcing seeking of prestige15 – but while such a list of possibilities

can be constructed, none of them implausible in itself, they are not only unsatisfyingly ad

hoc, but they produce no socially useful outcome16 while peer effects, by enhancing

learning, can increase the production of human capital.17



         On the other hand, there are some familiar production externalities of student

quality, aside from the peer interactions on which we’re concentrating – like an

instructor’s ability to assign more advanced readings to better students, to give more

intense and efficient lectures or to have more productive seminars – that are often thought


15
   (Arrow 1973; Basu 1989; James 1990; Becker 1991; Clotfelter 1996)
16
   Arrow is explicit: “Higher education, in this [filtering] model, contributes in no way to superior
economic performance; it increases neither cognition nor socialization. Instead, higher education serves as
a screening device, in that it sorts out individuals of differing abilities, thereby conveying information to
the purchaser of labor… But even if (it) does have a positive informational value, it by no means follows
that it is socially worthwhile" (p.199).
17
   Peer effects, what’s more, may explain some of the educational technologies observed in higher
education like residential colleges or organized study groups that increase peer interactions and hence
performance. (Alexander, Gur et al. 1974; Fraser, Beamn et al. 1977)


                                                                                                            9
of as “peer effects” and will have the same sort of effect of making educational

production a function of student quality and hence of motivating segmentation as

efficient. Though they may have much the same effects, however, these externalities

escape measurement when we ask, “Do peer effects exist?”



V. Efficiency and the Asymmetry of Peer Effects

           So if peer effects exist, they can explain the segmented structure of higher

education as the result of schools’ bidding for peer quality inputs, the wealthy with more

success than others. But, as Hoxby noted,18 the existence, per se, of peer effects may

leave any regrouping of students as a largely distributional matter. Resorting students –

altering the stratification in higher education – would create winners and losers in the

same measure under strictly linear or symmetric peer effects. But if peer effects are non-

linear – asymmetric – so students at different levels of behavior or characteristics are

influenced differently by their interaction with others, then peer effects introduce an issue

of economic efficiency, too. How students are grouped will affect the total amount of

learning produced from given resources.



           If weak students gain more from proximity to strong peers than the strong

students lose from that association, then overall learning would be increased by reducing

stratification – a point made a few years ago by McPherson and Schapiro in suggesting

random assignment of students to colleges.19 But if asymmetries in peer effects run the

other way so that strong students interacting with other strong students are also more


18
     (Hoxby 2000)
19
     (McPherson and Schapiro 1990)


                                                                                           10
sensitive to peer influence – gaining more in learning than would weak students in those

same circumstances – then stratification and segmentation could increase, not decrease,

aggregate learning. In the extreme, stratification would be supported on grounds of

efficiency if strong students were sensitive to peer quality at all levels while weak

students were unaffected by peers at any level.



          Yet framing the issue as one of “strong students” and “weak students” – while it

fits the empirical work that’s been possible so far – misses a potentially important

question of peer “distance” – how far apart the peers are in their behavior and

characteristics. Is their interaction a nudge or a bludgeon? Are peer responses very

different (asymmetric) outside of a “neighborhood” of proximity so a slightly different

peer is influential but someone very different is not?20 It’s certainly a question at the

center of stratification – a strong student might typically inspire somewhat weaker peers

while intimidating those more distant from her abilities. For the strong student,

moderately weaker peers might represent a challenge and a chance to learn-by-teaching

while much weaker peers would simply overwhelm. And numbers would play a role not

captured in either our framing or our evidence – given differences and distances among

peers, a student would likely respond differently to one such peer than to a whole school

of them. So the shape of nonlinearities in peer effect responses would depend on both

peer distance and numbers.




20
  This, of course, is in keeping with the Manski-Wise observation that students “… preferred to enroll in
colleges where the average academic ability of the enrolled students was slightly higher than their own.
Schools where the average SAT scores of entering freshmen were either too low or too high were relatively
disfavored.” (Manski and Wise 1983 )


                                                                                                      11
          Finally, whatever the efficiency or inefficiency of existing stratification in

producing aggregate learning, it would have to address the question recently raised with

some force by Nicholas Lemann about whether those high-ability students, after learning

more from their expensive educations with strong and sensitive peers, use all that

learning to do anything very useful for society – whether their social marginal product

justifies that selectivity.21 He argued that it doesn’t.



VI. The Evidence

          A. The Ideal Data

          As a transition from description of the potentially central economic role we’ve

suggested that student peer effects might play in higher education to description of the

more modest empirical results we are able to report on next, and add to, it’s useful to

describe the ideal data whose analysis would persuasively support that role. Inevitably,

of course, the actual evidence must fall far short of perfection, but it’s useful to see how

and where.



          Ideally, the empirical test of the existence and shape of peer effects in colleges

would, in terms of equation (1) above, deal with:

      •   Student behavior, B1, that is centrally relevant to the purposes of higher

          education, broadly defined, to include, inter alia, the development of intellectual

          curiosity, persistence, acquisition of facts, humane values, aesthetic sensitivities,

          analytical and technical sophistication, social responsibility, etc.



21
     (Lemann 1999, 1999)


                                                                                               12
   •   His behavior, B1, and the characteristics and behavior of his peers, B2, and C2,

       that were unambiguously measureable in order to investigate not only the sign of

       peer differences and response but also their magnitudes,

   •   A large population of students that generated a good deal of variation in B1, B2,

       and C2, and their interaction, describing different distances between peers to

       reveal neighborhood asymmetries and non-linearities,

   •   Truly random assignment of associations between students that eliminated

       preferences in peer association, and

   •   Variations in peer characteristics of communities to reveal any social critical mass

       in conditioning peer interactions.



       Data meeting these conditions would allow an effective test of the existence of

peer effects and their non-linearities or asymmetries. And they would eliminate

misgivings about the importance to higher education of the peer behaviors and

characteristics studied so far.



       Inevitably, of course, the studies described in the rest of the chapter fall short of

the ideal. Though selection bias has largely been avoided through use of randomly

assigned room mates and experimental groups and the results consistently show the

existence of peer influences on behaviors that are relevant to education, it remains that in

measuring a student’s GPA response (or test scores or retention or fraternity membership)

to his room mate’s SATs (or income or fraternity membership), we’re looking at a fairly




                                                                                               13
thin slice of student behaviors and characteristics that leaves out a whole lot of what’s

happening to shape higher education.



           But we find optimism in that thinness. If evidence of student peer effects can be

found in so narrow a range of academic characteristics and behaviors, it’s hard not to

believe that with a wider and more appropriate range, they would appear with a good deal

more strength. Indeed, in having to use such limited evidence for so broad an influence

(and so sweeping a hypothesis), we didn’t initially expect peer effects to be significantly

evident. But we could neither conjure up more appropriate data nor convince ourselves

that we could adequately account for selection effects in a more general population with

broader behaviors.22 We were trying to see if we could find an iceberg and feel confident

that we’ve located the tip.



           But clearly, it’s been easier to find evidence of the existence of peer effects than

to learn much about their non-linearities. So these results do more to support the idea

that peer effects help to explain industry structure and selectivity in higher education –

their positive role – than to support the more demanding idea that asymmetries in peer

effects can justify that structure on efficiency grounds – their normative role.



           B. What We Have Learned So Far

           In an earlier study, one of us (Zimmerman 1999) investigated peer effects

associated with a student’s own grade point average and the academic strength (as

measured by SAT scores) of his peers. That study attempted to overcome the selection
22
     Making it very difficult to document peer effects within athletic teams, for instance (Shulman 2001).


                                                                                                             14
bias issue by assembling a unique set of data comprised of twelve classes of students at

Williams College containing information on their grades, major, gender, race, etc. along

with information on where and with whom they were housed in their freshman year.23 In

that paper, Zimmerman argued that freshman housing at Williams closely resembled

random assignment. That being the case, it was meaningful to contrast students with

high, medium, and low SAT scores who, by chance, had roommates with high, medium,

or low SAT scores. This allowed, for example, comparisons between the grades of low

SAT students who roomed with other low SAT roommates to the grades of low SAT

students who roomed with high SAT roommates. Any differences in the outcomes could,

because of the quasi-random assignment, be attributed to peer effects. The basic findings

of that effort suggested that students in the middle of the SAT distribution did somewhat

worse in terms of grades if they shared a room with a student who was in the bottom 15

percent of the verbal SAT distribution. Interestingly, students in the top and the bottom

of the SAT distribution were not affected by the SAT scores of their (room or entry)

peers. The effects, for the middle group, weren’t large, but were statistically significant

in many models. Furthermore, peer effects were almost always linked more strongly

with verbal SAT scores than with math SAT scores.



     These results, however, were estimated in the context of a highly selective liberal arts

college. In that study, the “low” SAT students would, on average, still rank at about the

85th percentile of the national SAT score distribution. The results could also have been

idiosyncratic to Williams.


23
  See (Zimmerman forthcoming). This paper contains a broad overview of the academic literature
considering peer effects


                                                                                                 15
       Recent research has given additional support to the claim that peer effects exist in

higher education (c.f. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner 2000; Goethals 2001; Sacerdote

2001). All of these studies have examined the influence the characteristics or behavior

of one student has on the behavior of another. The peer characteristics observed were,

for the most part, variants on academic ability – SAT or ACT scores or more nuanced

evaluations of academic promise generated in the admission process – while the

influenced behavior was largely grades or performance on a written test. These

characteristics were broadened to include gender and income and behaviors were

broadened to include dropout behavior, choice of major, and fraternity membership.



       Sacerdote (2001), using data from Dartmouth and also using a roommate-based

strategy found evidence of a peer impact of a student on his roommate’s grade point

average as well as on his participation in fraternities. Sacerdote’s results suggest a non-

linear relationship with both weaker and stronger students performing better when their

roommate was in the top 25% of the academic index distribution. In addition, Sacerdote

found evidence of peer effects in fraternity participation, but no evidence of peer effects

in choice of college major.



       Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2000) employed a dataset from Berea College.

Like Zimmerman (1999) and Sacerdote (2001), they used the random assignment of

roommates to identify the peer effect. Berea College targets low-income students

(capping family income at about $65,000) and so provides a useful complement to the




                                                                                          16
highly selective schools used in the other studies. There, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner

found no evidence that either first semester grades or retention are associated with

roommates’ ACT scores. They did, however, find evidence that roommate income had a

positive impact on both grades and retention, holding ACT scores constant, but only for

women.



         Goethals (2000) employed a unique and innovative experimental framework to

measure peer effects. The study explored whether “students would perform better

writing about newspaper articles they read and discussed in academically homogenous or

heterogeneous groups of three.” Interestingly, he found that students’ performance was

not linked to their own academic rating but was affected by whether they were placed

with academically homogenous or heterogeneous peers. He found that groups composed

of students who all had a low academic rating and groups composed of students who all

had a high academic rating perform similarly – with both groups of these types out

performing groups in which some students had high ratings and some low ratings.24

These results were stronger for men than women. So he found that peers’ academic

characteristics influenced others’ behavior but not with straightforward non-linearities.



     In sum, there is a growing – though still small – body of evidence suggesting that

peer effects exist in higher education. The evidence is not clear on the nature of any non-

linearities or interactions based on gender. It also suggests that non-academic peer

characteristics may also be important.


24
  Should these results hold up on further study, they have clear implications for sorting, stratification, and
hierarchy among colleges.


                                                                                                            17
      In this chapter we next add to the empirical evidence by employing data from the

College and Beyond (C&B) database – created by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation --

along with matched housing data for three schools in the C&B data. This allows us to

apply the same empirical roommate-based approach to measuring peer effects described

above. In so doing, this work adds additional evidence on the impact of peer

characteristics in higher education.



 VII. Empirical Strategy: New Evidence



         To estimate academic peer effects from the College and Beyond data in terms of

equation (1) above, we follow the now traditional path of relating the cumulative grade

point average of a student (B1) to his own SAT scores and to the SAT scores of his first

year roommate (C2). More formally, we estimate regression models specified as:



(2)               GPAi = α + β 1SATi + β 2 SATi RM + β 3 X i + ε ic



where GPA is the student’s Grade Point Average measured cumulatively to graduation,25

SAT is the student’s own SAT score (sometimes entered separately for math and verbal

scores), SAT RM is the student’s freshman roommate’s SAT score (sometimes entered

separately for math and verbal scores), and X is a vector of other characteristics (such as



25
  Grade performance for the first year, alone, was not available in C&B data, but analysis of the Williams’
data where both cumulative and freshman year GPA could be used showed that they yielded the same
results (Zimmerman 1999).


                                                                                                        18
race, gender) of the student.26 If students are randomly assigned their roommates, then

the estimated peer effect ( β 2 ) will be unbiased. More generally, the estimate will be

unbiased if it is plausible that the error term is uncorrelated with the explanatory

variables.



        In addition, we estimate models that allow for non-linearities in the peer effect. In

particular, we allow the peer effect to vary based on whether the student or his roommate

is in the lowest 15 percent, the middle 70 percent, or the top 15 percent of the SAT

distribution. Formally, we estimate:



                                    3
(3)      GPAij = α + β 1 SATi + ∑ β g SATigDRM + β 3 X i + ε ic ; j = 1,2,3
                                   g =1



where SATigDRM are dummy variables for each SAT score range (indexed by g) and β g is

the peer effect associated with that range.



VIII. Data



        The C&B data used in this study were created and made available to us by the

Andrew Mellon foundation. The C&B data contain both institutional and survey data for

over 90,000 students enrolled in thirty-four mostly-selective colleges and universities in

the United States for the entering classes of 1951, 1976, and 1989. The present study


26
   An appealing alternative strategy would be to include the roommate’s GPA in the regression. Such a
variable might better measure actual rather than potential performance. The problem with including such a
variable is that it is simultaneously determined within the roommate context. Using such a measure would
introduce simultaneous equation bias.


                                                                                                      19
uses data from three of the schools in the C&B population for the entering class of 1989 –

for the graduating Class of ‘93. Institutional data in College and Beyond provide

information on the students’ grades, major, race, gender, etc. These data were combined

with housing information extracted from college phonebooks to form a unique data set

that allowed us to identify college roommates.



        The schools selected for our sub-sample were chosen because a) they house their

first year students together and b) the assignment mechanism of students to rooms (as

indicated by their housing descriptions on the World Wide Web and conversations with

their housing offices) is roughly random. It was necessary to use schools that group first

year students together because the C&B data do not provide information on other classes.

If, for example, a school allowed first and second year students to live together we would

have no information on the second year students, given C&B’s restriction to the three

cohorts. Further, it is necessary for the allocation to be approximately random since

selection bias can be serious when students are allowed to choose their roommates or if

the housing office groups students in such a way that under- or over-performers are more

likely to be housed together. In this case, the requirement that the error term be

uncorrelated with the explanatory variables would be violated. In Zimmerman’s earlier

study of Williams freshmen (1999), he was able to utilize data from the housing

application forms to conduct some relatively simple analyses to check whether the

assumption of random assignment was plausible, and it was.27 The schools in this sample

employed a similar protocol to that used by Williams in using housing forms indicating


27
   Similarly, estimates in Sacerdote (2001) were unaffected by the inclusion of housing preference
variables.


                                                                                                     20
sleep preferences, smoking behavior, etc. in assigning students to rooms/roommates –

though the underlying housing form data were not obtained.28



IX. Empirical Results



     Table 2 provides summary statistics for the sample. The number of observations for

the samples from the three schools ranged from 1,458 to 2,116. SAT scores ranged from

a low of 360 on the verbal test and 420 on the math test to a maximum of 800 on both

tests. The average combined SAT score ranged from 1344 to 1409. These scores are

high, putting the average student in the top 10 percent of the population of test takers.

Each school had between 7% and 9% African American students and 2%-5% Hispanic

students.



     Table 3 presents estimates of equation (2). The results for each school are reported in

a separate column where a student’s cumulative grade point average is regressed on his

own SAT score (divided by 100), race, gender, major, and roommate’s SAT score. The

model includes controls for a student’s major (which is selected in his or her junior year)

to provide some control for grade differentials arising from students’ taking different

courses (Sabot 1991).




28
   See (Zimmerman forthcoming) for a mathematical model that illustrates the possibility of bias in the
estimated peer effects flowing from the use of housing forms in assigning students to rooms. Chi-squared
tests indicate that we cannot reject independence between the SAT scores of roommates for schools #1 and
#3 in the sample. For school #2 independence is rejected. The rejection is driven by a somewhat high
fraction of low SAT students living together and a somewhat low fraction of low SAT students living with
high SAT students. The distribution of low, medium, and high students is as expected under independence
for the middle SAT students. In total, there are about 100 of the 2116 students that show signs of selection.


                                                                                                         21
     The effect of a student’s own SAT score is large and statistically significant, with

each 100 point increase resulting in between a .116 and a .132 increase in grade point

average. After controlling for SAT scores, black and Hispanic students score between a

quarter and a third of a grade point below white students. Female students score between

.082 and .127 grade points higher than male students.              Finally, roommate’s SAT score is

found to have a positive and statistically significant effect only for School #2 – where a

100 point increase in a student’s roommate’s combined SAT score translates into a .02

increase in the student’s own grade point average. This effect is about 17 percent as large

as that of a 100 point increment in the student’s own SAT score.29



     Tables 4, 6, and 8 report estimates of equation (3) allowing the peer effect to depend

on the student’s own position in the SAT distribution. Panel A allows us to see whether

weak, average, or strong students (as measured by their SAT scores) are more, or less,

affected by roommates. The results in these panels suggest that strong students at all

three schools are unaffected by the SAT scores of their roommates. Students in the

bottom 15% of the SAT distribution benefit from higher SAT scoring roommates at

School #1 – though not at schools 2 and 3. Students in the middle 70 percent of the

distribution are unaffected by the SAT scores of their roommates at Schools 1 and 3 –

though they benefit from higher scoring roommates at School #2. Students in the middle

70 percent of the SAT distribution at School #2 experience, on average, a .02 increase in

their cumulative GPA when their roommates’ SAT scores increase by 100 points.



29
  It is worth noting here that models allowing for differential effects for math and verbal SAT scores were
also estimated, but standard F-tests indicated no measurable difference in their impact. Accordingly, only
models using combined SAT scores are reported.


                                                                                                         22
   Panel B allows the peer effect to be nonlinear. That is, it allows us to see whether

weak, average, or strong students (as measured by their SAT scores) are more, or less,

affected by having roommates who are weak, average, or strong in terms of their

combined SAT scores. For this model, at School #1, we find low SAT students

performing somewhat worse when roomed with a similarly weak peer. The coefficient

shows grades for this group would increase by .156 points if they had a high SAT room

mate. The coefficient is significant at the ten percent level. At School #2, neither the

strongest nor the weakest students are affected by the SAT scores of their roommates.

Students in the middle 70% of the SAT distribution, however, perform somewhat worse

when their roommates are in the bottom 15% of the SAT distribution. The estimates

suggest that a student in this part of the SAT distribution, with a bottom 15% roommate,

would, on average, have a cumulative GPA that is lower by .086 points than that of a

similar student whose roommate was in the top 15% of the SAT distribution. Similar

results are found at School #3 where, in addition, there is evidence that the strongest

students perform better when their roommates are academically stronger. It is worth

noting that these results are robust to moderate variations in the percentile cutoffs used to

define the groups.



   Tables 5, 7, and 9 report estimates of equation (3) separately for men and women.

Perhaps due to smaller sample sizes, peer effects are not statistically significant for most

groups. Exceptions are found at Schools #2 and #3. At School #2, male students in the

middle of the SAT distribution are found to perform worse when their roommate is in the




                                                                                           23
lowest 15% of the SAT distribution; at School #3, academically strong women perform

better when given academically strong peers.



   Table 10 presents estimates using data stacked for the three schools. School fixed

effects are included in these models. The main advantage of stacking the data is that

there are larger cell sizes – giving us more precise estimates -- with which to gauge any

non-linearities. These results are presented pooled by gender and also separately for male

and female students. The results mirror those above with students in the middle showing

lower grades if their roommate is in the bottom 15% of the SAT distribution. The

estimates suggest that this result is driven by the male sample – as the coefficients for

women are not significant for any of the SAT groups. There is also some evidence –

again particularly for men – that strong students perform somewhat worse if their

roommate is in the middle of the SAT distribution rather than in the top.



   To put the myriad results in context it is useful to summarize the existing research

more succinctly. The research to date, including the evidence reported in this paper, on

the effect of peer academic characteristics on a “grade type” outcome, is summarized in

the Table 11.



   These studies differ in a variety of ways: the selectivity of the school surveyed, the

measurement and detection of non-linearities, the outcome considered, the existence of

differences by gender, and so on. The evidence found thus far suggests that the existence

of peer effects at the most basic level has been confirmed in each of the studies.




                                                                                            24
Sacerdote (2001) finds that grades are higher when students have unusually academically

strong roommates. Zimmerman (1999, 2001) finds that weak peers might reduce the

grades of middling or strong students. Stinebrickner finds that peer ACT scores are

insignificant after controlling for roommate family income, which is significant.

Goethals finds that homogeneity per se matters – students perform better when grouped

with others of like ability.


X. Conclusion and Agenda



        Evidence on peer effects in higher education now exists at the most basic level for

six colleges and universities – covering some 12,000 students – with interactions

measured for randomly assigned roommates and participants in psych lab experiments. It

seems clear that peer effects exist – that students’ characteristics and behavior do, indeed,

influence other students’ behavior with conventionally measured academic characteristics

(like SAT) influencing conventionally measured academic performance (like GPA).

New evidence presented in this chapter adds to our confidence that peer effects exist and

that the signs of those effects are in the direction that would motivate institutional

selectivity – strong students tend to increase peers’ academic performance and weak

students tend to reduce it. Combined with a sharply skewed distribution of resources

across colleges, the broad question, “Can peer effects in educational production help

explain the unusual economic structure and behavior of higher education?” is answered,




                                                                                          25
“Yes.” The models, of Winston (1999) and Epple-Romano-Sieg (2001) -- data-driven

and formally derived respectively -- fit both the data and the peer effect evidence.30



        But beyond that key question, the facts become less clear and the agenda for

investigation of peer effects becomes larger. So there are often different results by

gender, as in Hoxby’s K-12 results (2000), even in these data that rest on individual

interactions rather than on those between groups. On non-linearities – whether peer

influences operate equally and symmetrically across characteristics and behaviors – the

evidence is puzzling with homogeneous groupings – strong or weak – sometimes

performing significantly better than those with peers of different abilities. Students of

middling ability are usually more susceptible to peer influence than those at either end of

the ability distribution (keeping in mind that the student populations reported on here

represent very narrow ability ranges). And since our data are based on pairwise

interactions, a similar analysis might well be extended to those interactions that are

electronically mediated to see if a “distance learning” environment generates any

evidence of peer effects.



        The range of peer characteristics and behaviors should be extended, too, wherever

possible. The work reported here sticks, by and large, to the most measurable and

obvious aspects of education – grade performance and academic ability – with occasional

departure into fraternity membership, family income, and dropout behavior. But while


30
    Note that there’s no evidence of a “teaching effect” in which strong students gain from association with
weaker students whom they can teach (as implied by Zajonc’s analysis of older siblings (1976)) nor is there
strong evidence of an “intimidation effect,” though that might help explain Goethals’ finding that weak
students do better when grouped with other weak students.


                                                                                                        26
these are clearly the right place to start, they capture a small part of the behaviors

influenced by higher education and of interest to colleges in their selection of student

peer quality – it may be possible to get closer to our “ideal data” with other measurable

academic behaviors among randomly associated peers. Like Heckman (1999), Bowles,

Gintis and Osborn (2001) point out that a small part of the variance in wages attributable

to education is explained by the cognitive skills we measure with tests and GPAs – the

rest is attributable to behaviors learned before, after, in, and outside of school that may

escape cognitive measurement but influence job performance, nonetheless, like

reliability, attitude, discipline, fatalism, impatience, etc. To the extent that these

characteristics and behaviors can be identified and measured, they need to be included in

studies of peer effects in higher education.31



        So we conclude that evidence on the existence of peer effects in higher education

is strong, consistent with an understanding of its economic structure – selectivity, skewed

resources, and the resulting stratification – that relies on them, but that there remains a

rich set of questions on how and how broadly peer effects operate among students in

colleges32 and especially on the shape of the non-linearities that would help us evaluate

that structure.




31
   On the basis of evidence that a student’s impatience (his time-discount behavior) influences his own
academic performance (students with lower discount rates get better grades, holding SATs constant (Kirby,
Winston et al. 2002)), we tried, in a very small sample, to find evidence of peer influence such that one
roommate’s discount rate affected the other’s academic performance. But while the sign of the relationship
was right, it was decidedly insignificant.
32
   Nor has our discussion even touched on negative peer effects like binge drinking and date rape.


                                                                                                       27
                                                 Table 1
                       The Distribution of Average Cost, Price and Student Subsidies
                                                           1996
                                                                          Average           Average
                                                          Subsidy        Educational          Net
                                                        per Student         Cost            Tuition




                  All Colleges and Universities              $8,423           $12,413         $3,989
                             Public                          $8,590            $9,896         $1,305
                             Private                         $8,253           $14,986         $6,734

                       Schools ranked by
                       Student Subsidies:
                            Decile 1                        $20,991           $27,054         $6,063
                            Decile 2                        $11,865           $15,801         $3,936
                            Decile 3                        $10,009           $13,310         $3,301
                            Decile 4                         $8,752           $11,831         $3,080
                            Decile 5                         $7,855           $10,565         $2,710
                            Decile 6                         $7,020            $9,820         $2,799
                            Decile 7                         $6,250            $9,464         $3,214
                            Decile 8                         $5,447            $8,848         $3,401
                            Decile 9                         $4,262            $9,297         $5,035
                           Decile 10                         $1,736            $8,084         $6,348

         Source: Based on US Department of Education IPEDS data. Includes 2791 institutions, of which 1411 are
public and 1380 are private. All dollar amounts are per FTE student averaged over institutions. See Winston (2000) and
Winston-Yen (1995) for details on the derivation of these data from the IPEDS Finance Survey (Medical schools are
omitted here).




                                                                                                                         28
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
School #1                            Mean   Standard Deviation   Minimum   Maximum
Sample Size                          1863   0                    1863      1863


Own SAT Score – Verbal               714    66                   420       800
Own SAT Score – Math                 695    69                   480       800
Own SAT Score – Combined             1409   112                  1090      1600
Black                                .079   .270                 0         1
Hispanic                             .052   .223                 0         1
Native American                      .004   .069                 0         1
Asian                                .151   .358                 0         1
Not a Citizen of the United States   .03    .169                 0         1
Female                               .432   .495                 0         1
School #2                            .430   .494                 0         1
Sample Size                          2116   0                    2116      2116


Own SAT Score – Verbal               668    68                   360       800
Own SAT Score – Math                 676    68                   450       800
Own SAT Score – Combined             1344   110                  950       1600
Black                                .086   .282                 0         1
Hispanic                             .044   .206                 0         1
Native American                      N/A    N/A                  N/A       N/A
Asian                                .160   .367                 0         1
Not a Citizen of the United States   .095   .292                 0         1
Female                               .430   .494                 0         1
School #3                            Mean   Standard Deviation   Minimum   Maximum
Sample Size                          1458   0                    1458      1458


Own SAT Score – Verbal               687    61                   450       800
Own SAT Score – Math                 681    68                   420       800
Own SAT Score – Combined             1368   106                  880       1600
Black                                .072   .258                 0         1
Hispanic                             .022   .148                 0         1
Native American                      .001   .036                 0         1
Asian                                .079   .270                 0         1
Not a Citizen of the United States   .03    .148                 0         1
Female                               .466   .499                 0         1




                                                                                     29
Table 3: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores

                                     Cumulative GPA   Cumulative GPA   Cumulative GPA
                                     (School#1)       (School #2)      (School#3)

Own SAT Score/100                    0.131            .116             .132
                                     (0.01)           (.013)            (.012)
Black                                -.264            -.306            -.380
                                     (.068)           (.060)           (.054)
Hispanic                             -.172            -.080            .005
                                     (.085)           (.055)           (.046)
Native American                      -.268            N/A              .145
                                     (.157)                            (.071)
Not a Citizen of the United States   N/A              -.047            N/A
                                                      (.065)
Asian                                -.011            -.071            -.033
                                     (.031)           (.031)           (.042)
Female                               .127             .082             .112
                                     (.028)           (.024)           (.024)
Major Dummy Variables                YES              YES              YES


Roommates SAT Score/100              0.013            0.020            .013
                                     (0.007)          (0.008)          (.009)
Sample Size                          1863             2116             1458
R- Squared                           .303             0.215            0.2475

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Bolded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                        30
Table 4: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group –
School #1 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                       Combined SAT         Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       Score (lowest 15%)   (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
A. Linearity in Roommates Scores
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .065                 .223                 .036
                                       (.087)               (.029)               (.124)
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .024                 .172                 .124
                                       (.127)               (.033)               (.148)
Black                                  -.174                -.297                -.758
                                       (.186)               (.079)               (.165)
Hispanic                               .0402                -.311                -.024
                                       (.086)               (.142)               (.116)
Native American                        -.045                -.356                (dropped)
                                       (.160)               (.251)
Not a Citizen of the United States     N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                  .226                 -.004                -.040
                                       (.230)               (.039)               (.052)
Female                                 .233                 .138                 .012
                                       (.110)               (.032)               (.056)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES

Roommates SAT Score/100                .032                 .011                 -.009
                                       (.010)               (.008)               (.014)
Sample Size                            269                  1281                 313
R- Squared                             . 0.288              0.295                0.154
                                       Combined SAT         Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       Score (lowest 15%)   (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Non-linearity in Roommates Scores
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .060                 .223                 .021
                                       (.089)               (.02856)             .125
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .021                 .172                 .100
                                       (.128)               (.033)               (.151)
Black                                  -.175                -.297                -.805
                                       (.183)               (.079)               (.163)
Hispanic                               .043                 -.312                -.022
                                       (.086)               (.141)               (.114)
Native American                        -.075                -.352                (dropped)
                                       (.169                (.251)
Not a Citizen of the United States     N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                  .233                 -.004                -.039
                                       (.231)               (.039)               (.051)
Female                                 .220                 .137                 .022
                                       (.110)               (.032)               (.055)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES


Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%       -.156                -.044                -.002
                                       (.086)               (.032)               (.050)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%       -.131                -.023                -.038
                                       (.085)               (.025)               (.043)
Sample Size                            269                  1281                 313
R- Squared                             0.295                0.295                0.154

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster. Bolded peer
and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                      31
Table 5: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group and
Gender – School #1 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                     Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                     (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
A. Men
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100           .048                 .266                 -.006
                                     (.108)               (.034)               (.172)
Own SAT Score – Math/100             .113                 .163                 -.002
                                     (.122)               (.043)               (.002)
Black                                .041                 -.438                -.817
                                     (.124)               (.132)               (.206)
Hispanic                             .067                 -.128                .006
                                     (.096)               (.134)               (.091)
Native American                      (dropped)            -.717                (dropped)
                                                          (.254)
Not a Citizen of the United States   N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                .926                 .039                 -.075
                                     (.220)               (.056)               (.112)
Major Dummy Variables                YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%     -.167                -.054                .078
                                     (.117)               (.046)               (.060)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%     -.108                -.042                -.022
                                     (.088)               (.035)               (.033)
Sample Size                          137                  739                  187
R- Squared                           0.637                0.323                0.309
                                     Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                     (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Women
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100           .117                 .187                 -.101
                                     (.166)               (.057)               (.182)
Own SAT Score – Math/100             -.062                .192                 .095
                                     (.200)               (.046)               (.227)
Black                                -.436                -.228                (dropped)
                                     (.347)               (.085)
Hispanic                             -.057                -.474                (dropped)
                                     (.161)               (.251)
Native American                      -.242                -.064                (dropped)
                                     (.185)               (.130)
Not a Citizen of the United States   N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                .105                 -.073                -.040
                                     (.149)               (.052)               (.086)
Major Dummy Variables                YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%     -.104                -.026                -.020
                                     (.124)               (.040)               (.084)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%     -.143                -.006                .028
                                     (.124)               (.034)               (.101)
Sample Size                          132                  543                  128
R- Squared                           0.279                0.325                0.441

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Bolded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                    32
Table 6: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group –
School #2 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                       Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)

A. Linearity in Roommates Scores
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .162                 .142                 -.109
                                       (.088)               (.025)               (.098)
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .077                 .166                 .063
                                       (.101)               (.027)               (.112)
Black                                  -.235                -.341                -.117
                                       (.079)               (.085)               (.160)
Hispanic                               -.036                -.060                -.071
                                       (.127)               (.070)               (.095)
Native American                        N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Not a Citizen of the United States     -.204                -.016                .026
                                       (.243)               (.079)               (.065)
Asian                                  .102                 -.083                -.111
                                       (.145)               (.033)               (.081)
Female                                 .067                 .099                 -.109
                                       (.077)               (.026)               (.129)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES


Roommates SAT Score/100                .017                 .020                 .0438
                                       (.021)               (.009)               (.026)
Sample Size                            280                  1500                 336
R- Squared                             0.286                0.181                0.178
                                       Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Non-linearity in Roommates Scores
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .167                 .143                 -.110
                                       (.088)               (.025)               (.098)
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .088                 .166                 .059
                                       (.100)               (.027)               (.111)
Black                                  -.238                -.340                -.086
                                       (.079)               (.085)               (.168)
Hispanic                               -.035                -.050                -.055
                                       (.127)               (.069)               (.102)
Native American                        N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Not a Citizen of the United States     -.174                -.009                -.109
                                       (.242)               (.078)               (.128)
Asian                                  .108                 -.082                -.110
                                       (.142)               (.033)               (.081)
Female                                 .061                 .102                 .015
                                       (.077)               (.026)               (.064)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES


Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%       -.042                -.086                -.099
                                       (.088)               (.034)               (.102)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%       -.066                -.022                -.079
                                       (.072)               (.023)               (.057)
Sample Size                            282                  1505                 337
R- Squared                             0.286                0.181                0.172

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Bolded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                      33
Table 7: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group and
Gender – School #2 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                          Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                          (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
A. Men
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100                .230                 .194                 -.164
                                          (.166)               (.034)               (.114)
Own SAT Score – Math/100                  .105                 .212                 .038
                                          (.165)               (.038)               (.127)
Black                                     -.239                -.281                (dropped)
                                          (.187)               (.131)
Hispanic                                  -.134                .055                 -.087
                                          (.233)               (.077)               (.112)
Native American                           N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Not a Citizen of the United States        -.068                .027                 -.163
                                          (.377)               (.093)               (.141)
Asian                                     .188                 -.053                -.166
                                          (.270)               (.048)               (.112)
Major Dummy Variables                     YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates Verbal SAT Score – Lowest 15%   -.132                -.132                -.092
                                          (.194)               (.056)               (.121)
Roommates Verbal SAT Score – Middle 70%   -.093                -.036                -.082
                                          (.109)               (.029)               (.068)
Sample Size                               110                  839                  245
R- Squared                                0.258                0.209                0.238
                                          Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                          (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Women
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100                .126                 .074                 .093
                                          (.094)               (.041)               (.179)
Own SAT Score – Math/100                  .165                 .118                 .119
                                          (.123)               (.040)               (.269)
Black                                     -.226                -.375                -.477
                                          (.083)               (.113)               (.166)
Hispanic                                  .046                 -.273                (dropped)
                                          (.124)               (.116)
Native American                           N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Not a Citizen of the United States        -.358                -.087                (dropped)
                                          (.403)               (.070)
Asian                                     .030                 -.102                -.065
                                          (.133)               (.048)               (.145)
Major Dummy Variables                     YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%          .102                 -.014                .139
                                          (.112)               (.043)               (.129)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%          .072                 .022                 -.018
                                          (.095)               (.036)               (.080)
Sample Size                               172                  666                  92
R- Squared                                0.439                0.204                0.209

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Bolded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                         34
Table 8: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group –
School #3 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)
                                       Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)

A. Linearity in Roommates Scores
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .214                 .114                 .183
                                       (.061)               (.032)               (.085)
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .146                 .101                 .236
                                       (.065)               (.031                (.106)
Black                                  -.309                -.498                -.186
                                       (.082)               (.112)               (.076)
Hispanic                               .028                 -.021                .191
                                       (.086)               (.064)               (.131)
Native American                        (dropped)            .120                 (dropped)
                                                            (.087)
Not a Citizen of the United States     N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                  .310                 -.097                .045
                                       (.164)               (.049)               (.090)
Female                                 .108                 .088                 .122
                                       (.078)               (.030)               (.068)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES


Roommates SAT Score/100                -.016                .019                 .036
                                       (.025)               (.011)               (.026)
Sample Size                            221                  975                  262
R- Squared                             0.3560               (0.1151)             0.1215
                                       Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                       (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Non-linearity in Roommates Scores

Own SAT Score – Verbal/100             .207                 .114                 .186
                                       (.056)               (.032)               (.083)
Own SAT Score – Math/100               .148                 .100                 .238
                                       (.065)               (.031)               (.102)
Black                                  -.303                -.498                -.145
                                       (.078)               (.111)               (.079)
Hispanic                               .031                 -.014                .193
                                       (.082)               (.059)               (.116)
Native American                        (dropped)            .110                 (dropped)
                                                            (.085)
Not a Citizen of the United States     N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                  .314                 -.094                .058
                                       (.165)               (.049)               (.090)
Female                                 .110                 .090                 .139
                                       (.078)               (.030)               (.066)
Major Dummy Variables                  YES                  YES                  YES


Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%       .069                 -.092                -.175
                                       (.096)               (.041)               (.077)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%       .004                 -.038                -.127
                                       (.081)               (.031)               (.061)
Sample Size                            223                  981                  263
R- Squared                             0.3585               0.1173               0.1377

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Bolded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                      35
Table 9: Your Grades and Your Roommate’s SAT Scores by SAT Group and
Gender – School #3 (Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                          Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                          (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
A. Men
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100                .079                 .136                 .154
                                          (.073)               (.048)               (.099)
Own SAT Score – Math/100                  .255                 .174                 .176
                                          (.105)               (.049)               (.134)
Black                                     -.261                -.632                -.077
                                          (.151)               (.159)               (.077)
Hispanic                                  .006                 -.170                .112
                                          (.124)               (.087)               (.170)
Native American                           (dropped)            .043                 (dropped)
                                                               (.088)
Not a Citizen of the United States        N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                     .236                 -.158                -.008
                                          (.219)               (.071)               (.105)
Major Dummy Variables                     YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates Verbal SAT Score – Lowest 15%   .161                 -.085                -.107
                                          (.120)               (.069)               (.093)
Roommates Verbal SAT Score – Middle 70%   .105                 -.063                -.107
                                          (.112)               (.045)               (.063)
Sample Size                               104                  464                  204
R- Squared                                0.4625               0.1634               0.1396
                                          Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                          (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
B. Women
Own SAT Score – Verbal/100                .292                 .110                 .460
                                          (.081)               (.044)               (.127)
Own SAT Score – Math/100                  .200                 .031                 .350
                                          (.098)               (.039)               (.123)
Black                                     -.192                -.377                -.335
                                          (.107)               (.135)               (.055)
Hispanic                                  .0190                .070                 .429
                                          (.145)               (.073)               (.233)
Native American                           (dropped)            (dropped)            (dropped)
Not a Citizen of the United States        N/A                  N/A                  N/A
Asian                                     .128                 -.050                .212
                                          (.150)               (.072)               (.084)
Major Dummy Variables                     YES                  YES                  YES
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%          .018                 -.059                -.266
                                          (.179)               (.048)               (.133)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%          -.124                .003                 -.149
                                          (.114)               (.039)               (.076)
Sample Size                               119                  517                  59
R- Squared                                0.4546               0.1172               0.6660

Note: Standard Errors are corrected for correlation within roommate cluster.
Shaded peer and own SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                                         36
Table 10: Peer Coefficients from Stacked Data for All Three Schools
(Dependent Variable is Cumulative GPA)

                                     Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score   Combined SAT Score
                                     (lowest 15%)         (middle 70%)         (top 15%)
A. Men and Women
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%     -.070                -.067                -.063
                                     (.057)               (.021)               (.044)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%     -.073                -.029                -.066
                                     (.050)               (.015)               (.030)

B. Men
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%     -.004                -.077                -.029
                                     (.088)               (.031)               (.062)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%     -.042                -.044                -.067
                                     (.068)               (.020)               (.035)

C. Women
Roommates SAT Score – Lowest 15%     -.091                -.036                -.062
                                     (.075)               (.027)               (.057)
Roommates SAT Score – Middle 70%     -.101                .006                 -.021
                                     (.078)               (.022)               (.055)
Note: Bolded peer SAT coefficients are significant at the 10% level. Other controls are
own SAT scores, gender, ethnicity, major, and school fixed effect.




                                                                                                    37
Table 11 : Recent Studies of Academic Peer Effects
Academic Peer Effects
Study          Peer Characteristic  Coefficient         Comments
                                    on grades*
Zimmerman     Roommate’s Verbal     -.077               Impact on middle 70% of SAT
(1999)        SAT in bottom 15% (.027)                  distribution, Williams College
Zimmerman     Roommate’s Verbal     -.086               Impact on middle 70% of SAT
(as reported  SAT in bottom 15% (.034)                  distribution, three schools from
in this                                                 College and Beyond.
chapter)
Sacerdote     Roommate in top       .060              Dartmouth. Controls for housing
(2001)        25% of Academic       (.028)            questions. Also peer effect on
              Rating Index                            fraternity membership but none on
                                                      major.
Stinebrickner ACT score                 .001          Controls for roommate’s family
and                                     (.004)        income. Roommate income is
Stinebrickner                                         significant with grades, rising .052
(2001)                                                per $10,000 income, for women.
Goethals        Admissions office       N/A           Finds performance increases with
(2000)          academic rating                       group homogeneity in academic
                                                      rating.
*
  Taken from Table 4 in Zimmerman (1999), Table 3 in Sacerdote (2000), Table 3 in
Stinebrickner (2000) and Tables 5 to 10 above.




                                                                                      38
REFERENCES:

(1971). Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education. 402 U.S. 1, US Supreme
        Court. 28: 554.
(1993). United States v. Brown University. F.3d 658: 1993 U.S. App. LEXIS 23895,
        United States Court of Appeals for the Third District.
Akerlof, G. A. and J. L. Yellen (1986). Introduction. Efficiency Wage Models of the
        Labor Market. Akerlof-Yellen, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Alexander, L., R. Gur, et al. (1974). “Peer Assisted Learning.” Improving Human
        Performance Quaterly 3(4): 175-186.
Arrow, K. J. (1973). “Higher Education as a Filter.” Journal of Public Economics 2: 193-
        216.
Avery, C., A. Fairbanks, et al. (2001). What Worms for the Early Bird? Early
        Admissions at Selective Colleges.
Basu, K. (1989). “A Theory of Association: Social Status, Prices and Markets.” Oxford
        Economic Papers 41: 653-670.
Becker, G. S. (1991). “A Note on Restaurant Pricing and Other Examples of Social
        Influences on Price.” Journal of Political Economy 99: 1109-16.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, et al. (2001). “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral
        Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature XXXIX(4): 1137-1176.
Clotfelter, C. T. (1996). Buying the Best: Cost Escalation in Elite Higher Education.
        Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Coleman, J. S., E. Q. Campbell, et al. (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity.
        Washington DC, Office of Education, US Department of Health, Education, and
        Welfare.
Epple, D., R. Romano, et al. (2001). Peer Effects, Financial Aid, and Selection of
        Students into Colleges and Universities: An Empirical Analysis.
Epple, D. and R. E. Romano (1998). “Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
        Vouchers, and Peer-Group Effects.” American Economic Review 88(1): 33-62.
Fallows, J. (2001). “The Early-Decision Racket.” The Atlantic Monthly 288(2): 37-52.
Fraser, S., A. Beamn, et al. (1977). “Two, Three, or Four Heads are better than One:
        Modification of College Performance by Peer Monitoring.” Journal of
        Educational Psychology 69(2): 101-108.
Goethals, G. R. (2001). Peer Effects, Gender and Intellectual Performance Among
        Students at a Highly Selective College: a Social Comparison of Abilities
        Analysis. Williamstown, MA, The Williams Project on the Economics of Higher
        Education.
Hansmann, H. (1980). “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise.” The Yale Law Journal 89(5):
        835-901.
Hanushek, E. (1986). “The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in Public
        Schools.” Journal of Economic Literature 24(3): 1141-1177.
Heckman, J. J. (1999). “Doing it right: job training and education.” Public Interest.
Hoxby, C. M. (2000). Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
        Variation. Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic Research.
James, E. (1978). “Product Mix and Cost Disaggregation: A Reinterpretation of the
        Economics of Higher Education.” Journal of Human Resources XII(2): 157-186.



                                                                                      39
James, E. (1990). Decision Processes and Priorities in Higher Education. The Economics
       of American Universities. Buffalo, New York, State University of New York
       Press.
Kennedy, D. (1997). Academic Duty. Cambridge, Harvard University Press.
Kirby, K. N., G. C. Winston, et al. (2002). Impatience and Grades: Delay-Discount Rates
       Correlate Negatively with College GPA. Williamstown, MA, The Williams
       Project on the Economics of Higher Education.
Lazear, E. P. (1999). Educational Production. Cambridge, MA, NBER.
Lemann, N. (1999). The Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy. New
       York, Ferrar, Straus & Giroux, Inc.
Lemann, N. (1999). The Kids in the Conference Room: How McKinsey & Company
       Becme the Next Big Step. The New Yorker: 209-216.
Manski, C. F. and D. A. Wise (1983). College Choice in America. Cambridge, Harvard
       University Press.
McPherson, M. S. and M. O. Schapiro (1990). Selective Admission and the Public
       Interest. New York, The College Board Press.
National Commission on the Cost of Higher Education (1998). Straight Talk About
       College Costs and Prices: Report of the National Commission on the Cost of
       Higher Education. Phoenix, The Oryx Press.
Robertson, D. and J. Symons (1996). Do Peer Groups Matter? Peer Group versus
       Schooling Effects on Academic Attainment, London School of Economics Centre
       for Economic Performance, Discussion Paper.
Rosovsky, H. (1990). The University: An Owner's Manual. New York, W.W. Norton &
       Company.
Rothschild, M. and L. J. White (1995). “The Analytics of Pricing in Higher Education
       and Other Services in Which Customers are Inputs.” Journal of Political Economy
       103.
Sabot, R., J. Wakeman-Linn. (1991). “The Implications of Grading Policies for Student
       Course Choice.” Journal of Economic Perspectives Vol. 5(No. 1): 159-170.
Sacerdote, B. (2001). “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
       Roommates.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Shulman, J. L., and William G. Bowen (2001). The Game of Life: College Sports and
       Educational Values. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Stinebrickner, T. R. and R. Stinebrickner (2000). Peer Effects Among Students From
       Disadvantaged Backgrounds.
Summers, A. A. and B. L. Wolfe (1977). “Do Schools Make a Difference?” American
       Economic Review LXVII(67): 639-652.
Winston, G. C. (1999). “Subsidies, Hierarchy, and Peers: The Awkward Economics of
       Higher Education.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 13.
Winston, G. C. (2003). "Toward a Theory of Tuition: Prices, Peer Wages, and
       Competition in Higher Education. Williamstown, MA, The Williams Project on
       the Economics of Higher Education.
Winston, G. C., and Ivan C. Yen (1995). Costs, Prices, Subsidies, and Aid in U.S. Higher
       Education, Williams Project on the Economics of Higher Education.




                                                                                     40
Winston, G. C., J. C. Carbone, et al. (2001). Saving, Wealth, Performance, and Revenues
       in US Colleges and Universities. Williamstown MA, The Williams Project on the
       Economics of Higher Education.
Zajonc, R. B. (1976). “Family configuration and intelligence.” Science 192: 227-36.
Zimmerman, D. J. (1999). Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
       Experiment. Williamstown, MA, The Williams Project on the Economics of
       Higher Education.
Zimmerman, D. J. (forthcoming). “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a
       Natural Experiment.” Review of Economics and Statistics.




                                                                                     41
