                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EDUCATION SAVING INCENTIVES
                                 AND HOUSEHOLD SAVING:
                            EVIDENCE FROM THE 2000 TIAA-CREF
                             SURVEY OF PARTICIPANT FINANCES

                                              Jennifer Ma

                                          Working Paper 9505
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9505


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




This paper was prepared for an upcoming NBER volume on higher education. I would like to thank John
Ameriks, Douglas Fore, Caroline Hoxby, Kathleen McGarry, Harvey Rosen, Mark Warshawsky, and
participants at the NBER Conference on College Decisions for their helpful comments and suggestions. I
would also like to thank Jake Rugh for excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the author and not necessarily those of TIAA-CREF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Jennifer Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education Saving Incentives and Household Saving:
Evidence from the 2000 TIAA-CREF Survey of Participant Finances
Jennifer Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 9505
February 2003
JEL No. I2, H2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effects of education saving incentives on the level of private saving by
households. Little is known about this subject. One explanation for this gap in the literature is that
because education saving incentives are relatively new, data on education saving are not readily

available. Using wealth data from a survey of TIAA-CREF participants, this paper attempts to
estimate whether saving in education saving programs offsets other household saving. As in the

extant literature of the impact of retirement saving programs on household saving, an empirical
challenge is how to deal with the issue of saver heterogeneity. In this paper, two strategies are used
to address this issue. The first strategy distinguishes savers from non-savers by whether households
have an IRA or a supplemental pension plan. The second strategy uses the propensity score approach

to control for unobserved heterogeneity in taste for saving. Results from both strategies suggest that
education saving incentives in general do not offset other household saving and stimulate saving for
households with high propensities to use education savings accounts.


Jennifer Ma
TIAA-CREF Institute
730 Third Avenue, 24th Floor
New York, NY 10017
jma@tiaa-cref.org
1      Introduction

       College tuition inflation in the past thirty years has averaged two to three percentage

points higher than the general price inflation and is showing no sign of slowing down. For the

2001-2002 academic year, the average in-state tuition and fees at four-year public colleges and

universities was $3,754, a 7.7 percent increase from the previous year. For the same academic

year, the average tuition and fees at four-year private colleges and universities was $17,123, a

5.5 percent increase from the previous year.1

       As the cost of college continues to rise at a fast pace, financing a college education has

become a growing concern for many families. In order to help families save for college, the

federal government has introduced two tax-favored education saving instruments in recent

years: the 529 plan and the Education IRA (recently renamed the Coverdell Education Savings

Account). These saving instruments are just “Roth IRAs for education expenses.”

Contributions to these education saving instruments are not deductible for federal tax purposes,

but earnings on qualified withdrawals are exempt from federal income tax.2 These education

saving instruments, the 529 plans in particular, have grown rapidly since their inception and

will likely grow even more quickly under the new tax law passed in 2001.

       Education saving instruments are only one of the government’s interventions in the

capital market for higher education investments. However, they are an important one. The

new education saving instruments represent an important redirection of state and federal efforts

toward saving and away from two major forms of public subsidy to higher education — state-



       1
           Source: Trends in College Pricing 2001, the College Board.
       2
           Note that the tax law that provides federal tax exemption on earnings of qualified 529 plan withdrawals



                                                         1
subsidized public tuition prices and needs-based federal financial aid such as grants and student

loans. For example, while state and local appropriations accounted for 48 percent of the total

current-fund revenue for public degree-granting institutions in the 1980-81 academic year, they

accounted for only 36 percent in the 1996-97 academic year.3

         Enthusiasm for the tax-favored education saving instruments was partly spurred by the

idea that they would raise households’ saving rate by targeting a segment of the population that

is not targeted already by IRAs and 401(k)s. Moreover, by offering tax incentives, education

saving instruments may encourage marginal families to save and plan for college, which may

have a positive influence on students’ college experience.4

         As in the case of other tax-favored saving programs, whether saving in education saving

instruments represents new saving is an empirical issue. In the last two decades, a large and

contentious literature has developed over the impact of IRAs and 401(k)s on private and

national saving. Some researchers (Poterba, Venti, and Wise) have found evidence that

suggests the majority of saving in tax-favored retirement accounts represents new saving while

other researchers (Gale and Scholtz) have found evidence that suggests just the opposite.

         While the debate on the impact of retirement saving programs has continued for years,

little is known about how education saving programs affect household saving. One explanation

for this gap in the literature is that because education saving programs are relatively new, data




is scheduled to expire on December 31, 2010. Congress may or may not extend the law beyond this date.
          3
            Source: Digest of Education Statistics 2001, Department of Education.
          4
            Despite the fact that loans are available and can be made the responsibility of the student himself,
anecdotal evidence suggests that many families with a record of successful college attendance make considerable
use of internal family financing (i.e. parental savings). Although the greater college success of savers may be due
to their greater incomes or superior planning, it is also possible that saving and debt do not have parallel effects on
students’ college experience. Perhaps piling up debt worries students and causes them to disengage from college
in order to earn money. It is also possible that act of saving for college causes a family to think more concretely
about college and prepare for it better.


                                                           2
on education saving are not readily available. Using wealth data from a survey of TIAA-CREF

participants, this paper attempts a first check on whether education saving incentives offset

other household saving, controlling for saver heterogeneity. Results suggest that in general

education saving instruments do not seem to offset other forms of household saving. For

households with high likelihood of using education savings accounts, education saving seems

to be positively correlated with other household assets.

       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the 529 plan

and the recently renamed Coverdell Education Savings Account. Section 3 describes the data

and presents some summary statistics. Section 4 provides a brief summary of the IRA and

401(k) literature and discusses the empirical strategies used in this paper to identify savers from

non-savers. Section 5 presents the regression results. Section 6 provides some concluding

remarks.


2      The 529 Plan and the Coverdell Education Savings Account


2.1    The 529 Plan

       Named after the section of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) that created them, 529

plans are qualified tuition programs designed to help families save for college expenses. Two

types of 529 plans are available: savings and prepaid. Savings plans are investment programs

that typically offer a variable rate of return. Prepaid plans usually allow the plan purchaser to

prepay future tuition credits at current prices. All of the existing 529 savings and prepaid plans

are sponsored by individual states. However, some private colleges and universities may

establish their own prepaid plans in the near future.

       Although the first prepaid plan (Michigan Education Trust) was introduced in 1988, it


                                                 3
was not until 1996 that Section 529 was added to the IRC to clarify the federal tax treatment of

state-sponsored plans. Under Section 529, earnings in state-sponsored plans grow federal and

state tax-free until withdrawal. Contributions to 529 plans are not deductible for federal

income tax purposes. However, they are deductible (usually subject to an annual maximum) in

some states for state income tax purposes.

        Before 2002, when withdrawals from a 529 plan were made to pay for qualified higher

education expenses, the earnings portion was subject to federal income tax at the beneficiary’s

rate. The state tax treatment on earnings of qualified withdrawals depended on the state. While

some states followed the federal tax treatment, many exempted earnings of qualified

withdrawals from state tax to provide additional tax benefits.

        The Economic Growth and Tax Reconciliation Act of 2001 (the 2001 Tax Act) provided

more favorable tax treatment for 529 plans, as the earnings of qualified withdrawals from state-

sponsored plans were made exempt from federal income tax, starting in 2002. States that

currently do not exempt earnings from state income taxes may follow suit and exempt earnings

from state taxes. Starting in 2004, prepaid plans established by private colleges and

universities will also be eligible for the same benefits as state-sponsored plans.5

        The 529 plan is also more flexible than most tax-favored saving vehicles. There is no

income restriction on participation or tax benefits. Anyone, regardless of income, can

contribute to a 529 plan. Withdrawals may be used to pay for tuition, fees, room and board,

books, supplies, and equipment required for enrollment or attendance at an eligible

undergraduate, graduate, or professional institution of higher education, or any approved



        5
        Note that the provisions of the 2001 Tax Act regarding Section 529 of the IRC are scheduled to expire
on December 31, 2010. Congress may or may not extend the tax benefits beyond this date. If the law is not



                                                       4
vocational/technical school. Eligible postsecondary institutions include those that are

accredited and are eligible to participate in student aid programs administered by the

Department of Education.

         While most state-sponsored prepaid plans are open to state residents only, most savings

plans allow anyone from any state to open an account. There is generally no annual

contribution limit for 529 plans. Most plans impose a lifetime limit per beneficiary on account

balances (the sum of contributions and earnings less fees and expenses); a few plans impose a

lifetime limit on gross contributions. Lifetime limits vary widely across states and are usually

adjusted once a year to reflect inflation. Table A1 shows as of September 2002, the lowest

lifetime limit on account balances was $122,484 (California) and the highest was $305,000

(South Dakota).6 Table A1 also shows that minimum contribution requirements are generally

low.

         Awareness of and interest in 529 plans have increased considerably after the 2001 Tax

Act made the earnings of qualified withdrawals exempt from federal income tax. As of March

2002, there were approximately 3.1 million accounts with a total asset value of $18.9 billion

across all 529 savings and prepaid plans, an increase of 75 percent compared to June 2001. As

of September 2002, forty-eight states had 529 savings plans in operation. The rest of the states

and District of Columbia had 529 savings plans under development. Twenty-two states had

529 prepaid plans either in operation or under development.7

         With increased interest in 529 plans, more and more employers are offering 529 plan



extended the federal tax treatment of 529 plans will revert to its status prior to January 1, 2002.
         6
           See Ma, Warshawsky, Ameriks, and Blohm (2001) for a study of using an economic approach to set the
contribution limits for 529 plans. In practice, limits are set by states according to broad considerations set forth in
the IRC and regulations. In states with lifetime limits on account balances, once the combined balance for a
designated beneficiary reaches the maximum limit, the program will stop taking new contributions.


                                                           5
automatic payroll deductions for their employees. To take things one step further, it would be

interesting for employers to make 529 plan enrollment a default for some employees (for

example, those with young children).

        The earnings of non-qualified withdrawals from 529 plans are subject to federal and

state income taxes at the distributee’s rate in addition to a ten-percent penalty tax. However,

the account owner may make a penalty-free, tax-free rollover by designating another “member

of the family” as the new beneficiary. The ten-percent penalty does not apply in the event there

is a withdrawal due to the beneficiary’s death or disability. If the beneficiary receives a tax-

free scholarship, educational assistance allowance, or other tax-free educational benefits, then

the distribution from a 529 plan is not subject to the ten-percent penalty to the extent that the

distribution is not more than the amount of the scholarship, educational allowance, or other

similar benefits.


2.2     The Coverdell Education Savings Account

        The recently renamed Coverdell Education Savings Account was introduced as part of

the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997. Contributions to the Coverdell are not tax-deductible.

However, earnings are exempt from federal and state income taxes if withdrawals are used to

pay for qualified education expenses. Before 2002, qualified expenses included higher

education expenses only. The 2001 Tax Act provided that starting in 2002, qualified expenses

would also include elementary and secondary school expenses at public, private, or religious

schools.8



        7
          Source: College Savings Plan Network.
        8
          Allowable higher education expenses are the same as those for 529 plans. Allowable elementary and
secondary school expenses include tuition, fees, academic tutoring, books, supplies, other equipment, "special
needs services", room and board, uniforms, transportation and "supplementary items and services".


                                                       6
       There is an income restriction on participation in the Coverdell. For 2001, the phase-

out range was between $95,000 and $110,000 for single tax filers and between $150,000 and

$160,000 for joint tax filers. In 2002, more families are eligible for the Coverdell, as the 2001

Tax Act raised the income phase-out range for married couples to between $190,000 and

$220,000. The 2001 Tax Act also raised the annual contribution limit for the Coverdell from

$500 to $2,000 per beneficiary, starting in 2002.

       The earnings on non-qualified withdrawals from Coverdells are subject to federal and

state income taxes at the distributee’s rate in addition to a ten-percent penalty (with similar

exceptions as those for 529 plans). Before the tax law changes in 2001, an excise tax was

imposed if individuals contributed to both a 529 plan and a Coverdell on behalf of the same

beneficiary in the same year. The new law provided that starting in 2002, the excise tax would

no longer apply. However, the federal law prohibits the use of same education expenses to

support tax-free distributions from both a 529 plan and a Coverdell. Furthermore, the education

expenses used to support tax-free distributions from a 529 plan or a Coverdell may not be used

to claim a Hope or Lifetime Learning Credit.

       Table 1 summarizes some key features of the 529 plan and Coverdell. Since the 529

plan and Coverdell have very similar tax treatment on earnings and contributions, a comparison

of the attractiveness of the two education saving instruments reduces to a comparison of fees

(Ma and Fore, 2001). Currently, the fees charged by 529 plans range widely from a low of 0.3

percent to a high of over 2 percent. Assuming the same rates of return for a 529 plan and

Coverdell, the plan with lower fees will result in a higher level of asset accumulation. Another

difference between the two saving instruments is that 529 plan investors may not make direct

investment decisions, while Coverdell investors may. Finally, when it comes to calculating a



                                                 7
student’s Expected Family Contribution (EFC) for financial aid purposes, assets in a Coverdell

account will be considered as the student’s assets and assessed at a 35 percent rate, while assets

in a 529 account will be considered as the parents’ assets (if the owner is a parent) and assessed

at a 5.6 percent rate. Since a higher EFC means a lower level of financial needs, assets in a

Coverdell account will reduce a student’s financial aid more than assets in a 529 plan will.

       Table 2 illustrates how families may use the 529 plan and Coverdell to save for future

college expenses. Column 1 of Table 2 indicates a monthly contribution of $22 over an 18-

year investment horizon would be sufficient to fund the average cost of a two-year education at

a public two-year college. Columns 2 and 3 indicate that monthly contributions of $240 and

$630 over an 18-year investment horizon would be sufficient to fund the average cost of a four-

year education at a public four-year and private four-year college, respectively.

       It is also worth noting that the Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs) in Canada

are similar to the 529 plan and Coverdell. Contributions to the RESPs are not tax-deductible.

However, earnings grow tax-free until withdrawal. When withdrawals are used to pay for

qualified higher education expenses, earnings are taxed as the beneficiary’s income. Earnings

on non-qualified withdrawals (withdrawals not used for higher education) are taxable as the

account subscriber (owner)’s income. For each beneficiary, the current annual contribution

limit is CAD 4,000 and the lifetime limit is CAD 42,000.


3      The 2000 TIAA-CREF Survey of Participant Finances

        To examine the impact of education saving instruments on other household saving,

information on contributions or accumulations in education saving, other saving, and

demographics is required. Currently, there is no publicly available wealth data that contain



                                                8
information on contributions or accumulations in education saving programs. The 2001 Survey

of Consumer Finances (SCF) conducted by the Federal Reserve Board includes questions on

education saving programs such as the 529 plans and Coverdells. However, the 2001 SCF data

will not be available until 2003.

       The data used in this study are drawn from the 2000 TIAA-CREF Survey of Participant

Finances (SPF) conducted by TIAA-CREF. TIAA-CREF is a non-profit organization that

provides retirement plans at more than 12,000 colleges, universities, research centers, medical

organizations and other nonprofit institutions throughout the United States. The 2000 TIAA-

CREF SPF sample consists mostly of employees of colleges and universities. A small portion

of the sample consists of employees of research and other nonprofit organizations.

       The 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF was conducted among members of the TIAA-CREF

“Research Panel.” The TIAA-CREF Research Panel was established in 1993 when 60,000

TIAA-CREF participants were randomly selected to participate in the TIAA-CREF Research

Panel Project. The purpose of the Research Panel Project was to select a sample of TIAA-

CREF participants for future studies of participant financial decisions. A brief questionnaire

was mailed to these 60,000 randomly selected participants asking information about themselves

and their families. Of these 60,000 individuals selected, 9,847 responded to the 1993 Research

Panel questionnaire and formed the initial TIAA-CREF Research Panel. In the subsequent

years, some members were dropped from the Research Panel due to death, change of

participant status, or change of address. Several sample replenishment efforts were made in

1995, 1997, and 1999.

       The 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF is a comprehensive survey of household finances. It was

designed to examine in detail the types and amounts of financial assets owned by TIAA-CREF



                                                9
participants, and apply this information to the study of household asset allocation and other

financial decisions. Survey packets containing a cover letter and an eight-page questionnaire

were mailed in January 2000 to a total of 9,234 Research Panel members. A total of 2,835

completed questionnaires (2,793 usable) were received representing an overall response rate of

31 percent.

       The 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF gathered a wide range of information on household

finances and demographics. The demographic information gathered includes respondent’s age,

gender, education, employment status, occupation, marital status, and the number of children

for whom the respondent’s household is financially responsible. The financial information

gathered includes the amount and sources of the respondent’s income, the types of retirement

investments, non-retirement financial accounts, real estate holdings in the household, and the

estimates of the current value for each of those investments. Information on household

mortgages and other types of financial commitments was also gathered. For married

respondents, information on the spouse’s employment status, income, and retirement assets was

also collected. Most importantly, respondents were asked whether anyone in his/her household

had a Coverdell, a 529 savings account, or a 529 prepaid contract. Respondents were asked to

provide a value if they answered yes to any of these questions. Respondents were also asked to

measure on a 1-10 scale how important it was for them to leave a bequest.


3.1    A Comparison of the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF with the 1998 SCF

       Table 3 shows the summary statistics of households from the 1998 SCF and households

from the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF. Clearly, households from the two surveys are quite different

in terms of both demographic and financial characteristics. As Table 3 shows, the respondents

in the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF are older and much more educated than the respondents in the


                                               10
1998 SCF. For example, while only 33.2 percent of the 1998 SCF respondents have a college

degree, 87.5 percent of the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF respondents have at least a college degree

and 33.4 percent have a Ph.D. degree.

       Table 3 also shows that households from the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF on average earned

much higher income than those from the 1998 SCF. The median 1999 household income from

the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF was more than twice as much as the median 1997 household

income from the 1998 SCF. Even when the median household income from the 1998 SCF is

inflated by 10 percent to the 1999 level, it is still less than half of that from the 2000 TIAA-

CREF SPF. (The March Current Population Survey data suggest that for households with

householders 25 years and older, the median income in current dollars rose by 10.1 percent

between 1997 and 1999 while the mean income in current dollars rose by 10.6 percent.)

Moreover, households from the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF are much wealthier than those from the

1998 SCF. The median net worth for households from the 1998 SCF is only $71,700,

compared to $467,728 for those from the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF.

       The above comparisons suggest that the sample in the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF is quite

different from the general population. The respondents in the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF are older,

much more educated and wealthier than the general population. These unique characteristics

make the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF particularly well suited to the task of assessing the

effectiveness of education saving programs mainly for two reasons. First, the TIAA-CREF

sample is more likely to be saving-prone and more likely to plan for college. Thus, they are

more likely to use the new education saving instruments than the typical American household,

especially when the instruments are new and unfamiliar to most people. In fact, as of

December 1999, while 2.4 percent of the TIAA-CREF SPF households reported owning a 529



                                                11
savings or prepaid plan, less than 1.2 percent of the U.S. households owned a 529 plan.9 This

confirms the TIAA-CREF sample is much more likely to use education saving instruments than

the general population. The proneness of the TIAA-CREF sample to use saving instruments

allows one to find a sufficient number of users in a small sample.

        Second, estimates from the TIAA-CREF sample will likely overstate the extent to

which education saving crowds out other saving. Research on retirement saving suggests that

reshuffling of assets is more likely to occur for high-income households (Gale and Scholtz,

2000). Moreover, not only is the TIAA-CREF sample wealthier and has accumulated higher

levels of saving (and more saving to crowd out), it also consists largely of education-sector

workers who are very consciously dedicated to ensuring their children’s college opportunities.

These individuals are far more likely to have been saving explicitly for college even in the

absence of tax-favored instruments, which also raises the likelihood of crowding out.

Therefore, one can confidently predict that there would be much less crowding out in the

overall population than in the TIAA-CREF sample.


3.2     Non-responses in the Survey and Sample Selection

        Although missing data are common for many wealth surveys, the item response rates in

the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF are quite high. Table 4 presents the proportions of non-responses to

financial asset questions in the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF survey. As Table 4 shows, the item




        9
           These comparisons are on 529 plans only because data on the aggregate number of Coverdell accounts
are not readily available.
           Source: Author’s calculations. The percentage of U.S. households owning a 529 plan was calculated by
dividing the total number of 529 accounts in the U.S. by the total number of households, as of December 1999.
Data on the total number of 529 accounts are from the College Savings Plans Network and data on the total
number of households are from the U.S. Census Bureau. It is worth noting that to the extent that some households
may have multiple 529 accounts, the actual percentage of households owning 529 plans may be slightly lower than
the calculated 1.2 percent.


                                                      12
response rates for the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF are over 90 percent for most of non-retirement

financial assets (Column 4).

       Missing data could arise as a result of non-response to ownership questions or value

questions, or sometimes, both. Column 1 in Table 4 indicates that between 2.0 and 16.3

percent of respondents did not provide an answer to the ownership question for various types of

financial assets. Column 3 suggests that among those who answered yes to the ownership

questions, between 6.2 and 20.6 percent did not provide a value. As a result, between 5.9 and

23.2 percent of respondents had missing data for various assets (Column 4).

       Of all of the assets listed in Table 4, TIAA-CREF retirement assets (Row 1) seem to

have a much higher non-response rate (23.2 percent) than other assets. One reason for this is

that a third of the sample consists of annuitant respondents who were already receiving life-

annuity income from TIAA-CREF. For these respondents, it is difficult for them to report the

value of their TIAA-CREF retirement assets. In other words, since they had already annuitized

part or all of their TIAA-CREF retirement assets, they would need to calculate the present

value of their future annuity income in order to figure out the total value of their TIAA-CREF

retirement assets. Fortunately, for annuitants, the value of their total TIAA-CREF retirement

assets can be calculated by adding together their non-annuitized assets and their annuity

reserves from the TIAA-CREF accounting data. The annuity reserve for an annuitant is the

amount of reserve set aside to fund the annuitant’s life-annuity income. The value of an

annuitant’s annuity reserve can be considered as the present value of the annuitant’s life-

annuity income, using the TIAA-CREF guaranteed interest rate as the discount rate.

       Non-responses become more of an issue when one calculates aggregate wealth levels,

even though the non-response rates for individual assets are rather low. For example, when one



                                               13
calculates households’ self-reported non-education net worth, 54.9 percent of respondents have

missing data due to non-responses to the ownership and/or value questions for at least one of

the assets. In order to reduce the number of observations with missing net worth, the

respondent’s self-reported data on TIAA-CREF retirement assets were replaced with TIAA-

CREF accounting data. As a result, the proportion of respondents with missing data for net

worth reduced to 51.1 percent. It is worth noting that the net worth calculated from TIAA-

CREF accounting data is highly correlated with that from self-reported data with a correlation

coefficient of 0.96.

       Also of special attention are the non-responses for the three education saving questions.

At first glance, the non-response rates for the three education saving questions seem much

higher than those for other financial assets. Further investigation of the data reveals that

majorities of the non-responses to education saving questions represent non-responses to all

three education saving questions (440 cases). Of these 440 cases, household’s non-education

net worth (the sum of net non-education financial assets and real estate equity) is available for

184 cases. This indicates that these 184 respondents filled out all the necessary information

needed for the calculation of household non-education net worth, but left the education saving

questions blank. Because these education saving instruments were rather new at the time of the

survey (approximately two years after their introduction), it is likely that many respondents

were not familiar with these incentives and did not understand the questions. However, those

respondents who did report having such education saving seemed to understand the questions

and most of them provided a valid and positive answer for the value question. Therefore, it

seems reasonable to assume that these 184 respondents did not have such accounts. Under such




                                                14
an assumption, the non-response rate for the education ownership questions dropped to around

ten percent.

       Of the 2,793 respondents, 171 reported having at least one of the three education saving

instruments. The number of respondents reported having a Coverdell, a 529 savings account,

and a 529 prepaid contract was 109, 57, and 13, respectively. Moreover, 96, 53, and 11

provided a non-zero account balance. The reported median balance for the three types of

accounts was $2,000, $10,000, and $5,000, respectively. Due to the small number of

respondents who reported having these education saving accounts, it is difficult to empirically

distinguish the impact of each of these education incentives on household wealth. Therefore,

all three education saving instruments are treated equally in the empirical analysis. In other

words, the balances of all education saving accounts are aggregated to create a variable that

measures a household’s total education saving.

       Observations with missing values for explanatory variables in the regressions are

excluded from the analysis. Also excluded from the regression analysis are observations with

extreme values of net worth (over $10 million, 1 case) and observations with missing values for

net worth. The final regression sample includes 1265 cases.


4      Empirical Strategy — How to Control for Saver Heterogeneity?

       As mentioned earlier, one important public policy question for tax-favored saving

programs is whether saving in these tax-favored programs represents new saving. In other

words, does saving in education saving programs offset other household saving? The answer to

this question in large part depends on the source of contributions to these programs. If the

source of contributions is reduced consumption or tax saving, then saving in these programs



                                               15
represents new saving. However, if the source of contributions is borrowing, existing assets, or

the portion of wealth that would have been saved anyway even in the absence of these tax-

favored saving programs, then tax-favored saving programs do not stimulate new saving.

       In empirically estimating the saving effects of tax-favored retirement or education

saving programs, a challenging issue is how to deal with saver heterogeneity. Individuals’

saving behaviors may be different due to unobservable individual-specific preferences such as

their propensity to save. For example, participants in tax-favored saving programs may have

stronger tastes for saving than others and may tend to save more in all forms. Econometric

models that do not control for saver heterogeneity are likely to overestimate the saving effects

of tax incentives.

       In the retirement saving literature, a substantial amount of research has been devoted to

estimate the impact of IRAs and 401(k) plans on households’ wealth. This section provides a

summary of selected studies in the retirement saving literature.


4.1    A Summary of Selected Studies in the Retirement Saving Literature

       Two major retirement saving incentives, the IRA and the 401(k) have been the subject

of substantial public discussion and economic analysis. When first introduced in 1974, IRAs

were only available to individuals not covered by an employer pension plan. There was no

income restriction. Contributions were tax deductible and capped at $1,500 per year. The

entire proceeds were subject to income taxes upon withdrawals. There was a 10 percent

penalty on withdrawals made before the owner turned 59½.

       The IRAs grew rapidly after the Economic Recovery Act of 1981 raised the annual

contribution limit to $2,000 and made all wage earners and their spouses eligible. However,

the Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced the tax benefits so that contributions were no longer


                                               16
deductible for higher-income individuals covered by a pension plan. Consequently,

contributions to IRAs dropped sharply.

       The 401(k) plan became popular in the 1980s and is one of the most important

retirement saving programs. Sponsored by employers, only employees of firms that offer such

plans are eligible to participate in a 401(k) plan. The 401(k) plan offers tax deduction on

contributions, tax-free growth on earnings, and very often, employer matching contributions.

The entire proceeds are subject to income taxes upon withdrawal. There is a 10 percent penalty

on withdrawals made before the owner turned 59½. Before 1987, participants were allowed to

contribute up to $30,000 per year. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced the annual contribution

limit to $7,000. The limit is adjusted annually to reflect inflation. The contribution limit for

the 2002 tax year is $11,000.

       Since the introduction of the IRA and 401(k), there has been a growing literature on the

saving effects of these tax-favored retirement programs. The focus has been whether and to

what extent IRA and 401(k) saving represents new saving. A central theme of this body of

research is how to deal with saver heterogeneity. In dealing with saver heterogeneity, various

methods have been used to identify savers from non-savers, some of them described below.

For more detailed reviews of this literature, see Bernheim (1999), Poterba, Venti, and Wise

(1996), and Engen and Gale (2000).

Comparing the Same Individuals or Similar Individuals Using Multiple Waves of Data

       When panel data are available, one method to control for saver heterogeneity is to

follow the same households and compare the retirement and non-retirement assets of the same

households over time. This method relies on the assumption that any unobserved individual-

specific preferences in tastes for saving can be “differenced out” when one calculates the



                                                17
change in wealth levels of the same individuals over a certain time period. Studies that have

used this identification strategy include Venti and Wise (1992, 1995), and Gale and Scholz

(1994). Venti and Wise (1995) estimate whether IRA contributions reduce other non-IRA

financial assets, using two waves of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)

data. They find that whether households contributed to IRAs had little impact on their non-IRA

financial assets.

        Another strategy to identify savers is to compare households with similar

characteristics, using multiple waves of cross-section data. Using data from the 1984, 1987 and

1991 waves of the SIPP, Poterba, Venti and Wise (1995) estimate the saving effects of

retirement programs. They group households by whether households participated in IRA or

401(k) saving programs. They find that after controlling for age, income, education, and

marital status, a family’s IRA or 401(k) ownership or contribution status does not affect other

non-IRA non-401(k) financial assets. Therefore, they conclude that contributions to IRAs or

401(k)s do not reduce other saving.

        Engen and Gale (1995) use the 1987 and 1991 waves of the SIPP data and compare the

wealth accumulations of the same comparison groups as Poterba, Venti and Wise (1995). They

find that controlling for some demographics and income, 401(k)-eligible households

accumulated more financial assets than other households. However, when they use a broad

measure of wealth that includes net financial assets and home equity, 401(k)-eligible

households did not accumulate more wealth than other households. They find similar results

when comparing the wealth accumulations of IRA owners and non-owners. They argue that

between 1987 and 1991, the housing value of 401(k)-eligible households rose compared to non-

eligible households, but the mortgage debt level of those households rose even more. As a



                                               18
result, the home equity of 401(k)-eligible households fell during that period. Their results

suggest that 401(k)-eligible households substitute 401(k) assets for home equity.

The Eligibility Experiment

       Another identification strategy, employed by Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1995) and

Engelhardt (2000), relies on the assumption that the determination of 401(k) eligibility status is

exogenous and uncorrelated with the observed or unobserved household characteristics.

       Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1995) estimate whether 401(k) contributions offset other

conventional personal financial asset saving and IRA saving, assuming the 401(k) eligibility

status is independent of households’ preferences for saving, given income. Using data from the

1984, 1987, and 1991 waves of SIPP, they find little substitution between 401(k) saving and

other conventional personal financial asset saving. They also find very little substitution

between 401(k) saving and IRA saving. They conclude that most 401(k) contributions

represent net new saving.

       Using the 1992 Health and Retirement Study, Engelhardt (2000) finds results that are

similar to those in Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1995), when non-401(k) pension wealth is not

taken into account. However, when non-401(k) pension wealth is included in the wealth

measure, he finds that the total wealth levels of eligible and non-eligible families are similar.

Thus, his results suggest that families tend to substitute 401(k) pension wealth for non-401(k)

pension wealth.

       In an effort to reconcile the discrepancies in findings of different studies, Engen and

Gale (2000) estimate the effects of 401(k) plans on household wealth. Their new econometric

specification allows the impact of 401(k) to vary over both time and earnings groups. Using

data from the 1987 and 1991 waves of the SIPP, they find that 401(k) contributions by low



                                                19
earning groups are more likely to represent new saving than those by high earning groups.

Because high earning groups hold the majorities of 401(k) balances, they estimate that only

between 0 and 30 percent of 401(k) balances represents net additions to private saving between

1987 and 1991.

       Given the wide range of estimates of the impact of retirement saving programs on

household saving, what studies’ results are closer to the “truth”? In a review of several studies,

Hubbard and Skinner (1996) argue that the saving effects of retirement programs are likely to

lie somewhere between the extremes of “no new saving” and “all new saving”. Their

conservative estimate is that 26 cents per dollar of IRA contribution represent new saving.


4.2    The Empirical Strategy to Control for Saver Heterogeneity in This Study

       To examine the issue of saver heterogeneity in this study, Table 5 presents some

summary statistics of the respondents to the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF by the ownership status of

education saving instruments. Clearly, households who own education saving have quite

different economic and demographic characteristics than those who do not own. Households

who own education savings tend to be slightly more educated, earn higher incomes, more likely

to own a home, to be married, and to have an IRA or Keogh. For example, the median 1999

household income for households who own education saving was $100,000, compared to

$73,000 for households who do not own education saving. The difference is statistically

significant at the one percent level. Not surprisingly, households who own education saving on

average have more and younger children than those who do not own.

       Table 5 also shows that households with education saving have slightly more net worth

than those without education saving. But this does not necessarily mean that education saving

instruments stimulate new saving. It is possible that there may be systematic differences


                                                20
between households who own and do not own education saving. Therefore, analyses that do

not take into account these fundamental differences are likely to attribute higher levels of

wealth of the participant group to education saving participation and thus lead to an upward

bias in the estimates of the effectiveness of education saving instruments.

        Generally, panel data or multiple waves of cross-sectional data are better suited to

assessing the impact of saving programs than a single wave of cross-sectional data in that they

allow one to compare changes in household saving over time. However, because only one

wave of the survey data is available for this study, any longitudinal, “over time” comparisons

are not feasible for this paper.10 Furthermore, unlike 401(k) plans, almost anyone is eligible for

saving with 529 plans and Coverdells. Therefore, there is no eligibility experiment here, either.

        However, whether households have an IRA or Supplemental Retirement

Annuities/Group Supplemental Retirement Annuities (SRA/GSRA) may be used to identify

savers.11 SRAs or GSRAs are offered by TIAA-CREF and available through employers. SRAs

or GSRAs provide similar tax benefits as 401(k)s. Contributions are voluntary and tax-

deductible. The annual contribution limit for a SRA or GSRA account is $11,000 in 2002 and

$12,000 in 2003. Earnings in SRAs or GRSAs grow tax-free and the entire proceeds are

subject to income taxes upon withdrawal.

        Because participation in an IRA or a SRA/GSRA is entirely voluntary, it may be

considered a reasonable signal of taste for saving. For example, Poterba, Venti and Wise



        10
             Although a previous wealth survey was conducted among the Research Panel members in 1996, less
than 400 members responded to both the 1996 and the 2000 surveys, not enough to conduct a longitudinal
comparison. See Bodie and Crane (1997) for a paper that used data from the 1996 Survey to analyze household
asset allocation decisions.
          11
             For annuitants who had already annuitized part or all of their TIAA-CREF retirement assets, many of
them no longer had existing contracts (including SRAs or GSRAs) with TIAA-CREF at the time of the survey.
Therefore, the ownership status of SRA/GSRA for annuitants is determined by whether they ever owned a SRA or



                                                      21
(1994, 1995) use whether households participated in IRA or 401(k) saving programs as a signal

of taste for saving. In addition, participation in an IRA or a SRA/GSRA is also a good signal

for households’ familiarity with tax-favored saving instruments. As Table 5 shows, 63.4

percent of the households who owned education saving also reported owning an IRA,

compared to only 54.1 percent for households who did not own education saving.

        To the extent that the ownership status of IRA or SRA/GSRA only distinguishes savers

from non-savers to a certain degree, heterogeneity in individuals’ propensities to save may still

exist within the owner or non-owner group. Therefore, the propensity score approach is used to

better control for unobserved saver heterogeneity. The propensity score approach is a recently

developed technique often used to estimate the average treatment effects of program

participation. The propensity score approach has successfully reduced the selection bias in

many studies. For example, Dehejia and Wahba (1999) use the propensity score approach to

estimate the treatment effects in observational studies. They find that the propensity score

approach succeeds in replicating the treatment effects of a random experimental study

presented in Lalonde (1986).

        In this paper, the propensity score approach is applied as follows. In the first step, a

probit model is used to estimate the propensity of household having an education savings

account. In the second step, households are sorted by their estimated propensities, from lowest

to highest. Households who do not own an education savings account and have an estimated

propensity score higher than the maximum or lower than the minimum estimated propensity

score for those who do own are discarded. In the third step, households are stratified into

different strata based on their propensities to have an education savings account estimated from



GSRA account before they annuitized their assets.

                                                    22
the first step. Strata with too few numbers of observations (less than 5) with education savings

accounts are discarded. The strata are chosen so that the covariates are “balanced” within each

stratum, i.e., no statistical differences in means of covariates among households who have and

who do not have education savings account. Fourth, within-stratum robust regressions are run

to estimate the impact of education saving on other household assets.

       The propensity score approach greatly reduces the saver heterogeneity within each

stratum in that by design, within a stratum households who have and who do not have an

education savings account have similar propensities to use an education savings account and

similar covariates. In other words, there is no systematic difference between those who have

and who do not have an education savings account within a stratum. Therefore, the propensity

score approach should provide reliable estimates.


4.3    Empirical Model and Specifications

       The empirical model to be estimated is as follows:

               W = " + $* X + (* Edsave_balance + g                                EQ (1)

Where W is a wealth measure and Edsave_balance is the aggregate balance of a household’s

education saving. X is a vector of household demographic variables including respondent’s

age, gender, education, marital status, household income, number of children, bequest motive,

whether the respondent is an annuitant, and whether the household is covered by a defined

benefit pension. For married respondents, the household income is the sum of the respondent

and the spouse’s income. For other respondents, household income is set equal to the

respondent’s income. The income measure includes labor income, pension and social security

income, rental income, interests, dividends, and capital gains.

       In the regression analysis, two wealth measures are employed as the dependent variable.


                                               23
The first measure is net non-education financial assets, which is the total of non-education

retirement and non-retirement assets including stock mutual funds, bond mutual funds, money

market mutual funds, individual stocks, bonds, savings account, checking account, and

certificate of deposit less personal loans, educational loans, and credit card balances. The

second wealth measure is non-education net worth, which is the sum of net non-education

financial assets and real estate equity. Real estate equity is defined as the difference between

the total value of the household’s primary home and other properties the household owns and

the mortgage debt against these real estate properties.


5      Results


5.1    Using IRA Ownership to Identify Savers

       This section presents results from estimating the model described in Section 4.3. The

model is estimated separately for households who own and do not own an IRA. Table 6

presents the summary statistics for the full regression sample and by IRA ownership. Table 6

indicates a higher proportion of IRA owners have an education savings accounts than non-

owners. Perhaps this is related to the fact that IRA owners on average have more children in

the household.

       Because wealth distribution is skewed, mean regressions are often driven by outliers.

Therefore, median regressions are used instead. Heteroskedasticity in the error term is corrected

by estimating the standard errors using bootstrap estimation with 200 iterations.

       Table 7 presents results from using net non-education financial assets as the dependent

variable. The coefficient estimates of most explanatory variables have the expected signs. Not

surprisingly, net non-education financial assets increase with household income and age for


                                                24
both IRA owner and non-owner groups. For both groups, having an SRA/GRSA account has a

positive and significant impact on net non-education financial assets. Bequest motive

(measured on a 0-10 scale) seems to be positively associated with net non-education financial

assets for both groups and the estimate is somewhat significant for IRA owners.

         For both groups, education saving is positively associated with net non-education

financial assets and the estimate is statistically significant for IRA owners. This suggests that

for IRA owners, saving with education saving instruments seems to have a positive impact on

other household financial assets.

         Not surprisingly, having a defined benefit retirement plan has a negative and

statistically significant impact on net non-education financial asset for both groups. This

indicates that households who are covered by a defined benefit plan may save less in other

forms.

         Because there is a penalty on non-qualified withdrawals from tax-favored education

saving instruments, education saving may be considered illiquid. Furthermore, education

saving may be considered long-term investment because many households are saving for their

young children’s future college expenses, which very often will occur many years later. To the

extent that both housing and education saving may be considered illiquid and long-term

investment, households may increase education saving by taking out more home mortgage

debt. Therefore, regressions that use wealth measures that do not include home equity may

overestimate the impact of saving incentives.

         To address this issue, the model is estimated using non-education net worth (the sum of

net non-education financial assets and real estate equity) as the dependent variable. Results are

presented in Table 8. Most parameter estimates are similar to those presented in Table 7. The



                                                25
estimates of the education saving variable for both groups are still positive, yet statistically

insignificant. This indicates that after real estate equity is taken into account, education saving

has a negligible impact on households’ non-education net worth.


5.2    Using the Ownership Status of SRA/GSRA to Identify Savers

       This section presents results from estimating the model separately for SRA/GSRA

owners and non-owners. Again, two wealth measures are used as the dependent variable. Table

9 presents the summary statistics for the full regression sample and by SRA/GSRA ownership.

Surprisingly, the proportions of SRA/GSRA owners and non-owners who have an education

savings account are almost identical. Moreover, the mean value of total education saving is

higher for SRA non-owners than for owners ($949 vs. $471). This indicates that the saver and

non-saver groups defined by the ownership status of SRA/GSRAs are somewhat different from

those defined by the ownership status of IRAs.

       Table 10 presents results from using net non-education financial assets as the dependent

variable. The coefficient estimates of many explanatory variables are similar to those presented

in Table 7. For both SRA/GSRA owner and non-owner groups, net non-education financial

assets increase with income and age. For both groups, having an IRA is positively associated

with net non-education financial assets. Having a defined benefit pension plan is negatively

associated with net non-education financial assets and the estimate is statistically significant for

SRA non-owners.

       Total education saving is positively associated with net non-education financial assets

and the estimate is statistically significant for SRA non-owners and somewhat significant for

SRA owners. This suggests that saving with education saving instruments seem to be

positively associated with other household financial assets for both groups.


                                                 26
       Table 11 presents results from using non-education net worth as the dependent variable.

Table 11 suggests that when real estate equity is taken into account, total education saving is

positively associated with non-education net worth and the estimates are statistically significant

for both SRA owner and non-owner groups. The estimates of most other explanatory variables

are similar to those reported in Table 10.


5.3    Using the Propensity Score Method to Control for Saver Heterogeneity

       The results from using the ownership status of IRA or SRA/GSRA suggest that total

education saving seems to be positively associated with other household assets and the

estimates are statistically significant in many cases. Specifically, total education saving has a

positive and statistically significant impact on net non-education financial assets for IRA

owners. However, when real estate equity is taken into account, the estimate becomes

statistically insignificant. Total education saving has a positive impact on net non-education

financial assets and non-education net worth for both SRA/GSRA owners and non-owners and

most of the estimates are significant.

       As mentioned earlier, the saver and non-saver groups defined by the IRA ownership are

somewhat different from those defined by the SRA/GSRA ownership. This suggests that the

ownership status of IRA or SRA/GSRA controls for saver heterogeneity only to a certain

degree and potential unobserved heterogeneity in individuals’ propensities to save might still

exist within the owner or non-owner group.

       One way to better control for unobserved saver heterogeneity is to use the propensity

score approach. This section presents the results from using the propensity score approach to

control for saver heterogeneity. In order to estimate the impact of education saving on

household net worth, a reasonable number of households with education saving is needed.


                                                27
Therefore, strata with less than 5 observations that have an education savings account are

discarded. The discarded strata are those in the bottom 40 percentile of the estimated

propensity score distribution.

       Table 12 presents results from robust regressions within each of the remaining

propensity score strata. Table 12 indicates total education saving has a positive and significant

impact on other household net worth for the top two propensity score strata (Strata 4 and 5).

Moreover, the estimates are consistent with those obtained from using IRA or SRA/GSRA

ownership to identify savers. Because Stratum 5 has the most reasonable balance of

households who own and those who do not own education savings accounts, estimates for

Stratum 5 should be considered the most reliable estimates. For propensity score strata 1-3,

total education saving does not seem to have a significant impact on other household net worth.

       As a sensitivity analysis, the propensity score approach is applied to only households

with children (365 cases, slightly less than one third of the full regression sample). Again,

households are sorted into strata based on their estimated propensity to use an education

savings account. The lowest stratum is discarded due to the low number of households with an

education savings account (three cases).

       Table 13 presents the results using the subsample of households with children. Table

13 reiterates the findings in Table 12. That is, total education saving has a positive and

significant impact on other household net worth for the high propensity score strata (Strata 2

and 3). Moreover, the estimates are very similar to those in Table 12. This further confirms

that the propensity score approach provides reliable and robust estimates. The estimates are

especially robust for high-propensity-strata.




                                                28
6      Concluding Remarks

       Whether saving incentives increase total private and public saving has been the subject

of an ongoing debate. In the last two decades, a substantial amount of research has been

devoted to address this issue with a focus on the saving effects of retirement saving incentives

on total household saving.

       In recent years, the federal government has introduced several education saving

instruments in support of saving for education expenses. As in the case of retirement saving

incentives, an important public policy issue is whether these education saving instruments

stimulate new saving. Because these education saving instruments are relatively new, data are

not readily available. The lack of data makes it difficult to empirically estimate the saving

effects of these education saving instruments.

       Using wealth data from a survey of TIAA-CREF participants, this paper attempts to

estimate the impact of education saving instruments on household non-education assets. In the

analysis, two strategies are used to control for saver heterogeneity. The first strategy uses the

ownership status of IRA or SRA/GSRA as a signal of household’s taste for saving. The second

strategy uses the propensity score method to control for saver heterogeneity.

       Using IRA or SRA/GSRA ownership to identify savers from non-savers, median

regression results suggest that education saving does not offset other household assets. In

many cases, education saving seems to be positively associated with other household assets and

the estimates are significant. Results from the propensity score method confirm these findings.

Specifically, education saving is positively associated with other household assets for

households with higher propensities to use education savings accounts.

       It is not surprising that this study finds no evidence of household shifting assets from


                                                 29
other accounts to tax-favored education savings accounts. This is the case because if

withdrawals are not used for college expenses, a ten-percent penalty as well as regular income

tax is imposed on earnings. If an individual withdraws money from an education savings

account for non-education purposes, the after-tax, after-penalty asset accumulation could be

easily trumped by that from a tax-efficient mutual fund, assuming the same rates of return for

the mutual fund and the education savings account. Therefore, if an individual anticipates that

there is a high probability that withdrawals will not be used for education purposes, he/she

would be unlikely to use an education savings account.

       Also of considerable interest are the potential institutional responses to tax-favored

education saving programs. Some researchers argue that these saving programs may have

long-term impact on admission policies. For example, Olivas (2000) argue that some higher

education institutions may predicate admissions on ability to pay. These programs may also

present an opportunity for some institutions to raise tuition even more.

       As 529 plans and Coverdells continue to grow, new data may become available. With

new and hopefully better data, alternative and possibly more robust methods may be used to

control for saver heterogeneity. Such methods may include using panel data to compare

changes in household assets for those who own and those who do not own education savings

account. State variation in 529 plans may be used to examine the impact of plan features on

individuals’ saving behaviors. Future research should also examine the impact of education

saving instruments on national saving.




                                               30
                                        References
Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Taxation and Saving,” NBER Working Paper 7061, March 1999.

Bodie, Zvi, and Dwight Crane, “Personal Investing: Advice, Theory, and Evidence,” Financial
       Analysts Journal, November/December 1997, 13-23.

The Census Bureau, March Current Population Survey, various years.

Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba, "Causal Effects in Non-Experimental Studies: Re-
       Evaluating the Evaluation of Training Programs" Journal of the American Statistical
       Association, Volume 94, Number 448 (December 1999), 1053-1062.

Engelhardt, Gary, “Have 401(k)s Raised Household Raving? Evidence from the Health and
      Retirement Study,” mimeo, 2000.

Engen, Eric M. and William G. Gale, “The Effects of 401(k) Plans on Household Wealth:
       Differences Across Earnings Groups,” NBER Working Paper 8032, December 2000.

Engen, Eric M. and William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholtz, “The Illusory Effects of Saving
       Incentives on Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 10, Number 4, Fall
       1996, 113-138.

Engen, Eric M. and William G. Gale, “Debt, Taxes and the Effects of 401(k) Plans on
       Household Wealth Accumulation,” mimeo, October 1995.

Gale, William G. and John Karl Scholtz, “IRAs and Household Saving,” American Economic
       Review, Volume 84, Number 5, December 1994, 1233-1260.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Assessing the Effectiveness of Saving
      Incentives,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 10, Number 4, Fall 1996, 73-
      90.

Lalonde, Robert, “Evaluating the Econometric Evaluations of Training Programs,” American
      Economic Review, Volume 76, 604-620.

Ma, Jennifer, Mark Warshawsky, John Ameriks, and Julia Blohm, “An Economic Approach to
       Setting the Contribution Limits in Qualified State-sponsored Tuition Savings
       Programs,” National Tax Association Proceedings, 2000, 107-115.

Ma, Jennifer and Douglas Fore, “Saving for College: A Comparison of 529 Plans with Other
       Options,” Research Dialogue, Issue 67, 2000.

Ma, Jennifer and Douglas Fore, “Saving for College with 529 Plans and Other Options: an


                                             31
       Update,” Research Dialogue, Issue 70, 2001.

Olivas, Michael A., “College Savings Plans: Second Generation Progress and Problems,”
        National Tax Association Proceedings, 2000, 90-95.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A, Wise, “401(k) Plans and Tax-deferred
       Saving,” in David A. Wise (ed.), Studies in the Economics of Aging. University of
       Chicago Press, 1994.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A, Wise, “Do 401(k) Contributions Crowd Out
       Other Personal Saving?” Journal of Public Economics, Issue 58, 1995, 1-32.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A, Wise, “How Retirement Saving Programs
       Increase Saving,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 10, Number 4, Fall 1996,
       91-112.

Venti, Steven F. and David A, Wise, “Individual Response to a Retirement Saving Program:
       Results from U. S. Panel Data,” Ricerche Economiche, 1995, Issue 49, 235-254.

Venti, Steven F. and David A, Wise, “Government Policy and Personal Retirement Saving,” in
       James M. Poterba (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 6, MIT Press, 1992, 1-41.




                                             32
       Table 1. Key Features of the 529 Plan and Coverdell Education Savings Account
                                          (1)                               (2)
                                       529 Plan                Coverdell Education Savings
                                                                          Account
Tax Benefits            Earnings federal and state income     Earnings federal and state
                        tax deferred and federal income tax   income tax free, if used for
                        free, if withdrawals are used for     qualified elementary,
                        qualified higher education expenses. secondary and higher
                        Most states exempt earnings of        education expenses.
                        qualified withdrawals from state tax.
                        Some states also allow contributions
                        to be deducted from state income tax
                        (usually subject to an annual limit).
Is the Value of the     Yes.                                  Yes.
Account Excluded
from the Owner’s
Taxable Estate?
How Much Can Be         Varies by state. Some states allow    Up to $2,000 per year.
Invested ?              new contributions until the account
                        balance reaches $305,000.
Qualified Education    Tuition, fees, books, supplies, room    Same as (1) for higher
Expenses               and board, and equipment at an          education expenses.
                       eligible post-secondary education       Elementary and secondary
                       institution.                            education expenses also
                                                               qualify.
Financial Aid          Savings plans: parents’ assets if the   Student’s assets.
Treatment              account is under a parent’s name;
                       prepaid plans may reduce aid dollar-
                       for-dollar.
Who Makes              State sponsor with input from           Owner.
Investment Decision?   program manager.
Income Restriction     No.                                     Yes.
Impact on Hope and     Education expenses used to support      Education expenses used to
Lifetime Tax Credits   tax-free distributions from a 529       support tax-free distributions
                       plan may not be used to claim a         from a Coverdell may not be
                       Hope or Lifetime Learning credit.       used to claim a Hope or
                                                               Lifetime Learning credit.
Flexibility            Earnings on non-qualified               Earnings on non-qualified
                       withdrawals taxed at the                withdrawals taxed at the
                       distributee’s income tax rate plus an   distributee’s income tax rate
                       additional 10% tax.                     plus an additional 10% tax.




                                            33
                    Table 2. Examples of Saving for a College Education
                                                           Type of College

                                        Public two-year    Public four-year Private four-year


Current annual cost:

2001-2002 average total charges               $1,738             $9,008             $23,578
including tuition, fees, and room and
board1


Projected cost (savings goal)2:
                                              $8,575            $93,438           $244,571
Average cost of a four-year
education (or two-year for public
two-year colleges) for a student
enrolling in 2019

Investment period (years)                           18               18                  18

Monthly saving needed to meet the
goal3                                               $22            $240                $630


Saving instruments may be used          Coverdell or 529     529 plan or       529 plan or
                                             plan          combination of    combination of
                                                            529 plan and      529 plan and
                                                              Coverdell         Coverdell
Note:
   1) Tuition and fees only for public two-year colleges. Source: Trends in College Pricing
      2001, the College Board.
   2) Assuming the average college costs increase by 5% per year into the future.
   3) Assuming a 6% annual nominal rate of return for saving.




                                               34
Table 3. Summary Statistics of Households from the 1998 SCF and 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF
                                   Median      25th percentile 75th percentile Mean
                                       1998 SCF
Financial characteristics
 Household Income                      $33,000      $17,000            $60,000         $52,296
 Total financial assets                $17,320       $1,500            $85,000        $134,234
 Total personal debt                    $1,530           $0            $11,000          $9,920
 Total real estate assets              $70,000           $0           $140,000        $109,063
 Total mortgage debt                        $0           $0            $55,000         $37,621
 Total net worth                       $71,700       $9,920           $208,850        $282,592
  Percent own primary residence              --           --                 --         66.3%
Demographics
 Respondent's age                          46.0         35.0               61.0           48.7
 Respondent's education level
   Less than high school                     --               --                 --     16.5%
   High school or GED                        --               --                 --     31.9%
   Some college                              --               --                 --     18.5%
   College and above                         --               --                 --     33.2%
                                  2000 TIAA-CREF SPF1
Financial characteristics
 Household Income                     $75,000      $48,000          $111,000           $94,550
 Total financial assets              $336,750     $119,117          $859,000          $665,330
 Total personal debt                       $0           $0             $5,000           $9,221
 Total real estate assets            $160,000      $95,000          $300,000          $257,469
 Total mortgage debt                  $15,000           $0            $89,000          $62,943
 Total net worth                     $467,728     $187,375         $1,108,500         $837,333
 Percent own primary residence              --           --                 --          85.7%
Demographics
 Respondent's age                          59.0         48.0         69.0         57.9
 Respondent's education level
  High school or less                        --            --          --        3.2%
  Some college                               --            --          --        9.1%
  College graduate                           --            --          --      18.9%
  Master or first professional               --            --          --      35.2%
  Ph.D.                                      --            --          --      33.4%
 Source: Author’s calculations based on the 1998 SCF and the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF.
 Note: 1) For 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF, financial assets and demographic information was as
        of December 31, 1999.



                                           35
     Table 4. Non-responses to Financial Asset Questions in the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF
                                                                Among those
                                                                who answered
                                                                  "yes" to
                                           Non-                  ownership,
                                       response to "Yes" to        did not   Observations
                                        Ownership ownership provide a        with missing
                                         questions questions        value    information
                                           (%)         (%)           (%)         (%)
Type of Asset                           (Column 1) (Column 2) (Column 3) (Column 4)

Respondent's Retirement Assets
    TIAA-CREF Employer-Sponsored
(1) Retirement Accounts                          7.2       77.8        20.6          23.2
    Non-TIAA-CREF Employer-
(2) sponsored Retirement Accounts                7.7       31.2        17.3          13.1
(3) IRA or KEOGH Account                         7.7       44.3        10.9          12.5
(4) Other Tax-Deferred Annuities                10.2       17.8        19.8          13.7

Other Financial Assets

(5) Stock mutual funds                           5.8       46.8        10.6          10.7
(6) Publicly traded stock                        4.1       48.2        11.5           9.6
(7) Tax-free bond mutual funds                   5.8       16.0        17.9           8.7
(8) Other bond mutual funds                      6.3       11.7        17.7           8.4
(9) U.S. government savings bonds                5.4       24.3        11.6           8.3
(10) Corporate bonds or foreign bonds            6.4        5.7        20.3           7.6
(11) Savings accounts                            2.0       71.0         6.2           6.4
(12) Checking accounts                           2.1       94.9         6.3           8.1
(13) Certificates and deposit                    3.3       29.9         8.9           5.9
(14) Money market mutual funds                   5.2       41.9        11.2           9.9

Education Saving

(15) Education IRA                               16.3      3.9         11.9          16.8
(16) 529 Savings plan                            16.0      2.0          7.0          16.2
(17) 529 Prepaid contract                        16.0      0.5         15.4          16.0
Source: Author's calculations based on the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF data.
        Total number of respondents: 2,793.




                                           36
          Table 5. Summary Statistics of Respondents to the 2000 TIAA-CREF SPF
                           by Ownership of Education Saving
                                     Own at least one of the        Do not own any
                                    three types of education       education savings
                                        savings accounts               accounts
                                           (171 cases)               (2,347 cases)

Median
Respondent's age (years)                                 52.0               59.0 **
Household 1999 income                                $100,000            $73,000 ***
Household net non-education
financial assets                                     $346,493           $332,500
Household non-education net
worth                                                $473,000           $465,000
Number of children the
household is financially
responsible for                                                1                0 ***
Age of oldest child in the
household                                                  8.0               13.0 ***

Mean
Respondent's age (years)                                 55.3               57.6 **
Household 1999 income                                $119,390            $93,995 **
Household net non-education
financial assets                                     $680,093           $664,998
Household non-education net
worth                                                $892,684           $832,778
Number of children the
household is financially
responsible for                                           1.00               0.45 ***
Age of oldest child in the
household                                                  7.6               12.5 ***
Percent with a Ph.D. degree                           38.2%               34.4%
Percent own home                                      92.9%               85.2% ***
Percent with IRA or Keogh                             63.4%               54.1% **
Percent with supplemental
pension                                               46.0%               43.4%
Percent married                                       82.5%               65.0% ***
Note: ** indicates the medians (means) of the two groups are statistically different at the
       5% level.
       *** indicates the medians (means) of the two groups are statistically different at the
       1% level.


                                            37
             Table 6. Summary Statistics of Dependent and Explanatory Variables
                                       By IRA Ownership                      Full Regression
                                     Own          Do Not Own                     Sample
                                        Standard              Standard              Standard
Variable                          Mean Deviation        Mean Deviation        Mean Deviation
Non-education Net worth
(in $000’s)                    1044.482 1063.457      543.162    839.841    803.928    994.371
Net non-education financial
assets (in $000’s)              850.548    939.772    406.805    679.972    637.621    854.347
Education saving (in $000’s)      1.230      9.822      0.231      1.660      0.751      7.191
Respondent's age1
  45-54                           0.243      0.429      0.242      0.429      0.243      0.429
  55-64                           0.237      0.426      0.181      0.386      0.210      0.408
  65 and older                    0.274      0.446      0.252      0.435      0.263      0.441
Respondent is male                0.576      0.495      0.557      0.497      0.567      0.496
Household income
(in $000’s)                     108.802    112.936     77.532     78.905     93.798     99.291
Respondent's education2
  Master's degree                 0.388      0.488      0.329      0.470      0.360      0.480
  Doctorate degree                0.340      0.474      0.316      0.465      0.329      0.470
Respondent is an annuitant        0.229      0.421      0.249      0.433      0.239      0.426
Other household variables
  Has an SRA/GSRA                 0.447      0.498      0.379      0.486      0.414      0.493
  Covered by a DB plan            0.348      0.476      0.298      0.458      0.324      0.468
  Number of children              0.448      0.852      0.623      1.020      0.532      0.940
  Bequest motive                  4.711      3.269      4.890      3.330      4.797      3.298
Respondent's marital status3
  Single                          0.157      0.364      0.201      0.401      0.178      0.383
  Divorced                        0.099      0.299      0.125      0.331      0.111      0.315
  Widowed                         0.043      0.202      0.051      0.220      0.047      0.211
Percent owning a Coverdell,
a 529 savings, or a 529
prepaid account                   0.071      0.258      0.046      0.210      0.059      0.236
Number of Observations             658                   607                   1265
Note:
 1) The reference group consists of those respondents who are younger than 45.
 2) The reference group consists of those respondents with a college degree or less.
 3) The reference group consists of those respondents who are married.


                                            38
              Table 7. Median Regression Estimates by IRA Ownership Status
                  Dependent Variable: Net Non-education Financial Assets
                                                   IRA Ownership
                                         Own                        Do Not Own
                                         Standard                        Standard
Explanatory Variable         Coefficient    Error Pr > |t| Coefficient      Error   Pr > |t|
Total education saving             5.553 2.721 0.042            10.859     10.808    0.315
Respondent's age
 45-54                          198.766 58.879 0.001          103.189      26.457    0.000
 55-64                          422.272 67.675 0.000          311.243      61.304    0.000
 65 and older                   548.297 90.015 0.000          475.196      66.590    0.000
Respondent is male              129.881 43.938 0.003            18.817     20.758    0.365
Household income                   3.471    0.912 0.000          3.349      0.989    0.001
                       2
Respondent's education
 Master's degree                  74.682 50.279 0.138           -6.428     20.332    0.752
 Doctorate degree               155.424 70.704 0.028            34.968     31.145    0.262
Respondent is an annuitant       -82.818 73.102 0.258        -141.594      60.170    0.019
Other household variables
 Has an SRA/GSRA                135.517 41.603 0.001            57.015     24.088    0.018
 Covered by a DB plan            -98.677 41.094 0.017          -64.311     23.796    0.007
 Number of children                3.391 33.515 0.919            7.986     11.315    0.481
 Bequest motive                   11.582 7.236 0.110             3.166      2.448    0.196
                           3
Respondent's marital status
 Single                           53.758 64.898 0.408           57.465     33.338    0.085
 Divorced                      -125.311 63.726 0.050            -2.679     42.346    0.950
 Widowed                          87.716 107.929 0.417         -57.123     58.336    0.328
Constant                       -258.595 73.870 0.000         -189.379      61.329    0.002

Pseudo R-squared                             0.248                         0.255
Number of Observations                     658.000                       607.000
Note: Standard errors are bootstrapped with 200 iterations.




                                             39
              Table 8. Median Regression Estimates by IRA Ownership Status
                       Dependent Variable: Non-education Net Worth
                                                      IRA Ownership
                                           Own                            Do Not Own
                                           Standard                       Standard
Explanatory Variable           Coefficient    Error Pr > |t|  Coefficient    Error Pr > |t|
Total education saving               6.480 5.269 0.219            10.859 11.422 0.342
Respondent's age
 45-54                             316.490 66.325       0.000    103.189 27.820     0.000
 55-64                             566.248 83.876       0.000    311.243 57.901     0.000
 65 and older                      731.023 90.442       0.000    475.196 69.941     0.000
Respondent is male                 141.981 52.787       0.007     18.817 17.625     0.286
Household income                     4.119    1.127     0.000       3.349    0.860  0.000
                       2
Respondent's education
 Master's degree                   111.187 56.957 0.051            -6.428 19.727 0.745
 Doctorate degree                  162.612 78.517 0.039           34.968 28.265 0.217
Respondent is an annuitant         -19.477 83.469       0.816   -141.594 59.597     0.018
Other household variables
 Has an SRA/GSRA                   178.298 54.753       0.001     57.015 24.482     0.020
 Covered by a DB plan             -116.012 50.519       0.022    -64.311 24.223     0.008
 Number of children                  4.087 35.706 0.909             7.986 10.296 0.438
 Bequest motive                     18.604 8.809 0.035              3.166    2.588 0.222
                           3
Respondent's marital status
 Single                             30.548 71.989       0.671     57.465 34.433     0.096
 Divorced                         -149.417 83.689 0.075            -2.679 41.091 0.948
 Widowed                            34.226 140.933      0.808    -57.123 58.533     0.330
Constant                          -331.607 103.815 0.001        -189.379 54.773 0.001
Pseudo R-squared                              0.270                          0.255
Number of Observations                      658.000                        607.000
Note: Standard errors are bootstrapped with 200 iterations.




                                           40
             Table 9. Summary Statistics of Dependent and Explanatory Variables
                                     By SRA/GSRA Ownership                   Full Regression
                                     Own          Do Not Own                     Sample
                                        Standard              Standard              Standard
Variable                          Mean Deviation        Mean Deviation        Mean Deviation
Non-education Net worth (in
$000’s)                         924.168 1092.158      718.900    910.182    803.928    994.371
Net non-education financial
assets (in $000’s)              743.893    939.874    562.471    780.249    637.621    854.347
Education saving (in $000’s)      0.471      3.623      0.949      8.885      0.751      7.191
Respondent's age1
  45-54                           0.250      0.433      0.238      0.426      0.243      0.429
  55-64                           0.198      0.399      0.219      0.414      0.210      0.408
  65 and older                    0.225      0.418      0.290      0.454      0.263      0.441
Respondent is male                0.544      0.499      0.583      0.493      0.567      0.496
Household income (in
$000’s)                         100.456     99.463     89.089     98.966     93.798     99.291
Respondent's education2
 Master's degree                  0.355      0.479      0.363      0.481      0.360      0.480
 Doctorate degree                 0.336      0.473      0.324      0.468      0.329      0.470
Respondent is an annuitant        0.158      0.365      0.296      0.457      0.239      0.426
Other household variables
 Has an IRA                       0.561      0.497      0.491      0.500      0.520      0.500
 Covered by a DB plan             0.323      0.468      0.325      0.469      0.324      0.468
 Number of children               0.529      0.938      0.534      0.942      0.532      0.940
 Bequest motive                   4.908      3.281      4.748      3.310      4.797      3.298
Respondent's marital status3
 Single                           0.179      0.384      0.177      0.382      0.178      0.383
 Divorced                         0.105      0.307      0.116      0.321      0.111      0.315
 Widowed                          0.038      4.821      0.053      0.223      0.047      0.211
Percent owning a Coverdell,
a 529 savings, or a 529
prepaid account                  0.0592     0.2361     0.0594     0.2365     0.0593     0.2363
Number of Observations             524                   741                   1265
Note:
 1) The reference group consists of those respondents who are younger than 45.
 2) The reference group consists of those respondents with a college degree or less.
 3) The reference group consists of those respondents who are married.


                                            41
         Table 10. Median Regression Estimates by SRA/GSRA Ownership Status
                  Dependent Variable: Net non-education Financial assets
                                               SRA/GSRA Ownership
                                         Own                         Do Not Own
                                          Standard                       Standard
Explanatory Variable         Coefficient     Error Pr > |t| Coefficient     Error     Pr > |t|
Total education saving             19.461      12.759     0.128     5.704     2.586    0.028
Respondent's age
 45-54                            174.266     50.506      0.001   119.547 28.422       0.000
 55-64                            526.887     91.981      0.000   298.150 51.675       0.000
 65 and older                     808.783    154.705      0.000   449.203 60.519       0.000
Respondent is male                 97.545     38.312      0.011    23.441 18.987       0.217
Household income                    4.049      1.382      0.004     2.860  0.772       0.000
Respondent's education2
 Master's degree                   13.354     40.578      0.742     39.874 25.280      0.115
 Doctorate degree                  99.337     73.087      0.175     82.344 32.122      0.011
Respondent is an annuitant       -166.672    144.350      0.249   -102.114 50.565      0.044
Other household variables
 Has an IRA                       141.057      39.432     0.000   133.961 25.738       0.000
 Covered by a DB plan             -31.770      48.722     0.515   -85.668 24.119       0.000
 Number of children                -6.450      22.351     0.773     0.899 13.962       0.949
 Bequest motive                     5.619       6.272     0.371     7.705  2.880       0.008
Respondent's marital status3
 Single                            80.574     60.783      0.186     36.832 39.108      0.347
 Divorced                         -26.046     88.076      0.768    -56.097 35.198      0.111
 Widowed                          -51.430    157.248      0.744    -38.469 57.526      0.504
Constant                         -297.439    108.130      0.006   -185.444 48.093      0.000

Pseudo R-squared                                  0.294                       0.276

Number of Observations                       524.000                        741.000
Note: Standard errors are bootstrapped with 200 iterations.




                                             42
          Table 11. Median Regression Estimates by SRA/GSRA Ownership Status
                       Dependent Variable: Non-education Net Worth
                                                SRA/GSRA Ownership
                                         Own                         Do Not Own
                                           Standard                      Standard
Explanatory Variable         Coefficient      Error Pr > |t| Coefficient    Error   Pr > |t|
Total education saving            25.411     15.320 0.098         6.190     2.738    0.024
Respondent's age
 45-54                           281.438     60.139 0.000       153.994 39.615       0.000
 55-64                           630.262     89.600 0.000       397.628 56.849       0.000
 65 and older                    942.358 149.970 0.000          574.394 63.820       0.000
Respondent is male                98.371     43.115 0.023        39.231 29.331       0.181
Household income                   4.802      1.489 0.001         4.207     1.135    0.000
                       2
Respondent's education
 Master's degree                  19.526     49.788 0.695        68.008 31.335       0.030
 Doctorate degree                142.515     78.821 0.071        98.484 43.687       0.024
Respondent is an annuitant       -78.273 128.859 0.544          -96.857 57.587       0.093
Other household variables
 Has an IRA                      180.751     51.217 0.000       172.117 34.098       0.000
 Covered by a DB plan            -27.206     58.012 0.639     -116.607 30.960        0.000
 Number of children                3.490     25.240 0.890        -7.758 18.330       0.672
 Bequest motive                   12.680      7.139 0.076         7.625     3.928    0.053
                           3
Respondent's marital status
 Single                          118.639     72.100 0.100         6.973 51.340       0.892
 Divorced                        -61.597     88.419 0.486       -64.798 47.706       0.175
 Widowed                         -84.079 191.382 0.661         -115.048 68.197       0.092
Constant                       -387.224 122.123 0.002         -227.520 68.632        0.001

Pseudo R-squared                              0.3239                      0.2903
Number of Observations                            524                        741
Note: Standard errors are bootstrapped with 200 iterations.




                                             43
          Table 12. Robust Regression Estimates Within Propensity Score Stratum
                     Dependent Variable: Non-education Net Worth

Explanatory Variable           Stratum 1   Stratum 2      Stratum 3   Stratum 4   Stratum 5
Total education saving            -0.800      33.378         -1.630      43.720       6.987
                                 (8.886)    (22.766)        (3.227)     (5.792)     (1.612)
Respondent's age
 45-54                           137.424     284.086        131.981     514.630     117.176
                               (116.349)   (147.428)      (128.090)   (120.373)    (61.603)
 55-64                           334.479     505.351        420.808    1000.985     574.172
                               (112.218)   (146.733)      (153.895)   (175.217)   (139.212)

 65 and older                    568.080    1122.364        889.738    1602.332     315.813
                               (119.067)   (145.528)      (163.574)   (189.815)   (297.402)
Respondent is male              183.186      -94.846        214.522    166.300       97.101
                                (65.856)    (90.872)      (111.123)    (84.128)    (59.423)
Household income                   7.492          2.265       6.192       1.171       4.156
                                 (0.466)        (0.245)     (0.870)     (0.282)     (0.362)
Respondent's education2
 Master's degree                 -52.866     -27.975        -76.745    133.015        9.418
                                (75.267)   (100.989)      (122.333)    (90.734)    (71.019)

 Doctorate degree                 90.631     145.729       -233.562      24.053      26.835
                                (77.299)   (104.068)      (124.768)   (105.587)    (71.649)
Respondent is an annuitant        10.668    -359.587       -149.138    -812.914   1172.186
                                (88.019)   (118.841)      (144.527)   (184.435)   (369.222)
Other household variables
 Has an IRA                      204.630     237.669        496.727     191.161     116.935
                                (86.250)   (112.528)      (165.217)   (121.449)    (73.718)
 Has an SRA/GSRA                 171.909     184.538        168.087      77.488     117.145
                                (62.528)    (76.265)       (92.100)    (76.583)    (54.699)
 Covered by a DB plan          -132.100       22.728      -110.346      -87.377     -90.475
                               (64.673)     (79.958)      (94.594)     (74.608)    (54.713)
 Number of children              100.496      68.385        105.115      60.098      15.151
                               (101.888)    (85.665)       (94.173)    (56.592)    (40.904)
 Bequest motive                   28.097      18.675         12.485      22.126      -4.947
                                (19.915)    (23.369)       (19.704)    (18.070)    (10.231)
Respondent's marital status3


                                           44
 Single                           -35.388       -89.058     dropped       157.695     dropped
                                (144.566)     (214.701)                 (353.224)
 Divorced                         -85.597       -49.300     -241.135      dropped      315.586
                                (154.525)     (235.296)    (376.450)                 (304.061)
 Widowed                           48.988       133.810      dropped     dropped       dropped
                                (185.194)     (536.131)
Constant                         -664.085      -264.749     -625.249     -365.156     -245.880
                                (151.256)     (206.924)    (214.536)    (189.813)    (149.174)

F-statistics                         30.15        15.64        14.99        31.03        21.30


Number of Observations                253           195          104           96          125
Number of Observations with
an education savings account             5           10           15           12           25

Note: The first stage probit model includes the following covariates: a dummy variable for
household owning an IRA, age, age squared, the number of kids in the household, bequest
motive, a dummy variable indicating the respondent is married, and an interaction term of the
number of kids and bequest motive. Results from the probit model are not sensitive to the
addition of other covariates.




                                             45
         Table 13. Robust Regression Estimates Within Propensity Score Stratum
                Including Only Households with Children in the Analysis
                     Dependent Variable: Non-education Net Worth

Explanatory Variable                Stratum 1            Stratum 2               Stratum 3
Total education saving                 19.105               63.864                   6.666
                                     (29.630)             (13.440)                 (1.469)
Respondent's age
 45-54                                120.958              182.047                 144.011
                                    (133.670)            (133.913)                (72.945)
 55-64                                552.632              278.244                dropped
                                    (253.275)            (189.202)

 65 and older                        1211.519             dropped                 dropped
                                    (357.479)
Respondent is male                    -83.223              135.956                  51.762
                                     (93.673)             (74.563)                (68.098)
Household income                        3.372                1.191                   4.330
                                      (0.920)              (0.220)                 (0.357)
Respondent's education2
 Master's degree                       44.676              185.003                  -0.595
                                    (114.485)             (87.852)                (80.848)

 Doctorate degree                      39.580               87.583                  18.004
                                    (112.901)             (95.765)                (77.512)
Respondent is an annuitant           dropped              1412.520                dropped
                                                         (369.338)
Other household variables
 Has an IRA                           355.351              406.870                 117.019
                                    (205.025)            (141.415)                (88.270)
 Has an SRA/GSRA                      194.686              -22.755                  99.548
                                     (99.469)             (65.994)                (58.624)
 Covered by a DB plan                 -54.315              -68.183               -107.001
                                    (103.928)             (72.293)               (56.576)
 Number of children                   -46.238              -59.692                  57.746
                                     (65.245)             (44.004)                (40.719)
 Bequest motive                        12.757               -8.072                   1.060
                                     (18.554)             (15.219)                (10.168)



                                          46
Respondent's marital status3
 Single                                -419.492               289.475              dropped
                                      (298.516)             (360.191)
 Divorced                               -75.292               dropped              dropped
                                      (261.743)
 Widowed                                dropped              dropped               dropped

Constant                                -41.174               114.553              -346.402
                                      (274.015)             (153.946)             (120.001)

F-statistics                               9.25                 19.42                 23.90


Number of Observations                       60                  118                     91
Number of Observations with
an education savings account                     9                      10                30
Note: The first stage probit model includes the following covariates: a dummy variable for
household owning an IRA, age, age squared, household income, respondent’s education, the
number of kids in the household, bequest motive, a dummy variable indicating the respondent
is married, and an interaction term of the number of kids and bequest motive. Results from
the probit model are not sensitive to the addition of other covariates.




                                             47
