NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET INTEGRATION AND CONTAGION
Geert Bekaert
Campbell R. Harvey
Angela Ng
Working Paper 9510
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9510
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

This work is partially supported by the Earmarked Grant of the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong. We
have greatly benefited from the comments of an anonymous referee. We appreciate the comments of Joe
Chen, Monika Piazzesi, Andrew Frankel, the participants at the 2002 European Finance Association meetings
in Berlin and the 2003 Econometric Society meetings in Washington, DC. Ka-Chun Ip, Ching-Ka Chui, and
Sangeetha Ramalingam provided excellent research assistance. Please send comments to
gb241@columbia.edu, cam.harvey@duke.edu or angelang@ust.hk. Geert Bekaert acknowledges the support
of a NSF research grant. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Angela Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Market Integration and Contagion
Geert Bekaert, Campbell R. Harvey and Angela Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 9510
February 2003
JEL No. G15, G12, F3, F36, F15
ABSTRACT
Contagion is usually defined as correlation between markets in excess of what would be
implied by economic fundamentals; however, there is considerable disagreement regarding the
definitions of the fundamentals, how the fundamentals might differ across countries, and the
mechanisms that link the fundamentals to asset returns. Our research takes, as a starting point, a twofactor model with time-varying betas that accommodates various degrees of market integration
between different markets. We apply this model to stock returns in three different regions: Europe,
South-East Asia, and Latin America. In addition to providing new insights on contagion during crisis
periods, we document patterns through time in world and regional market integration and measure
the proportion of volatility driven by global, regional, and local factors.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway/ 802 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Angela Ng
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong

1. Introduction
Contagion in equity markets refers to the notion that markets move more closely together
during periods of crisis. One of the most interesting aspects of the contagion debate is the
disagreement over a precise definition. Forbes and Rigobon (2001) declare that “there is no
consensus on exactly what constitutes contagion or how it should be defined.” Rigobon (2001)
states “paradoxically, ... there is no accordance on what contagion means.”
What is clear is that contagion is not simply revealed by increased correlation of market
returns during a crisis period. From a completely statistical perspective, one would expect higher
correlations during periods of high volatility.1 Forbes and Rigobon (2001) present a statistical
correction for this conditioning bias and argue that there was no contagion during the three most
recent crises.
We define contagion as excess correlation – that is, correlation over and above what one
would expect from economic fundamentals. Unfortunately, there is disagreement on the
definitions of the fundamentals, the potential country-specific nature of the fundamentals, and
the mechanism that links the fundamentals to asset correlation.
Our paper takes an asset pricing perspective to the study of contagion. For a given factor
model, increased correlation is expected if the volatility of a factor increases. The size of the
increased correlation will depend on the factor loadings. Contagion is simply defined by the
correlation of the model residuals.
By defining the factor model, we avoid a problem with the bias correction for correlations
that Forbes and Rigobon (2001) propose, that the bias correction does not work in the presence
of common shocks. Defining the factor model does mean that we effectively take a stand on the
global, regional and country specific fundamentals, as well as the mechanism that transfers
fundamentals into correlation. Of course, any statements on contagion will be contingent on the
correct specification of the factor model; therefore, we start with a model that has the maximum
flexibility.

1

See Stambaugh (1995), Boyer, Gibson and Loretan (1999), Loretan and English (2000), Forbes and Rigobon
(2001), and early work by Pindyck and Rotemberg (1990, 1993). Work linking news, volatility and correlation
includes King and Wadhawani (1990), Hamao, Masulis and Ng (1990), and King, Sentana and Wadhwani (1994).

1

We apply a two-factor model with time-varying loadings to “small” stock markets in three
different regions: Europe, South-East Asia, and Latin America. The two factors are the U.S.
equity market return and a regional equity portfolio return. Our framework nests three models: a
world capital asset pricing model (CAPM), a CAPM with the U.S. equity return as the
benchmark asset, and a regional CAPM with a regional portfolio as the benchmark. We test the
asset pricing specifications by adding local factors.
Segmentation and integration play a critical role in our tests. If the countries in a particular
region are globally integrated for most of the sample period, but suddenly see their intra-regional
correlations rise dramatically during a regional crisis, our test will reject the null hypothesis of no
contagion. If, however, these countries do not follow a global CAPM, but rather a regional
CAPM, the increased correlations may simply be a consequence of increased factor volatility.
Our volatility model is related to Bekaert and Harvey (1997) and Ng (2000) in that equity
return volatilities follow univariate generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
(GARCH) processes with asymmetry. Hence, negative news regarding the world or regional
market may increase volatility of the factor more than positive news and lead to increased
correlations between stock markets.2 Moreover, our model incorporates time-varying betas,
where the betas are influenced by the trade patterns. Chen and Zhang (1997) find that the crossmarket correlations of stock returns are related to external trade among countries.
Previous studies on international market linkages have focused mainly on one source of risk
or on the effects of a single international market (often the U.S. or world market) on other stock
markets.3 In fact, a contemporaneous paper (Tang, 2001) uses a definition of contagion similar to
the one we propose, but restricts the model to a world CAPM. Our structure, which allows world
market integration to be a special case, bears some resemblance to the set-up in Chan, Karolyi
and Stulz (1992). However, the existing literature has primarily focused on world market
integration, and regional integration has been scarcely discussed. Exceptions include Engle and
Susmel (1993), who group the data according to time zones and search for common regional
2

Longin and Solnik (1995) report an increase in cross-country correlation during volatile periods. Other empirical
studies (for example, Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta, 1994 and De Santis and Gerard, 1997) find different correlations in
up and down markets, while Longin and Solnik (2001), Ang and Bekaert (2002) and Das and Uppal (2001)
document higher correlations in bear markets.
3
See, for example, Hamao, Masulis, and Ng (1990), Bekaert and Hodrick (1992), Bekaert and Harvey (1995, 1997),
Karolyi (1995), Karolyi and Stulz (1996), Hartmann, Straetmans and de Vries (2001), and Connolly and Wang
(2002).
2

news factors, and Cheung, He, and Ng (1997), who examine common predictable components in
returns within a region.
Our main contribution is to examine periods of crises and investigate whether our model can
generate sudden increases in correlations across countries. Our approach, however, produces
many other useful empirical tests and implications. Indeed, our framework provides a natural test
for world and regional market integration. In addition, we analyze the time variation and crosssectional patterns in regional versus world market correlations, addressing the question of
whether correlations between country returns and the world or regional market have increased
over time. Finally, we measure the proportions of variance driven by global, regional and local
factors, and how these proportions change through time.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical model
specifications and several testable hypotheses. Section 3 describes the data and presents the
empirical results. Some conclusions are offered in the final section.

2. Framework
The international version of the conditional CAPM of Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965)
under the assumption of purchasing power parity (PPP) predicts the excess return on a world
market portfolio, with the factor of proportionality being the country-specific conditional beta.
Rather than focusing on currency risk [see Ferson and Harvey (1993), and Dumas and Solnik
(1995)], we extend the traditional CAPM from a one-factor to a two-factor setting, by dividing
the world market into the U.S. and a particular region, and also allow for local factors to be
priced.

2.1

The Model
Let Ri ,t be the excess return on the national equity index of country i in U.S. dollars. The

model has the following form:
us
reg
Ri ,t = δ i' Z i ,t −1 + β ius,t −1 µ us ,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 µ reg ,t −1 + β i ,t −1 eus ,t + β i ,t −1 e reg ,t + ei ,t ,

(

)

ei ,t | I t −1 ~ N 0,σ i2,t ,

(1)

(2)
3

σ i2,t = ai + biσ i2,t −1 + ci ei2,t −1 + d iη i2,t −1 ,

(3)

where µ us ,t −1 and µ reg ,t −1 are the conditional expected excess returns on the U.S. and regional
markets, respectively, based on information available at time t-1, ei ,t is the idiosyncratic shock of
any market i, including the U.S. and regional portfolio, η i,t is the negative return shock of
country i, that is, η i ,t = min{0, ei ,t } , and I t −1 includes all the information available at time t-1.
The vector Z i ,t −1 contains a constant and the local dividend yield, which help estimate the
expected return of market i. The dividend yields are lagged by one month. The variance of the
idiosyncratic return shock of market i follows a GARCH process in (3) with asymmetric effects
in conditional variance, as in Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993) and Zakoian (1994).
The sensitivity of equity market i to the foreign news factors is measured by the parameters

β ius,t −1 and β ireg
,t −1 . Following Bekaert and Harvey (1995, 1997) and Ng (2000), we model these risk
parameters to be time-varying as:

β ius,t −1 = p1' ,i X usi ,t −1 + q i' X iw,t −1 ⋅ wus ,t −1 ,

(4)

'
reg
'
w
β ireg
,t −1 = p 2 ,i X i ,t −1 + q i X i ,t −1 ⋅ (1 − wus ,t −1 ) ,

(5)

where wus ,t −1 denotes the market capitalization of the U.S., relative to the total world market
capitalization, at time t-1. In (4)-(5), we further introduce three different sets of local
w
us
reg
instruments, X ius,t −1 , X ireg
,t −1 and X i ,t −1 . The set X i ,t −1 ( X i ,t −1 ) consists of information variables that

capture the covariance risk of market i with the U.S. (the region). We use a constant and the sum
of exports to and imports from the U.S. (the rest of the world) divided by the sum of total exports
and total imports. We try to capture within the region trade by all trade minus the U.S. While this
w
is only a proxy, it imposes a clean relation between X ius,t −1 , X ireg
,t −1 and X i ,t −1 . Note that our

structure allows the conditional betas to be impacted by trade. Chen and Zhang (1997) study the
relation between cross-market return correlation and bilateral trade and find that countries with
heavier external trade to a region tend to have higher return correlations with that region.
Similarly, the information set X iw,t −1 consists of local instruments that should capture the

4

covariance risk of market i with a world portfolio. Here, we include a constant and the country’s
total size of trade as a percentage of GDP. All of the trade variables are lagged by six months.4
The U.S. and regional markets models are special cases of (1)-(5). For the U.S. market (with

i = us ), p1,us = p 2,us = q us = 0 (that is, β usus,t −1 = β usreg,t −1 = 0 ) and Z us ,t −1 contains a set of world
information variables, including a constant, the world market dividend yield, the spread between
the 90-day Eurodollar rate and the 3-month Treasury-bill yield, the difference between the U.S.
10-year Treasury bond yield and the 3-month bill yield, and the change in the 90-day Treasuryus
'
us
bill yield. For the regional portfolio (with i = reg ), p 2,reg = q reg = 0 (that is, β reg
,t −1 = p 1, reg X reg ,t −1
reg
and β reg
,t −1 = 0 ), Z reg ,t −1 includes a constant and the regional market dividend yield (weighted by
us
market capitalization), and X reg
,t −1 contains a constant and the sum of the region’s total exports

to and imports from the U.S. divided by the sum of total exports and imports of the region.
As shown in (1), the expected excess return on market i is a linear function of some local
information variables and the expected excess returns on the U.S. and regional markets, that is,

µ i ,t −1 = E [Ri ,t −1 | I t −1 ] = δ i' Z i ,t −1 + β ius,t −1 µ us ,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 µ reg ,t −1

(

)

(

(6)

)

us
'
reg
'
= δ i' Z i ,t −1 + [ β ius,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 β reg ,t −1 ] δ us Z us ,t −1 + β i ,t −1 δ reg Z reg ,t −1 .

Hence, the effect of the world market information originating from the U.S. on market i’s
expected return has two components – a direct impact, as measured by β ius,t −1 , and an indirect
us
effect via its influence on the regional market, as measured by β ireg
,t −1 β reg ,t −1 .

Similarly, the unexpected portion of the market return is driven not only by shocks from the
local market, but also by two foreign shocks originating in the U.S. and the region, that is,

ε i ,t = β ius,t −1eus ,t + β ireg
,t −1 e reg ,t + ei ,t ,

(7)

where ε i,t denotes the return residual of market i. To complete the model, we further assume that
the idiosyncratic shocks of the U.S., regional market, and country i are uncorrelated. As a result,
the model implies the following variance and covariance expressions:

[

] (

)

2

(

)

2

2
2
hi ,t = E ε i2,t | I t −1 = β ius,t −1 σ us2 ,t + β ireg
,t −1 σ reg ,t + σ i ,t ,
4

The appendix provides a detailed discussion of the construction of the information variables.
5

(8)

hi ,us ,t = E [ε i ,t ε us ,t | I t −1 ] = β ius,t −1σ us2 ,t ,

[

(9)

]

us
reg
2
2
hi ,reg ,t = E ε i ,t ε reg ,t | I t −1 = β ius,t −1 β reg
,t −1σ us ,t + β i ,t −1σ reg ,t ,

[

]

reg
reg
2
2
hi , j ,t = E ε i ,t ε j ,t | I t −1 = β ius,t −1 β us
j ,t −1σ us ,t + β i ,t −1 β j ,t −1σ reg ,t .

(10)
(11)

Equation (8) shows that the return volatility of market i is positively related to the conditional
variances of the U.S. and regional markets. Consequently, we can investigate whether potential
asymmetric effects in the U.S. and/or regional markets induce asymmetry in the conditional
return volatility of any equity market.
The conditional covariance dynamics given in (9)-(11) have several important implications.
First, a market’s covariance with the U.S. (regional) market return is positively related to its
country-specific beta with the U.S., β ius,t −1 (region, β ireg
,t −1 ). Second, provided that the countryspecific beta parameter β ius,t −1 is positive, higher volatility in the U.S. market induces higher
return covariance between the U.S. and market i. Third, the covariance with the regional market
or any other national market j within the same region increases in times of high return volatility
in the U.S. and/or the regional market. This natural implication of any factor model, coupled
with asymmetric volatility, could lead to the appearance of “contagious bear markets.” Whereas
these points, which follow immediately from (9)-(11), apply to covariances, they are also true for
correlations.5 Notice, that increased trade integration (changes in β i ,jt −1 for j = us, reg ) may also
increase the correlation with the U.S. or regional market and between countries.
In the empirical section, we study the time variation and cross-sectional patterns in regional
versus U.S. market correlations of market i. The U.S. and regional correlations are given by:

ρ i ,us ,t =
ρ i ,reg ,t =

β ius,t −1σ us ,t

(12)

hi ,t
2
2
us
reg
β ius,t −1 β reg
,t −1σ us ,t + β i ,t −1σ reg ,t

(13)

hi ,t hreg ,t

5

It is straightforward to show this formally, but it is also clear intuitively. If the variance of the common factor goes
to zero, then the returns are only driven by idiosyncratic shocks. At the other extreme, if the variance of the common
factor goes to infinity, the idiosyncratic shocks become irrelevant and the fluctuations in returns are fully explained
by the common shock. Hence, the correlation becomes one.
6

us
2
2
where hreg ,t = (β reg
,t −1 ) σ us ,t + σ reg ,t is the conditional variance of the regional market return. We
2

also examine the (relative) proportions of conditional return variance that are accounted for by
the U.S. and the region. The following variance ratios are computed:
us
i ,t

VR

reg
i ,t

VR

(β ) σ
=
2
us
i ,t −1

2
us ,t

hi ,t

(β ) σ
=
reg 2
i ,t −1

hi ,t

,

2
reg ,t

(14)

.

(15)

Clearly, these variance ratios increase when the “factor” variance (US or regional market)
increases. We are specifically interested in the crisis periods and investigate whether the model
can generate sudden increase in correlations across markets following a crisis.

2.2 Testable hypotheses regarding market integration
The specification presented in (1)-(5) is a general two-factor model that allows us to examine
several testable hypotheses. First, if the two-factor model holds, that is, if the two foreign risk
factors are sufficient in explaining the expected return on market i, the local instruments should
have no explanatory power on their own market return and, thus, δ i = 0 . Consequently, we
interpret this test as a test of market integration, where integration can be global or regional.
Second, the model nests the one-factor CAPM as a special case. Under the constraint that
p 2,i = 0 ( p1,i = 0 ) and q i = 0 , together with δ i = 0 , the model reduces to the traditional CAPM,
with the U.S. (the region) being the benchmark market and β ius,t −1 ( β ireg
,t −1 ) equal to the conditional
beta of market i with the U.S. (regional) market. The model then implies that market i is fully
integrated with the U.S. (regional) market. Under this setting, we should be able to detect
deviations from the one-factor integrated model. We interpret the test, p1,i = q i = δ i = 0 , as a test
of regional market integration.
Third, our model encompasses a world market integration model. Suppose that the world
market is separated into the U.S. and a particular region, and that each market i is fully integrated
with the world capital market. This happens when p1,i = 0

7

and p 2,i = 0 , that is,

w
'
w
w
β ius,t −1 = β iw,t −1 ⋅ wus ,t −1 and β ireg
,t −1 = β i ,t −1 ⋅ (1 − wus ,t −1 ) . Hence, β i ,t −1 = q i X i ,t −1 is the conditional beta

of market i with the world market portfolio in the traditional CAPM. Hence, our framework
encompasses the world market integration model presented in Chan, Karolyi and Stulz (1992).

2.3 Contagion definitions and tests
We measure contagion by measuring the correlation of the model’s idiosyncratic shocks or
unexpected returns. We establish a baseline level of contagion by examining shock correlations
estimated over the full sample period; however, we are most interested in the shock correlations
during particular periods. Our tests involve the time-series cross-section regression model:

eˆi ,t = wi + vi ,t eˆg ,t + ui ,t
vi ,t = v0 + v1 Di ,t
where eˆi ,t and eˆ g ,t are the estimated idiosyncratic return shocks of market i and region g,
respectively. For the regional residuals, three cases are considered: eˆg ,t = eˆus ,t , eˆg ,t = eˆreg ,t , and
eˆ g ,t = ∑ j ≠i eˆ j ,t where G denotes a particular country-group. In studying the market residuals,
j∈G

countries are categorized into the following country-groups: Europe, Europe excluding Turkey,
Asia, and Latin America. Di ,t is a dummy variable that represents five sample periods: the
second sub-sample period, the Mexico crisis period from November 1994 to December 1995, the
Asian crisis period from April 1997 to October 1998, abnormally negative U.S. unexpected
market returns (i.e., the unexpected returns are one standard deviation below zero), and
abnormally negative regional unexpected market returns. Our tests determine whether v0 and v1
are zero (overall contagion), and whether v1 is significantly different from zero (contribution of
particular periods to contagion).
2.4 Estimation method
The model presented in the first section can be expressed in a multivariate setting. Let

[

]

′
R t = Rus ,t , Rreg ,t , R1,t ,..., RN ,t ,

[

]

′
'
µ ∗t −1 = δ us
Z us ,t −1 , δ 'reg Z reg ,t −1 , δ1' Z1,t −1 ,..., δ 'N Z N ,t −1 ,

8

and

[

]

′
e t = eus ,t , ereg ,t , e1,t ,..., eN ,t , where N is the number of countries within the particular region. The

general (N + 2) multivariate model has the following form:
R t = Φ t −1µ ∗t −1 + β t −1e t

e t | I t −1 ~ N (0, Σ t )

[

]

{ },

Σ t = E e e | I t −1 = diag σ

with Φ t −1

'
t t

 1
 β us
 reg ,t −1
=  φ1,t −1

 M
 φ N ,t −1


β
β

2
j ,t

0

0

L

1

0

L

reg
1,t −1

I(N)

M
reg
N ,t −1

(16)
where j = us, reg ,1,..., N ,
0
0






and β t −1

 1
 β us
 reg ,t −1
=  β1us,t −1

 M
 β Nus,t −1


β
β

0

0

L

1

0

L

reg
1,t −1

M

I(N )

reg
N ,t −1

0
0
 , where





us
φi ,t −1 = β ius,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 β reg ,t −1 and I ( N ) is a (N × N) identity matrix.

We estimate the joint multivariate likelihood function for the returns in three stages. Given
that

the

density

of

the

U.S.

return,

conditional

on

I t −1 ,

depends

only

on

θ us = [δ′us , aus , bus , cus , d us ]′ , in the first stage, we estimate the (univariate) model in (1)-(5) for the
U.S. market. In the second stage, based on the U.S. estimates from stage 1, we examine the
model for the regional market portfolio. Conditional on I t −1 and Rus ,t , the density function of the
regional market return depends only on [θ′us , θ′reg ]′ , where θ′reg = [δ′reg , p1′,reg , areg , breg , creg , d reg ]′
and, thus, consistent estimates of θ reg are obtained by maximizing the univariate likelihood for
the regional market return. Finally, in the third stage, we estimate the univariate model in (1)-(5)
country by country, conditioning on the U.S. and regional market model estimates. This
methodology is similar to the one proposed by Bekaert and Harvey (1997).

2.5 Model selection and specification tests
Because asymmetric and symmetric GARCH models produce very different conditional
variances, our model selection focuses on that issue. Moreover, it is conceivable that asymmetric
effects at the U.S. or regional market level make the country-specific asymmetry superfluous.
We first carry out a likelihood ratio (LR) test for the null hypothesis of no asymmetry in the
conditional variance of the local return residual. If the LR test rejects the null hypothesis at the

9

5% level, the model with asymmetry is chosen; if the p-value of the test statistic is greater than
15%, the model without asymmetry is selected. For the intermediate case, we regress the squared
return residuals for both models on the estimated conditional variances, as in Pagan and Schwert
(1990), and select the model with the higher R2.
We conduct specification tests on the estimated standardized idiosyncratic shocks,
ẑ i ,t = êi ,t / σˆ i ,t for all i, using the generalized method of moments. Under the null hypothesis that
the model is correctly specified,
E [zˆi ,t ] = 0 ,

(17a)

E [ẑ i ,t ẑ i ,t −s ] = 0 , for s = 1,...,τ ,

(17b)

[

]

[(

)(

E ẑ i2,t − 1 = 0 ,

(17c)

)]

E ẑ i2,t − 1 ẑ i2,t −s − 1 = 0 , for s = 1,...,τ ,

(17d)

[ ]

E ẑ i3,t = 0 ,

[

(17e)

]

E ẑ i4,t − 3 = 0 .

(17f)

Equations (17b) and (17d) are a consequence of the correct specification for the conditional
mean and variance, and these two constraints are tested separately by a χ 2 test with τ degrees
of freedom. The unconditional moments in the other four constraints are tested jointly by
calculating a χ 2 statistic with four degrees of freedom. We also carry out a joint test of all six
restrictions, which has 2τ + 4 degrees of freedom. In all of the specification tests, τ is set equal
to 4. The Monte Carlo analysis in Bekaert and Harvey (1997), in a similar setting, confirms that
the small sample distribution of the test statistics is relatively well described by χ 2 distributions,
despite the multi-stage estimation.

10

3. Results
3.1 Equity market data
Our sample of national equity markets includes data for both developed markets, as compiled
by Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI), and emerging markets from the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) of the World Bank. The sample period begins in January 1980 for
most of the MSCI data and January 1986 for the IFC data. The sample ends in December 1998.
We study a total of 22 countries that are grouped into three geographical regions – Asia, Europe,
and Latin America. The regional equity indices we examine are the MSCI Europe index, as well
as our own Asia and Latin America emerging market indices. The Asia (Latin America)
emerging market index is a weighted average of all the Asian (Latin American) emerging
markets, excluding the country under investigation. Hence, we compute the Asia or Latin
America emerging market index, Rreg / i ,t , as
Rreg / i ,t = ∑ wk ,t Rk ,t
k ≠i

∑w
k ≠i

k ,t

,

with k indexing the Asian or Latin American markets, except market i and wk , denoting the
market capitalization of market k. It is not always the case that country returns are more highly
correlated with a regional index than with either the U.S. or MSCI world index returns. For
example, all European countries are more highly correlated with the MSCI World and Europe
indices than with the U.S., but Indonesia, Korea and the Philippines have higher unconditional
correlations with the U.S. than with their regional index. Within the Latin American group,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico have higher correlations with the U.S. than with their
regional index. Detailed summary statistics regarding correlations are available on request.
As section 2.1 indicated, we use a substantial number of both economic and financial
information variables, which are detailed in the appendix

3.2 U.S. and regional models
Table 1 details the U.S. and regional market model estimation. The first row (Wald test I)
shows that, consistent with previous research, there is significant variation in the conditional
mean for the U.S. return. Our results strongly reject the hypothesis of no asymmetry in the
11

conditional variances. All three specification tests fail to reject the U.S. model specification. The
joint test fails to reject the specification at the 5% level, but provides some evidence against the
specification at the 10% level.6
While we are constrained by data beginning in the 1980s for Asian and Latin American
emerging markets, the U.S. and European data are available earlier. We have independently
conducted alternative estimations using, in particular, the U.S. market model estimated over a
longer sample. These results are available on request. Over the longer sample, the U.S. market
exhibits the same strong asymmetry. Furthermore, the three specification tests and the joint test
fail to provide evidence against the specification. Finally, all the results we report regarding
integration and contagion are qualitatively robust to the use of these U.S. residuals.
The next part of Table 1 presents the regional model estimation. We find little evidence of
asymmetric volatility outside the U.S. We fail to reject symmetry in the European, Asian and
Latin American regional portfolios. The three specification tests and the joint test fail to provide
evidence against the specifications at conventional significance levels. The local instruments
have significant explanatory power in Asia, but not in Latin America or Europe.
Table 1 also presents a test of whether the coefficients on the trade variable account for
variation in the beta with respect to the U.S. (Wald test II), and we find no significant effect.
However, do find that the beta with respect to the U.S. (Wald test III) is significantly different
from zero for Europe and Latin America. For Asia, the p-value is 0.11. We also report the
average conditional betas and correlations of the three regional portfolios with the U.S. Europe
has the highest average conditional correlation with the U.S. (0.587), followed by Latin America
(0.432), and Asia (0.146).

Latin America’s high β (around one) translates into lower

correlation and a low proportion of variance explained by U.S. shocks because of its relatively
high return variability. In Europe, more than 30% of the conditional return variance can be
attributed to U.S. shocks.
These conditional betas and correlations are the cornerstone of our tests of contagion and
market integration. We are interested in whether these betas and correlations increase during
crisis periods. Our framework gives us the ability to decompose the increased correlation of

6

When we do not explicitly mention the test level, we use 5% tests to judge significance.
12

returns into two components: the part the asset pricing model explains and the part the model
does not explain.

The explained part provides potential insights about market integration

through the movements in the betas. We define contagion as the correlation of the unexplained
portion.

3.3 Country models and integration
Our framework nests at least three distinct models: an asset pricing model with a single
factor (a regional portfolio return), an asset pricing model with a single U.S. factor, and a world
capital asset pricing model. Detailed country-by-country results are available upon request. Here
we summarize the main findings.
In Europe, most country residuals still display asymmetric volatility, but in the other regions
only half the countries do. Our residual specification tests typically fail to reject. The joint test is
the most powerful, rejecting at the 1% level in three countries (Greece, Turkey and Colombia),
and at the 5% level in four other countries.
We also test whether lagged local information enters the mean equation (test of δ i = 0 ). If
the asset pricing model is properly specified, these lagged instruments should not enter the
model. That is, the asset pricing model through its time-varying risk and risk premiums should
capture variation in the country’s conditional mean. This test can be thought of as a test of
whether the conditional alpha (or pricing error) is zero and, under the null hypothesis of the
regional or world CAPM, as a test of market integration.
The hypothesis that local information is unrelated to the pricing errors is rejected in seven of
10 European countries. In Asia, local information is important for explaining the pricing errors in
Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Taiwan. Local information is also important for the pricing
errors in Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico.
Similar to our regional analysis, we are interested in whether the beta with respect to the
U.S. is influenced by trade with the U.S. and, more generally, whether the beta is equal to zero
(test whether p1,i = 0 ). We find that U.S. trade impacts the conditional betas in eight of 10
European countries (exceptions are Austria and Portugal), five of six Asian countries (exception
is the Philippines), and two of six Latin American countries. The tests of whether the betas are

13

equal to zero closely mimic the tests of whether trade is important. The beta with respect to the
U.S. is significantly different from zero in eight of 10 European sample countries. The beta with
respect to the U.S. is not zero at the 5% level for all Asian countries except for the Philippines
(where it is significant at the 10% level). In Latin America, three of the countries, Chile,
Colombia and Venezuela, have statistically significant non-zero betas with respect to the U.S.
At the country level, we can also examine how trade with the rest of the world impacts the
regional beta and, more generally, whether the beta with respect to the regional benchmark is
equal to zero (test whether p 2,i = 0 ). Trade with the rest of the world is important for nine of 10
European markets’ regional betas. In Asia, five of the six countries have regional betas that are
significantly influenced by trade (at the 10% level). The regional beta of three Latin American
countries (Chile, Colombia and Mexico) is influenced by trade. In the more general tests of
whether the regional betas equal zero, we find that eight of 10 European countries have non-zero
betas, and that Austria does when the test is conducted at the 10% level. In Asia, the betas are
non-zero (at the 5% level) for all countries except for the Philippines, where the test rejects at the
10% level. In contrast, only two of Latin American countries’ regional betas are statistically
nonzero: Chile and Colombia.
We also test the significance of the total trade size as a percentage of GDP in the U.S. and
regional betas. Here, we find that trade impacts the betas of nine of 10 European countries (the
exception is Austria), five of six Asia countries (the exception is Thailand), but only one of six
Latin American countries (Chile).
The more interesting tests restrict two sets of parameters. If both p1,i = 0 and q i = 0 , then
the model reduces to a CAPM with a single regional factor. This regional factor model is
rejected at the 5% level for all countries except for Venezuela. If both p 2,i = 0 and q i = 0 , the
model reduces to a single factor model with the U.S. market return as the relevant benchmark.
This model is rejected for 20 of 22 countries at the 5% significance level, with Mexico and
Venezuela being the only two exceptions. If both p1,i = 0 and p 2,i = 0 , the model reduces to a
standard world CAPM model. The simple world CAPM is rejected in 20 of 22 countries at the
10% level, and 21 of 22 countries at the 5% level. The countries adhering to the world CAPM
are Portugal and Venezuela (at the 10% level).

14

These Wald tests reveal that the special cases are usually rejected. Consequently, a regional
international model is not a good description of the data by itself, but the covariance with one
regional benchmark is a significant determinant of expected returns in most markets.
Table 2 reports average betas, correlations and variance ratios for all the countries with
respect to the U.S. and the regional markets. Note that our model produces time-varying betas,
correlations and variance ratios, but we only report the sample average of these conditional
variables.
First, let us focus on the small European markets. The betas and correlations with respect to
the U.S. market are surprisingly small for most markets, and even negative for Turkey. The
exceptions are Finland (dominated by Nokia, a very international, U.S. listed company) with a
beta of 0.883 and Norway, an oil sensitive economy, with a beta of 0.784. However with the
exception of Greece, betas and correlations with the regional market (the European index) are
always larger than with the U.S. market. Given the small size of these markets and their
correspondingly small weight in the index, this is not spuriously accounted for by index
composition. Not surprisingly, this implies that the fraction of the return shock variance
explained by U.S. factors is small. It is mostly in the 15-22% range. The regional market
accounts for 25-35% of total shock variance, with the exceptions being Greece (close to 0%) and
Turkey (3.4%). The qualitative nature of the results is definitely in line with what we would
expect given the relative idiosyncratic nature of various markets.
The results for the Asian markets are somewhat surprising. The betas with respect to the U.S.
market factor are quite high, exceeding 0.7 in four of the six markets. Only Korea and Taiwan
display very small betas. The correlations are lower, because of the higher idiosyncratic volatility
of these markets. Except for Korea and Taiwan, it is always the case that the beta with respect to
the U.S. is larger than the beta with respect to the regional market. In terms of variance ratios,
Taiwan and Korea are similar to Greece and Turkey: the U.S. and regional factors do not account
for very much of the total variation of return shocks. However, the other markets are closer to
what we see for the European markets, with the regional and U.S. factors jointly accounting for
over 30% of the variance of return shocks.
For the Latin-American countries, high betas with respect to the U.S. market are no surprise,
but there is substantial cross-country variation: they range from 0.413 for Venezuela to 1.205 for

15

Brazil. The regional betas are always much smaller than the U.S. betas. This is also true, to a
lesser extent, for the correlations, with the exceptions being Argentina and Brazil. Overall, this
analysis suggests that regional integration may not be as strong a phenomenon as previously
thought. Examining the variance ratios, in four of the six countries we explain less than 20% of
the shock variance with both the U.S. and regional factors. Only in Argentina and Brazil do we
explain around 28% of the variance, which is still lower than what we observe for most
European and the Asian markets. These results also help us calibrate the results on changes in
betas, correlations and variance ratios during crises times.
3.4 Patterns in regional and global integration
We investigate patterns in regional and global integration by examining how the estimated
betas and correlations change during particular periods. We also examine the patterns in the
variance ratios (amount of variance in the country’s unexpected return accounted for by the U.S.
or region). We consider five different sample periods: the second half of the sample (or subsample), the Mexican crisis, the Asian crisis, periods of abnormally negative U.S. unexpected
returns, and periods of abnormally negative regional unexpected returns. Abnormal is defined as
more than one standard deviation below zero. We run panel regressions of each of our measures
on a constant and on a dummy variable that takes a value of one during these designated periods.
The first panel of Table 3 compares the first half of the sample to the second half, which is
dominated by the 1990s. For most countries, the betas, correlations and variance ratios with
respect to the U.S. and the region increase, leading to positive slope coefficients. This increase
suggests increased linkages among the various countries. In Asia, there is a sharp increase in the
regional betas, correlations and variance ratios in the second half of the sample. In general, the
regional correlations, betas and variance ratios increase by more than their U.S. counter parts.
There are some exceptions. In Europe, the betas with respect to the U.S. increase somewhat more
than the regional betas. This is somewhat surprising given that the second sub-sample is a time
when Europe is moving further towards unification and a single currency. However, it is
probably best to interpret these results as showing increased correlation both within the region
and with respect to the U.S., given that there is little economic difference between the increases.

16

Panel B of Table 3 examines the Mexican crisis. For Latin America, there is no significant
increase in the regional beta or correlation during the crisis. At only 0.004, the increment to
regional correlation is not even one standard error from zero. Indeed, the regional beta decreases
while the beta with respect to the U.S. increases, but neither change is significantly different
from zero. The regional variance ratio change is not significantly above zero. Overall, the model
suggests no change in correlation during this crisis period.
The Asian crisis presents a completely different story. The regional correlations, betas and
variance ratios for Asia in Panel C of Table 3 increase by economically meaningful magnitudes
in Asia, and the change appears statistically significant. The fact that the effect is economically
much smaller for correlations and variance ratios than for betas is due to higher overall volatility
during this period. Comovements with the U.S. appear to have decreased during the period,
suggesting increased economic regional integration during this time. Interestingly, the same
regional effects are evident in both Latin America and Europe during this period, but they are
smaller and, in fact, are dominated by increased comovement with the U.S. market.
The last two panels of Table 3 examine periods of large negative returns. In periods of
negative abnormal returns, we would expect the asymmetric model to generate higher
correlations. Although these negative abnormal returns are usually associated with higher
correlation, the increment in correlation is substantially smaller than that experienced during the
Asian crisis. Indeed, the last two panels help to calibrate the importance of Asian crisis with
respect to our comovement variables.

3.5 Contagion
The increased correlation detected during the Asian crisis is not itself evidence of contagion.
The hypothesis of contagion would be supported if the model’s idiosyncratic shocks exhibit
significant correlation. Table 4 provides a baseline estimate of contagion over the full sample.
We examine the correlation of the country idiosyncratic shocks with the U.S. residuals, the
regional residuals, and every other country’s idiosyncratic residuals.
To assess the statistical significance of the residual correlations, we perform a bootstrap
exercise based on 5,000 draws of the actual return residual set, with the same number of

17

observations as in our sample. The bootstrap experiment is constructed as follows. First, we
compile all the idiosyncratic shocks from all markets, including the U.S. and regional indices,
together into one grand vector of return shocks. Second, in each replication, we draw from the
grand return shock vector to construct a matrix of return shocks with the same number of
observations as in the sample (rows) and number of countries (columns), and then compute the
bivariate correlation and cross-country correlation matrix. We use 5,000 replications in all.
Finally, we record the 95% values for the bivariate correlation and the cross-country correlation
matrix.
In the first panel of Table 4, we find that there is no evidence of excess correlation between
the European countries and the U.S. There is one country, Greece, which has excess correlation
with the regional residual. However, most interestingly, we find evidence in all but one country
(Belgium) of contagion among the European countries. That is, the residual correlations among
the different countries are significantly above zero.
In the second panel of Table 4, we find no evidence of excess correlation with the U.S.
residual or the regional residual for any of the Asian countries; however, there is sharp evidence
of average contagion within Asia. Every country except Taiwan has significant excess
correlation with other Asian countries. Indeed, the magnitude of these correlations is roughly
double what we documented for Europe.
The Latin American countries are presented in the final panel of Table 4. Only one country,
Mexico, has excess correlation with the U.S. portfolio. No country has excess correlation with
the regional portfolio. Only two countries, Colombia and Venezuela show significant excess
correlation with other Latin American countries.
This analysis measures the correlation of idiosyncratic residuals over the entire sample. We
are most interested in the time-series patterns of these residuals. Table 5 uses the five time
periods introduced in Table 3 to examine patterns in the residuals. We use a panel regression of
the country idiosyncratic shocks onto a country-specific constant and a relevant benchmark
residual with the slope coefficient allowed to change during the time periods of interest. We
estimate the panel model accommodating group-wise heteroskedasticity.7
7

We also have conducted the estimation assuming an AR(1) model for the residual. These alternative estimates
yield qualitatively similar results.
18

In panel A, the v1 coefficient measures the additional correlation in the second half of the
sample. Regardless of the benchmark or region, v1 is positive, suggesting that the idiosyncratic
residuals are more correlated in the second half of the sample. The correlation with respect to the
U.S. index residuals is significantly higher only for Asia; however, the correlation with the
regional residuals is significantly higher for all regions in the second half of the sample.
Considering the sum of the country-specific residuals, we find that the correlation jumps
significantly in the second half of the period for both Asia and Latin America.
The joint test of v0 = v1 = 0 is an overall test of contagion. We reject at the 5% level for Asia
with respect to the U.S. index, for Latin America with respect to regional return residuals, and
for all regions with respect to the “sum of other residuals” benchmark. In the latter case, v0 is by
itself also significant for three regions. Clearly, country residuals within a region are correlated
beyond what is captured in our model, suggesting evidence of contagion. Overall, contagion
worsened in the second half of the sample, but it is only economically and statistically significant
for Asia and Latin America.
Panel B of Table 5 examines the Mexican crisis. Our results show that there is no significant
increase in residual correlations within Latin America. Insignificant effects are also found for
Europe and Asia during the Mexican crisis, suggesting little evidence of contagion resulting
specifically from the Mexican crisis. However, the overall contagion tests confirm the results of
panel B, indicating contagion across countries in the region.
Panel C of Table 5 presents the results for the Asian crisis. Here we see significantly higher
residual correlations among Asian countries for all residual benchmarks. The increase in
correlation for Asia is many times larger than the increase in correlation for either Latin America
or Europe when investigating comovements with U.S. return residuals or the sum of the
idiosyncratic residuals, but the increase in correlation is of the same order of magnitude when
examining regional residuals. For Latin America and Europe, statistical significance is only
reached in this latter case. Hence, the Asian crisis worsened contagion.
Panels D and E of Table 5 put the historical crisis periods in perspective. Compare the
increases in regional excess correlation in panel E (abnormal negative regional unexpected
returns) with those reported for the Asian crisis. The increase in residual correlations when

19

regional returns are negative is of the same order of magnitude as the increase observed during
the Asian crisis, in panel C, except for the sum of idiosyncratic residuals, where the increase
during the Asian crisis is much larger. The U.S. unexpected returns in panel D yield an increase
in correlations for Asia of the same order of magnitude as observed for all of panel C, even for
the sum of idiosyncratic residuals. One interpretation of this result is that our model fails to
capture fully asymmetric volatility (higher volatility in bear markets) and the potential effects it
has on correlations during crisis periods.8 If this is the case, what we call contagion here for Asia
may no longer be considered contagion vis-à-vis a richer model.

5. Conclusions
Contagion is a level of correlation over and above what is expected. Considerable research
has investigated whether the crises in both Mexico and Asia in the 1990s resulted in contagion.
Our research directly addresses the issue of “what is expected.” We present a two-factor asset
pricing model and define contagion as correlation among the model residuals. It is important
here to operate within the framework of a model. Indeed, increased return correlation between
two countries during a period of crisis could simply be the consequence of their exposures to a
common factor. That is, it is necessary to undo the natural changes in correlation that result from
an asset pricing model, before making statements about contagion.
Our framework allows for time-varying expected returns as well as time-varying risk
loadings for the countries we examine. Our results suggest that there is no evidence of additional
contagion caused by the Mexican crisis. However, we find economically meaningful increases in
residual correlation, especially in Asia, during the Asian crisis. Dungey and Martin (2001), using
a different methodology, find similar results for Asia and explore the role of currency risk in
equity market contagion.
One useful extension of our methodology could be to investigate contagion in currency
markets and to link equity to currency contagion. In fact, our framework is very different from
the typical empirical strategy used in the international economics literature, where crisis
indicators in one country (e.g. the probability of a speculative attack or the magnitude of a crisis
8

Ang and Bekaert (2002) report that GARCH models (although simpler than the ones we study here) do not capture
asymmetric correlations very well and propose a regime switching model.
20

indicator) are directly linked to indicators in other countries (see De Gregario and Valdes (2001)
and Eichengreen, Rose and Wyplosz (1997)). As Rigobon (1999) also stresses, this approach is
problematic in the presence of common unobservable shocks and increased variances during
crisis periods. Our asset pricing approach, which directly models the shock and correlation
structure, and uses crisis and non-crisis periods for identification, does not suffer from these
problems. Of course, it is possible that our model of correlations is incorrect and that contagion
could simply be a result of model misspecification. Nevertheless, we believe that it is more
desirable to frame statements about excess correlation in the context of an asset-pricing model.

Appendix: Information variable specification
In estimating the time-varying beta model in (1)-(5), we introduce several sets of information
variables in the empirical model. This appendix provides a detailed discussion of these
information variables.
Stage 1: U.S. Model

The U.S. instrument set, Z us ,t −1 , includes: a constant, the lagged world market dividend yield, the
lagged spread between the 90-day Eurodollar rate and the 3-month Treasury-bill yield; the
difference between the US 10-year Treasury bond yield and the 3-month Treasury-bill yield, and,
finally, the change in the 90-day Treasury-bill yield.
Stage 2 : Regional Model

The regional instrument set, Z reg ,t −1 , includes: a constant and regional market dividend yield.
Note that for the MSCI Europe, the market-capitalization weighted dividend yield includes the
large, developed markets, such as France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the
U.K. The Asian or Latin American emerging market indices are market-capitalization weighted
over all the markets in Asia or Latin America except for the one under examination.

21

us
The trade data set, X reg
,t −1 , from the World Bank CD-ROM, includes: a constant and the adjusted

trade with U.S. (i.e., sum of exports to and imports from the US divided by the sum of total
exports and imports) lagged 6 months. For the MSCI Europe, we aggregate over France,
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and U.K. For our Asian or Latin American
emerging market indices, we aggregate over all the markets in Asia or Latin America except for
the one under examination.
Stage 3: Individual country models

The individual country instrument set, Z i ,t −1 , includes a constant and the local dividend yield
(Source: IFC).
The trade data set with the U.S., X us
i ,t −1 ¸ includes a constant as well as adjusted trade with U.S.
(i.e., sum of exports to and imports from the US divided by the sum of total exports and imports)
lagged 6 months. Note, for Belgium, there are many missing values in its trade with the U.S. ;
therefore, we replace the data for Belgium with the average of France, Germany, and the
Netherlands.
The trade data set with the region, X ireg
,t −1 , includes a constant and the sum of exports to and
imports from the rest of the world except to and from the U.S., divided by the sum of total
exports and imports, lagged 6 months.
The trade with the rest of the world data set, X iw,t −1 , includes a constant and total trade by GDP,
lagged 6 months.

22

References
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2002, International Asset Allocation under Regime Switching, Review of Financial
Studies, 15, 1137-1187.
Ang, Andrew and Joseph Chen, 2002, Asymmetric Correlations of Equity Portfolios, Journal of Financial
Economics 63, 443-494.
Bae, Kee-Hong, G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, 2001, A New Approach to Measuring Financial Contagion,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1995, Time-Varying World Market Integration, Journal of Finance, 50,
403-444.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 1997, Emerging Equity Market Volatility, Journal of Financial Economics,
43, 29-77.
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey, 2000, Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets, Journal of
Finance, 55, 29-77.
Bekaert, Geert and Robert J. Hodrick, 1992, Characterizing Predictable Components in Excess Returns on Equity
and Foreign Exchange Markets, Journal of Finance 47, 467-509
Bekaert, Geert and Guojun Wu, 2000, Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity Markets, Review of Financial
Studies, 13, 1-42.
Boyer, M. S., B. H. Gibson, and M. Loretan, 1999, Pitfalls in Tests for Changes in Correlations, International
Finance Discussion Paper, 597, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.
Chan, K.C., G. Andrew Karolyi, and Rene M. Stulz, 1992, Global Financial Markets and the Risk Premium on U.S.
Equity, Journal of Financial Economics, 137-168.
Chen, Nai-fu and Feng Zhang, 1997, Correlations, Trades and Stock Returns of the Pacific Rim Markets, Pacific
Basin Finance Journal, 5, 1997, 559-577.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Jia He and Lilian Ng, 1997, What Are the Global Sources of Rational Variation in International
Equity Returns? Journal of International Money and Finance, 16, 821-836.
Connolly, Robert A. and F. Albert Wang, 2002, International Equity Market Comovements: Economic Fundamental
or Contagion, Pacific Basin Finance Journal, forthcoming.
De Gregorio, José and Rodrigo G. Valdés, 2001, Crisis Transmission: Evidence from the Debt, Tequila, and Asian
Flu Crises, World Bank Economic Review 15, 289-324.
De Santis, Giorgio and Bruno Gerard, 1997, International Asset Pricing and Portfolio Diversification with TimeVarying Risk, Journal of Finance, 52, 1881-1912.
Dumas, Bernard and Bruno Solnik, 1995, The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk, Journal of Finance, 50, 665679.
Dungey, Mardi and Vance L. Martin, 2001, Contagion Across Financial Markets: An Empirical Assessment,
Unpublished working paper, Australian National University.
Eichengreen, B., A. K. Rose, and C. Wyplosz, 1996, Contagious Currency Crises, NBER working paper 5681.

23

Engle, Robert. F. and Raul Susmel, 1993, Common Volatility in International Equity Markets, Journal of Business
& Economic Statistics, 11, 2.
Erb, Claude, Campbell R. Harvey and Tadas Viskanta, 1994, Forecasting International Equity Correlations,
Financial Analysts Journal, November/December, 32-45.
Ferson, Wayne E. and Campbell R. Harvey, 1993, The Risk and Predictability of International Equity Returns,
Review of Financial Studies, 6, 527- 566
Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, 2001, Contagion in Latin America: Definitions, Measurement, and Policy
Implications, Economia, 1, 1-46.
Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, 2001, No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring Stock Market Comovements, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Glosten, Lawerence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David Runkle, 1993, On the Relation Between the Expected Value
and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks, Journal of Finance, 48, 5, 1770-1801.
Hamao, Yasushi, Ronald W. Masulis and Victor Ng, 1990, Correlations in Price Changes and Volatility Across
International Stock Markets, Review of Financial Studies 3, 281-307.
Hartmann, P., Straetmans, S., de Vries, C. G., 2001. Asset market linkages in crisis periods. Working paper,
European Central Bank.
Karolyi, G. Andrew, 1995, A Multivariate GARCH Model of International Transmissions of Stock Returns and
Volatility: The Case of the United States and Canada, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13, 11-25.
Karolyi, G. Andrew and René M. Stulz, 1996, Why do Markets Move Together? An Investigation of US-Japan
Stock Return Comovements, Journal of Finance, 51, 951-986.
King, M., Wadhwani, S., 1990. Transmission of volatility between stock markets. Review of Financial Studies 3, 533.
King, M., Sentana, E., Wadhwani, S., 1994. Volatility and links between national stock markets. Econometrica,
62:901—33.
Longin, Francois and Bruno Solnik, 1995, Is Correlation in International Equity Returns Constant: 1960-1990,
Journal of International Money and Finance, 14, 3-26.
Longin, Francois and Bruno Solnik, 2001, Extreme Correlation of International Equity Markets, Journal of Finance,
56, 649-676.
Loretan, M. and English, W. B., 2000. Evaluating “correlation breakdowns" during periods of market volatility.
Federal Reserve Board, Mimeo.
Ng, Angela, 2000, Volatility Spillover Effects from Japan and the U.S. to the Pacific-Basin, Journal of International
Money and Finance, 19, 207-233.
Pagan, A. R. and G. W. Schwert, 1990, Alternative Models for Conditional Stock Volatility, Journal of
Econometrics, 45, 267-290.
Pindyck, R. S., Rotemberg, J. J., 1990, The excess co-movement of commodity prices. Economic Journal 100,
1173-1189.
Pindyck, R. S., Rotemberg, J. J., 1993. The comovement of stock prices. Quarterly Journal of Economics 108,
1073-1104.

24

Rigobon, Roberto, 1999, On the Measurement of the International Propagation of Shocks, Unpublished working
paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 7354.
Rigobon, Roberto, 2001, Contagion: How to Measure It? in Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel Ed., Currency
Crises Prevention, National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming.
Stambaugh, Robert, 1995, Unpublished discussion of Karolyi and Stulz (1996), National Bureau of Economic
Research Universities Conference on Risk Management, May.
Tang, J.W., 2001, Contagion: An Empirical Test, Unpublished working paper, Duke University.
Zakoian, J., 1994, Threshold Heteroskedastic Models, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 18, 931-955.

25

Table 1: The U.S. and Regional Market Return Model
The following model is estimated:
Ri ,t = δ i' Z i ,t −1 + β ius,t −1 µˆ us ,t −1 + β ius,t −1 eˆus ,t + ei ,t

β ius,t −1 = p 1' ,i X usi ,t −1
ei ,t | I t −1 ~ N (0, σ i2,t )

σ i2,t = a i + bi σ ri2 ,t −1 + c i ei2,t −1 + d iη i2,t −1
η i ,t −1 = min{0, ei ,t }
where µˆ us ,t −1 and eˆus , t are the conditional expected excess return and residual of the U.S. market. For the U.S. market (i.e., i = us), p1,us = 0, and Zus,t-1 represents a set of U.S. or

world information variables, which includes a constant, the world market dividend yield, the spread between the 90-day Eurodollar rate and the 3-month Treasury-bill yield, the
difference between the U.S. 10-year Treasury bond yield and the 3-month Treasury-bill yield, and the change in the 90-day Treasury-bill yield. All these U.S. information variables
are lagged by one month. For the regional market (i.e., i = reg), Zreg,t-1 represents a set of regional information variables, which includes a constant and the regional market
dividend yield weighted by the market capitalization, and X us
a constant, and the sum of the region’s total exports to and imports from the U.S. divided by the sum of total
reg ,t −1
exports and imports of the region. The dividend yield is lagged by one month and the trade variable is lagged by six months.
All monthly returns are calculated in excess of the U.S. one-month Treasury-bill rate and in U.S. dollars. The sample covers the period from January 1980 to December 1998 for
the U.S. and Europe, while the data for Asia and Latin America start from January 1986. Return data for the U.S. and Europe are from Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI), whereas Asia and Latin America data are from the International Finance Corporation (IFC). The Asia or Latin America emerging market index is a value-weighted
average of all the Asian or Latin American emerging markets in the sample.
To test for model specification, the mean test is based on the first four autocovariances of the scaled residuals (17b); the variance test is based on the first four autocovariances of
the squared scaled residuals (17d); the moment test is based on four moments (17a,c,e,f); and the joint test is based on all the restrictions in (17). Three hypotheses are tested. Wald
I is a test of the significance of the regional information in the mean, i.e., δi = 0; Wald II is a test of the significance of the trade variable in β ius,t −1 ; and Wald III is a test of the
significance of the regional variables on β ius,t −1 , i.e., p1,i = 0. Sample means and standard deviations of the implied βˆ ius, t −1 , the conditional correlation between the U.S. and regional
market ( ρ̂ i ,us ,t ), and the variance ratio of conditional variance of the regional portfolio accounted for by the U.S. factors ( VRˆ ius,t ) are reported. P-values are given in brackets.
Implied statistics
Model

Specification tests

βˆ ius,t −1

Wald tests (p-value)

Market

(Asy/Sym)

Mean

Moment

Variance

Joint

I

U.S.

Asy

1.555
[0.817]

4.962
[0.291]

4.808
[0.308]

20.90
[0.052]

<0.001

Europe

Sym

6.774
[0.148]

4.705
[0.319]

2.738
[0.603]

15.96
[0.193]

Asia

Sym

3.593
[0.464]

11.12
[0.025]

1.718
[0.788]

Latin America

Sym

2.935
[0.569]

3.027
[0.553]

2.134
[0.711]

∧

ρ̂ i ,us ,t

VR ius,t

II

III

Mean

Std. dev.

Mean

Std. dev.

Mean

Std. dev.

0.390

0.856

<0.001

0.657

0.016

0.587

0.102

0.355

0.133

20.15
[0.064]

<0.001

0.174

0.114

0.296

0.263

0.146

0.138

0.040

0.058

13.46
[0.336]

0.365

0.603

<0.001

0.977

0.112

0.432

0.114

0.199

0.120

26

Table 2: Implied Statistics of the Country-Specific Model
The following model is estimated for the country portfolios:
us
reg
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Ri ,t = δ i' Z i ,t −1 + β ius,t −1 µˆ us ,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 µ reg ,t −1 + β i ,t −1 eus ,t + β i ,t −1 e reg ,t + ei ,t

(

ei ,t | I t −1 ~ N 0, σ i2,t

σ

2
i ,t

= ai + bi σ

2
i ,t −1

)

+ ci ei2,t −1 + d iη i2,t −1

η i ,t −1 = min{0, ei ,t −1 }

where ei,t is the idiosyncratic shock of market i, µˆ us ,t −1 and eˆus ,t ( µˆ reg ,t −1 and eˆreg ,t ) are the conditional expected excess return and residual on the U.S. (regional) market.Zi,t-1
represents a set of local information variables. The region market is represented by the MSCI Europe index, and the Asia and Latin America emerging market indices, a valueweighted average of all the Asian (Latin American) emerging markets, excluding the country under consideration.
Sample average of standard deviation of the implied beta parameters ( β̂ ius and β̂ ireg ), correlations with the U.S. and regional markets ( ρ̂ i ,us ,t and ρ̂ i , reg , t ), and variance ratios
∧
∧
accounted for by the U.S. and region ( VR ius,t and VRireg
) are reported. Standard deviations are given in parentheses.
,t
Market

∧

∧

β̂ ius

β̂ ireg

ρ̂ i ,us ,t

ρ̂ i , reg ,t

VRius, t

VRireg
,t

0.224
(0.155)
0.509
(0.081)
0.459
(0.125)
0.883
(0.297)
0.248
(0.231)
0.784
(0.277)
0.675
(0.249)
0.606
(0.264)
0.643
(0.143)
-0.241
(1.273)

0.954
(0.242)
0.868
(0.103)
0.724
(0.154)
0.976
(0.277)
-0.048
(0.100)
0.799
(0.071)
0.971
(0.292)
0.963
(0.177)
0.903
(0.057)
0.795
(0.511)

0.153
(0.121)
0.398
(0.126)
0.345
(0.129)
0.416
(0.150)
0.110
(0.117)
0.448
(0.166)
0.357
(0.150)
0.370
(0.184)
0.409
(0.137)
-0.046
(0.293)

0.527
(0.105)
0.721
(0.119)
0.596
(0.093)
0.573
(0.136)
0.053
(0.061)
0.604
(0.093)
0.594
(0.179)
0.642
(0.168)
0.658
(0.093)
0.100
(0.168)

0.038
(0.055)
0.174
(0.119)
0.136
(0.112)
0.196
(0.143)
0.026
(0.040)
0.228
(0.146)
0.150
(0.126)
0.171
(0.151)
0.186
(0.136)
0.087
(0.119)

0.308
(0.125)
0.362
(0.122)
0.243
(0.106)
0.168
(0.084)
0.002
(0.006)
0.173
(0.052)
0.251
(0.156)
0.275
(0.100)
0.260
(0.067)
0.034
(0.034)

0.100
(0.140)
0.009
(0.012)
0.237
(0.182)
0.104
(0.116)

0.255
(0.237)
0.056
(0.064)
0.134
(0.118)
0.192
(0.184)

European Countries
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Greece
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Turkey

Asian Countries (with the Asia emerging market index being the regional market)
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines

0.849
(0.615)
0.139
(0.049)
0.875
(0.333)
0.767
(0.398)

0.448
(0.964)
0.169
(0.047)
0.334
(0.269)
0.442
(0.464)

0.251
(0.194)
0.077
(0.053)
0.443
(0.204)
0.284
(0.152)

0.289
(0.426)
0.220
(0.108)
0.372
(0.247)
0.351
(0.314)

27

Table 2 (continued)
∧

∧

Market

β̂ ius

β̂ ireg

ρ̂ i ,us ,t

ρ̂ i , reg ,t

VRius, t

VRireg
,t

Taiwan

-0.055
(0.696)
0.723
(0.365)

0.558
(0.278)
0.650
(0.343)

0.031
(0.242)
0.302
(0.201)

0.398
(0.110)
0.521
(0.176)

0.059
(0.080)
0.132
(0.162)

0.177
(0.098)
0.278
(0.146)

Thailand

Asian Countries (with MSCI Pacific being the regional market)
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand

0.449
(0.296)
0.425
(0.175)
0.906
(0.508)
0.688
(0.381)
0.157
(0.419)
0.780
(0.412)

-0.156
(0.276)
0.524
(0.221)
0.232
(0.160)
0.452
(0.536)
0.397
(0.183)
0.413
(0.452)

0.173
(0.148)
0.190
(0.111)
0.432
(0.253)
0.290
(0.190)
0.075
(0.180)
0.302
(0.181)

-0.035
(0.147)
0.397
(0.160)
0.311
(0.193)
0.336
(0.225)
0.253
(0.172)
0.312
(0.212)

0.052
(0.063)
0.048
(0.082)
0.250
(0.211)
0.120
(0.151)
0.038
(0.068)
0.124
(0.138)

0.032
(0.050)
0.139
(0.101)
0.040
(0.042)
0.120
(0.151)
0.072
(0.064)
0.090
(0.089)

0.781
(0.233)
0.825
(0.174)
0.090
(0.139)
-0.015
(0.069)
0.217
(0.224)
0.017
(0.131)

0.263
(0.178)
0.324
(0.162)
0.293
(0.104)
0.123
(0.074)
0.354
(0.134)
0.139
(0.170)

0.474
(0.209)
0.475
(0.186)
0.254
(0.206)
0.033
(0.109)
0.272
(0.197)
0.073
(0.126)

0.100
(0.135)
0.131
(0.127)
0.097
(0.091)
0.021
(0.033)
0.143
(0.114)
0.048
(0.084)

0.185
(0.137)
0.154
(0.113)
0.058
(0.102)
0.009
(0.014)
0.052
(0.050)
0.009
(0.013)

Latin American Countries
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

0.927
(0.203)
1.205
(0.257)
0.537
(0.093)
0.216
(0.075)
0.907
(0.203)
0.413
(0.445)

28

Table 3: Patterns in Regional Integration
The following time-series-cross-section regression model is estimated:

S i ,t = κ i + φDi ,t + u i ,t

us , market correlations, ρ
where Si,t denotes the implied statistic being examined, such as β ius,t −1 , β ireg
, β ireg
i,us,t, ρi,reg,t, ρi,reg,t - ρi,us,t, as given in equations (12)-(13), and
, t −1
,t −1 − β i ,t −1
reg
us , as in equations (14)-(15). D is a dummy variable that represents (A) the second sub-sample period, (B) the Mexico crisis period from
,
variance ratios, VRius, t , VRireg
VRi ,t − VRi ,t
i,t
,t
November 1994 to December 1995, (C) the Asia crisis period from April 1997 to October 1998, (D) abnormally negative U.S. unexpected market returns (i.e., the unexpected
returns are one standard deviation below zero), and (E) abnormally negative regional unexpected market returns. In studying the implied statistics, countries are categorized into
four different country-groups: Europe, Europe excluding Turkey, Asia, and Latin America. The estimation results correct for group-wise heteroskedasticity with Newey-West
correction for serial correlation (with one lag). The parameter estimates of φ are reported, with standard errors given in parentheses.

Market

β ius,t −1

β ireg
, t −1

us
β ireg
,t −1 − β i ,t −1

ρ i ,us ,t

ρ i ,reg ,t

0.044
(0.007)
0.043
(0.007)
0.261
(0.022)
0.063
(0.009)

-0.075
(0.008)
-0.063
(0.009)
0.164
(0.025)
-0.011
(0.014)

0.065
(0.008)
0.061
(0.008)
-0.026
(0.009)
0.089
(0.010)

0.061
(0.006)
0.058
(0.006)
0.182
(0.017)
0.144
(0.012)

0.023
(0.013)
0.019
(0.013)
0.016
(0.018)
-0.025
(0.018)

-0.040
(0.020)
-0.046
(0.018)
0.005
(0.033)
0.003
(0.020)

0.023
(0.015)
0.027
(0.016)
0.034
(0.016)
-0.006
(0.016)

0.058
(0.010)
0.059
(0.010)
0.287
(0.036)
0.085
(0.015)

-0.063
(0.018)
-0.049
(0.016)
0.280
(0.042)
-0.003
(0.017)

0.139
(0.013)
0.134
(0.013)
-0.075
(0.012)
0.104
(0.015)

ρ i ,reg ,t − ρ i ,us ,t

VRius,t

VRireg
,t

us
VRireg
,t − VRi , t

0.001
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
0.170
(0.022)
0.063
(0.009)

0.016
(0.005)
0.018
(0.005)
-0.007
(0.004)
0.033
(0.006)

0.017
(0.003)
0.021
(0.004)
0.084
(0.010)
0.016
(0.004)

0.003
(0.005)
0.003
(0.005)
0.079
(0.014)
-0.007
(0.005)

0.031
(0.011)
0.034
(0.011)
0.073
(0.025)
-0.003
(0.022)

0.006
(0.010)
0.003
(0.010)
0.049
(0.026)
0.004
(0.017)

-0.004
(0.008)
-0.003
(0.009)
0.005
(0.004)
-0.008
(0.008)

0.006
(0.004)
0.005
(0.004)
0.028
(0.016)
-0.005
(0.003)

0.010
(0.010)
0.009
(0.010)
0.018
(0.018)
0.008
(0.009)

0.074
(0.010)
0.068
(0.010)
0.067
(0.022)
0.158
(0.018)

-0.040
(0.009)
-0.037
(0.009)
0.065
(0.031)
0.051
(0.014)

0.077
(0.008)
0.084
(0.009)
-0.010
(0.005)
0.071
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.028
(0.015)
0.008
(0.005)

-0.054
(0.011)
-0.065
(0.012)
0.026
(0.020)
-0.030
(0.009)

Panel A: Second sub-sample dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.054
(0.010)
0.042
(0.009)
-0.036
(0.013)
0.130
(0.013)

Panel B: Mexico crisis dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.003
(0.019)
0.006
(0.019)
0.015
(0.021)
0.013
(0.020)

Panel C: Asia crisis dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.141
(0.018)
0.121
(0.017)
-0.096
(0.014)
0.092
(0.018)

29

Table 3 (continued)
Market

β ius,t −1

β ireg
, t −1

us
β ireg
,t −1 − β i ,t −1

ρ i ,us ,t

ρ i ,reg ,t

0.003
(0.011)
0.002
(0.011)
0.010
(0.013)
0.010
(0.013)

0.002
(0.008)
0.001
(0.008)
-0.006
(0.021)
0.013
(0.018)

0.018
(0.011)
0.020
(0.011)
0.025
(0.017)
0.020
(0.014)

0.005
(0.008)
0.006
(0.008)
-0.012
(0.024)
0.013
(0.020)

ρ i ,reg ,t − ρ i ,us ,t

VRius,t

VRireg
,t

us
VRireg
,t − VRi , t

-0.003
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.017
(0.022)
0.002
(0.014)

0.006
(0.006)
0.007
(0.006)
0.004
(0.003)
0.011
(0.007)

0.001
(0.001)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.012
(0.014)
0.001
(0.003)

-0.008
(0.007)
-0.008
(0.007)
-0.012
(0.015)
-0.007
(0.007)

-0.016
(0.007)
-0.017
(0.007)
-0.054
(0.028)
-0.006
(0.016)

0.014
(0.006)
0.015
(0.006)
0.005
(0.005)
0.018
(0.008)

-0.001
(0.002)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.017
(0.016)
0.006
(0.003)

-0.013
(0.007)
-0.016
(0.007)
-0.030
(0.018)
-0.007
(0.008)

Panel D: Abnormally negative U.S. unexpected return dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

-0.002
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.013)
0.002
(0.015)
-0.002
(0.016)

-0.002
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.010
(0.014)
-0.001
(0.014)

-0.0004
(0.012)
-0.0002
(0.012)
-0.013
(0.027)
0.002
(0.016)

Panel E: Abnormally negative regional unexpected return dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

-0.010
(0.013)
-0.009
(0.013)
0.017
(0.021)
-0.024
(0.018)

-0.005
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.009)
-0.026
(0.018)
-0.018
(0.016)

-0.003
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.013)
-0.035
(0.034)
0.001
(0.018)

30

Table 4: Correlations of Market Residuals
The following model is estimated for the country portfolios:
us
reg
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
Ri ,t = δi' Z i ,t −1 + β ius,t −1µˆ us ,t −1 + β ireg
,t −1 µ reg ,t −1 + β i ,t −1eus ,t + β i ,t −1ereg ,t + ei ,t

(

ei ,t | I t −1 ~ N 0, σ i2,t

σ = ai + biσ
2
i ,t

2
i ,t −1

)

+ ci ei2,t −1 + d iηi2,t −1

ηi ,t −1 = min{0, ei ,t −1 }

where µˆ us ,t −1 and µˆ reg ,t −1 are the conditional expected excess returns on the U.S. and regional markets, respectively, and ei,t is the idiosyncratic shock of any market i, including
the U.S. and regional portfolio. Zi,t-1 represents a set of local information variables.
The correlations of market residuals across different markets are computed over the longest possible overlapping sample between the two markets. The + symbol indicates 5%
rejection of the null hypothesis of zero correlation according to the appropriate small sample distribution. The small sample distribution is computed based on 5,000 draws of
the actual return residual set, {eˆ j ,t }∀j , with the same number of observations as the markets in our sample.
Correlations of

ei ,t and eus ,t

ei ,t and ereg ,t

Market

ei ,t and e j ,t
Mean

Maximum

Minimum

European Countries
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Greece
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Turkey

0.039
0.028
-0.005
-0.046
0.104
0.052
-0.034
-0.001
0.041
0.011

0.060
-0.015
0.008
-0.043
0.212+
0.071
0.014
-0.015
-0.019
-0.002

0.070+
-0.009
0.042+
0.081+
0.134+
0.132+
0.114+
0.071+
0.097+
0.131+

0.257
0.110
0.146
0.327+
0.350+
0.249
0.350+
0.166
0.327+
0.283+

-0.036
-0.132+
-0.036
-0.132+
-0.006
0.006
-0.074
-0.049
-0.125+
0.013

-0.114
0.105
0.118
-0.054
0.136
0.049

0.018
-0.056
0.173
-0.066
0.013
-0.032

0.097+
0.123+
0.171+
0.091+
-0.105
0.158+

0.197
0.314+
0.316+
0.218
0.042
0.316+

-0.154+
-0.116+
0.042
-0.114+
-0.183+
-0.183+

-0.092
-0.286
0.011
-0.005
0.057
0.002

-0.028
-0.072
-0.001
0.068+
-0.034
0.039+

0.056
0.039
0.115
0.180
0.017
0.180

-0.099+
-0.205+
-0.099+
-0.012
-0.205+
-0.064

Asian Countries
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand

Latin American Countries
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

-0.036
-0.134
0.028
0.0005
0.135+
-0.038

31

Table 5: Cross-Section Analysis of Market Residuals
The following time-series-cross-section regression model is estimated:

eˆi ,t = wi + v i ,t eˆ g ,t + u i ,t

v i ,t = v 0 + v1 Di ,t
where eˆi ,t and eˆ g ,t are the estimated idiosyncratic return residuals of market i and region g, respectively. For the regional residuals, three groups are considered: eˆg ,t = eˆus ,t ,
j ≠i
eˆg ,t = eˆreg ,t , and eˆg ,t = j∈G eˆ j ,t where G denotes a particular country-group. In studying the market residuals, countries are categorized into nine different country-groups –
Europe, Europe excluding Turkey, MSCI Pacific, Asia (IFC composite), Asia emerging markets, IFC Latin America, Latin America (IFC composite), Latin America emerging
markets, and all markets. Di,t is a dummy variable that represents (A) the second sub-sample period, (B) the Mexico crisis period from November 1994 to December 1995, (C) the
Asia crisis period from April 1997 to October 1998, (D) abnormally negative U.S. unexpected market returns (i.e., the unexpected returns are one standard deviation below zero),
and (E) abnormally negative regional unexpected market returns. The estimation results correct for group-wise heteroskedasticity. The parameter estimates of v0 and v1 are
reported, and standard errors are given in parentheses, while p-values are reported in brackets.

∑

U.S. return residuals ( eˆus ,t )

v0

{wi = 0}∀i

v 0 = v1 = 0

0.035
(0.061)
0.032
(0.061)
0.346
(0.164)
0.254
(0.174)

3.634
[0.962]
3.636
[0.934]
8.232
[0.222]
8.560
[0.200]

1.305
[0.521]
1.239
[0.538]
6.094
[0.048]
2.173
[0.337]

-0.022
(0.043)
-0.022
(0.044)
-0.044
(0.040)
-0.073
(0.036)

0.136
(0.069)
0.136
(0.069)
0.160
(0.067)
0.202
(0.069)

3.702
[0.960]
3.701
[0.930]
8.271
[0.219]
10.07
[0.122]

0.190
(0.207)
0.197
(0.208)
0.036
(0.472)
-0.781
(0.506)

3.588
[0.964]
3.584
[0.937]
8.163
[0.226]
9.428
[0.151]

1.807
[0.405]
1.855
[0.395]
1.663
[0.436]
2.433
[0.296]

0.031
(0.034)
0.032
(0.034)
0.005
(0.033)
-0.021
(0.032)

-0.003
(0.245)
-0.037
(0.247)
0.380
(0.229)
0.039
(0.126)

0.058
(0.083)
0.058
(0.083)
0.504
(0.193)
0.525
(0.206)

3.656
[0.962]
3.655
[0.933]
8.268
[0.219]
8.701
[0.191]

1.459
[0.482]
1.442
[0.486]
8.526
[0.014]
6.540
[0.038]

0.010
(0.035)
0.011
(0.035)
-0.013
(0.036)
-0.057
(0.032)

0.272
(0.127)
0.264
(0.127)
0.155
(0.087)
0.436
(0.107)

v1

v0

{wi = 0}∀i

v1

∑

j ≠i
j∈G

eˆ j ,t )

Wald test

Wald test

Wald test
Country group

Sum of return residuals (

Regional return residuals ( eˆreg ,t )

v 0 = v1 = 0

{wi = 0}∀i

v 0 = v1 = 0

-0.0002
(0.009)
0.011
(0.011)
0.132
(0.025)
0.100
(0.024)

3.708
[0.960]
3.646
[0.933]
10.36
[0.110]
11.10
[0.085]

42.58
[<0.001]
37.44
[<0.001]
66.02
[<0.001]
18.12
[<0.001]

0.029
(0.004)
0.033
(0.006)
0.069
(0.012)
-0.010
(0.012)

-0.010
(0.026)
0.010
(0.033)
0.071
(0.074)
0.048
(0.044)

3.702
[0.960]
3.669
[0.932]
10.13
[0.119]
9.580
[0.143]

42.86
[<0.001]
36.49
[<0.001]
37.57
[<0.001]
1.517
[0.468]

0.027
(0.005)
0.032
(0.006)
0.018
(0.016)
-0.023
(0.011)

0.011
(0.013)
0.009
(0.017)
0.111
(0.024)
0.201
(0.041)

3.726
[0.959]
3.672
[0.932]
10.28
[0.113]
12.94
[0.044]

43.53
[<0.001]
36.83
[<0.001]
59.26
[<0.001]
24.24
[<0.001]

v0

v1

4.743
[0.093]
4.706
[0.095]
5.868
[0.053]
9.024
[0.011]

0.028
(0.007)
0.028
(0.008)
-0.017
(0.020)
-0.037
(0.013)

3.647
[0.962]
3.637
[0.934]
8.255
[0.220]
9.169
[0.164]

0.847
[0.655]
0.876
[0.645]
2.922
[0.232]
0.446
[0.800]

3.747
[0.958]
3.743
[0.928]
8.336
[0.215]
10.13
[0.119]

5.484
[0.064]
5.177
[0.075]
3.348
[0.187]
16.95
[<0.001]

Panel A: Second sub-sample dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.015
(0.038)
0.016
(0.038)
-0.020
(0.096)
-0.066
(0.100)

Panel B: Mexico crisis dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.025
(0.030)
0.025
(0.030)
0.099
(0.079)
0.040
(0.083)

Panel C: Asia crisis dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.020
(0.032)
0.020
(0.032)
-0.001
(0.087)
-0.083
(0.090)

32

Table 5 (continued)
U.S. return residuals ( eˆus ,t )

Country group

v1

{wi = 0}∀i v0

= v1 = 0

v0

v1

-0.003
(0.037)
-0.002
(0.037)
-0.044
(0.039)
-0.067
(0.037)

0.200
(0.090)
0.196
(0.090)
0.187
(0.071)
0.169
(0.072)

0.032
(0.043)
0.031
(0.043)
-0.036
(0.041)
-0.099
(0.041)

-0.002
(0.078)
0.002
(0.078)
0.150
(0.078)
0.214
(0.071)

{wi = 0}∀i

∑

j ≠i
j∈G

eˆ j ,t )

Wald test

Wald test

Wald test

v0

Sum of return residuals (

Regional return residuals ( eˆreg ,t )

v1

{wi = 0}∀i

v 0 = v1 = 0

0.029
(0.005)
0.036
(0.006)
0.049
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.012)

-0.004
(0.012)
-0.012
(0.014)
0.088
(0.028)
-0.033
(0.032)

3.697
[0.960]
3.642
[0.933]
10.07
[0.122]
8.922
[0.178]

42.93
[<0.001]
37.25
[<0.001]
46.65
[<0.001]
1.362
[0.506]

0.028
(0.005)
0.034
(0.006)
0.073
(0.013)
-0.013
(0.012)

0.002
(0.013)
-0.007
(0.018)
-0.009
(0.029)
0.053
(0.032)

3.713
[0.959]
3.634
[0.934]
10.22
[0.116]
9.800
[0.133]

42.71
[<0.001]
36.57
[<0.001]
36.76
[<0.001]
3.056
[0.217]

v 0 = v1 = 0

v0

3.874
[0.953]
3.870
[0.920]
8.522
[0.202]
11.39
[0.077]

5.764
[0.056]
5.578
[0.061]
7.157
[0.028]
5.768
[0.056]

3.629
[0.963]
3.644
[0.933]
8.876
[0.181]
13.64
[0.034]

0.850
[0.654]
0.864
[0.649]
3.913
[0.141]
9.350
[0.009]

Panel D: Abnormally negative U.S. unexpected return dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

0.016
(0.046)
0.019
(0.046)
-0.185
(0.127)
-0.274
(0.135)

0.026
(0.067)
0.018
(0.067)
0.504
(0.177)
0.512
(0.187)

3.794
[0.956]
3.740
[0.928]
10.07
[0.122]
13.11
[0.041]

1.121
[0.571]
1.031
[0.597]
9.770
[0.008]
7.580
[0.023]

Panel E: Abnormally negative regional unexpected return dummy
Europe
Europe/Turkey
Asia
Latin America

-0.007
(0.040)
-0.003
(0.040)
-0.086
(0.098)
-0.164
(0.110)

0.086
(0.063)
0.076
(0.063)
0.498
(0.161)
0.417
(0.167)

4.160
[0.940]
4.091
[0.905]
8.520
[0.202]
10.29
[0.113]

2.827
[0.243]
2.443
[0.295]
11.29
[0.004]
6.286
[0.043]

33

