                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GEOGRAPHY AND RACIAL HEALTH DISPARITIES

                                           Amitabh Chandra
                                           Jonathan Skinner

                                         Working Paper 9513
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9513


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




Paper written for the National Academies conference on Ethnic Disparities in HealthCare. We have benefited
from conversations with Elliott Fisher, Douglas Staiger, Kate Baicker, and Jack Wennberg, and this paper
draws on our work with these individuals. We are grateful to the National Institute of Aging (NIA) and the
National Research Council (NRC) for generous support and to Angus Deaton, Christopher Jencks, Jim Smith,
Richard Suzman, and anonymous referees for useful comments. Chandra also acknowledges support from
the Nelson A. Rockefeller Center through the Rockefeller Faculty Fellowship program. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by Amitabh Chandra and Jonathan Skinner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
Geography and Racial Health Disparities
Amitabh Chandra and Jonathan Skinner
NBER Working Paper No. 9513
February 2003
JEL No. I1, J1

                                            ABSTRACT

       An extensive literature has documented racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic disparities in
health care and health outcomes. We argue that the influence of geography in medical practice needs
to be taken seriously for both the statistical measurement of racial disparities, and in designing
reforms to reduce disparities. Past research has called attention to disparities that occur within
hospitals or provider groups; for example black patients who are treated differently from whites
within a hospital. We focus on a different mechanism for disparities; African-Americans tend to live
in areas or seek care in regions where quality levels for all patients, black and white, are lower. Thus
ensuring equal access to health care at the local or hospital level may not by itself erase overall
health care disparities. However, reducing geographic disparities in both the quality of care, and the
quality of health care decisions by patients, could have a first-order impact on improving racial
disparities in health care and health outcomes.

Amitabh Chandra
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
amitabh.chandra@dartmouth.edu

Jonathan Skinner
Department of Economics and
Department of Community and Family Medicine
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jonathan.skinner@dartmouth.edu
        During the past several decades, many studies have documented racial, ethnic,
gender, and socioeconomic disparities in both medical care treatments and health
outcomes.1 There are no easy economic explanations to explain such differences:
African Americans seem less likely to receive invasive treatments even in the VA
system, where doctors’ economic incentives are likely to be blunted (Peterson et al,
1994; Whittle et al, 1993). Nor do differences in insurance coverage seem to eliminate
racial or gaps (Carlisle, 1997); indeed Ross and Mirowsky (2000) believe public
insurance such as Medicare and Medicaid lead to worse health. More recently, racial
differences in cardiac surgery were hypothesized to depend on the race of the
physician; however, no significant differences were found (Chen, et. al., 2001). The
Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) landmark study (Smedley et al, 2002) has conducted a
comprehensive survey of the evidence and concluded that racial disparities in medical
care treatments and outcomes are pervasive; this topic has also been an integral part
of the National Research Council’s (NRC) research agenda (Martin and Soldo, 1997).

        Collectively these papers clearly document important racial differences in
treatments, intensity of care, and outcomes. In this paper, we consider a complicating
factor that has implications for both statistical inference and policy recommendations
regarding racial disparities: the geography of health care and health outcomes and its
relationship to the measurement of racial health disparities. This is a broad topic (see
for example the work of Morenoff and Lynch (2002) in this volume), and so we will
organize our contribution along five basic points:

(1) There is considerable variation in the utilization of health care, and in outcomes, by region.
        The phenomenon of “small area variation” in utilization rates has been studied
for a number of decades. Most recently the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care has used
nearly 100 percent samples of Medicare enrollees to measure such differences across
306 Hospital Referral Regions (HRR) in the United States (Wennberg and Cooper,
1999). Even after controlling for differences in underlying health status across regions,
there is clear evidence of persistent and large differences in treatment patterns, even
in contiguous areas. Much of the current debate is how to interpret such differences,
are they “demand” driven by patient preferences, or “supply” driven by physician
beliefs and historical patterns of hospital location? In addition to disparities in
treatment patterns, there are also substantial variations in health outcomes by region.
Recent research has documented race-specific and gender-specific variations at the




1
 For a partial list of references, see Bluestein and Weitzman, 1995; Rathore et. al.,
2000; Chen, et. al., 2001; Alter, et. al., 1999; Peterson, et. al., 1997, Whittle, 1993,
Gornick et al, 1996; and references therein.
county or state level in overall mortality rates as well as disease-specific mortality
rates (Casper et al, 2001, Barnett et al, 2001).2

(2) People who are African-American, Hispanic, and belonging to other minority groups tend
to seek care from different hospitals and from different physicians compared to non-Hispanic
whites.
        It is not surprising that African-American and Hispanic patients tend to see
different physicians and are admitted to different hospitals compared to non-Hispanic
whites. This is largely the consequence of where people live: there are many fewer
African-Americans seeking care in eastern Tennessee hospitals than in Mississippi
hospitals, and many more Hispanic patients seeking care in hospitals in Florida,
Texas, and California, than in Maine and New Hampshire. Furthermore, patients of
color who live in the same neighborhood as whites may go to different hospitals or
(more clearly) see different physicians and in different settings owing to a variety of
reasons including financial barriers, as well as racial barriers to care (Lillie-Blanton,
Martinez, and Salganicoff, 2001). Patients also tend to be seen by physicians of the
same race, although one study (Harrison and Thurston, 2001) suggested this matching
is in part the consequence of minority physicians being more likely to live near
minority neighborhoods.

(3) Racial disparities are pronounced in some areas, but are less so (or may not be present) in
other areas.
        In most regions of the United States, there are pronounced racial differences in
utilization and outcomes. But in other areas, there are no significant racial differences.
In some sense, this is welcome news, in that the medical profession is not some
monolithic and uniform “system” that treats patients identically regardless of where
they live. Such differences, however, are not easily explained, and may rely on one or
two surgeons who account for the majority of procedures in their region. In other
cases, the differences in racial disparities may arise from spatial “mismatches” of
patients and physicians, for example because of segregation in residential areas, or the
location of hospital facilities.3

2 Also see Skinner, Fisher, and Wennberg (2001) for measures of morbidity (i.e., heart
attacks, stroke, gastrointestinal bleeding, colon cancer, lung cancer) across HRRs as
developed in the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care (Wennberg and Cooper, 1999).
3
  Gomes and McGuire (2001) have developed a very useful way to characterize non-
minority-minority gaps in utilization: racial differences in health care (i.e., the overall
minority-non-minority gap regardless of cause), racial disparities (the difference after
accounting for clinical appropriateness, need, and patient preferences), and racial
discrimination (disparities after accounting for characteristics of the health care system
and legal or regulatory climates). Given how little is known about differences in
preferences of patients, the comparisons presented below will not generally meet their
criterion for disparities.


                                              2
(4) These three facts create strong statistical interactions between geography and racial
identity: one may falsely diagnose geographical variation as racial disparities, and conversely.
       On average, Hispanic Medicare enrollees account for the same level of
expenditures as their non-Hispanic elderly counterparts (CMS, 2000, Table 4.8). While
this might reassure observers that there are no obvious utilization disparities between
Hispanic and non-Hispanic Medicare enrollees, there is one complicating factor:
geography. Medicare expenditures on average are substantially higher in Florida,
Texas, and California (Wennberg and Cooper, 1999). Since a large fraction of Hispanic
Medicare patients live in these three states, the researcher might well find that within
each state, Hispanic patients experience lower utilization rates than their non-
Hispanic counterparts.
       More generally, in typical regression analysis when minority patients live in
regions with systematically different rates of utilization (e.g., African-Americans in
the south), and the region of residence is not controlled for, one can estimate larger or
smaller racial “disparities” that are in fact the consequence of where people live, and
not how they are treated or their outcomes within their community. Nor are typical
regional measures, such as MSA, necessarily accurate mirrors of “local” effects.
        It is important to note here that we do not argue against the existence of racial
disparities, nor do we argue that they are necessarily mitigated by geographical
variation. If African-Americans live in regions with poor hospital quality, then that in
itself represents a valid source of racial disparities. Instead, our central thesis is that
ignoring geography (or mis-specifying it) will cause the analyst to “cry wolf” when
true differences are nonexistent, or to falsely conclude that there are no differences
when in fact there are substantial differences in the outcomes of interest.
Furthermore, as we argue next, the policy prescriptions may well differ depending on
whether the racial disparities are caused by regional variations instead of by
differences in treatment within hospitals or communities.

 (5) A potentially large part of overall health disparities in the United States may be the
consequence of regional differences in treatment and outcomes. Reducing geographic
disparities in quality of care will benefit all Americans, but are likely to yield greater benefits
to minority patients.
        The policy implications of racial disparities are different depending on their
proximate causes. Racial differences arising within a hospital or even within a
physician’s practice may reasonably be ascribed to differences in underlying health
status, patient preferences, financial barriers, provider biases, or some combination of
these four factors. Here, however, the insights of the regional variation literature is
relevant; it is not the case that the rate of therapeutic interventions for whites should
be necessarily viewed as the “correct” or “desired” rate (Wennberg, 1986; Tu et al,
1997). This is because the white rate might reflect inappropriate care -- whites get too
much done to them as in Schroeder et al, (2001) or too little care -- or because
preferences for care may differ by race or gender.



                                               3
       When aggregate racial differences in outcomes are the consequence of minority
patients being more likely to live in regions where everyone in the region experiences
poorer outcomes, then the policy focus should be on disparities in geography – that
specific regions be targeted to improve quality of care or reduce “flat of the curve”
health care spending.4 Such policies would ensure that disadvantaged racial groups
would be the major beneficiaries of quality improvements.


I. The Geography of Health Care
        The measurement of regional variation in health care utilization is difficult for a
variety of reasons. First, a great deal of statistical power is necessary to measure
utilization at the local level; even a sample of 50,000 observations quickly loses power
when the data are partitioned into separate regions, and used to focus on specific
diseases. Small sample sizes and inadequate statistical power can generate spurious
“area variation” just because of random noise in measured average rates.5 Second, the
problem of migration to hospitals must be considered; Boston hospitals accept
referrals from all over New England, and if these patients were counted, it might
appear falsely that Boston residents are at elevated risk of hospitalization. Third, one
needs a sample that is not subject to selectivity bias. For example, the sample of
Medicaid patients, or of managed care patients, is not likely to be representative of the
general population; Medicaid patients can become eligible because of serious illness,
and managed care patients tend to be healthier than the general population. Finally,
the regions should correspond to actual migration patterns of patients rather than
artifacts of historical compromises such as state or county boundaries.
       In this section, we use data from the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care that goes far
to avoid these four shortfalls (Wennberg and Cooper, 1999; 1996). The data comprises
a nearly 100% sample of Medicare enrollees over age 65, often for two years, so the
sample sizes are as much as 60 million person-years in a given map or graph; this
provides considerable power for regional analysis. Second, the Atlas defines one’s
location by the zip code of residence, rather than where one actually gets care. So if a
patient from the Burlington VT region is admitted to a Boston hospital, that hospital
stay (and any procedures done there) is assigned to Burlington, not Boston.
      Third, the Medicare data provide nearly 100 percent coverage of the population
over age 65 and is the nearest thing to a national database of utilization in the U.S.

4 The ‘flat of the curve’ refers to a region where the marginal health intervention has zero impact
on outcomes. For economists, this corresponds to the region of zero marginal product and this
notion is formalized in Fisher et al, 1999; Skinner, Fisher, and Wennberg, 2001; Wennberg,
Fisher, and Skinner, 2002.
5 It is possible that much of the observed variation reflects random deviations from identical
practice patterns across communities (Diehr, et. al., 1992). While this possibility must be
considered for smaller samples, the very large samples in the Medicare claims data preclude this
explanation; also see McPherson et al. (1981).



                                            4
There have been increases in the population of risk-bearing HMOs in the Medicare
population (now referred to as Medicare+Choice), but that ratio never exceeded 12
percent and has fallen as many insurance carriers have dropped Medicare+Choice
option. In some urban regions the ratio of HMO patients in the Medicare population
has been higher than the national average, and this has engendered more concern
about selection bias.6
       The Dartmouth Atlas has divided the U.S. into 306 Hospital Referral Regions
(HRR), the unit of analysis at which health care for the elderly is delivered and are
computed by using complex algorithm of commuting patters and the location of
major referral hospitals.7 HRRs are named for the hospital service area containing the
referral hospital or hospitals most often used by residents of the region. The regions
sometimes cross state boundaries-- an attribute that is eo nomine ruled out by cross-
state analysis. Intuitively, one may think of HRRs as representing the geographic level
at which “tertiary” services such as cardiac surgery are received.
        To demonstrate the construction of the HRRs, in Figure 1 we detail the
construction of the Evansville, Indiana HRR. This region comprises three states:
Illinois, Indiana, and Kentucky. In this region, three hospitals provide cardiovascular
surgery services. Two were in Evansville; a third hospital, in Vincennes, Indiana. The
Evansville HRR also demonstrates that the inclusion of simple MSA fixed effects does
not account for geography adequately: the US Census’ Evansville-Henderson MSA is
actually comprised of three HRRs. This is not a problem in itself. However, if different
HRRs have different practice styles, then it blurs the measure of true regional
differences in utilization by aggregating up to the state or MSA level. To demonstrate
the overwhelming degree to which even adjacent HRRs practice different “styles” of
medicine we now draw on the findings of the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care.
        Figure 2 demonstrates that Medicare payments for services reimbursed on a
fee-for-service basis (including non-risk bearing health maintenance organizations)
were $4,993 for each beneficiary. However, even after controlling for age, sex, race,
illness patterns, and differences in regional prices, reimbursements per enrollee varied
greatly: as noted in the Atlas, these ranged from $9,033 in the McAllen, Texas hospital
referral region to $3,074 in Lynchburg, Virginia.8


6 In statistical analysis, controlling implicitly for selection using the percent HMO enrollees in
the area has not affected empirical estimates. Beginning in 2000, HMOs were expected to report
hospital procedures to CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services), suggesting better
data on managed care enrollees in the future.
7 For further details on the construction methods see
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/99US/toc8.php.
8 Illness has been controlled for by using age-sex-race specific mortality and hospitalizations
rates for five conditions: hip fracture, cancer of the colon or lung treated surgically, gastro-
intestinal hemorrhage, acute myocardial infarction or stroke. These conditions were chosen
because hospitalization for them is a proxy for the incidence of disease. The cost of living indices


                                             5
       In Figure 3 the Atlas illustrates the enormous geographic variation in a
relatively standard procedure— angioplasty (PTCA), an invasive procedure in which
a catheter is inserted in the thigh and guided to the narrowed artery, where a balloon
is expanded to clear the blockage and improve blood flow. PTCA is often used
immediately following a heart attack, or shortly thereafter, or to relieve pain for
patients with ischemic heart disease. In 1996 over 200,000 of these procedures were
conducted with an average rate of 7.5 per 1000 Medicare enrollees. As in previous
figures the data have been standardized for demographics are reported at the HRR
level. Note how in Texas, Pennsylvania and California the ratio of rates (to the US
average) can vary drastically even across adjacent HRRs.
        The same pattern exists for other surgical procedures. Figure 4 summarizes the
variation in rates (on a log scale) at which 10 common surgical procedures are used
relative to the US average (in 1996). Similar results have been documented for the
variation in rates at which different diagnostic tests are utilized. Together the 10
procedures listed in Figure 4 comprised 42% of Medicare inpatient surgery and
accounted for 44% of reimbursements for surgical care in 1995-96. For many of these
procedures, regional variation occurs because of fundamental uncertainty about the
effectiveness of the procedure and ambiguity about the efficacy of alternatives. For
example, variation in rates of radical prostatectomy might be partly attributable to the
lack of controlled clinical trials comparing the risks and benefits of surgery, radiation
therapy, and watchful waiting. For other procedures, even the best clinical trials are
often not sufficient to eliminate variation in procedure rates: physicians vary in how
they interpret and apply findings from the carefully controlled settings of clinical
trials to decision making for individual patients in other settings. The variation for
hip-fractures is small because the fracture can be easily diagnosed and there is
virtually all physicians agree on the appropriate treatment therapy. The observed
variation therefore more accurately reflects variation in the actual rate of the hip-
fractures. Similarly, hospitalizations for colectomy reflect variations in the incidence of
colorectal cancer, rather than differences in treatment strategies.
        One might suspect that these variations may be in part the consequence of
differences in underlying patterns of cardiovascular disease. Certainly one might
expect that HRR-level rates of PTCA should be associated with HRR-level rates of
heart attacks (Acute Myocardial Infarctions). This is because nearly one-third of heart
attack patients are treated with PTCA, and as well, community rates of AMI should be
correlated with true (diagnosed and undiagnosed) levels of ischemic heart disease.
However, the correlation coefficient (weighted by the Medicare population) between
PTCA rates and AMI rates is essentially zero (correlation= .05, p = 0.35) and not
significant, meaning that these variations are unlikely to be explained by differences
in cardiovascular health status.


were computed by using non-medical regional price measures. Doing so avoids contaminating
the analysis with physician workforce or hospital market conditions.



                                          6
        The provocative nature of these results has not gone unnoticed and several
hypotheses have been put forward to explain these variations. These include the role
of sampling variation, differences in underlying severity, patient preferences, the role
of capacity and the nature of physician learning. Wennberg, Fisher and Skinner (2002)
demonstrate that higher Medicare spending does not result in more high-quality care
such as flu vaccines, use of Beta blockers when appropriate, or better health outcomes.
Instead, higher spending is typically associated with more “supply-sensitive services”
such as physician visits, specialist consultations, and days in the Intensive Care Unit
(ICU). Supply sensitive services are those that are provided in the absence of specific
clinical guidelines on frequency of use, and where medical texts provide little
guidance. Utilization rates for such services appear to be highly correlated with the
supply of resources-- the number of physicians, specialists, labs and beds. As such,
there appears to be little support for the notion that costs or inadequate training drive
practice variation.
        Another class of rationalizations is developed in Phelps and Mooney (1993) and
Bikhchandani, Chandra, Goldman and Welch (2002) who suggest that explanations
based on the nature of physician learning are most likely to account for much of the
empirically observed locality of treatment. In the Phelps-Mooney model, physicians
are Bayesian learners, who attempt to reach an optimal rate for the application of a
particular treatment. Eventually, as physicians sample both their own and their
colleagues experiences, the two will converge towards an optimal rate. This
hypothesis suggests a number of implications: a physician's propensity to treat
converges toward the community norm, and faster if the community is more
informed and the doctor is less informed (e.g., younger). Among the implications of
this theory is the hypothesis that the provision of more precise medical information in
medical studies can enhance the learning of physicians, and thus offer dramatic social
efficiency gains. Bikhchandani, Chandra, Goldman and Welch (2002) consider a
modification of this model and demonstrate that it is possible for physicians to fall
into a localized “cascade” because of the difficulty in experimenting with alternative
treatment choices.
       The message of Figures 2, 3 and 4 is that the practice or “intensity” of medicine
varies tremendously across space. But there are also large differences within states
and even within cities. Fisher et al (1994) construct cohorts of Medicare beneficiaries
on the basis of initial hospitalization for either AMI, stroke, GI bleeding, hip fracture,
and surgery for breast, colon or lung cancer. They find that there are substantial
differences in the intensity with which beneficiaries were treated (as measured by
readmission rates) even across similar teaching hospitals in the Boston area.
Specifically, there is substantial variation across the readmission rates for
Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Beth Israel, and
Boston University Medical Center. Most interestingly, there is no relationship between
mortality (both 30 day and over the entire study period) and the intensity of
hospitalization. Clearly, racial differences in migration patterns to hospitals of




                                         7
patients within Boston could have first-order effects on utilization rates although in
this case, probably not with respect to outcomes.


II. Racial Differences in Where (and From Whom) Health Care is Provided
       A variety of studies have documented the large differences in insurance status
and presence of regular providers (versus emergency room visits) among African-
Americans, Hispanics, and non-Hispanic whites (e.g., Lillie-Blanton, Martinez, and
Salganicoff, 2001). As well, simple differences in where people live will lead to
minority patients being seen at different hospitals, and by different providers, from
whites. This is not terribly surprising; clearly hospitals in Washington DC will be
more likely utilized by African-Americans and Hispanics than those in Minot, South
Dakota.
        To capture this difference, we use a nearly 100% sample of Medicare fee-for-
service patients who were admitted for a heart attack, or acute myocardial infarction
(AMI), in 1998-99, these data come from the National Bureau of Economic Research
Medicare claims panel developed by Mark McClellan and his colleagues. There were
a total of 468,663 admissions in the two years to 4,737 separate hospitals. Nonblack
admissions totaled 439,350, while black admissions were 29,313. We use a Lorenz
curve approach to characterize the extent to which black and nonblack AMI patients
tend to be admitted to different hospitals, as shown in Figure 5. The 4737 hospitals
were sorted according to the total number of black AMI Medicare patients admitted
during 1998-99, starting with the lowest number (to the left) and ranging to the right
of the graph with hospitals comprising the largest number of black patients. The scale
on the horizontal axis is the percentage of total nonblack patients in the sample. The
scale on the vertical axis is the percentage of black patients in the sample. Given we
have sorted hospitals in this way, we then plot the cumulative percentage of black
admissions on the vertical axis, and the cumulative number of nonblack admissions
on the horizontal axis.
       The 45 degree line in Figure 5 is the hypothetical line one would get if perfect
equality held in the distribution of black and nonblack patients by hospital. That is, if
every hospital admitted 6.25 black patients per 100 nonblack patients (i.e., .0625 =
29,313/468,663), then the hospitals accounting for 50 percent of nonblack patients
would also account for the cumulative total of 50 percent of black patients. (The
analogy in the economics literature is that the 45 degree line in the Lorenz curve
characterizes perfect equality of income.)
       As is clear from the graph, however, there is very little equality with regard to
hospital admissions. For slightly more than one-fifth of nonblack AMI patients, they
are admitted to hospitals with no black AMI patients. Point A shows that 50 percent
of nonblack Medicare patients are admitted to hospitals that account for just 9 percent
of black patients. And point B shows the converse statistic, that 50 percent of black
AMI patients are admitted to hospitals that combined account for just 14 percent of



                                         8
nonblack AMI patients. The Gini coefficient (or the ratio of the area between the 45
degree line and the curved line, divided by the total area underneath the 45 degree
line) is 0.61. As such, the results of Figure 5 suggest that even thirty-five years after
the passage of Title VI and VII of the Civil Rights Act which forbade de jure
segregation and discrimination, considerable de facto selection by race still occurs in
the hospitals that whites and blacks seek care.
        These patterns are not unique to hospital admissions, and it is likely that
differences in where whites and minorities seek care may ultimately reflect differences
in where they live. The important work of Douglas Massey (2001) on residential
segregation confirms our intuition on this fact. Using data on thirty major US cities,
Massey finds dissimilarity indices (the relative number of minorities that would have to
migrate in order to establish a uniform distribution of race across neighborhoods)
range from 67 in southern cities to 78 in northern ones; 9 larger cities like Chicago,
Cleveland, Detroit and New York had isolation indices of over 80 (implying that in
these cities the average African American inhabits a neighborhood that is more than
80 percent black).10
       A similar story to racial differences in the hospitals where minorities seek care
holds for physicians. In a recent study, Harrison and Thurston (2001) first
demonstrated considerable “matching” between minority physicians and minority
patients. The degree to which racial matching occurs is striking-- in 1991, 47 percent
of patients seen by black physicians were black (versus 17 percent for white non-
Hispanic physicians), and 30 percent of patients seen by Hispanic physicians were
Hispanic (versus 9 percent for white non-Hispanic physicians). However, the
differences between white and minority physicians are substantially reduced when
the analysis controls for location according to the zip code of the physician’s practice.
As the authors suggest, improving health care services for minority population can be
addressed both by increasing the number of physicians (of any race) who live in the
area, as well as by increasing the numbers of minority physicians. (See also Cooper-
Patrick et al. (1999), however, who find greater patient satisfaction and treatment
adherence when there is concordance in racial identity between provider and patient.)
        These results are useful reminders that when health care more generally
exhibits such wide variations across areas, these area differences could well be
reflected as racial differences at the aggregate level. What is not as well known is how
much of the actual differences in where one lives (i.e., the zip code of residence) and



9 Values of the index over 60 are considered high. It means that 60% of the members of one
group would need to move to a different neighborhood in order for the two groups to be equally
distributed.
10 The isolation index measures the extent to which minority members are exposed only to each
other, and is calculated as the minority-weighted average of the minority proportion in each
area.



                                          9
selective migration to different hospitals conditional on where one lives (i.e., whether
blacks and whites in a given zip code go to different hospitals).
        Furthermore, it is important to put these differences in health care providers in
the context of the many other effects of neighborhood on health status more generally.
Morenoff and Lynch (2002) have documented the multiple and dynamic causal
pathways by which neighborhood-specific factors can influence long-term health
outcomes independent of the type or nature of health care. Thus access to health care,
and quality of health care, are but two of a variety of factors affecting health that are
likely to vary by neighborhood of residence. The work of Oliver and Shapiro (1995)
and more quantitatively, Smith and Kingston (1997) provides additional perspective
on understanding these facts. Smith and Kingston emphasize noting the difference
between income (a relatively transitory measure of SES) and wealth (a more
permanent index of SES). Smith and Kingston document that wealth disparities across
race are substantially larger than income disparities. What is not well understood is
the extent to which wealth as well as income can explain racial variations in health
care utilization, and health care outcomes.


III. Geographic Variations in the Extent of Racial Differences: An Example
        Few studies of racial disparities treat such differences at a regional level. In
part, this is the consequence of power considerations; there are not enough
observations in most data sets to distinguish racial differences in utilization across
regions. Mark McClellan and his collaborators have constructed a long panel of AMI
patients, and in recent work Katherine Baicker conducted preliminary research on
state-level differences in treatment patterns (Baicker, 2002). Figure 6 provides uses
these data to provide measures of angioplasty use for several selected states during
1990-95 using a sample of fee-for-service Medicare patients admitted to hospital for
AMI.11 As well, the U.S. national rates are presented based on a sample size of more
than one million Medicare patients. These estimates are adjusted for two broad age
categories (age 65-80 or greater than 80), gender, and income (whether in the bottom
quintile of zip codes as sorted by race-specific income). Generally, sample sizes were
very large, and the 95% confidence intervals for black PTCA rates were (at most)
±0.025 in the smallest state, Massachusetts, and generally an order of magnitude
smaller among nonblacks and in larger states (e.g., ±0.0063 for blacks in New York.)
        Figure 6 shows the remarkable heterogeneity in PTCA rates across selected
states and across race in these states. On average, there was a large gap in PTCA rates
in the U.S., with rates for blacks just 69 percent of those for nonblacks; this result has
been established in many other studies. However, a state-by-state analysis suggests
some variability in the magnitude of the disparities. In Massachusetts, rates are
slightly higher among black Medicare patients, although the results are by no means

11   States are used instead of HRRs to increase statistical power.




                                              10
statistically significant. By contrast, black PTCA rates in Arkansas are just 23 percent
of the nonblack rates (p < .001). Most states are closer to the national mean difference,
such as New York (black rates 62 percent of nonblack rates) and California (69 percent
of nonblack rates). Note also the considerable degree of variation across states, so that
the PTCA rates for black Medicare patients in California (13.9 percent) are higher than
nonblack rates in New York (8.8 percent).
These results are obviously quite preliminary and have not been fully risk-adjusted,
so they should be interpreted cautiously. Nonetheless, they suggest that racial
disparities in utilization are not entirely uniform across regions.
IV. The Interaction Between Geography and Racial Disparities: Statistical Issues
       The standard approach to measuring racial disparities in health data makes
careful efforts to control for a variety of risk adjusters that include health status,
comorbidities, possibly clinical data on admission, demographic information, and
where possible income. Often, in quantitative studies, region is not included, either
because region is suppressed because of concerns about confidentiality, or because of
difficulty in how to interpret regional differences.
        To see how region can interact with measures of health disparities in a
statistical sense, it is useful to begin with a simple example. Table 1 shows
cardiovascular deaths by race for men in two states, Massachusetts and Mississippi;
these statistics were developed by a team of researchers and published by the CDC
(2001). (Results are similar but not as pronounced for women). Were we to combine
the data and consider the difference in age-adjusted mortality rates for cardiovascular
disease for both states, we would find black mortality rates of 900 per 100,000, and for
whites, a corresponding rate of 668.12 In other words, cardiovascular disease is 35
percent higher for blacks than for whites.
       However, note that rates of cardiovascular deaths in Mississippi are higher for
both blacks and whites. Within Mississippi, rates are 24 percent higher for men, and
within Massachusetts, black cardiovascular rates are actually 6 percent below those
for white men. Indeed, the overall weighted elevated risk for cardiovascular disease
is 15 percent once state-level differences are accounted for. Furthermore, all of the
additional mortality is occurring not in Massachusetts, but in Mississippi.
       There are many scenarios in which the 35 percent elevated rate would be
relevant; for example, how much at risk are African-Americans overall to
cardiovascular disease? However, from a policy viewpoint it is useful to decompose
that 35 percent difference into two parts: that part owing to within state differences
(15 percent) and the remaining 20 percent that is caused by African Americans being
more likely to live in a state where everyone experiences higher cardiovascular

12Population weights are for the state-specific African-American and non-African
American population for both men and women, and not just men alone (Statistical
Abstract 2001, p. 28).



                                         11
mortality rates. The latter 20 percent (which comprises almost 60% of the total 35
percent disparity) is perhaps best addressed by improving health behaviors and
health care for all citizens of Mississippi.
        The point of this exercise is not to argue that the 35 percent elevated rate
observed in these two states is not the consequence of deep-rooted discrimination, nor
does it rule out the presence of disparities in health among blacks even in
Massachusetts. Instead, we are trying to suggest that it is useful to decompose overall
black-white differences in health outcomes (or health care utilization) into two parts.
First, there could be discrimination by providers and hospitals (or the healthcare
system) and second, there could be economic and social discrimination (or a historical
legacy) that affects the location decisions of minorities. Our paper focuses on the role
of the first source of disparities and not on the second. It is critical to note that ruling
out the first, does not rule out the second (or for that matter, vice versa).
        A similar issue can be seen in evaluating quality of care for blacks and whites
as measured by specific treatment regimes for acute myocardial infarction (AMI)
patients. For example, beta-blockers are effective in extending survival because they
lower blood pressure and reduce the demands placed upon a weakened heart
following AMI. Most clinicians would agree that the rate of beta-blockers among
patients when appropriate should be close to 100 percent. Yet as one important study
demonstrated using data from the Cooperative Cardiovascular Project during 1993-94,
actual rates of compliance were considerably below 100 percent, and in some states
were below 50 percent (Jencks, 2001). Figure 7 graphs on the vertical axis the
percentage of AMI patients for whom chart review indicated that beta blockers were
appropriate, while on the horizontal axis is graphed the percentage of people living in
that state who were African-American; the lowest rate of compliance was in
Mississippi (47%).13 .) There is a distinct and significant negative correlation between
the percentage of the state that is African-American and quality of care as measured
by the use of beta-Blockers.14 A state-level regression implies that black rates of beta-
blocker compliance are 32 percentage points lower than for nonblacks.
       However, another study that used the same CCP data found little overall
differences in the use of beta-blockers at discharge by race (Rathore, et. al., 2000).
Unadjusted odds ratios were 0.90, but after adjusting for differences in clinical
presentation, the odds ratio was just 0.96 which, while significant, implied just a 1
percentage point lower rate in the use of beta blockers for African-Americans.



13
  We exclude Washington DC from this analysis. However, including Washington DC
weakens the correlation, because it is an outlier with a 63 percent African-American
population and 93 percent beta-Blocker use. However, many of the patients treated in
Washington DC are residents of Maryland and Virginia.

14   We are grateful to Melinda Pitts for pointing out this correlation to us.



                                               12
       Why the difference? One reason may be that the model also adjusts for
differences in poverty rates, which do exert a significant influence on beta blocker use
(odds ratio = 0.93). More importantly, however, the regression controlled for Census
region and for hospital volume, and while Census regions are crude measures of
regional variation, they effectively limit differences in utilization of beta blockers to
within-region comparisons. In other words, it is not simply the large African-
American population in Mississippi that leads to such low compliance with the use of
beta blockers where appropriate; it would appear that white AMI patients in
Mississippi are not getting beta blockers either.15 Nonetheless, this example illustrates
the risks of making inferences about individual behavior based on aggregated data.

        This problem is generally referred to as “ecological fallacy” and is well known
in both the public health literature and in the political science literature. (Susser,
1994a,b; King, 1997). In theory, one can “solve” the ecological fallacy problem with
the use of micro-level data with both race and location identifiers, but in practice that
is often difficult. And often one must aggregate data at some level to identify
community or region-specific effects that may themselves reflect a variety of
unmeasured confounding variables.
       The results shown in Figure 7 are replicated for the more general measures of
health care quality in Jencks et al (2000) in Figure 8 and are taken from Fisher and
Skinner (2001).16 They show a southward progression from the Northeast (NH, VT,
ranked numbers 1 and 2 in state-level quality) to the deep south (LA, MS ranked 49
and 50, respectively; Washington DC drops to 34 in the ranking). The first point is
that conventional t-statistics in state-level regressions are overstated; these are not
independent draws of 50 states.
       As well, this graph displays Medicare spending by state in 1996. The estimated
spending values are adjusted for the fact that some states have more elderly people in
the population, or a sicker population. (The elderly in states like Louisiana and West
Virginia are indeed sicker – and we allow for their greater health needs in calculating
per-capita Medicare spending.) The spending data, from the Dartmouth Atlas of
Health Care Working Group (www.dartmouthatlas.org) do show remarkable
differences in per-capita Medicare spending across states, ranging from $2763 in
Oregon to $5668 in Texas and $6307 in Alaska. The pattern of the dots, each of which
represents a state, shows that more spending per capita does not appear related to
better quality -- if anything, it appears to be associated with worse care (Fisher and
Skinner, 2001). We do not believe that increasing spending will reduce the quality of

15Mean beta blocker use differs between the two studies; 56 percent versus 72 percent,
suggesting different criterion may have been used to determine appropriateness.
16 Jencks (2000) ranks states on the basis of whether interventions that are known to be
correct were administered for conditions such as AMI, heart failure, stroke, pneumonia,
screening for breast cancer for women aged over 53 and eye-exams and lipid profiles for
diabetics.



                                           13
care. Connecticut and Massachusetts are both high cost states, but ranked in the top
ten in terms of quality. Instead, we think that spending on Medicare is largely
independent of how well physicians follow clinical guidelines for appropriate care
such as giving the right set of drugs for heart attack patients, or screening for common
and treatable diseases. High quality care is not necessarily expensive care
(Wennberg, Fisher, and Skinner, 2002).
       The second point is that this pattern is replicated in other studies showing a
correlation between outcomes and percentage African-American (Deaton and
Lubotsky, 2001), rather than a correlation, as earlier hypothesized, between income
inequality and mortality (Kennedy, Kawachi, and Prothrow-Stith, 1996).17 Because
there are many factors that seem to align themselves along this geographical
dimension from New England to the new South (percent black, income inequality,
quality of health care, social capital), the ecological fallacy problem is particularly
relevant here. The point to note from this figure is that the states where many blacks
live-- Mississippi, Louisiana, Georgia and Alabama are all “low-quality” providers.
The north-east tends to comprise the “high-quality” providers but as is well known
these states have a small African American population.
        Even when researchers do specify regional covariates, they are often not
specific to actual geographical patterns of health care use and outcomes; while
incorporating state or MSA fixed effects is an improvement over ignoring them, they
are still a highly simplistic characterization of the data, since patient migration
patterns are not necessarily constrained by state or MSA boundaries. For example,
blacks who live in Covington, Kentucky will find it much easier to seek care in
Cincinnati, Ohio (1 mile away across the Ohio river) versus driving to Louisville, KY
or Lexington, KY. The same story can be told for any large urban population center
that encompasses several states (consider for example, large east coast cities such as
Boston, Providence, Philadelphia, New York, Washington DC).18 And while the
Dartmouth Atlas’ use of HRR attempts to circumvent these problems by using zip-
code location and migration data to assign individuals to hospitals, even these
measures likely understate true differences across HRRs in utilization variability. 19



17As such, percent African-American may be a better proxy for SES than income or other
indirect measures of economic well-being. This interpretation is one that will be consistent
with the results presented in our paper. It would however, not be a proxy for income or
social-inequality as is conclusively demonstrated by Deaton and Lubotsky (2001).
18 More technically, one might think of this error as being identical to measurement
error in a covariate (geography, in our example). For a subset of observations, the wrong
state has been included (Kentucky instead for Ohio). In general, measurement error
biases the coefficient towards zero implying that the researcher is prone to incorrectly
conclude that geography does not matter.
19  For example, if 15% of the residents in HRR A seek care in the more aggressive HRR
B, then because HRR measures of utilization are based on residence, the measured level


                                            14
        We next consider the statistical issues at a more general level: how specification
of risk-adjusters and geography can dramatically affect the bias in estimated
regression coefficients. To illustrate the importance of geography and focus the
discussion we simplify the analysis and assume that high-quality data has been
obtained that avoids problems with unmeasured confounding variables; any errors in
measuring the “true” relationship arises because of model specification. For the
purpose of these pictures geography may be thought to be a variable such as hospital
quality; this link is especially persuasive if we recall the previous discussion on
hospital quality and residential segregation.

       Figures 9a-9c simulate the estimation of simple regressions, where the
parameter of interest is the coefficient on race (in our simple example, the coefficient
on an indicator variable for ‘Black’). In Figure 9a, we illustrate two data “clouds” for
blacks and whites. Mortality is plotted on the y-axis and the x-axis measures the
quality of healthcare provided at the relevant regional level. Ideally, this would be at
the level of individual HRRs. blacks are shown to have higher mortality than whites.
However, this is entirely shown to driven by geography-- blacks live in regions, or
seek care at hospitals that provide low-quality care. blacks and whites who live in the
same region have the same outcomes. As we showed above, omitting quality or the
correct measure of geography from the regression and comparing the racial difference
in mortality (risk-adjusted or otherwise) will yield an estimate of
                        ∆ = E[Mortality|Black]- E[Mortality|White].
However, if whites are more likely to be seen at high quality hospitals than blacks, ∆
is overstated. In the true regression, there is no effect of race on mortality within
hospitals or geographic area.
       In Figure 9b we assume that within-area blacks receive worse care than whites,
but that this differential is constant over areas. Here, African Americans have worse
outcomes even within the same hospitals. This correct race difference is β2 (the
distance between the lines for blacks and whites at the same level of quality, or within
the same geographical unit). Omitting Quality or the correct measure of geography
from the regression and comparing the racial difference in mortality (risk-adjusted or
otherwise) will yield an estimate of ∆ = E[Mortality|Black]- E[Mortality|White]. It
can be seen that ∆ considerably overstates β2. An indirect example of estimating this
model may be seen in the careful work of Morrison et al (2000) who study the
relationship between the racial composition of neighborhoods in New York and the
degree to which pharmacies in these neighborhoods carried opioid supplies.20 After
controlling for the fraction of the local population that is elderly at the census block

of utilization for HRR A would be higher than is the true level of utilization in its local
hospitals.
20 Opioids refer to codeine, morphine, and other drugs whose effects are mediated by

specific receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems. They are used for
severe pain management in cancer patients.



                                             15
level, the authors find that only 25 percent of the pharmacies in the largely non-white
neighborhoods (those with non-white populations of 60 percent or larger) carried
opioids. In contrast, in predominately white neighborhoods (those where over 80
percent of the residents are white) over 72 percent of pharmacies carried the requisite
supplies. The Morrison studies provides an intuitive description of the Figure 9a and
10b: if the researcher does not control for geography and simply asks whether
minorities are less likely to be near a well-stocked pharmacy (relative to whites), the
conclusion would be yes. However, the point of Figure 9b is to note that whites who
live in predominately non-white neighborhoods are also not near an adequately
stocked pharmacy.

       In Figure 9c we illustrate the problems of ignoring differential quality effects.
Here, African Americans have worse outcomes even within the same hospitals and
the race difference grows in worse hospitals. This correct race differential is β1 Quality
+ β2. Graphically, this is the height of the larger arrow. Omitting the Quality x Race
interaction leads to severely understating the gap (the regression line will be weighted
heavily by the white data), and the height of the smaller arrow is incorrectly estimated
to be the race difference.
       In practice, of course, the problem of unmeasured confounding variables is
quite serious, even for very good data sets such as the CCP. Suppose the researcher
estimates a model of the form:
                     Mortalityi = β0 + ZΓ + β1 Blacki + ui
Mortality (say 30-day mortality after AMI) for the ith individual is regressed on a
vector of risk-adjustment controls (the Z matrix), and an indicator variable for
whether the individual was African American. Here, the coefficient on race (here, an
indicator variable for whether the respondent is an African American) is the
parameter of interest. If the risk-adjusters Z are complete then it is possible to
interpret the estimated coefficient β1 as the effect of being black on mortality.
However, the assumptions necessary to justify such a conclusion are very strong.
First, as noted above, the presumption is that racial differences are the same across
regions (as in Figure 9b), a finding that does not appear to be true in practice. (One
might still interpret the coefficient as a weighted average, of course.)
       Second, it presumes that the researcher has controlled for all biological or
genetic differences that persist even once measurable risk-adjustment has been made.
If controls for comorbidities are not complete and blacks are unobservably sicker than
whites we will overstate the coefficient estimate for β1 ; otherwise the categorical
variable on race will “pick up” all the unmeasured variables that differ by race. For
example, in evaluating the use of thrombolytics (medications that dissolve blot clots)
for the treatment of coronary it is of first-order importance to know that such
interventions are contraindicated for those patients who have had a recent
hemorrhagic stroke. If blacks are more likely to have suffered from a stroke,



                                          16
documenting lower thrombolytic prescription rates alone, without appropriate
covariates, is not meaningful.
       Third, the model as estimated presumes that the influence of either
comorbidities or treatments are the same for both whites and blacks. Barbara McNeil
in her Shattuck Lecture, for example, emphasized the importance of noting clinically
relevant drug and race interactions (McNeil, 2001). For example, biological
differences between races in receptor polymorphisms will cause different responses to
the same drugs. A series of papers in the New England Journal of Medicine reflects these
concerns. Among patients with congestive heart failure and left ventricular
dysfunction, the use of enlaprin or bucindolol (ACE inhibitors) reduced
hospitalizations for whites and nonwhites respectively but not for blacks (Exner et al,
2001). Similarly, Chen et al. (2001) note African American patients who have had an
AMI are more likely to have negative or oftentimes unclear cardiograms at the
moment of presentation, thereby complicating the ensuing diagnoses.
        One approach to avoiding such statistical pitfalls is to use the insights of the
Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition approach, used previously in the economics literature
to evaluate racial wage disparities; (Oaxaca, 1973, 1975; Blinder, 1973) more recently
this approach has been used to measure racial disparities in health care (Balsa and
McGuire, 2001). This approach counsels against pooling patient data across race or
ethnic identity, but instead prescribes estimating the type of model above for just (say)
whites. One can then ask: what would be the implied results (whether utilization or
health outcome) for blacks or Hispanics given their own levels of covariates Z and the
set of coefficients estimated for whites, Γw.

       Skinner et al (2002) for example used this approach to measure differences in
average hospital quality for African-American AMI patients. They did not attempt to
measure differences in outcomes between blacks and nonblacks within a given
hospital directly. Instead, they used only nonblack AMI adjusted mortality rates to
measure hospital “quality” for both blacks and nonblacks. Thus if blacks tended to be
admitted to hospitals with higher nonblack mortality rates, hospital quality was
deemed to be lower for blacks than for nonblacks. (The critical assumption in using
nonblack mortality rates as a measure of quality is that the authors can adjust for
differences in underlying health status for nonblacks living in largely black areas
compared to nonblacks living in largely white areas.) This focus on identifying the
degree to which the observed racial disparities are explained by hospital quality alone
has the strength of not being contaminated by other potentially important factors such
as provider-patient interactions and patient preferences.

       In equation form, average 30-day mortality rates for whites at the national
level, Mw, can be written as the weighted average of mortality rates for each of the i =
1,…, N hospitals in the U.S.:




                                        17
                                        Mw = Σi fw(i)θ2w(i)

where fw(i) is the transformed mean of Zw, and is equal to the fraction of nonblack
Medicare AMI patients who are admitted to hospital i (so that Σi f(i) = 1) and Qw(i) is
the quality measure, in terms of differential 30-day mortality, for hospital i among
nonblack patients. The alternative counterfactual measure of mortality Mw* is
predicted mortality under the assumption that nonblack AMI Medicare patients are
admitted to the same distribution of hospitals as are black AMI Medicare patients;

                                        Mw* = Σi fb(i)θ2w(i)
       where fb(i) is again the transformed value of Zb, the distribution of hospitals to
which black AMI patients are admitted. The difference, Mw – Mw*, is defined to be the
component of mortality rates for black AMI patients that is the consequence of
differential admission (by race) to high or low quality hospitals.
       At first glance, this emphasis on geography and disparities may appear to
contradict many of the findings reviewed in the recent IOM study (Smedley et. al.,
2002). It seeks to explain the observed racial disparity that has been noted in the
countless other studies (reviewed in the IOM report) as a function of differences in
where care is sought. It does not rule out the role of provider discrimination in
explaining outcomes, but notes the striking degree to which whites and blacks who
are seen at similar hospitals tend to have similar outcomes. In fact, many of the
studies reviewed in the IOM report are consistent with the findings of this paper.
Consider for example, the IOM discussion of the 13 high-quality studies on racial and
ethnic disparities in cardiovascular care. Out of the hundreds of studies that were
reviewed by the Institute these 13 are highlighted because they use clinical (chart)
data to adjust for co-morbidities, which is superior to the use of administrative data.
Furthermore, they accounted for the use of cardiovascular services by including
measures of the appropriateness of care. Of these studies only two, Leape et al (1999)
and Carlisle et al (1999), found no racial and ethnic disparities in care after controlling
for insurance status, co-morbidities, and severity.
        What separates these studies from the others? We note that the Leape study
uses data from thirteen New York hospitals and tests for racial differences in
revascularization. On the basis of the previously discussed RAND appropriateness
criteria all patients in the study were classified as being proper candidates for the
requisite intervention. However it is important to also note that the analysis also
controls for the hospital that the patient was seen as (through the inclusion of a
hospital fixed effect). As noted above, regions vary substantially with regard to the
degree of racial differences in utilization; controlling for hospital effects could have
further attenuated such differences.
       These studies taken together suggest an additional focus for improving quality
of care among the black elderly population. If African Americans are more likely to
be seen at low-quality hospitals, public-policies that attempt to improve hospital



                                          18
quality would disproportionately benefit African-Americans. This conclusion remains
consistent with one of the salient conclusions of the IOM report:
       Significantly, minorities access to better quality facilities is often limited by
       the geographic distribution of care facilities and patterns of residential
       segregation, which results in higher-quality facilities being less-accessible.
       (Preprint, chapter 3).




V. Geography and Racial Disparities: Policy Implications and Conclusions
        Most of the literature on health disparities find dramatic differences in
utilization by race, but are generally vague on the question of whether differences are
driven by demand (for example, blacks do not want the more intensive care) or
supply (physicians treat blacks with otherwise identical characteristics differently) or
perhaps that blacks and whites differ by unmeasured health characteristics (e.g.,
Johnson et al, 1993) or respond to different nonmedical incentives such as insurance
coverage. Hence most studies do not provide strong policy prescriptions on how one
goes about fixing the problem. It is often useful to characterize such differences into
three general categories:
       (1) Preferences, or the underlying demand function for patients
       (2) “Supply” or physician, health professional, and hospital behavior
      (3) Implicit and explicit “Prices,” or differences in insurance coverage,
  travel time, and other factors without explicit prices such as location of
  residence that are likely to affect behavior.
        A massive body of literature in social science and medicine may classified
under the first two categories. Indeed, the recent IOM report provides a detailed
literature review of these two categories. The report concludes that while a small
number of studies demonstrate that minority patients are more likely to refuse care,
these differences in refusal rates are insufficiently large to explain a significant share
of the observed disparities. A smaller subset of studies has also considered the impact
of insurance coverage and travel time on utilization. We group location in this third
categorization; in theory, an individual could travel 300 miles to a different hospital,
but the costs of travel broadly defined (including the potential for adverse outcomes
during the travel) are too high to make it feasible. Most health care is local, and we
believe that this third category is critical in evaluating both evidence for racial
disparities, and developing policies to reduce such disparities.
      We would suggest that, if possible, racial disparities be decomposed into their
proximate causes, for example with respect to “across hospital” variation (i.e., patients
are more likely to be admitted to hospitals with perhaps less aggressive treatment
protocol) and “within hospital” variation (i.e., black, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic
white patients are treated differently within a hospital). Both variations can lead to


                                             19
lower utilization rates for minority populations, the difference however lies in the
policy implications. The latter type of variation clearly involves the internal workings
of specific hospitals or provider groups, and further inquiry into causes of such
differences (financial barriers, preferences of patients, or provider behavior) is clearly
warranted. The former type of variation, however, relates less to race per se and more
to geographical variations in treatment patterns of all patients.
        It is particularly with these types of variations that the research on regional
variations, health outcomes, and shared decision making provide illuminating
lessons. For example, a cursory examination of the medical and social-science
literature on racial disparities in outcomes reveals that for almost every study, the
white treatment rate is seen as the “gold-standard” to evaluate black outcomes
against. This may or may not be the right approach: for economists interested in the
study of the racial wage gap for example, it makes sense to view white wages or white
test-scores as the standard against which black outcomes should be measured
(Chandra, 2000, 2002). Increases in incomes, wealth or test-scores are viewed as being
desirable, and decreases in these measures are unanimously viewed as being adverse
events. However, with medical outcomes there are at least two reasons why the above
logic may not translate over.
        First, there are a number of recent studies that suggest “more is not necessarily
better.” Simply put, the fact that whites have higher rates of PTCA or CABG following
AMI does not necessarily mean that blacks ought to get the same rate (Schwartz et al,
1999).21 This is because it is entirely possible that the white rate of PTCA is a
consequence of aggressive medicine and is therefore not the desired benchmark. In
the technical jargon of economics, if physicians are operation in a region of negative
marginal product on the production function, then scaling back on intensity could
actually improve outcomes. Very similar issues are considered in asking whether
some regions that practice more intensive health care are in fact practicing “flat of the
curve” medicine with no observable benefit in terms of better health outcomes (Fisher
et al, 1999, Skinner, et. al., 2001).
      For example, in a widely publicized study, actors of difference races and
gender described identical symptoms in videos that were then shown to physicians,
who were then asked whether they would prescribe cardiac catheterization
(Schulman et al, 1999;).22 The results of the study indicated that for the actors who
were white males, black males, and white females, prescribed catheterization rates of


21 CABG-- Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting Surgery: Surgery in which a vein is
harvested from the leg, or an artery is harvested from the internal mammary artery to
bypass the coronary artery that has narrowed because of the buildup of atherosclerotic
plaque.
22Cardiac catheterization (or an angiogram) is a nonsurgical procedure performed
under X-ray guidance in the Cardiac Catheterization Lab to aid in the diagnoses of
coronary artery disease.



                                          20
about 91% were identical. For the two actresses who were African-American,
prescribed catheterization rates were 79%. (These findings were reported to the
media in a quite different way; see Schwartz et al, 1999.) The researchers suggested
such differences were evidence of provider discrimination, but what is not known is
whether the 91% rate is too high or the 79% rate too low (or both) (Schwartz et al,
1999). This is a question that has been confronted as well in studies of geographical
variation: we don’t know which rate is right (Wennberg, 1986; Tu et. al., 1997).
       This point also constitutes the central thesis of a recent paper by Schneider, et al
(2001). In this important paper the authors use RAND criteria to classify CABG and
PTCA procedures on a sample of Medicare beneficiaries who had all undergone
coronary angiography. The sample was drawn from over 173 hospitals and each
beneficiaries treatment was classified as being appropriate, uncertain and
inappropriate.23 The authors found that there was substantial cross-state variation in
the inappropriate use of both bypass surgery (CABG) and PTCA; for PTCA
inappropriate rates were 24% in California, 14% in Pennsylvania, 8% in Georgia and
12% in Alabama. These regional differences clearly have implications for the
percentage of Hispanics and African-Americans receiving inappropriate care.
Furthermore, they find almost all of the measured racial gap in PTCA
revascularization is explained by the higher rate of inappropriate care for whites as
well as higher rate of PTCA that is viewed as being of “uncertain” legitimacy. By
contrast, they found lower rates of CABG use where appropriate among African-
American patients.
       The null hypothesis in the racial disparities literature always appears to be that
there should be no differences in utilization. This is reasonable for procedures where
nearly 100% of patients should be in favor of such treatments (immunization, eye
exams for diabetics) or where 100% of patients should be against (inappropriate PTCA
as above). It is not unreasonable, however, that preferences for certain types of care
may differ across patients, even for demonstrably effective elective surgical
procedures (where appropriate) such as hip replacements. It is highly unlikely that
observed differences in utilization can be attributed solely to preferences, however.
Preferences for a kidney transplant were slightly lower among African-American men
and women, but these differences in preferences could explain only a fraction of
overall racial differences in transplant rates (Ayanian, et. al., 1999). When seriously ill
patients were asked about preferences for life-sustaining technology, preferences
among African-Americans were stronger for more intensive care (Hopp and Duffy,
2000). Still, it should be kept in mind that the null hypothesis is not exact equality

23 The RAND appropriateness criteria for CABG and PTCA are discussed in Leape, et al
(1991) and Hilborne et al (1991). These criteria are not based on the cost of the procedure
and classify a procedure as being appropriate or inappropriate based on the expected
health benefit (quality of life or longevity) versus the expected health costs (probability
of death, or disability). The criteria are constructed for almost 3,000 clinical scenarios or
indications.



                                             21
across racial or ethnic groups, but instead that rates of procedures (by race) match
with informed preferences for that procedure.
        To sum up, this paper has argued that local area variations need to be taken
seriously in considering racial disparities in health care. This is true for two reasons:
statistical pitfalls can trip up otherwise careful and valid empirical research
documenting the existence and prevalence of disparities. And second, the policy
solutions to racial disparities that occur because African-Americans and Hispanics
tend to live in different places from non-Hispanic whites are quite different from the
more obvious sources of racial differences in treatment within a hospital or provider
group. A potentially important, but not well understood, source of racial disparities
cannot be solved by equal access to health care at the local level, or by universal health
insurance for everyone. Instead, the disparities that occur when hospital or provider
quality is worse in regions with a larger fraction of African-Americans can only be
solved by addressing the problem of geographic disparities in health care. As well,
reducing geographic disparities will likely have a first-order impact on improving
racial disparities in health care and health outcomes.




                                         22
REFERENCES

Alter, DA et al., “Effects of Socioeconomic Status on Access to Invasive Cardiac
Procedures and on Mortality After Acute Myocardial Infarction.” New England Journal
of Medicine, 341 (19) 1999: 1359-68.

Altonji, Joseph and Rebecca M. “Race and Gender in the Labor Market,” in Orley
Ashenfelter and David Card (Eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3C. (Elsevier
Science) (2000).

Ayanian, John Z., Paul D. Cleary, Joel S. Weissman, and Arnold M. Epstein, “The
Effect of Patients’ Preferences on Racial Differences in Access to Renal
Transplantation,” New England Journal of Medicine, 341 (22) (November 25, 1999): 1359-
68.

Baicker, Katherine, “The Government Subsidization of Hospital Care and Health Care
Outcomes,” mimeo, Dartmouth College (2002).

Balsa, Ana I., and Thomas G. McGuire, “Testing for Statistical Discrimination: An
Application to Health Care Disparities,” mimeo, Department of Health Care Policy,
Harvard Medical School (2002).

Barnett, Elizabeth, Michele Casper, Joel Halverson, et al. Men and Heart Disease: An
Atlas of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Mortality Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (2001).

Baron, J., et al., “Total hip arthroplasty: Use and selected complications in the US
Medicare population,” American Journal of Public Health, 1996. 86(1): p. 70-72.

Belman, M.J., L. Payne-Simon, E. Tom, and J. Rideout, “Using a Quality Scorecard to
Measure and Improve Medical Groups’ Performance,” Joint Commission Journal on
Quality Improvement, 1999; 25(5): 239-51.

Berkman, Lisa F., and Jewel M. Mullen, “How Health Behaviors and the Social
Environment Contribute to Health Differences Between Black and White Older
Americans,” in Linda G. Martin and Beth J. Soldo (eds.) Racial and Ethnic Differences in
the Health of Older Americans. Washington DC: National Academy Press (1997).

Bikhchandani, Sushil, Chandra, Amitabh, Goldman, Dana and Welch, Ivo, “The
Economics of Iatroepidemics and Quakeries: Physician Learning, Informational
Cascades and Geographic Variation in Medical Practice,” July 2002. Department of
Economics, Dartmouth College.




                                         23
Birkmeyer, J.D., Finlayson, E.V., and Birkmeyer, C.M. "Volume standards for high-risk
surgical procedures: Potential benefits of the Leapfrog initiative." Surgery 130, 2001,
September): 415-422.

Birkmeyer, J.D., Siewers, A, Finlayson, EA et. Al “Hospital Volume and Surgical
Mortality in the United States,” NEJM 354(15), April 12, 2002: 1128-37.

Blackhall, Leslie J., Gelya Frank, Sheila T. Murphy, et. al., “Ethnicity and Attitudes
Towards Life Sustaining Technology,” Social Science and Medicine 48 (1999): 1779-1789.

Blinder, Alan S., 1973. "Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural
Estimates," Journal of Human Resources 8(4): 436-55.

Blustein J, Weitzman BC. “Access to hospitals with high-technology cardiac services:
how is race important?” Am J Public Health 1995, 85: 345-51.

Carlisle DM, Leake BD, Shapiro MR. “Racial and ethnic disparities in the use of
cardiovascular procedures: associations with type of health insurance.” Am J Public
Health 1997, 87: 263-7.

Casper, Michele ,Elizabeth Barnett, Joel Halverson, et al. Women and Heart Disease: An
Atlas of Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Mortality Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (2001). http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/cvd/womensatlas/atlas.htm

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Health and Health Care of the
Elderly Population: Data from the 1996 Current Beneficiary Survey. Washington DC:
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, HHS (2000).

Chandra, Amitabh, 2000a. “Labor Market Dropouts and the Racial Wage Gap,”
American Economic Review 90(2): 333-38.

Chandra, Amitabh. 2002. “Is the Convergence in the Racial Wage Gap Illusory?”
NBER Working Paper 9476. Cambridge, MA

Chen, J, SS Rathore, MJ Radford, Y Wang, and HM Krumholz, “Racial Differences in
the Use of Cardiac Catheterization after Acute Myocardial Infarction,” New England
Journal of Medicine 344(19) (May 10, 2001), 1443-1449.

Cooper-Patrick, L., Gallo, J.J., Gonzales, J.J., Vu, H.T., Powe, N.R., Nelson C., Ford
D.E., “Race, Gender and Partnership in the Patient-Physician Relationship,” JAMA
282(6): 583-89.

Cutler DM, McClellan MB, and Newhouse JP, “What has increased medical-care
spending bought?,” American Economic Review 88(2): 132-136, May 1998.


                                        24
Cutler DM and McClellan MB. "What is technological change?" in D. Wise, ed.,
Inquiries in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press, 1998.

Deaton, Angus, and Darren Lubotsky, “Mortality, Inequality and Race in American
Cities and States,” NBER Working Paper No. 8370 (July 2001).

Diehr, P., K.C. Cain, W. Kreuter, and S. Rosenkranz (1992), "Can Small Area Analysis
Detect Variation in Surgery Rates? The Power of Small Area Variations Analysis”,
Medical Care 30(6):484-502.

Escarce, Jose J., and Frank W. Puffer, “Black-White Differences in the Use of Medical
Care by the Elderly: A Contemporary Analysis,” in Linda G. Martin and Beth J. Soldo
(eds.) Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of Older Americans. Washington DC:
National Academy Press (1997).

Fiscella, K., Franks, P., Gold, M. and Clancy, C. “Inequality in Quality: Addressing
Socioeconomic, Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care,” JAMA, May 17, 2000,
Vol. 283, No. 19, pp. 2579-2584

Fisher, Elliott S., Wennberg, John E., Stukel, Therese A., Sharp, Sandra (1994),
.Hospital Readmission Rates for Cohorts of Medicare Beneficiaries in Boston and New
Haven. New England Journal of Medicine 331: 989-95.

Fisher ES, Wennberg JE, Stukel TA, et al. Associations among hospital capacity,
utilization, and mortality of US Medicare beneficiaries, controlling for
sociodemographic factors. Health Serv Res. 2000;34(6):1351-62.

Fisher, Elliott, and Jonathan Skinner, Providence Journal (March 2001).

Geronimus A, Bound J, Neidert. “On the validity of using census geocode
characteristics to proxy individual socioeconomic characteristics.” J Am Stat Assoc
1996;91:529-37.

Geronimous AT, Bound J, Waidmann TA, Hillemeier MM, Burns PB. “Excess
mortality among blacks and whites in the United States.” N Engl J Med. 1996, 335(21):
1552-1558.

Giles WH, Anda RF, Casper ML, Escobedo LG, Taylor HA. “Race and sex differences
in rates of invasive cardiac procedures in US hospitals: data from the National
Hospital Discharge Survey.” Arch Intern Med 1995, 155: 318-24.

Gomes, Carla, and Thomas G. McGuire. “Identifying the Sources of Racial and Ethnic
Disparities in Health Care Use.” manuscript, Harvard Medical School (2001).


                                        25
Gornick ME, Eggers PW, Reilly TW, et al. “Effects of race and income on mortality
and use of services among Medicare beneficiaries.” N Engl J Med 1996, 335: 791-9.

Gornick, ME et al, “Understanding Disparities in the Use of Medicare Services,” Yale J
Health Policy, Law, and Ethics 1(1) (2001).

Greene W.H. Econometric Analysis, Macmillin Publishing Company, NY, 1993.

Gross DJ, et al. “Out-of-pocket health spending by poor and near-poor elderly
Medicare beneficiaries.” Health Services Research, April 1999 v 34 no 1 pp 241-254.

Gurland, Barry, David Wilder, Rafael Lantigua, et. al., “Differences in Rates of
Dementia Between Ethno-Racial Groups,” in Linda G. Martin and Beth J. Soldo (eds.)
Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of Older Americans. Washington DC: National
Academy Press (1997).

Harrison, Martha, and Norman K. Thurston, “Racial Matching Among African-
American and Hispanic Physicians and Patients: Causes and Consequences,” Journal
of Human Resources (2001).

Hirsch, R., et al., Radiographic Knee Osteoarthritis Prevalence in Older Adults in the United
States. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 2001 September. 44(9 Suppl): p. S225 (Abstract No.
1033).

Hopp FP. Duffy SA. “Racial variations in end-of-life care.” Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society. (June 2000) 48(6):658-63.

Hurd MD, McGarry K. “Medical Insurance and the Use of Health Care Services by
the Elderly.” Journal of Health Economics 16 (1997), 129-154.

Jencks, Stephen F., Cuerdon, Timothy, Burwen, Dale R., Fleming, Barbara, Houck,
Peter M., et. al., “Quality of Medical Care Delivered to Medicare Beneficiaries: A
Profile at State and National Levels, JAMA 284(13) (4 October 2000), 1670-1676.

Johnson PA, Lee TH, Cook EF, Rouan GW, Goldman L. “Effect of race on the
presentation and management of patients with acute chest pain.” Ann Intern Med
1993, 118: 593-601.

Keith VM, Smith DP. “The current differential in black and white life expectancy.”
Demography. 1988,25: 635-631.




                                           26
Kennedy, Bruce P., KIchiro Kawachi, and Deborah Prothrow-Stith, “Income
Distribution and Mortality: Cross-Sectional Ecological Study of the Robin Hood Index
in the United States,” British Medical Journal 312 (1996): 1004-07.

King, Gary. A Solution to the Ecological Inference Problem. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press (1997).

Kominski GF, Long SH. “Medicare’s disproportionate share adjustment and the cost
of low-income patients.” Journal of Health Economics 16 (1997) pp 177-190.

Lee J, McClellan MB, and Skinner JS. “The distributional effects of Medicare,” in J.
Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 13, 1999.

Lillie-Blanton M, Laveist T. “Race/ethnicity, the social environment, and health.”
Social Science Medicine. 1996, 43(1): 83-91.

Lillie-Blanton, Jarsha, Rose Marie Martinez, and Alina Salganicoff, “Site of Medical
Care: Do Racial and Ethnic Differences Persist?” Yale J Health Policy, Law, and Ethics
1(1) (2001).

Massey, Douglas G. “Residential Segregation and Neighborhood Conditions in US
Metropolitan Areas,” in Smelser, N.J., Wilson, W.J., Mitchell, F. (Eds.) America
Becoming: Racial Trends and their Consequences. Volume I. (Washington DC: National
Academy Press).

Martin, Linda G. and Soldo, Beth J. (Eds). Racial and Ethnic Differences in the Health of
Older Americans. National Research Council, 1997. National Academy Press
(Washington, DC).

McClellan MB, McNeil BJ, and Newhouse JP. "Does more intensive treatment of acute
myocardial infarction reduce mortality?" Journal of the American Medical Association
272(11): 859-66, September 1994.

McClellan MB and Newhouse JP. "The marginal cost-effectiveness of medical
technology: a panel instrumental-variables approach," Journal of Econometrics 77(1): 39-
64, March 1997.

McClellan MB and Noguchi H, “Technological change in heart-disease treatment:
does high-tech mean low value?,” American Economic Review 88(2): 90-96, May 1998.

McClellan, Mark and Douglas Staiger, “Comparing the Quality of Health Care
Providers,” in Alan Garber (ed.) Frontiers in Health Policy, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago IL, (forthcoming) 2000.



                                        27
McClellan, Mark and Douglas Staiger, “Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit and
Not-for-Profit Hospitals,” in David Cutler (ed.) The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing
Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Institutions, University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL, 2000.

McClellan, Mark and Douglas Staiger, “The Quality of Health Care Providers,” National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper #7327, August 1999 (revised 2000).

McPherson K., P.M. Strong, A. Epstein and L. Jones, (1981), “Regional Variations in
the Use of Common Surgical Procedures: Within and Between England and Wales,
Canada, and the United States,” Social Science in Medicine 15A:273-288.
Morenoff, Jeffrey D., and George Lynch, “What Makes a Place Healthy?
Neighborhood Influences on Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Health over the Life
Course,” This volume (2002).

Morrison, R.S., Wallerstein, S., Natale, D.K., Senzel, R.S., and Huang, L. “We Don’t
Carry That- Failure of Pharmacies in Predominately NonWhite Neighborhoods to
Stock Opioid Analgesics,” NEJM 342(14), 2000: 1023-1026.

Oaxaca, Ronald, “Estimation of Union/Nonunion Wage Differentials within
Occupational/Regional Subgroups,” Journal of Human Resources 10(4) (Fall 1975): 529-
537.

Oaxaca, Ronald, “Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets,”
International Economic Review, 14(3), Oct. 1973: 693-709.

Oliver, Melvin L. and Shapiro, Thomas M. Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New
Perspective on Racial Inequality, 1995. (New York: Routledge).

Pappas G et al. “The Increasing Disparity in Mortality between Socioeconomic
Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986.” New England Journal of Medicine 329 (2):
103-9.

Peterson ED, Wright SM, Daley J, Thibault GE. “Racial variation in cardiac procedure
use and survival following AMI in the Department of Veterans Affairs.” JAMA 1994,
271: 1175-80.

Peterson ED, Shaw LK, DeLong ER, Pryor DB, Califf RM, Mark DB. “Racial variation
in the use of coronary-revascularization procedures: are the differences real? Do they
matter?” N Engl J Med 1997, 336: 480-6.

Phelps, C.E. and C. Mooney, 1993. "Variations in Medical Practice Use: Causes and
Consequences”, in Competitive Approaches to Health Care Reform, Richard J. Arnauld,
Robert F. Rich and William White, eds. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press.



                                         28
Pourate, N, T Rice, G Kominski, and RE Snyder. “Socioeconomic Difference in
Medicare Supplemental Coverage.” Health Affairs 2000, 19(5): 186-196.

Potter LB. “Socioeconomic determinants of white and black males’ life expectancy
differentials, 1980.” Demography. 1991, 28: 303-321.

Rathore, Saif S., Berger, Alan K., Weinfurth, Kevin P., et. al., “Race, Sex, Poverty, and
the Medical Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly,” Circulation
102(6) (August 8, 2000), 642-648.

Ross, Catherine E., and John Mirowsky, 2000. “Does Medical Insurance Contribute to
Socioeconomic Differentials in Health?” The Millbank Quarterly 72(2): 291-321.

Schneider, EC, Leape, LL, Weissman, JS, Piana, RN, Gatsonis, C, Epstein, AM, “Racial
Differences in Cardiac Revascularization Rates: Does “Overuse” Explain Higher Rates
Among White Patients?” Annals of Internal Medicine, 135(5) (Sept 4, 2001): 328-337.

Schulman KA, et al. “The effect of race and sex on physicians’ recommendations for
cardiac catheterization.” N Engl J Med 1999, 340(8): 618-26.

Schwartz LM, et al. “Misunderstandings about the effects of race and sex on
physicians’ referrals for cardiac catheterization.” N Engl J Med 1999, 341(4): 279-83.

Skinner, Jonathan, Elliott Fisher, and John E. Wennberg, “The Efficiency of Medicare,”
NBER Working Paper (July 2001).

Skinner, Jonathan, Staiger, Douglas, Chandra, Amitabh, Lee, Julie, and Mark
McClellan, “Racial Differences in Hospital Quality for the Treatment of Acute
Myocardial Infarction: Evidence from the Medicare Population,” mimeo, Dartmouth
Medical School (2002).

Smedley, Brian D., Stith, Adrienne Y., Nelson, Alan, R. Unequal Treatment: Confronting
Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care. Institute of Medicine, 2002. (Washington
DC: National Academy Press)

Smith, James P., and Raynard S. Kington, “Race, Socioeconomic Status, and Health in
Late Life,” in Linda G. Martin and Beth J. Soldo (eds.) Racial and Ethnic Differences in
the Health of Older Americans. Washington DC: National Academy Press (1997).

Susser, M., “The Logic in Ecological: I. The Logic of Analysis,” AJPH 84(5):825-29
(May 1994).

Susser, M., “The Logic in Ecological: II. The Logic of Design,” AJPH 84(5):830-35 (May
1994).


                                        29
Tu, JV, Naylor, CD, Kumar, D., DeBuono, BA, McNeil BJ, Hannan EL. “Coronary
artery bypass graft surgery in Ontario and New York State: which rate is right?”
Annals of Internal Medicine. 126(1):13-9, 1997 Jan 1.

van Ryn, Michelle, and Jane Burke, “The Effect of Patient Race and Socio-economic
Status on Physicians’ Perceptions of Patients,” Social Science and Medicine 50 (2000):
813-828.

Wang H, Remington PL, Kindig DA. “How fast can the racial gap in life expectancy
between whites and blacks be eliminated?” Gen Med 1999, 1(9).

Weinstein, James, and John Birkmeyer. The Dartmouth Atlas of Musculoskeletal Health
Care. Hanover NH: Dartmouth Medical School and the AHA Press (2000).

Wennberg J. “Which rate is right?” New England Journal of Medicine. 314(5) (January
30) 310-1, 1986.

Wennberg, John E., and Megan Cooper (eds.) Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. Chicago:
Dartmouth Medical School and American Hospital Association (1996).

Wennberg, John E., and Megan Cooper (eds.) Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 1999.
Chicago: Dartmouth Medical School and American Hospital Association (1999).

Wennberg, John E., Elliott Fisher, and Jonathan Skinner, “Geography and the Debate
Over Medicare Reform,” Health Affairs (2002).

Whittle J, Conigliaro J, Good CB, Lofgren RP. “Racial differences in the use of
invasive cardiovascular procdures in the Department of Veterans Affairs medical
system.” N Engl J Med 1993, 329: 621-7.




                                       30
Appendix A: Definitions used in the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care 24

Hospital Service Area: Hospital Service Areas (HSAs) represent local health care
markets for community-based inpatient care. The definitions of HSAs used in the 1996
edition of the Atlas were retained in the 1999 edition. HSAs were originally defined in
three steps using 1993 provider files and 1992-93 utilization data. First, all acute care
hospitals in the 50 states and the District of Columbia were identified from the
American Hospital Association Annual Survey of Hospitals and the Medicare
Provider of Services files and assigned to a location within a town or city. The list of
towns or cities with at least one acute care hospital (N=3,953) defined the maximum
number of possible HSAs. Second, all 1992 and 1993 acute care hospitalizations of the
Medicare population were analyzed according to ZIP Code to determine the
proportion of residents' hospital stays that occurred in each of the 3,953 candidate
HSAs. ZIP Codes were initially assigned to the HSA where the greatest proportion
(plurality) of residents were hospitalized. Approximately 500 of the candidate HSAs
did not qualify as independent HSAs because the plurality of patients resident in
those HSAs were hospitalized in other HSAs. The third step required visual
examination of the ZIP Codes used to define each HSA. Maps of ZIP Code boundaries
were made using files obtained from Geographic Data Technologies (GDT) and each
HSA's component ZIP Codes were examined. In order to achieve contiguity of the
component ZIP Codes for each HSA, "island" ZIP Codes were reassigned to the
enclosing HSA, and/or HSAs were grouped into larger HSAs. This process resulted in
the identification of 3,436 HSAs, ranging in total 1996 population from 604 (Turtle
Lake, North Dakota) to 3,067,356 (Houston) in the 1999 edition of the Atlas.
Intuitively, one may think of HSAs as representing the geographic level at which
“front end” services such as diagnoses are received.

Hospital Referral Region: Hospital service areas make clear the patterns of use of
local hospitals. A significant proportion of care, however, is provided by referral
hospitals that serve a larger region. Hospital referral regions were defined in the Atlas
by documenting where patients were referred for major cardiovascular surgical
procedures and for neurosurgery. Each hospital service area was examined to
determine where most of its residents went for these services. The result was the
aggregation of the 3,436 hospital service areas into 306 hospital referral regions. Each
hospital referral region had at least one city where both major cardiovascular surgical
procedures and neurosurgery were performed. Maps were used to make sure that the
small number of "orphan" hospital service areas - those surrounded by hospital
service areas allocated to a different hospital referral region - were reassigned, in
almost all cases, to ensure geographic contiguity. Hospital referral regions were


24We have duplicated the definitions used in CECS (1999a, 1999b). For further
details on the construction methods see
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/99US/toc8.php.



                                        31
pooled with neighbors if their populations were less than 120,000 or if less than 65% of
their residents' hospitalizations occurred within the region. Hospital referral regions
were named for the hospital service area containing the referral hospital or hospitals
most often used by residents of the region. The regions sometimes cross state
boundaries. Intuitively, one may think of HRRs as representing the geographic level
at which “back end” services such as invasive surgery are received.




                                        32
                   Table 1: Cardiovascular Deaths Per 100,000 Population for Men:
                                   Mississippi and Massachusetts
                               Black Mortality Rate White Mortality Rate Ratio: Black/White
Both States Combined                         900                      668                    1.35
Mississippi                                  1028                     835                    1.23
Massachusetts                                580                      616                    0.94
Notes: Cardiovascular data from CDC (2001). Black and white state population numbers (total, not by sex)
from Statistical Abstract (2001) and are for 1998.




                                            33
Figure 1: Construction of the Evansville, Indiana Hospital
                     Referral Region




                          34
Figure 2: Geographic Variation in Illness Adjusted Medicare Payments




                              35
Figure 3: Geographic Variation in PTCA Rates




                  36
Figure 4: Surgical Variation for Ten Common Procedures




Source: Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care. Each data point represents an observation for a
Hospital Referral Region relative to the US average standardized for age-gender-race
and illness.




                                       37
                                                    Figure 5: Lorenz Curve Showing Distribution of Black and Nonblack AMI
                                                                       Patients by Hospital of Admission


                                        1.0

                                        0.9
Cumulate Percentage of Black Patients




                                        0.8

                                        0.7
                                                                               45 Degree Line
                                        0.6
                                                                                                                            B
                                        0.5

                                        0.4

                                        0.3

                                        0.2
                                                                                        A
                                        0.1
                                                                                                 Cumulative Black Percentage
                                        0.0
                                              0.0     0.1      0.2     0.3      0.4        0.5     0.6      0.7       0.8       0.9   1.0
                                                                      Cumulative Percentage of Nonblack Patients




                                                                                      38
                    Figure 6: Ninety-Day PTCA Rates per AMI Patient in the Medicare Population,
                                            by Selected States, 1990-95

               25

                                                                                Nonblack
               20                                                               Black
Percent PTCA




               15


               10


                5


                0
                    Massachusetts   New York       California   United States     Arkansas




                                                       39
                                                       Figure 7: Percent of Appropriate AMI Patients Treated with Beta
                                                        Blockers at Discharge and Percent African-American, by State

                                              95
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                  % Beta Blocker = 74.9 - .32 x {% Black}, t-stat. = -2.3, R = .08
Percent Appropriate Patients Receiving Beta




                                              90

                                              85

                                              80
           Blocker at Discharge




                                              75

                                              70

                                              65

                                              60

                                              55

                                              50

                                              45
                                                0.00       5.00        10.00         15.00        20.00        25.00           30.00   35.00   40.00
                                                                                   % African-American in State




                                                                                             40
              Figure 8: Geography and the Quality of Health Care


     Quality Rank

                                 VT                       NH
 1                    MN
                                                ME                             MA
                                                                                        CT
                                ND
                                      IA
         OR                                 WI
10                         WA    CO                        WY
                                                DE
                                           MT
                                     VA          PA
                 AZ
                                           NC                  UT
                      HI
20                                                        ID
                                                                         RI
                                                                                                    AK
                                     SD
                                                           MD
                                                                              MI
                                 NE         MO
                                                      IN
                                                                         NY
                                NM
30
                                                OH                  DC
                                            SC
                            NV                       KY
                                                KS              TN
                                                           FL
40                         CA             WV                        OK
                                                     IL    AL                           TX
                                                                         NJ
                                                           GA
                                                                                   LA
                                            AR                           MS
51
         3000                    4000                               5000                     6000
                            Per Capita Medicare Spending




                                                     41
      Figure 9a: Geography and the Measurement of Racial Disparities



      Mortality                               True Regression:
                                              E[Mortality|Quality] = β0+ β1Quality


                                                          Data cloud for Blacks
E[Mortality|Black]



                                                                     Data cloud for Whites


E[Mortality|White]




                                             Geography or Hospital Quality




      Omitting Quality or the correct measure of geography from the regression and comparing the
      racial difference in mortality (risk-adjusted or otherwise) will yield an estimate of ∆ =
      E[Mortality|Black]- E[Mortality|White]. However, if whites are more likely to be seen at high
      quality hospitals than blacks, ∆ is overstated. In the true regression, there is no effect of race
      on mortality within hospitals or geographic area.




                                                  42
         Figure 9b: Geography and the Measurement of Racial Disparities



                                           True Regression:
      Mortality
                                           E[Mortality|Quality] = β0+ β1Quality + β2 Black




E[Mortality|Black]




E[Mortality|White]


                                                          β2




                                         Geography or Hospital Quality


    Here, African Americans have worse outcomes even within the same hospitals. This correct
    race difference is β2 (the distance between the lines for Blacks and Whites at the same level of
    quality, or within the same geographical unit). Omitting Quality or the correct measure of
    geography from the regression and comparing the racial difference in mortality (risk-adjusted
    or otherwise) will yield an estimate of ∆ = E[Mortality|Black]- E[Mortality|White]. It can be
    seen that ∆ considerably overstates β2.




                                                43
    Figure 9c: Geography and the Measurement of Racial Disparities


                                     True Regression:
 Mortality
                                     E[Mortality|Quality] = β0+ β1Quality + β2Black
                                                              + β3 (Black x Quality)




                                                 Estimated Regression (Biased):
                                                 E[Mortality|Quality] = γ0+ γ1Quality + γ2Black




                                                           γ2


                                    Geography or Hospital Quality



Here, African Americans have worse outcomes even within the same hospitals and the race
difference grows in worse hospitals. This correct race differential is β1 Quality + β2.
Graphically, this is the height of the larger arrow. Omitting the Quality x Race interaction
leads to severely understating the gap (the regression line will be weighted heavily by the
white data), and the height of the smaller arrow is incorrectly estimated to be the race
difference.




                                          44
