                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       RESIDENT AND NONRESIDENT TUITION
                 AND ENROLLMENT AT FLAGSHIP STATE UNIVERSITIES

                                          Michael J. Rizzo
                                         Ronald G. Ehrenberg

                                         Working Paper 9516
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9516


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




Rizzo is a PhD candidate in economics at Cornell University and a research assistant at the Cornell Higher
Education Research Institute (CHERI). Ehrenberg is the Irving M. Ives Professor of Industrial and Labor
Relations and Economics at Cornell University, Director of CHERI, and a research associate at the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Without implicating them for what remains, we are grateful to the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundation and the Atlantic Philanthropies (USA) Inc. for their support of CHERI and to Michelle
White, Caroline Hoxby and participants at the NBER conference for their comments on an earlier version.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Michael J. Rizzo and Ronald Ehrenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
Resident and Nonresident Tuition and Enrollment at Flagship State Universities
Michael J. Rizzo and Ronald G. Ehrenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 9516
February 2003
JEL No. I2

                                            ABSTRACT


       We address the determinants of resident and nonresident tuition and enrollment at public
universities. A key explanatory variable is the share of out-of-state students enrolled under
reciprocity agreements. We find that public universities use out-of-state enrollments primarily to
augment student quality, not to make up for losses in state appropriations.In the main out-of-state
enrollment levels are relatively insensitive to out-of-state tuition levels charged by institutions.
Finally, we find no evidence that public universities increase their in-state or out-of-state tuition
levels in response to increased federal or state financial aid for students.



Michael J. Rizzo                                       Ronald G. Ehrenberg
Cornell Higher Education Research Institute            Cornell Higher Education Research Institute
ILR-Cornell University                                 ILR-Cornell University
256 Ives Hall                                          256 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                  Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
mjr38@cornell.edu                                      and NBER
                                                       rge2@cornell.edu
I. Introduction

    The recent economic downturn in the United States has led to severe current and

projected budget deficits in most states. Sharp rises in healthcare costs and increased

competition for state funds from other sources has concurrently led to a decrease in the

shares of state budgets earmarked for the higher education sector.1 Because universities

are able to attract revenue from other sources (e.g. tuition, annual giving and federal

student aid) and they are a discretionary component of most state budgets, they are often

the first to go under the knife during tough times. The resulting revenue shortages from

these budget cuts will most certainly have deleterious effects on college accessibility and

on the behavior of these higher educational institutions. Inasmuch as 65% of the 9.2

million students enrolled in four-year institutions in 1999 were enrolled in public

institutions and in most states the major public research universities are also the most

selective in terms of admissions, it is important to understand institutional responses

relating to tuition and enrollment policies, as well as the likely changes in state grant aid

policies.

    During the 1979 to 2000 period, the average state appropriation at the flagship public

research institutions, as a share of total current fund revenues at the institution, fell from

42% to 31%. Only ten institutions saw increases in the share of their revenues coming

from state appropriations over this period, and only three of these saw any increase in the

share during the 1988 to 2000 period.




1
  From FY92-FY02, the share of states’ discretionary budgets allocated to higher education has fallen 0.8
percentage points from 13.5% to 12.7%. Health care’s share has risen from 12.1% to 16.0% during this
time. See National Association of State Budget Officers, State Expenditure Report 2001.


                                                    1
      To make up for this revenue shortfall, public institutions are largely constrained to

using two tools.2 First, they may increase the tuition they charge in-state students,

however this is often a politically unpopular move. Second, because all public research

institutions charge a higher tuition to out-of-state students than they do to in-state

students, they can raise the tuition they charge out-of-state students and/or adjust the

composition of their student body by enrolling more out-of-state students.

    Adjusting the share of students that come from out-of-state is at best a short-run

solution and for political reasons may be much less easily adjusted than the out-of-state

student tuition level. After some point, it may be politically very difficult to further

expand the share of out-of-state students, while state officials may not be concerned

about charging nonresident students increasingly higher rates of tuition. The political

difficulties arise because enrolling more nonresidents may preclude qualified students

from one’s own state from attending the flagship public university in the state. On the

flip side, it would be unwise for a state to totally exclude nonresidents from its

universities’ corridors because other states might then retaliate against students from the

state in question.

    The prospects for revenue augmentation from increasing nonresident enrollments are

diminished by the presence of tuition reciprocity agreements. These are either bilateral or

multi-lateral agreements between schools and / or states allowing nonresident students to

attend a public university at less than the normal out-of-state tuition.3 These agreements


2
  There are of course other sources of revenue. Total educational and general current fund revenues include
tuition and fees, federal, state and local appropriations, government grants and contracts, private gifts,
payouts from endowments, sales and services of educational activities and other sources. Local revenues
are typically directed to community colleges while federal monies are focused on direct student support.
The endowment levels at most publics are small, so increasing the payout rate is unlikely to have a large
impact on annual revenues.



                                                    2
are often program specific, have a regional focus and were created to encourage

universities to achieve cost efficiencies in their program offerings.

    An institution's ability to employ different tuition and enrollment strategies is

dependent upon its degree of autonomy from state interests. Because elected state

officials interests diverge from university administrators’ and faculty members’, we

expect institutions in states where there is more legislative oversight in the form of a

statewide coordinating board and/or fewer governing boards to find it more difficult to

increase tuition and to adjust their enrollment margins.4

    Some observers have expressed concern that direct student aid (both federal grant aid

and state aid), which was designed to improve access, has instead given institutions the

freedom to increase tuition. States’ financing of higher education is increasingly being

provided in the form of grant aid to students rather than in the form of appropriations to

institutions. From 1979 to 2000, average (median) direct student aid as a share of total

higher educational aid has increased from 3.0% to 5.8% (1.8% to 4.8%). While the real

value of the federal Basic Educational Opportunity Grant (Pell Grant) fell by 9% over

this time period, access to federal subsidized loans was vastly expanded. In fact, by

1999, 45.4% of students receiving financial aid did so in the form of federal loan aid.

    How tuition levels, or the availability of grant or loan aid, influence access are

empirical questions that we will not address in this chapter. Rather, we will analyze how

tuition and enrollment strategies at institutions react to changes in federal and state

3
  In some cases, if the flow of students between states taking advantage of tuition reciprocity agreements is
not roughly equal, the state that exported more students than it imported makes a payment to the importing
state to compensate it for bearing more than its fair share of the costs. These payments go to the state
treasury, however, not to the universities themselves.
4
  See Lowry (2001a, 2001b). Lowry also points out that states (schools) where a high percentage of
university trustees are appointed by elected officials or directly elected by the voting public also have lower
tuition.


                                                      3
student need based aid and to state appropriations to public higher education institutions.

The former increases student mobility by expanding their choice set, while the latter does

not travel with the student.

    Institutions may also choose nonresident enrollment policies to satisfy different

interests. Since many flagship publics are also high quality institutions, they typically

experience an excess demand for seats and can enroll nonresidents to improve academic

quality or to enhance the diversity of their student bodies.

    Given differing state governance structures, political climates, institutional objectives,

and the like, it is not surprising to see the dramatic disparity across states in their use of

nonresidents as an enrollment strategy. Figure 1 shows that many of the larger, more

populous states such as Ohio, Illinois, Texas, California and New York, do not make

great use of this strategy, enrolling less than 10% of their first time freshmen from out-of-

state in 1998.5 6 However, other states that are smaller, older and/or have a history of

private provision of higher education enroll nearly half of their entering classes as

nonresidents. Vermont, Delaware, Rhode Island and New Hampshire respectively

enrolled 66%, 60%, 48% and 40% of their classes in 1998 in this manner.

    Table 1 lists the 91 flagship public research institutions whose behavior is analyzed in

our study.7 They are primarily Research I and II institutions and were chosen because

5
 The categories were defined using a means clustering analysis described by Everitt (1993). This is an
exploratory data technique meant to find natural groups in the data. We chose to employ a partition
method that breaks the observations into k-non-overlapping groups. Multiple iterations suggest that the
most natural partition was 4 groups. States near the average include Maine and Georgia, enrolling about
20% each.
6
  Public Universities in Texas do not get to keep the extra tuition revenue they receive from enrolling out-
of-state students; this revenue flows into the state government coffers. As such they have no financial
incentive to enroll out-of-state students.
7
 There are 84 schools from 43 states that were classified as Research I and II in 1994 by the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. To fully exploit state variation in tuition, enrollment and


                                                      4
they are the most selective and largest public institutions in each state and they enroll the

largest shares of nonresidents, or out-of-state students. This chapter is motivated by our

desire to understand the causes and consequences of nonresident enrollment. We seek to

explain how the share of nonresidents among first-time freshmen varies at a point in time

across these institutions and over time at any given institution. We employ panel data

from a variety of sources and estimate a system of equations to explain the levels of state

need-based grant aid per student, in-state tuition, out-of-state tuition and the share of out-

of-state students among first-time freshmen. The longitudinal nature of the data permits

us to control for omitted variable bias.

    In the next section, we briefly survey related literature. Section III presents

information on trends in tuition, enrollment and grant aid. In addition to summarizing the

data we use to explain these trends, it also discusses the results of a survey we undertook

to obtain information on the nature and prevalence of tuition reciprocity agreements.

Section IV describes our estimation strategy, presents empirical results and conducts

some policy simulations based upon these results. Section V briefly concludes.



II. Selective Literature Review

    The literature on pricing and access in public higher education is replete with papers

that analyze issues related to one or more of state grant aid, in-state tuition, out-of-state

tuition and nonresident enrollment shares, but none has studied all of these issues

simultaneously. Two papers have addressed the determinants of nonresident enrollments.

Mixon and Hsing (1994) found, using cross-section data for a sample of public and

grant aid policies, we added the flagship public institution from each state that did not have a Research I or
II institution. These states were Alaska, Maine, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Dakota and
South Dakota.


                                                      5
private academic institutions, that higher nonresident tuition levels were associated with

higher nonresident enrollment shares. Their findings lent credence to the notion that

universities enroll nonresidents for revenue purposes. Siow (1997) found, after

controlling for student body ability, that universities with more successful researchers

were more likely to have larger shares of nonresident and foreign students.

        Other studies have addressed the determinants of tuition levels for in-state

students at public universities. Using cross-section data, Lowry (2001a, 2001b) found that

net tuition and fee revenues were higher at public universities that receive less state

government funding per student and in states in which public universities have more

financial autonomy. Quigley and Rubinfeld (1993) found that states with high private

enrollments and many private colleges and universities charged higher tuition levels at

their public universities.

        Several studies have treated tuition levels at public higher education institutions

and state appropriations to these institutions as being simultaneously determined. In the

context of a model in which state appropriations were treated as endogenous, Koshal and

Koshal (2000) found that lower state appropriations per student, higher median family

income and a higher share of students that came from out-of-state were all associated

with higher in-state tuition levels. However, Lowry’s (2001a, 2001b) work suggests that

state appropriations per student can be treated as exogenous in in-state tuition equations.

        Greene (1994) is one of the few studies that addressed out-of-state tuition levels at

public universities. Using cross-section data, he found that states with many private

colleges, lower tax rates, poor labor markets and with strong in-migration of both

population and students, charged higher nonresident tuition. While he observed that




                                              6
higher regional tuition was associated with higher nonresident tuition levels, the

association was not statistically significant.

           Research relating to federal and state grant aid has addressed how grant aid

affects tuition levels and access. Examples include Balderson (1997), Coopers and

Lybrand (1997), Haupman and Krop (1998), McPherson and Shapiro (1998), and

National Center for Education Statistics (2001). Of concern to many researchers and

policymakers is whether academic institutions respond to increases in the Pell Grant

program maximum benefit level by increasing their tuition levels. Estimates of the size of

this “Bennett Hypothesis” at public institutions range from negligible to a $50 increase in

tuition for every $100 increase in aid.8 Little attention has been given to the

determination of federal grant aid levels themselves, let alone to how states determine

how much of their resources to devote to financial aid for students.

           Most of the prior studies are cross-section analyses, and are subject to the

criticism that unobserved institutional or state specific variables may lead to biased

coefficient estimates. To avoid this problem, we employ a rich longitudinal institutional

level data set that is derived primarily from the Higher Educational General Information

System (HEGIS) and its successor the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System

(IPEDS) in the estimation reported below. The HEGIS and IPEDS data are

supplemented with data from numerous other sources.

           We report estimates of a system of four simultaneously determined equations for

state need-based grant aid, in-state tuition, out-of-state tuition and the share of

undergraduate students that are nonresidents. The explanatory variables that are treated as

exogenous in our models include federal financial aid parameters, institutional
8
    Named for William Bennett, the Secretary of Education during the Reagan administration.


                                                     7
characteristics, state governance characteristics, tuition reciprocity agreement parameters,

measures of higher education competition in the state and the institution’s enrollment

capacity, and other state and regional specific information. Our analyses should be

viewed as reduced form in nature due to the difficulty of finding suitable supply and

demand restrictions for each equation.



III.   Data

        Our study uses data on resident and nonresident enrollment and tuition levels for a

sample of 91 American public research institutions representing all 50 states. The data

come from a variety of sources including HEGIS, IPEDS, the National Association of

State Student Grant and Aid Programs (NASSGAP) and annual Current Population

Surveys (CPS), as well as other sources. Our econometric analyses use data for eight

years during the 1979 to 1998 period.9

        Table 2 presents data on the shares of full-time first-time freshmen that were

nonresidents at sample institutions during the 1979 to 1998 period. Overall, the

enrollment share of nonresidents rose from .174 to .191 during the period. However,

from 1981 through 1992, when states faced particularly difficult financial times, the

average share increased from .166 to .205, an increase of almost .04 and then remained

relatively constant as budget situations improved during the remainder of the period.

        To illustrate the magnitude of a 4 percentage point increase in nonresident

enrollment, consider a school with a freshmen enrollment of 3,000 students and a


9
 Appendix Table 1 details the sources for all of our data. The specific years included in the study were
dictated by the years in which information on resident and nonresident enrollments were collected as part
of HEGIS or IPEDS. The 1998 academic year is the most recent year for which IPEDS Residence and
Migration data is publicly available.


                                                     8
nonresident tuition premium of $6,000. If this school decides to enroll 4% more of its

class as nonresidents (120 students), over the course of four years, this would provide the

institution with an additional $2.88 million of revenues that could be used to raise faculty

salaries, invest in start-up costs for new scientists, hire additional faculty and staff, reduce

class sizes and offer more courses.

        Schools that exhibited the largest increases in nonresident enrollment shares

during the period included Pittsburgh, Massachusetts, Minnesota and Mississippi State,

which all more than doubled their shares during the period. In contrast, Illinois-Chicago,

Texas Tech, Houston, South Florida and the University of California schools reduced

their nonresident enrollment shares by more than half. While the time series variation in

nonresident enrollment shares exhibited in this table may not appear very striking, more

dramatic cross-section variation exists and can be seen in figure 1.

        The well-documented increases in resident and nonresident tuition that occurred

during the period are shown in Table 3. In real terms, resident and nonresident tuition

levels both more than doubled between 1979 and 1998, with each growing at about 4%

per year above the rate of inflation. This table veils the dramatic cross-section variation

that exists in public higher education tuition levels. For instance, in 1998 Vermont

charged its residents over $7,000 and Pittsburgh, Temple, Michigan, Penn State, and New

Hampshire all charged over $6,000, while all of the Florida universities, Arizona

universities, Idaho, Houston, Texas A&M and Nevada-Reno charged near $2,000. The

public higher education institutions in California and Texas are among those that

increased tuition at the fastest rates, while the Florida and Mississippi schools exhibited

the smallest increases during the period.




                                               9
       Every public research institution charges a higher price to nonresidents,

presumably because state taxpayers do not want to subsidize the schooling of non-

taxpayers from other states. Moreover, the extent to which nonresidents pay more than

residents increased during the period. The roughly equal percentage increases during the

period in resident and nonresident tuition caused the real difference in resident and

nonresident tuition levels to substantially increase during the period.

       Table 3 shows that while in-state tuition increased by an average of less than

$2,000 in real terms, nonresident tuition increased by an average of more than $5,000 in

real terms. As a result the average premium charged to nonresidents has increased in real

terms from $2,700 in 1979 to over $6,500 in 1998 (table 4). The raw data suggest that

during the period institutions adjusted their out-of-state tuition levels to generate revenue.

       The lowest out-of-state tuition levels and smallest increases occurred largely in

the southeastern region. Both the largest out-of-state tuition levels and tuition increases

occurred at Michigan, the Virginia schools, North Carolina schools and the California

schools. As with the overall level of nonresident tuition, the smallest premia charged to

nonresidents and the smallest increases tended to occur at southeastern public institutions.

The strong regional patterns that we observe in tuition and enrollment trends suggests the

importance of historical competitive and political economic factors.

       Turning to trends in state support for public higher education, tables 5 and 6

outline the changes in state need based grant aid to students attending public institutions

and state appropriations to public higher education institutions that occurred during the

period. Table 5 shows that average state provided need based grant aid per full-time

equivalent undergraduate enrolled in public higher education institutions in the state has




                                             10
more than quadrupled in real terms, growing from roughly $67 per student per year to

$285 per student per year.10 One recent study found that 68.5% of first-time, full time

students enrolled in public higher educational institutions received financial aid from any

source and that 26.9% of these students received state grant aid averaging $1,742 per

year. 11 Inasmuch as the average in-state tuition in 1998 was $3,525, state grant aid alone

appears to cover over half of the tuition costs for eligible students.

         Among the most generous states, in terms of state provided grant aid per full-

time equivalent student enrolled in public higher education institutions are New York,

Illinois and Pennsylvania, while the least generous states include Wyoming, Utah,

Montana and Mississippi. New Mexico, Virginia, Washington, Maine and Massachusetts

are among those states that increased state aid per student the fastest during the period,

while Utah, Wyoming, Montana, Alabama and Mississippi actually decreased in real

terms the amount of need based grant aid they awarded per student enrolled in public

institutions during the period. While direct student aid grew rapidly, real state

appropriations per full-time equivalent student to public higher education institutions saw

very little growth during the period. Table 6 summarizes data on real average state

government appropriations per full-time equivalent undergraduate. Nationwide real state

appropriations per student did not increase between 1988 and 1998, and only grew by

21% between 1979 and 2000, a 1% per annum annual growth rate. Again, dramatic

cross-section variation existed in state funding per student.



10
  Though the annual percentage increases in real student grant aid (7.5%) outpaced the annual real
increases in tuition (4.5%), the real dollar cost to students still rose during the period.
11
  National Center for Education Statistics (2001). In addition, 28.3% of aid recipients receive federal
grants averaging $2,262, 30.9% of aid recipients received institutional grants averaging $2,576 per student
and 45.4% received loan aid averaging $3,490 per student in 1999.


                                                    11
         A few states were able to generously increase support for selected institutions

during the period. New Mexico, Maryland, Georgia Tech, Maine and Oklahoma State all

enjoyed a doubling of real state support, amounting to increases between $6,000 and

$12,000 per student. However, of the 91 schools in our sample, 22 faced decreases in

real state appropriations per student between 1979 and 2000. Among the hardest hit were

many of the California and Virginia schools, each losing anywhere from 10% to 49% of

its state support. These losses represented $1,000 to $12,000 per student cuts in real state

appropriations.

         In the face of budget pressures and changing political attitudes, states may have

an easier time funding direct student aid increases under the guise of promoting access.

Legislators and their constituents may also prefer not to fund institutions directly,

because they may worry that the dollars will not go to the intended uses. Raw

correlations, however, do not indicate that states that are more generous to students are

less generous to institutions (the simple correlation coefficient is 0.14). In fact, it appears

that there are states that are generous to higher education on both dimensions and states

that are not.

         Figure 2 depicts state preferences for direct student aid versus institutional aid in

1996, controlling for per capita tax revenues.12 The axes represent US averages. We see

that New York, Michigan, Maryland and California exert a great deal of effort to fund

both student financial aid and state appropriations to public higher education, while

Wyoming, Nebraska, Delaware, Idaho, Utah and Montana fund neither very well. Some


12
  The figure plots normalized residuals from a regression of grant aid on per capita tax revenues in 1996
against residuals from a regression of state appropriations on per capita tax revenues in 1996. These are
institutional level regressions and each point on the graph represents enrollment weighted state averages for
those states with multiple institutions.


                                                     12
states do appear to prefer one form of aid to another. New Jersey, Minnesota,

Pennsylvania and Illinois are above average funders of public higher education

institutions, while Alaska, Hawaii, North Dakota and Mississippi are above average

funders of aid to students.13 Wealthier and larger states seem to support higher education

on both fronts (northeast quadrant of figure) more greatly than the rural and poorer states

(southwest quadrant). It is somewhat of a surprise that no clear regional disparities

emerge when comparing state preferences for direct student aid versus in-kind

institutional aid.

        During the 1990s, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi and New Mexico each

introduced direct student financial aid programs that were based on student performance

rather than student need. In some cases these grant aid awards came at the expense of

their need-based aid programs. The largest program was Georgia’s HOPE scholarship

program which awarded $208M of Georgia’s total grant aid support of $209M in

academic year 1998. Florida and New Mexico’s programs each comprised well over

50% of their states’ total grant aid funding, while the programs in Mississippi and

Arkansas were very small.

        Tuition reciprocity agreements are agreements between a school or state and

another state or consortium that allow a nonresident student from a neighboring state to

attend the public institution at less than the normal out-of-state tuition. The magnitude of

the discount may depend on the type of program in which a student is interested, the

county in which a student resides, the availability of opportunities in the home state,

whether the student is an undergraduate or graduate, whether the student attends part- or


13
  This table shows results for need based aid. Many states are now moving to merit-based aid programs
(e.g. GA) and inclusion of this would alter this picture.


                                                  13
full-time and many other factors. While some schools negotiate agreements bilaterally

with other states, many now choose to participate in consortium agreements in which a

number of states in a geographical region are treated similarly under the agreement.

         Tuition reciprocity agreements typically do not require that an institution accept a

given number of students, or all students whose “quality” is above a specified level, from

out-of-state. They only specify that if the out-of-state students are admitted that the

tuition charged to them be below the normal out-of-state student rate. Given that the

political process has approved the agreement, at the margin, institutions will only accept

students under a tuition reciprocity agreement if there is excess capacity at the institution

for the programs in which the students are applying, or if the accepted students yield

more in prestige to the university than accepting more in-state students would yield the

institution and if rejecting the marginal in-state students will not cause political problems

for the institution.14

         Under these circumstances, the marginal revenue received by the public

university from accepting out-of-state students enrolled under tuition reciprocity

agreements is always at least equal to the marginal revenue the institution would have

received if it had not enrolled these students. While the marginal revenue the institution

receives from a student admitted under a tuition reciprocity agreement may be less than

the institution would have received if it could have enrolled more out-of state-students

paying its normal out of state tuition, the latter would not always be possible. Moreover,

the state as a whole is better off with the tuition reciprocity agreement because of the


14
  Because of these conditions, sometimes the flagship institutions in a state opt out of the program. So for
example, the University of California campuses are not part of the Western Interstate Commission on
Higher Education (WICHE) undergraduate exchange consortium, but the California Maritime Academy at
California State University is a participant.


                                                     14
opportunity that students from it also have to study in other states’ public institutions. As

we have indicated above, if the balance of students flowing between two states is not

equal, often there are additional payments made directly to the coffers of the state that is

receiving more students than it is sending.

         In the spring of 2001, the Cornell Higher Education Research Institute conducted

a “Survey of Tuition Reciprocity Agreements at Public Research and Doctoral

Universities”. The sample consisted of all 149 public institutions that were classified as

Research or Doctoral institutions by the Carnegie Foundation in their 1994 classification

scheme. Sixty-one of the 128 universities that responded to the survey said that they

participated in a tuition reciprocity program with schools in another state, or as part of a

consortium. Table 7 indicates that 39 of the 91 institutions in our sample, a slightly

smaller percentage than found in our reciprocity survey sample, participated in such an

arrangement.

         Four consortia are represented among our survey responses: the Academic

Common Market, the Midwest Student Exchange Program, the New England Regional

Student Program and the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. Some

institutions in the survey also participate in student exchange programs (e.g. the National

Student Exchange, the Consortium of Universities in the Washington Metropolitan Area

and the Tuition Exchange, Inc.). Student exchange programs differ from reciprocity

agreements in that students participating in them are either visiting another school for a

specified time period, or eligibility is limited to a narrowly defined group of students.15




15
  A brief description of each of the consortia and exchange programs and the institutions participating in
each is found at http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/cheri, click on surveys and then click on tuition reciprocity.


                                                     15
        While the number of schools participating in these agreements has not changed

over our sample period, columns 4 and 5 suggest that students have been increasingly

taking advantage of such programs. In addition, the schools that report reciprocal

enrollments also enroll a larger share of nonresidents than the average school in our

survey. In 1996 for example, an average of 23.9% of enrolled students were nonresidents

in the 28 schools reporting reciprocal enrollments while an average of 19.6% of enrolled

students were nonresidents in the entire sample.

        Increasing nonresident enrollment shares under these programs does not translate

into higher revenues for public higher education institutions given that these students

often pay the in-state tuition level.16 The final column of the table indicates that for these

schools, nearly a quarter of their nonresident enrollments are covered under this plan.

Returning to our example from earlier, a typical school would then forego about

$720,000 in additional tuition revenues due to the presence of these agreements.17



IV. Estimation Strategy & Results

A) Model Specification

        To achieve a fuller understanding of the causes and consequences of changing

tuition and enrollments, we move to a multivariate analyses. We estimate a system of

16
  Recall from above that sometimes revenues flow from one state to another if the flow of students across
the two states does not equalize. However, such revenues accrue to the state, not to the academic
institution.
17
   Of course, it is unlikely that anyone would leave cash on the table. The long term cost savings from
eliminating program duplication will very likely make up for the revenue losses. States might also gain
politically from engaging in these agreements. States that send students likely save money because they do
not have to establish and maintain costly programs. States and colleges that receive students can operate
programs more efficiently because they gain quality students and if the supply of students is elastic, they
might be able to fill spaces that otherwise would have been vacant. Students benefit by not having to pay
out-of-state tuition, which may have prevented many of them from earning degrees in the fields they had
chosen.


                                                    16
four simultaneously determined equations using panel data, with the institution - year as

our unit of analysis, in which the logarithm of state need-based grant aid per student, the

logarithm of in-state tuition, the logarithm of out-of-state tuition and the logarithm of the

odds-ratio of the share of first time freshmen that are nonresidents are each specified to

be functions of each other, state and institutional level variables, federal financial aid

variables and random uncorrelated (across equations) error terms.18 Our model should be

thought of as being reduced form, rather than structural, because the variables found on

the right hand side of each equation likely capture both demand and supply factors and

represent an equilibrium condition in the underlying structural model.

            To give the reader a sense of the sides of the market from which each variable

originates and how the system of equations is identified, table 8 summarizes the variables

that are excluded and included in each equation. A blank indicates that the variable is

excluded from that equation. For included variables, a “D” indicates that the variable is

assumed to influence the outcome through the demand side of the market, an “S” that it is

assumed to influence the outcome through the supply side of the market, and a “B” that it

is assumed to influence the outcome through both sides of the market. Similarly, a “+”

indicates that we expect that the net effect of the variable is to increase the outcome, a “-”

that we expect that the net effect of the variable is to decrease the outcome and a “?” that

the prediction is ambiguous.

            The state need-based grant aid equation is assumed to result from the interaction

of students’ demand for financial aid and the state’s willingness to supply it. The in-state

tuition equation is assumed to result from the interaction of in-state students’ demand for

seats at the institution and the institution’s willingness to supply such seats. The
18
     The first variable, average state need-based aid per student is observed at the state, not institutional level.


                                                          17
institution’s willingness to supply seats can be thought of as being derived from a utility

maximizing model of university behavior in which the objective of the university is to

maximize its prestige, which in turn depends upon the average quality of the students that

it enrolls, subject to a balanced budget constraint (Ehrenberg and Sherman 1984,

Ehrenberg 2000, Garvin 1980, Winston 1999). A public university’s behavior may also

be constrained by its state government, which may have different objectives than the

university does. For example, while the university may want to maximize student quality,

the political process may want to keep in-state tuition as low as possible (Groen and

White 2001). The out-of-state tuition and the share of nonresident students enrolled at an

institution are similarly assumed to result from the interaction of out-of-state students’

demand for seats at the institution and the institution’s willingness to supply such seats,

the latter constrained by the political process in the state.

         The grant aid equation includes variables that relate to federal, other state and

institutional sources of student financial aid. Federal loan and grant program variables

included in the model are the size of the maximum Pell grant (PELL), the share of

households with incomes below that necessary to be eligible for a Pell (ELIG), the

percent cap on costs (CAP) and categorical variables that indicate the degree the degree

of access that students have to subsidized federal loans(1979, 1992).19 The presence of

state merit aid programs (MERIT) would both reduce student demand for need based aid

and reduce a state’s pool of available resources from which it might fund need-based aid


19
  The percent cap is a percentage of college costs that students were eligible to receive in Pell grants. The
cap was removed in 1992, so that students at low-tuition institutions that were eligible for the maximum
Pell grant could use any funds in excess of tuition costs to pay for living and other expenses. In 1981,
student access to subsidized loans was dramatically reduced with the repeal of the Middle Income Student
Assistance Act (MISAA) after a run-up in usage from its inception in 1978. Access was expanded again in
1992 with the removal of a portion of housing assets in the expected family contribution formula.



                                                     18
programs. Variables that relate to institutional sources of aid are the logarithm of real

state appropriations per student (APP), the logarithm of real endowment per student

(END) and the logarithm of in-state tuition (TUITI) – each of these variables generates

income that the institution can use, in principle, for scholarship aid. Also included in this

equation to help capture a state’s financial capacity to provide need based student aid are

its real tax revenues per capita (TAX), its unemployment rate (UNEMP) and the share of

its population that is college aged (AGE).

         To control for the impact of enrollment pressure on grant aid, we include a

measure of state seating capacity (SEAT), calculated as the ratio of a state’s predicted

enrollment in its public higher education institutions to its actual enrollment in these

institutions in a year.20 Additional measures of enrollment pressures that are included are

the share of new students enrolled in private colleges (PRIV) and in two-year colleges

(TWO). Also included in the equation are the overall quality, as measured by the

Barron’s rating of public (BPUB) and private (BPRIV) institutions in the state, the

logarithm of real average tuition in the region (TUITR - excluding the state in which the

institution is located) and the degree of political autonomy of each school, as measured

by the number of governing boards in the state (GOV).21 Finally, we include the ratio of

graduate enrollments to undergraduate enrollments at the institution (GRAD).22


20
  Predicted enrollments are calculated by dividing a state’s full-time equivalent public 4 year enrollment in
1970 by the size of the college age population in the state in 1970 (ages 18-24) and then multiplying this
ratio by a weighted cohort size in each year of our study. If both the share of students going to publics and
college enrollment rates in a state remained constant over time, then the weight used to calculate predicted
enrollments in year t would simply be the size of the college age population in year t. Between 1970-1998,
the share of students attending publics was stable (between 75-80%), but enrollment rates increased
nationwide from 28.8% to 42%. To account for the enrollment rate expansion, we allow the population
weight to grow as the enrollment rate grows in each year. We would prefer to have used the ratio of seats
available in public colleges to the number of its high school graduates as a capacity measure, but did not do
so because of endogeneity concerns.



                                                     19
         Our in-state tuition equation is similarly specified. However, real state tax

revenues per capita are excluded from this equation because the impact of state resources

on tuition is captured by the inclusion of real state appropriations per student (APP). The

latter is treated as exogenous in our model.23 In addition, we include institutional

measures of school quality - categorical variables that indicate the Barron’s rank of each

institution.24 More generous federal financial aid programs make it easier for a school to

increase tuition for at least two reasons. First, federal financial aid may reduce barriers to

entry for students at the margin of attending college. Second, institutions can increase

tuition and for those students not at the grant or loan limits, each dollar of tuition increase

will be covered by an additional dollar of aid, up until some maximum. The availability

of merit aid will increase the desirability of attending college for all students, putting

upward pressure on tuition. Increased state appropriations per student may allow schools

to keep tuition low, but this increase in in-kind student aid may result in an increase in

demand, forcing tuition upward. Larger endowments per student and higher Barron’s

rankings reflect higher institutional quality and permit higher tuition levels.



21
  Lowry (2001a, 2001a) hypothesized that the greater the number of different independent governing
boards in a state, the more decentralized state governance of higher education was and thus the less that
political pressure from the state could be used to keep tuition levels down. He found evidence that this
relationship held. It is not clear, however, whether state aid per student will be higher or lower in states
with more political autonomy for their higher education institutions.
22
  The grant aid per student equation is estimated using state level data. As such all institutional level
variables, including real state appropriations per student, are excluded from this equation.
23
  As noted above, Lowry (2001a, 2001a) found that it was permissible to treat state appropriations per
student as exogenous in the in-state tuition equation.
24
  For roughly three decades, Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges has assigned categorical rankings to
4-year institutions according to a subjective measure of quality. From best to worst, they rank institutions
as most competitive, highly competitive, very competitive, competitive, less competitive and non-
competitive. We created a categorical variable HIGHB for those institutions in the top two categories as
well as LOWB for those in the bottom two. The coefficients on these variables are then relative to the
omitted middle categories.


                                                      20
        The logarithm of real out-of-state tuition (TUITO) is specified to be a function of

the logarithm of real in-state tuition (TUITO) and most of the variables included in the

in-state tuition equation. Again real state tax revenue per capita is excluded from the

equation. A notable difference is that we replace the institution’s Barron’s rankings with

measures of the shares of students in the state enrolled at other public (BSPUB) or private

(BSPRIV) institutions in the state that are enrolled at schools of equal or better Barron’s

rankings than the institution. These variables capture the institution’s monopoly power

within the state for students seeking to attend institutions of its quality or higher.

Similarly, we include the share of students in the region enrolled in schools of equal or

better quality that are enrolled in private schools (SPRIV); the greater this share is the

higher the average tuition will be at institutions perceived as good alternatives to the

institution.

         The logarithm of the share of first time freshmen that are nonresidents (NON) is

included to capture the financial benefits to the institution from increasing out-of-state

enrollments. Finally, we include the logarithm of the share of undergraduates that are

enrolled under reciprocity agreements (RECIP).

        The final equation is the nonresident enrollment share equation. The dependent

variable in this equation is specified as the logarithm of the odds-ratio of the share of first

time freshmen that are nonresidents to allow the error term to be normally distributed.

This equation is specified very similarly to the out-of-state tuition equation, but now the

logarithm of real out-of-state tuition (TUITO) is included as an explanatory variable. We

also include the logarithm of the mean SAT scores in the state in which the institution is




                                              21
located (SAT) to see if states with a low supply of high “quality” high school graduates

seek to recruit out-of-state students to attract top talent.25

           Starting with the Georgia HOPE program, which was established in 1993, a

number of states have recently adopted merit based grant aid programs for students who

attend college within state. These programs increase the incentive that students from

those states have to attend college within state.26 During our sample period, only

Georgia, Arkansas, Florida, New Mexico and Mississippi instituted such programs

(between 1994 and 1998), but seven more did so by 2002. Such programs should serve

to increase the demand for in-state students to attend public institutions in the state,

which may limit the public institution’s ability to expand, or even maintain, its

nonresident enrollment share. We include year/state interaction terms for those years in

which an institution was in a state that had adopted one of these programs in the

nonresident enrollment share equation to test if these programs do in fact reduce

nonresident enrollment shares.27

           We present two types of estimates for each equation. First, to understand why

tuition, grant aid and nonresident enrollment vary across states and institutions at a point

in time, we present pooled cross-section time-series estimates, using institutional level

data for 8 years between 1979 and 1998. Year dichotomous variables are included in

these models to control for idiosyncratic time effects.

             While the wide variation in the cross-section data makes this approach

appealing, it is subject to possible omitted variables bias. For example, institutions
25
     Groen and White (2001) discuss this issue in detail.
26
     Dynarski –this volume
27
  For example, we include a dummy variable that takes on the value of 1 for Georgia institutions in our
sample for 1994, 1996 and 1998, and is zero otherwise.


                                                       22
located in beautiful areas, other factors held constant, may be able to charge higher

tuitions. In this example, omission of “beauty” as an explanatory variable might bias the

estimates of other explanatory variables’ parameters effects on tuition if these variables

are correlated with “beauty.” We have attempted to minimize this problem by including

a carefully constructed, rich set of explanatory variables in our models.

         An alternative way of controlling for omitted variables is to take advantage of the

panel nature of the data and employ a fixed effects estimation strategy. The panel data

results are useful in understanding how changes in explanatory variables affect changes

in the dependent variables. In addition, the panel data results will be employed to

simulate how changes in key explanatory variables will affect changes in the outcomes of

interest to us.

         For each approach, we estimate a jointly determined system of four equations,

using a two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimation procedure to control for the

endogeneity of all four outcomes.28 2SLS estimation is necessary to attempt to correct

for the biases that result from the violation of the orthogonality conditions necessary for

OLS to be unbiased, though the signs of the potential biases here are ambiguous. The

success of this procedure is highly dependent on finding appropriate “instruments” for the

endogenous variables in the system.29

28
  The efficiency of a system such as ours can be improved if one accounts for the correlation among the
error terms in each equation. 3SLS estimates were largely similar to the 2SLS estimates, but are not
reported here due to concern that one or more of the equations in the system are misspecified, which can
effect estimates in other equations (Johnston and DiNardo).
29
   In the grant aid equation, we instrument for in-state tuition using the institution’s Barron’s ranking
because the quality of an institution’s students likely affects tuition, but not a state’s willingness to disperse
financial aid to all students in the state. In the in-state tuition equation, we instrument for grant aid with
state tax revenues per capita and the weighted ranking of public schools in the state. In the out-of-state
tuition equation, we instrument for in-state tuition with state private enrollment share, state two year
enrollment share, weighted ranking of private schools in the state, state tax revenues per capita and
weighted rank of public schools in the state. Nonresident enrollment shares are instrumented with average


                                                       23
         Though finding suitable exclusion restrictions is a challenging endeavor for this

system of equations, the estimates that follow in table 9 have proven to be robust to a

variety of specification changes. The key exclusion restrictions that are necessary to

identify the model are real state tax revenue per capita in the in state and out-of-state

tuition equations and average SAT scores of high school students in the state in the

nonresident enrollment share equation. Many of the other exclusions are made to reduce

multicollinearity.

         Estimates in a non-instrumented setting, or using different instrument sets, or

from a reduced form system are all strikingly similar to the 2SLS results that follow and

as such, we present only the 2SLS results. We suspect that the insensitivity of the 2SLS

estimates and their similarity to OLS estimates is due to the instruments being either “too

weak” or “too strong”. By the former, we mean that there is not enough exogenous

variation to produce a change in the outcome in question (with a corresponding large

asymptotic variance matrix of the 2SLS estimator). By the latter, we mean that the

instruments may also be correlated with the underlying model’s disturbance term.



B) Econometric Estimates: Cross – Section Findings

         The odd numbered columns of table 9 present the estimated coefficients and

standard errors from the cross-section equations. Turning first to the average state need-

based grant aid per student equation (column (i)), states that charge a higher level of

tuition to its own residents (TUITI) also award them with more need based grant aid.



SAT scores of high school seniors in the state. In the nonresident enrollment share equation, out-of-state
tuition is instrumented with state private enrollment share, state two-year enrollment share, weighted
ranking of private schools in the state, state tax revenues per capita and weighted rank of public schools in
the state.


                                                     24
However, the average (excluding in-state) tuition in the region (TUITR) that the state is

located in does not seem to affect the level of grant aid that is awarded, other variables

held constant.30 Wealthier states, as measured by per capita tax revenues (TAX), award

more grant aid per student, but states in which a larger share of the population is of

college-aged (AGE) award less aid per student.

         One might expect that growing state affinities for non-need based aid programs

would crowd out spending on need based grant aid to students. The preliminary evidence

varies by state. While it is not surpising to see that Georgia, Mississippi and Florida have

coupled increasing merit based aid generosity with decreasing need based aid support, it

is surprising to see that Arkansas and New Mexico have responded by increasing their

need based aid generosity, ceteris parabis.

         As expected, states with higher quality public (BPUB) and private (BPRIV)

academic institutions, and thus likely higher costs, offer more grant aid. States in which a

larger share of students attend low-cost (and thus likely low state-appropriations) two-

year colleges (TWO) award more grant aid per student. However, as expected, the state

appropriation per student to the specific 4-year institution (APP) does not affect the

average need based state aid per student attending public institutions in the state. States

with greater available seating capacity in their public institutions – i.e. their predicted

enrollments exceed what they actually enroll in a given year (SEAT) award less grant aid

per student, contrary to our a prior expectation. Finally, institutional autonomy (GOV)

does not seem to be correlated with state grant aid generosity.




30
   All of the results discussed in the paper are ceteris paribus, or other variables in the model held constant,
findings.


                                                      25
       Moving to the in-state tuition equation (column (iii)), we find that every 10%

increase in state need based grant aid per student (AID) across states is associated with

public universities charging tuitions about 2.7% higher. Evidence on the impact of merit

aid programs is again mixed – with Georgia and Mississippi charging higher tuition than

would otherwise be expected and New Mexico charging less. Schools that receive higher

state appropriations per student (APP) charge lower tuition, though the elasticity is far

from unity. As expected, higher quality schools, as measured by better Barron’s rankings

(HIGHB) and higher endowment per student (END) are able to charge more for their

product.

        Turning to other variables, public universities in states in which the

unemployment rate (UNEMP) is high and hence the opportunity cost of enrolling in

school is low, charge higher in-state tuition, as do institutions in states in which a smaller

share of students attend two-year colleges (TWO). Unlike Lowry (2001b), we find no

evidence that public universities in states with more autonomous governance structures

(GOV) charge higher tuition. Finally, when private competition in a state is important, as

measured by the share of first time freshmen in the state that are enrolled in private

academic institutions (PRIV), public universities are able to charge higher tuition.

       Column (v) in part B of the table displays the results for the nonresident tuition

equation. In-state tuition (TUITI) is a strong predictor of out-of-state tuition, although

the elasticity is less than one. An institution’s out-of-state tuition does not appear to be

significantly positively associated with its nonresident enrollment share (NON).

Institutions in states in which a larger share of households are eligible for Pell grants

(ELIG) appear to charge lower nonresident tuition. As with in-state tuition, institutions




                                              26
with more selective Barron’s rankings (HIGHB) are able to charge higher out-of-state

tuition, while institutions receiving higher state appropriations per student (APP) charge

less (not statistically significant). Regional competition clearly also matters, as schools

located in regions in which a large share of students attend private schools (SPRIV) are

able to charge more to out-of-state residents. Similarly, when the average tuition in the

geographical region is higher (TUITR), schools also charge more to nonresidents. Unlike

in the instate tuition equation, evidence of the impact of merit aid programs (MERIT) on

tuition is not mixed – they seem to have had little effect on nonresident tuition levels.

       A striking finding is that non-resident undergraduates may be partially subsidizing

the huge costs of graduate education at these research universities. Across institutions,

the higher is the ratio of graduate to undergraduate students (GRAD), the higher is the

out-of-state undergraduate tuition. However, this finding might merely reflect that

universities with larger shares of their students enrolled as graduate students may be

higher quality institutions, which attract better faculty and thus can charge higher tuition

levels to non-residents.

       Column (vii) presents the nonresident enrollment share equation. As one might

expect, institutions with higher out-of-state tuition levels (TUITO), ceteris parabis, enroll

smaller shares of nonresidents. While the variables relating to federal financial aid

policies do not contribute to explaining the cross-sectional variation in nonresident

enrollment shares, measures relating to institutional quality and financial resources

clearly do. Schools with larger endowments per student attract more nonresidents, while

schools with below average Barron’s rankings (LOWB) attract fewer.




                                             27
          Another variable relating to institutional quality is the institution’s share of

enrollments in a state at schools of equal or higher quality. Other variables held constant,

institutions whose enrollment is large relative to the total of all public enrollments

(BPUB) or all private enrollments (BPRIV) at institutions of equal or greater quality in

the state have larger shares of nonresident enrollments.31

          Flagship public institutions face political pressure to ensure access to the

children of state residents. We do not find however that when seating capacity at all

public institutions in a state is low (SEAT), that public institutions enroll smaller

fractions of nonresidents.32

         We do find that schools located in states where high school student quality is

relatively poor (SAT) enroll a larger share of nonresidents – they need to look elsewhere

to find high quality students. Contrary to our expectations, we find that once we control

for other factors, schools in states with more governing boards (GOV), hence more

autonomous institutions, enroll smaller shares of nonresidents. We see that states

providing higher state appropriations per student (APP) tend to enroll fewer nonresidents.

While one might expect nonresidents to prefer to attend institutions that receive more

state support per student, sometimes state support per student is endogenous in the sense

that institutions may receive greater state appropriations per student for each in-state

student they enroll. Finally, we do see some evidence that in-state residents formerly



31
  For example, for the public schools, we simply take the ratio of full-time equivalent first time freshmen
enrollments in the school under observation and divide it by the total number of full-time equivalent first
time freshmen students in public institutions in the state that have at least as high a Barron’s ranking as the
school under observation.
32
  Due to concerns that the enrollment constraints at the University of California may be heavily
influencing our results, we reestimated all of our equations without these schools. These results were very
similar (with larger standard errors) to those presented in the text.


                                                      28
attending college out-of-state have been lured back home due to the availability of non-

need based aid.

C) Econometric Estimates – Panel Data Results

         The even numbered columns of Table 9 present our fixed effects estimates.

Because these parameters are estimated from within institution changes over time, they

are useful for understanding the potential impacts of policy changes. As most of the

variation in our data occurs across institutions, fewer statistically significant coefficients

arise. Our discussion focuses on results that significantly differ from those found in the

cross section.

         Turning first to the state need based grant aid equation (column (ii)), grant aid per

student does not respond to changes in either in-instate tuition (TUITI) or changes in

regional tuition (TUITR) levels. Grant aid does increase when per capita state tax revenue

(TAX) increases and state grant aid also responds to changes in income distribution of a

state’s population. An increase in the share of households whose incomes fall below the

maximum level that permits them to be eligible for Pell grants (ELIG), leads to higher

levels of state needs based grant aid per student.

         Turning next to the in-state tuition equation (column (iv)), the panel estimates are

very different from the cross-section ones. While changes in state grant aid levels (AID)

now do not appear to influence in-state tuition levels, institutions are seen to respond to

increases in the average tuition in their geographical region (TUITR), though the effect is

small.    While increased state appropriations per student (AID) are associated with lower

in-state tuition changes, neither increases in endowment per student (END) nor changes

in the share of students that are graduate students (GRAD) are statistically significantly




                                              29
associated with changes in in-state tuition in the panel. In addition, it does not appear

that institutions are capturing the additional revenues that have been generated by federal

and state financial aid programs. Neither increases in the generosity of the Pell grant

(PELL) nor implementation of the merit aid programs has led to significant increases in

instate tuition levels.

        The nonresident tuition equation results (column (vi)) indicate that changes in in-

state tuition levels have an even larger effect on changes to nonresident tuition levels than

the cross-section indicated. Due to the overwhelming dependence of nonresident tuition

on in-state tuition, very little variation can be explained by other variables in our model.

However, there are a few interesting observations to be made. While we found that

schools with a higher proportion of their student body represented by graduate students

(GRAD) charged higher nonresident tuition, we do not find that increases in this share

are associated with increases in nonresident tuition levels. Further, there is no indication

that seating capacity affects the nonresident pricing decisions of institutions.

        Finally, turning to the nonresident enrollment share equations (column (viii)),

while the nonresident enrollment share is not responsive to changes in out-of-state tuition

levels (TUITO), it is positively related to increases in regional tuition levels (TUITR).

As seats at quality private schools in the region continue to make up a larger share of

overall enrollments (SPRIV), we see that nonresident enrollment shares will fall at the

publics. Last, the presence of merit aid programs in Florida and Georgia have led

institutions in each state to enroll far fewer nonresidents than they had before these

programs were instituted.




                                             30
D. Policy Simulations

        Table 10 outlines the effects that selected policy changes have on the four

outcomes, using the panel data estimates presented in Table 9.33 Inspection of the grant

aid results indicates that changes in grant aid are primarily a result of political and

demographic factors in a state, not the result of economic factors. If a state at the average

per student grant aid level experienced an increase of $1,000 in per capita tax revenues,

that state would only increase per student grant aid by $11 over an average of $307.

        Increases in state support for higher education institutions helps to curb in-state

tuition increases but the magnitude of this effect is quite small. For the average institution

in our sample, it would take an increase of $1,000 in state appropriations per student to

generate an in-state tuition reduction of $104. The comparable reduction in out-of-state

tuition would be only $2.

        While the elasticity of out-of-state tuition with respect to in-state tuition is close

to one, the coefficient estimates imply that every $1,000 increase in in-state tuition, leads

to a larger increase, at the mean $2,584, in out-of-state tuition. When institutions

maintain the ratio of out-of state to in-state tuition, an increase in the latter is associated

with a larger real increase in the former.

         Finally, our estimates suggest that changes in most of the variables in the model

fail to influence the share of nonresidents that public universities enroll. Even the

statistical impact of reciprocity agreements is inconsequential. While increases in

average tuition rates in the region tend to increase nonresident enrollment shares, clearly

individual institutions have little or no control over these rates.

33
  The table reports marginal effects from the presented regressions evaluated at the sample means in the
data. When we calculated the marginal effects for individual institutions and then took their means, the
impacts were nearly identical.


                                                    31
V. Conclusion

        In this chapter, we have analyzed why state need based grant aid per student, in-

state and out-of-state tuition levels and nonresident enrollment shares differ across

flagship public research universities at a point in time and how each changes over time.

There are wide disparities across states in political persuasion, demographic

characteristics, income, the availability of private college alternatives, historical factors,

university governance and funding priorities that lead to most of the cross-section

differences that we observe in these outcomes. Exploiting the panel nature of the data

enables us to control for unmeasured institutional heterogeneity, but it also removes

much of the variation in our data. Despite this, there are four insights to be drawn from

our empirical work.

        First, aside from the higher quality institutions, public universities cannot (or do

not) use nonresident enrollment as a revenue generating strategy. Rather the institutions

use nonresident enrollments to augment academic quality and/or to take advantage of cost

efficiencies achieved through participation in tuition reciprocity agreements. The

increased usage of tuition reciprocity programs suggests that institutions realize this

revenue limitation. These agreements also reflect the growing regionalization of these

state schools. In fact, institutions respond to higher regional tuition by charging high in-

state and out-of-state tuition and we see that nonresident students tend to migrate more

often when average tuition in their region of residence is higher.

        Second, it does not appear that institutions attempt to capture additional revenues

by cannibalizing the monies provided by federal and state grant aid programs. We find

no evidence that increases in the generosity of the federal Pell grant program and state




                                              32
need-based grant aid awards lead to increases in either in-state or out-of-state tuition

levels. Further, there is little evidence that institutions in states where merit based aid

programs were initiated have made attempts to capture these additional monies as well.

         Third, it does not appear that public institutions make up for losses in state

institutional appropriations by adjusting the proportion of students they enroll from out of

state.

         Finally, quality plays an important role in public higher education. An

institution’s quality, as measured by it’s Barron’s ranking, influences the in-state and out-

of-state tuition levels that it can charge and the share of its undergraduates that come

from out-of-state. In total, our estimates provide some small support for the theory that

institutions enroll nonresidents to enhance the quality of their student bodies.

         We must caution that the period our data span ends before the recession of the

early years of the 21st century, the accompanying growing tightness in state government

budgets and thus the decline in the growth, and in some cases the decline in the level, of

real state appropriations per student to public higher education institutions. Finding other

sources of revenue became increasingly important to public higher education institutions

and a number increased their in state tuition levels at double digit rates for the 2002-2003

academic year. Time will tell if they will increasingly turn to out-of state students’ tuition

revenues to fill the holes in their budgets.




                                               33
                                      References


Balderston, Frederick. “Tuition and Financial Aid in Higher Education,” Economics of
Education Review v16, n3 (June 1997): 337-343.

Bezmen, Trisha and Craig A. Depken II. “School Characteristics and the Demand for
College,” Economics of Education Review v17, n2 (April 1998): 205-210.

Brewer, Dominic J., Eric Eide and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. “Does it Pay to Attend an Elite
Private College? Cross Cohort Evidence on the Effects of College Type on Earnings,
Journal of Human Resources v34, (1999): 104-123.

Clotfelter, Charles T., Ronald G. Ehrenberg, Malcolm Getz and John J. Siegfried.
Economic Challenges in Higher Education, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
1991 (NBER).

Coopers & Lybrand, L.L.P. “The Impact of Federal Student Assistance on College
Tuition Levels,” Washington, DC, (September 1997).

Dynarski, Susan. “The Consequences of Merit Aid,” in College Choices: The Economics
of Which College, When College, and How to Pay For It, Cambridge, MA: The
University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Dynarski, Susan. “Loans, Liquidity and Schooling Decisions,” unpublished manuscript,
Harvard University, (July 2001).

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. Tuition Rising: Why College Costs So Much, Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press, 2000.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Daniel R. Sherman, “Optimal Financial Aid Policies for a
Selective University”, Journal of Human Resources 19 (Spring 1984): 202-230.

Everitt, B.S. Cluster Analysis, 3rd edition. London: Edward Arnold (1993).

Garvin, David The Economics of University Behavior, New York NY: Academic Press,
1980)

Greene, Kenneth V. “The Public Choice of Non-resident College Tuition Levels,” Public
Choice v78, n3-4 (March 1994): 231-240.

Groen, Jeff and Michelle J. White. “In-State versus Out-of-State Students: The
Divergence of Interest between Public Universities and State Governments,” presented at
2001 Annual Cornell Higher Education Research Institute Conference.




                                           34
Hauptman, Arthur M. and Cathy Krop. “Federal Student Aid and the Growth in College
Costs and Tuition: Examining the Relationship,” In Commission on the Cost of Higher
Education, Straight Talk About College Costs and Prices, Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press
(1998).

Hoxby, Caroline M. “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education
Explains College Tuition,” NBER Working Paper No. 6323, (December 1997).

Johnston, J. and J. DiNardo. Econometric Methods, 4th ed. NY: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

Koshal, Rajindar K. and Manjulika Koshal. “State Appropriation and Higher Education
Tuition: What is the Relationship?” Education Economics v8, n1 (April 2000): 81-89.

Lowry, Robert C. “The Effects of State Political Interests and Campus Outputs on Public
University Revenues,” Economics of Education Review v20, (2001): 105-119 (2001a).

Lowry, Robert C. “Governmental Structure, Trustee Selection and Public Universities
and Spending: Multiple Means to Similar Ends,” American Journal of Political Science
v45 (October 2001): 845-861 (2001b).

McPherson, Michael and Morton Owen Shapiro. The Student Aid Game: Meeting Need
and Rewarding Talent in American Higher Education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press (1998).

McPherson, Michael and Morton Owen Shapiro. Keeping College Affordable:
Government and Educational Opportunity. Wash., DC: The Brookings Institution (1991).

Mixon, Franklin G., Jr. “A Public Choice Note on College Student Migration,”
International Journal of Manpower v13, n3 (1992): 63-68.

Mixon, Franklin G., Jr. and Yu Hsing. “The Determinants of Out-of-State Enrollments in
Higher Education: A Tobit Analysis,” Economics of Education Review v13, n4
(December 1994): 329-335.

National Center for Education Statistics. “Study of College Costs and Prices, 1988-89
to1997-98,” commissioned by Congress in 1998 in the amendments to the Higher
Education Act, (December 2001).

Peltzman, Sam. “The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private Expenditures:
The Case of Higher Education,” Journal of Political Economy v81, n1 (1973): 1-27.

Quigley, John M. and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. “Public Choices in Public Higher Education,”
in Eds. Charles T. Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, Studies of Supply and Demand in
Higher Education, National Bureau of Economic Research (1993): 243-283.




                                           35
Rose, David C. and Robert L. Sorensen. “High Tuition, Financial Aid, and Cross-
subsidization: Do Needy Students Really Benefit?” Southern Economic Journal v59, n1
(July 1992): 66-76.

Siow, Aloysius. “Some Evidence on the Signaling Role of Research in Academia,”
Economics Letters v54, n3 (July 1997): 271-276.

Strathman, James G. “Migration, Benefit Spillovers and State Support of Higher
Education,” Urban Studies v31, n6 (June 1994): 913-920.

Winston, Gordon, “Subsidies, Hierarchies and Peers: The Awkward Economics of
Higher Education”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (Winter 1999): 13-36.




                                          36
                                   Figure 1
1998 Average Share of First Time Freshmen that are Nonresidents at Research
                    Institutions in the 50 United States
           (categories computed through means clustering analysis)




                                                 0.6% - 16.7% (21)
                                                 17.8% - 26.6% (11)
                                                 27.7% - 36.6% (13)
                                                 39.5% - 66.0% (5)




                                     37
                                                      Table 1
                                 Flagship Public Research Institutions in the Sample

                                                      1994                                                               1994
                                                Carnegie                                                           Carnegie
School                                       Classification   School                                            Classification
Arizona State University (AZ)                            RI   University of Hawaii at Manoa (HI)                            RI
Auburn University (AL)                                  RII   University of Houston (TX)                                   RII
Clemson University (SC)                                 RII   University of Idaho (ID)                                     RII
Colorado State University (CO)                           RI   University of Illinois at Chicago (IL)                        RI
Florida State University (FL)                            RI   University of Illinois at Urb.-Champaign (IL)                 RI
Georgia Institute of Technology (GA)                     RI   University of Iowa (IA)                                       RI
Indiana University at Bloomington (IN)                   RI   University of Kansas (KS)                                     RI
Iowa State University (IA)                               RI   University of Kentucky (KY)                                   RI
Kansas State University (KS)                            RII   University of Louisville (KY)                                RII
Kent State University (OH)                              RII   University of Maine (ME)                                     DII
Louisiana State University (LA)                          RI   University of Maryland - College Park (MD)                    RI
Michigan State University (MI)                           RI   University of Massachusetts - Amherst (MA)                    RI
Mississippi State University (MS)                       RII   University of Michigan (MI)                                   RI
New Mexico State University (NM)                         RI   University of Minnesota - Twin Cities (MN)                    RI
North Carolina State University (NC)                     RI   University of Mississippi (MS)                               RII
Ohio State University (OH)                               RI   University of Missouri, Columbia (MO)                         RI
Ohio University (OH)                                    RII   University of Montana (MT)                                   DII
Oklahoma State University (OK)                          RII   University of Nebraska at Lincoln (NE)                        RI
Oregon State University (OR)                             RI   University of Nevada-Reno (NV)                               DII
Pennsylvania State University (PA)                       RI   University of New Hampshire (NH)                             DII
Purdue University (IN)                                   RI   University of New Mexico (NM)                                 RI
Rutgers University - New Brunswick (NJ)                  RI   University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill (NC)               RI
Southern Illinois Univ-Carbondale (IL)                  RII   University of North Dakota (ND)                              DII
SUNY at Albany (NY)                                     RII   University of Oklahoma, Norman Campus (OK)                   RII
SUNY at Buffalo (NY)                                    RII   University of Oregon (OR)                                    RII
Temple University (PA)                                   RI   University of Pittsburgh (PA)                                 RI
Texas A&M University (TX)                                RI   University of Rhode Island (RI)                              RII
Texas Tech University (TX)                              RII   University of South Carolina at Columbia (SC)                RII
University of Alaska at Fairbanks (AK)                  DII   University of South Dakota (SD)                              DII
University of Alabama - Birmingham (AL)                  RI   University of South Florida (FL)                             RII
University of Arizona (AZ)                               RI   University of Tennessee at Knoxville (TN)                     RI
University of Arkansas (AR)                             RII   University of Texas at Austin (TX)                            RI
University of California-Berkeley (CA)                   RI   University of Utah (UT)                                       RI
University of California-Davis (CA)                      RI   University of Vermont (VT)                                   RII
University of California-Irvine (CA)                     RI   University of Virginia (VA)                                   RI
University of California-Los Angeles (CA)                RI   University of Washington - Seattle (WA)                       RI
University of California-Riverside (CA)                 RII   University of Wisconsin-Madison (WI)                          RI
University of California-San Diego (CA)                  RI   University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (WI)                       RII
University of California-Santa Barbara (CA               RI   University of Wyoming (WY)                                   RII
University of California-Santa Cruz (CA)                RII   Utah State University (UT)                                    RI
University of Cincinnati (OH)                            RI   Virginia Commonwealth University (VA)                         RI
University of Colorado at Boulder (CO)                   RI   Virginia Polytechnic Institute (VA)                           RI
University of Connecticut (CT)                           RI   Washington State University (WA)                             RII
University of Delaware (DE)                             RII   Wayne State University (MI)                                   RI
University of Florida (FL)                               RI   West Virginia University (WV)                                 RI
University of Georgia (GA)                               RI

states in ( )
Carnegie Classification descriptions can be found at http://chronicle.com/stats/carnegie




                                                               38
                                         Table 2
    Proportion of First-Time Freshmen from Out-of-State (excluding foreign students)
                   Flagship Public Research and Doctoral Institutions

             Unweighted        Standard        Weighted b
Year          Average          Deviation        Average           Median           Minimum           Maximum
1979             0.174            0.120            0.168            0.136             0.011             0.550
1981             0.166            0.120            0.161            0.133             0.007             0.543
        a
1984             0.171            0.128            0.170            0.127             0.010             0.629
1988             0.203            0.136            0.205            0.158             0.012             0.602
1992             0.205            0.157            0.201            0.169             0.001             0.660
1994             0.202            0.152            0.196            0.172             0.005             0.674
1996             0.196            0.145            0.194            0.167             0.005             0.665
1998             0.191            0.139            0.185            0.179             0.006             0.660
%∆                 9.4             15.7            10.3              31.2             -47.8              19.9
a
    Numbers of out-of-state freshmen imputed for the 8 California schools in 1984
b
    Weights are full-time equivalent first time freshmen enrollments

Source: NCES Higher Education General Information Surveys (HEGIS), Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
                                  (IPEDS) via direct surveys and WebCASPAR




                                                      39
                                                              Table 3
                                       In-State and Out-of-State Tuition Levels (1996 dollars)
                                         Flagship Public Research and Doctoral Institutions

                                   In-State                                                           Out-of-State
Year     Average      Wtd. Avg.    Median      Minimum      Maximum             Average   Wtd. Avg.     Median     Minimum   Maximum
1979       1,552         1,582       1,509        676          3,435             4,250      4,246        4,097     2,068      8,182
           (520)                                                                (1,273)

1981       1,633         1,667       1,569        638          3,799             4,431      4,460        4,105     1,844      8,402
           (615)                                                                (1,401)

1984       1,943         2,006       1,861        557          5,126             5,203      5,334        5,047     1,755      9,799
           (756)                                                                (1,614)

1988       2,266         2,320       2,100        1,018        4,840             6,282      6,454        6,059     3,238      13,393
           (859)                                                                (1,833)

1992       2,833         2,887       2,656        1,315        6,724             8,055      8,243        7,604     4,139      16,103
          (1,065)                                                               (2,551)

1994       3,145         3,174       2,847        1,417        6,919             8,766      8,939        8,169     3,982      17,131
          (1,189)                                                               (2,768)

1996       3,348         3,397       3,102        1,568        7,726             9,459      9,689        9,030     5,100      17,916
          (1,185)                                                               (2,659)

1998       3,525         3,553       3,302        1,697        7,669            10,094     10,284        9,586     5,512      18,623
          (1,181)                                                               (2,687)
%∆          127              125     119          151          123                137       142          134        167        128

CAGR        4.2%         4.1%        4.0%         4.7%         4.1%              4.4%       4.5%         4.3%       5.0%      4.2%
Standard deviations in ( )

CAGR: "Compound Annual Growth Rate"
Source: NCES Higher Education General Information Surveys (HEGIS), Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) via WebCASPAR




                                                                   40
                                                    Table 4
                           In-State, Out-of-State Tuition Differentials (1996 dollars)
                             Flagship Public Research and Doctoral Institutions

                                    Weighted
Year            Mean                Average                   Median        Minimum      Maximum

1979             2,698                 2,664                   2,537            1,138     5,028

1981             2,798                 2,793                   2,517            1,077     5,321

1984             3,260                 3,328                   3,150            1,198     6,526

1988             4,016                 4,133                   3,878            1,469     8,968

1992             5,222                 5,357                   4,855            1,878     10,891

1994             5,620                 5,765                   5,471            1,770     11,439

1996             6,110                 6,292                   6,060            2,400     12,206

1998             6,569                 6,731                   6,471            2,537     12,695
%∆                143                   153                    155              123        152

CAGR             4.5%                  4.7%                    4.8%             4.1%      4.7%
Weights are full-time equivalent first time freshmen enrollment
Source: NCES Higher Education General Information Surveys (HEGIS), Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) via direct surveys and WebCASPAR




                                                         41
                                  Table 5
       Need Based Grant Aid to Instate Undergraduate Public Students
          per FTE Public Undergraduate in the State (1996 dollars)
             Flagship Public Research and Doctoral Institutions

         Unweighted      Standard
Year      Average        Deviation        Median      Minimum   Maximum
1979         67.5           78.4              34.9      5.4       415.9
1981         77.2           89.9              45.2      4.5       410.9
1984         93.2          127.0              51.3      11.0      663.4
1988        117.0          134.2              60.9      10.3      594.8
1992        128.6          140.4              89.2      9.0       644.0
1994        139.1          162.4              92.0      10.8      881.1
1996        183.5          196.6              125.8     10.7      949.1
1998        284.7          322.0              180.2     6.8      1585.6
%∆          321.6          310.8              416.8     25.6      281.2

CAGR         7.5%           7.3%              8.6%     1.1%       6.9%

Source: NASSGAP Annual Reports, HEGIS and IPEDS




                                         42
                                      Table 6
             State Appropriations per FTE Undergraduate (1996 dollars)
                 Flagship Public Research and Doctoral Institutions

        Unweighted        Weighted   Standard
Year     Average          Average    Deviation   Median     Minimum      Maximum
1979        9,446          8,932       4,355      8,430       3,200       25,297
1981        9,394          8,809       4,757      8,532       3,126       29,429
1984        9,977          9,544       4,495      9,162       3,180       26,045
1988       11,397          10,788      5,203     10,615       3,698       24,741
1992       11,227          10,934      4,769     10,549       3,300       26,736
1994       11,069          10,835      4,522     10,454       3,361       25,372
1996       11,204          10,922      4,429     10,666       3,180       24,421
1998       10,777          10,569      4,030     10,429       3,218       23,306
2000       11,402          11,173      4,364     11,032       3,328       24,073
%∆          20.7            25.1        0.2       30.9         4.0         -4.8

CAGR        0.9%            1.0%       0.0%       1.2%        0.2%        -0.2%

Source: HEGIS and IPEDS




                                          43
                                                                  Figure 2
                                 1996 State Appropriation per Student vs. Need Based Grant Aid per Student*

                                                                                          CA


                                                                                                  MD
Real Grant aid per student




                                                          ND
                             AK HI                                                                                         NY
  (normalized residual)




                                                  MS
                                                       LA                                                 MI
                                                                  KSOR                                            VT
                                             NH    SD                  TN          ARSC                 NM    IAIN
                                     UT                                                      MA    OHK Y
                                                     NV
                                     IDGA AZ AL              MO                 OK
                                                                                 CO                      WA VI          IL
                              WY NE DE MT                   NC TXFL                WV          CT ME                 MNPA
                                                                           RI                                       NJ


                                                                                        WI

                                           Real State Appropriation per student (normalized residual)
    * Plot of state averages of residuals from regression of state appropriations per student on per capita tax revenues
    versus residuals from regression of grant aid per student on per capita tax revenues.




                                                                      44
                                                           Table 7
                                              Tuition Reciprocity Agreements

  I              II                   III                IV              V              VI             VII
            # schools          agreements,         Mean share of    Max share of    Mean share     Mean share
            reporting            but don't          undergrads      undergrads     of enrollment   nonresidents
           reciprocal             report              that are        that are        that are       that are
Year       enrollments          enrollment           reciprocal      reciprocal    nonresidents*    reciprocal

1979             3                   36                 1.9%            3.9%          14.0%           13.6%

1981             4                   35                 3.8%           12.5%          24.7%           15.4%

1984             10                  29                 3.6%           16.6%          21.5%           16.7%

1988             15                  24                 3.1%           22.4%          23.8%           13.0%

1992             20                  19                 7.6%           30.1%          24.2%           31.4%

1994             24                  15                 6.7%           30.1%          25.4%           26.4%

1996             28                  11                 5.5%           28.6%          23.9%           23.0%


* for those schools that report reciprocal enrollment




                                                               45
                                                      Table 8
                          Expected Impacts and Exclusion Restrictions in Estimated Equations
                                                                                         Equation
                                                                                                             Non-
                                                                                    In-state   Out-State   resident
Variable                                                                Grant Aid    Tuition    Tuition     Share
Log need based grant aid per public student (AID)                                    D +
Log in-state tuition (TUITI)                                              B +                    S +
Log out-state tuition (TUITO)                                                                               B ?
Log nonresident enrollment share (NON)                                                           B ?
Log state tax revenues per capita (TAX)                                   S +
Share of population aged 18-24 (AGE)                                      S -        D +         D +        D +
Share of population with incomes below Max Pell allowable (ELIG)          D+         D -         D -        D -
Log maximum Pell grant award (PELL)                                       B -        D +         D +        D +
Percent cap on costs (CAP)                                                D -        D +         D +        D +
Post-1979 subsidized loan access (1979)                                   D +        D -         D -        D -
Post-1992 subsidized loan access (1992)                                   D +        D -         D -        D -
Log state appropriations per student (APP)                                B -        B ?         B ?        B ?
Log endowment per student (END)                                           B -        B +         B +        B ?
Ratio of fte grad to undergrad enrollments (GRAD)                         D -        B ?         B ?        B ?
Share of fteftf in state in privates (PRIV)                               B ?        S +
Share of fteftf in state in 2 years (TWO)                                 B ?         S -
Weak barron's rank (LOWB)                                                            D -         D -        D -
Strong barron's rank (HIGHB)                                                         D +         D +        D +
Weighted barrons's rank of privates in state (BPRIV)                      B +        D -
Weighted barrons's rank of publics in state (BPUB)                        B ?
Institution's share of quality public seats in the state (BSPUB)                                 B +        D +
Institution's share of qual. private seats in the state (BSPRIV)                                 B +        D +
Share of quality seats in region that are private (SPRIV)                                        D +        D +
Log seating capacity (SEAT)                                               S +        D -         B ?        S +
Log SAT (SAT)                                                                                                S -
Log composite regional tuition (TUITR)                                    B -        S +         D +        D +
Log share of fte undergrads in reciprocity agreements (RECIP)                                               B ?
Log unemployment (UNEMP)                                                  D ?        D ?         B ?        B ?
Log number of governing boards (GOV)                                      S ?        S +         S +         S ?
State merit-based aid programs (MERIT)                                     B-        B +         S +         S -
Endogenous variables



                                                                   46
                                                            Table 9 - Part A
                                         State Need Based Grant Aid and Instate Tuition Equations
                                                              2SLS Results

* 95% significance level                                                (i)          ( ii )             ( iii )             ( iv )
                                                                          GRANT AID                          IN-STATE TUITION
Variable                                                         Cross-Section      Panel           Cross-Section           Panel
                                                                                                        0.274       *       0.178
Log need based grant aid per public student (AID)
                                                                                                       (0.040)             (0.113)
                                                                      1.592     *      0.305
Log in-state tuition (TUITI)
                                                                    (0.352)          (0.619)
                                                                      0.484     *      0.187    *
Log state tax revenues per capita (TAX)
                                                                    (0.142)          (0.079)
                                                                    -24.49      *     -10.67            7.284       *     -7.234     *
Share of population aged 18-24 (AGE)
                                                                     (4.32)           (6.74)           (1.929)            (2.080)
                                                                      1.999     *      1.029           -1.153       *       0.137
Share of pop. w/ incomes below Max Pell allowable (ELIG)
                                                                    (0.773)          (0.618)           (0.200)            (0.226)
                                                                      -7.95             1.17    *       0.449               0.269
Log maximum Pell grant award (PELL)
                                                                    (11.71)           (0.53)           (4.289)            (0.265)
                                                                     -2.404            0.593    *       0.056               0.215
Percent cap on costs (CAP)
                                                                    (2.085)          (0.251)           (0.763)            (0.115)
                                                                      0.102            0.591    *      -0.246       *     -0.316     *
Log state appropriations per student (APP)
                                                                    (0.110)          (0.146)           (0.033)            (0.077)
                                                                     -0.014            0.009            0.018       *       0.011
Log endowment per student (END)
                                                                    (0.024)          (0.022)           (0.009)            (0.008)
                                                                      0.054           -0.084            0.024               0.008
Ratio of fte grad to undergrad enrollments (GRAD)
                                                                    (0.053)          (0.062)           (0.020)            (0.027)
                                                                     -0.056          -1.304     *       0.514       *       0.719    *
Share of fteftf in state in privates (PRIV)
                                                                    (0.406)          (0.540)           (0.108)            (0.212)
                                                                      1.201     *      1.344    *      -0.463       *      -0.303
Share of fteftf in state in 2 years (TWO)
                                                                    (0.237)          (0.278)           (0.081)            (0.183)
                                                                                                        0.014               0.045
Weak barron's rank (LOWB)
                                                                                                       (0.033)            (0.025)
                                                                                                        0.098       *       0.060
Strong barron's rank (HIGHB)
                                                                                                       (0.040)            (0.033)
                                                                      0.309     *     0.005            -0.084       *       0.041    *
Weighted barrons's rank of privates in state (BPRIV)
                                                                    (0.053)          (0.060)           (0.024)            (0.021)
                                                                      0.203     *    -0.008
Weighted barrons's rank of publics in state (BPUB)
                                                                    (0.046)          (0.052)
                                                                    -0.496      *     0.264             -0.012             0.101
Seating capacity {predicted enroll/actual enroll} (SEAT)
                                                                    (0.132)          (0.160)           (0.051)            (0.061)
                                                                      0.077          -0.100              0.019             0.080     *
Log composite regional tuition, ex-in state (TUITR)
                                                                    (0.094)          (0.063)           (0.034)            (0.022)
                                                                      0.010           0.017              0.104      *      0.062     *
Log unemployment (UNEMP)
                                                                    (0.131)          (0.078)           (0.043)            (0.025)
                                                                      0.009                             -0.002
Log number of governing boards (GOV)
                                                                    (0.007)                            (0.003)
                                                                      0.932     *      0.687    *       -0.175             0.111
Arkansas Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                    (0.385)          (0.295)           (0.147)            (0.137)
                                                                     -0.103           -0.250            -0.262            -0.126
Florida Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                    (0.478)          (0.263)           (0.167)            (0.099)
                                                                    -1.578      *    -1.518     *        0.381      *      0.186
Georgia Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                    (0.320)          (0.203)           (0.138)            (0.193)
                                                                    -2.183      *    -0.987     *        0.691      *      0.095
Mississippi Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                    (0.400)          (0.222)           (0.164)            (0.140)
                                                                      1.044            0.749    *      -0.405       *     -0.188
New Mexico Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                    (0.548)          (0.286)           (0.203)            (0.135)
Adjusted R2                                                          0.585            0.618             0.647              0.843




                                                                   47
                                                             Table 9 - Part B
                                    Out-of-State Tuition and Nonresident Enrollment Share Equations
                                                               2SLS Results

* 95% significance level                                               (v)              ( vi )            ( vii )       ( viii )
                                                                         OUT-STATE TUITION                NON-RESIDENT SHARE
Variable                                                           Cross-Section        Panel         Cross-Section     Panel
                                                                       0.488     *      0.902    *
Log in-state tuition (TUITI)
                                                                      (0.055)          (0.060)
                                                                                                         -1.493     *     -0.264
Log out-state tuition (TUITO)
                                                                                                         (0.434)          (0.357)
                                                                       -0.028           -0.057
Log nonresident enrollment share (NON)
                                                                      (0.022)          (0.073)
                                                                       0.106     *       0.069   *        0.343     *     0.371     *
Log regional composite tuition (TUITR)
                                                                      (0.019)          (0.028)           (0.125)         (0.069)
                                                                       -1.245            1.130             3.123           4.570
Share of population aged 18-24 (AGE)
                                                                      (0.920)          (1.047)           (5.091)         (3.909)
Share of population with incomes below Max Pell                       -0.691     *       0.053             0.590          -0.537
allowable (ELIG)                                                      (0.135)          (0.153)           (0.856)         (0.619)
                                                                       -0.087            0.017            -0.123          -0.269
Log maximum Pell grant award (PELL)
                                                                      (2.521)          (0.103)          (13.806)         (0.431)
                                                                       -0.185           -0.019             0.161          -0.023
Percent cap on costs (CAP)
                                                                      (0.446)          (0.043)           (2.447)         (0.210)
                                                                       -0.049           -0.002           -1.305     *     -0.014
Log state appropriations per student (APP)
                                                                      (0.032)          (0.031)           (0.123)         (0.141)
                                                                       0.037     *       0.021   *        0.211     *      0.034
Log endowment per student (END)
                                                                      (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.033)         (0.024)
                                                                      -0.039     *       0.025            -0.079          -0.096
Ratio of fte grad to undergrad enrollments (GRAD)
                                                                      (0.012)          (0.017)           (0.064)         (0.069)
                                                                      -0.099     *      -0.002           -0.406     *      0.018
Poor Barrons's rank (LOWB)
                                                                      (0.019)          (0.017)           (0.116)         (0.071)
                                                                       0.069     *       0.019            -0.083           0.107
Strong Barrons's rank (HIGHB)
                                                                      (0.026)          (0.024)           (0.146)         (0.095)
                                                                       -0.026            0.041            1.061     *     0.286     *
Institution's share of quality public seats in the state (BSPUB)
                                                                      (0.032)          (0.031)           (0.132)         (0.110)
                                                                      0.0008           -0.0006            0.016     *      0.000
Institution's share of qual. private seats in the state (BSPRIV)
                                                                     (0.0011)         (0.0011)           (0.006)         (0.004)
                                                                       0.191     *      -0.137   *        0.716     *    -0.593     *
Share of quality seats in region that are private (SPRIV)
                                                                      (0.049)          (0.059)           (0.293)         (0.200)
                                                                       0.137     *      -0.017            -0.112          -0.285
Seating capacity {predicted enroll/actual enroll} (SEAT)
                                                                      (0.026)          (0.040)           (0.120)         (0.151)
                                                                                                         -1.207     *      0.210
Log SAT (SAT)
                                                                                                         (0.596)         (1.085)
Log share of fte undergrads in reciprocity agreements                                                    -0.065     *      0.052
(RECIP)                                                                                                  (0.021)         (0.036)
                                                                     -0.0034     *                       -0.021     *
Log number of governing boards (GOV)
                                                                     (0.0016)                            (0.009)
                                                                        0.007          -0.078    *       -0.333     *    -0.169     *
Log unemployment (UNEMP)
                                                                      (0.025)          (0.020)           (0.132)         (0.076)
                                                                       -0.142           -0.071            -0.110          -0.428
Arkansas Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                      (0.084)          (0.079)           (0.462)         (0.307)
                                                                       -0.038            0.093           -1.339     *    -1.163     *
Florida Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                      (0.103)          (0.107)           (0.544)         (0.260)
                                                                       -0.059            0.047            -0.142         -0.441     *
Georgia Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                      (0.069)          (0.060)           (0.386)         (0.219)
                                                                      -0.300     *       0.045             0.061           0.188
Mississippi Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                      (0.085)          (0.059)           (0.482)         (0.241)
                                                                        0.118            0.037             0.305           0.176
New Mexico Merit Program (MERIT)
                                                                      (0.118)          (0.077)           (0.644)         (0.316)

Adjusted R2                                                            0.865            0.933             0.374           0.203




                                                                       48
                                                                      Table 10
                                                Effect of Selected Policy Changes on Outcomes
                                                   Fixed Effects Instrumental Variables Results
                                                                                          Evaluated at 1998 level of appropriate variable
Selected Policy Change                                            Grant Aid        Instate Tuition   Out-of-State Tuition Nonresident Share*
Increase state grant aid per fte undergrad in the state by
                                                                                        $205
$100 per student

Increase real in-state tuition by $1,000                             $27                                   $2,584


Increase real out-of-state tuition by $1,000                                                                                    -0.75


Increase nonresident enrollment share by 10 perc. pts                                                       -$299


Increase state tax revenues per capita by $1,000                     $11


Increase maximum real Pell Grant award by $100                       $12                $32                  $6                 -0.26


Increase real state appropriations per student by $1,000             $17               -$104                 -$2                -0.04


Increase real endowment per student by $1,000                         $0                 $2                 $11                   0.05


Increase ratio of grad students to first time frosh by 10 pts        -$3                 $3                 $25                 -0.27


Having lower than average Barron's ranking**                                            $160                -$22                -0.15


Having higher than average Barron's ranking**                                           $146                $196                  1.07


Increasing seating capacity 10 perc. Pts                              $9                $41                 $48                 -0.82


Having higher SAT scores by 100 points in your state                                                                              0.56


Increasing the share of std. reciprocal by 10 perc. pts                                                                         0.003

Average 1998 Value of Dependent Variable                             $307              $3,525             $10,094               19.1%

Items in bold are significant at 95% level
* Represents percentage point changes, for example -2.0 would indicate nonresident share falls from x% to (x-2)%
** For enrollment equation, numbers indicate percentage point change in share due to being in this category relative to average
*** Table reports marginal effects evaluated at mean                          49
                                            Appendix Table 1
                                    Sources and Definitions of Variables

Variable   Definition/Explanation *                                                                      Source
           Dummy for years subsequent to repeal of Middle Income Student Assistant Act in 1979
1979                                                                                                      1, 2
           which reinstated "needs" test for eligibility for subsidized federal loans

           Dummy for years subsequent to 1992 when the 5.64% of home equity that was taxable in
1992                                                                                                      1, 2
           the expected family contribution (EFC) calculation was removed from taxable assets

AGE        Share of population in a state between age 18 & 24                                              3

           Logarithm of need based state grant aid to instate undergraduate students attending
           institutions in their own state per full-time equivalent four year undergraduate in the
AID                                                                                                        4
           state. Includes federal matching LEAP/SSIG monies.


           Logarithm of state government appropriations in 000's per full-time equivalent
APP                                                                                                        5
           undergraduate at the institution

           Undergraduate enrollment weighted average Barron's ranking of all rated four-year
BPRIV                                                                                                     6, 5
           private institutions in the state.

           Undergraduate enrollment weighted average Barron's ranking of all rated four-year
BPUB                                                                                                      6, 5
           public institutions in the state.

           Institution's undergraduate enrollment divided by the total undergraduate enrollment of
BSPRIV                                                                                                    6, 5
           all equally or more highly rated private (Barron's) institutions in the state.

           Institution's undergraduate enrollment divided by the total undergraduate enrollment of
BSPUB      all equally or more highly rated public (Barron's) institutions in the state (including the    6, 5
           institution of observation).
         Maximum percentage of college costs covered by Pell Grants. Initially 50% of costs,
CAP                                                                                                   7
         raised to 60% in 1986 and eliminated in 1992.

         Share of state's households with incomes below the maximum allowable to be eligible to
ELIG                                                                                                 8, 7
         received federal grant aid. Maximum income eligibility estimated from EFC calculation.

         Logarithm of institutional endowment in 000's per full-time equivalent undergraduate at
END                                                                                                   5
         the institution.

GOV      Number of governing boards in the state.                                                     9

         Ratio of full-time equivalent graduate students to full-time equivalent undergraduate
GRAD                                                                                                  5
         institutions at the institution.

         Dummy variable equal to one if Barron's ranking is "Highly Competetive" or "Most
HIGHB                                                                                                 6
         Competetive."

         Dummy variable equal to one if Barron's ranking is "Not Competetive" or "Less
LOWB                                                                                                  6
         Competetive."

_MERIT   Dummy variable equal to one if state had a merit aid program in that year.                   4

         Logarithm of the share of first-time freshmen that are nonresident, non-foreign students.
NON      In nonresident share equation, we use the log-odds ratio. That is the share divided by      5, 10
         one minus the share.

PELL     Logarithm of the maximum available Pell Grant award.                                         7

PRIV     Share of fteftf in state in privates (PRIV)
                     Logarithm of the share of full-time equivalent undergraduates enrolled under tuition
RECIP                                                                                                                11
                     reciprocity programs.

SAT                  Average SAT score in the state (includes public and private high school students).              12

                     Maximum number of full-time equivalent first-time freshmen enrollment in the state
SEAT                 historically at public schools of equal or greater Barron's rank divided by the current        5, 12
                     number of high school graduates in the state.

                     In the census region, the share of full-time equivalent first time freshmen in schools that
SPRIV                                                                                                               5, 6
                     are of equal or greater Barron's rank that are enrolled in private schools.

                     Logarithm of total state tax revenues received per population in the state, excludes
TAX                                                                                                                 13, 3
                     federal receipts, in 000's.

TUITI                Logarithm of in-state tuition charged.                                                          5

TUITO                Logarithm of out-of-state tuition charged.                                                      5

                 Logarithm of the enrollment weighted average of public out-of-state (for schools outside
TUITR (EQUN 1&2) my state), public instate (for schools in my state, excluding my school) and private tuition        5
                 in the census region.

                     Logarithm of the enrollment weighted average of public in-state, public out-of-state and
TUITR (EQUN 3&4)                                                                                                     5
                     private tuition in the census region, including schools in the state of observation.

                     Share of public full-time equivalent first-time freshmen enrollment in the state that are in
TWO                                                                                                                  5
                     two-year colleges.

UNEMP                Logarithm of the state average unemployment rate.                                               14

* All data in real values using 1996 calendar year GDP implicit price deflator.
Data Sources
1. United States Department of Education web-site
2. Michael Mumper, Removing College Price Barriers, SUNY Press, 1996.
3. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population Estimates Program - Age distribution data on web-site.
4. National Association of State Scholarship and Grant Programs, Annual Survey Reports.
5. Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System Surveys via WebCASPAR. See http://caspar.nsf.gov
   or www.nces.ed.gov/ipeds.
6. Barron's Profiles of American Colleges , 1979-1996.
7. American Councilon Education Center for Policy Analyisis, 2000 Status Report on the Pell Grant Program .
8. Current Population Surveys, Estimates of Income of Households by State 1979-1996 .
9. Education Commission of the States.
10. Older resident enrollment data from Higher Education General Information Surveys not available on WebCASPAR was
     retrieved through original "Fall Residence and Migration Surveys."
11. Cornell Higher Education Research Institute (CHERI) Survey of Tuition Reciprocity Programs at Public Research and
    Doctoral Institutions, Summer 2001. Available on CHERI website at www.ilr.cornell.edu/cheri.
12. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics .
13. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Governments via the Statistical Abstract of the United States.
14. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment and Earnings.
                                                   Appendix Table 2
                                                  Summary Statistics
                                        Average Values of Independent Variables*
Variable                                              1979     1981    1988        1992     1994     1996     1998
# grad students / # first time freshmen               1.20     1.24     1.27        1.59     1.58     1.49     1.10
# schools strong Barrons rank                            2        3        5         13       11       11       11
# schools weak Barrons rank                             17       15       16         13        7       11       11
Average SAT scores of HS grads                         936      939    1,042        966     1,043    1,057    1,062
Composite regional tuition                           2,932    3,086    5,567       6,090    6,332    6,672    7,059
Composite regional tuition, ex-instate               4,217    4,439    8,005       8,721    9,047    9,541   10,002
Endowment per student                                  957    1,401    4,466       7,726    9,809   13,977   19,337
Instn's share of state's quality private seats      251.0%   299.3%   262.0%   267.7%      273.9%   191.6%   191.6%
Instn's share of state's quality public seats        47.9%    47.5%    52.9%    50.8%       51.1%    49.9%    49.9%
Pell grant award (real)                              3,416    2,663    2,734       2,617    2,392    2,470    2,917
Per capita real state tax revenues                   2,279    1,865    3,070       2,535    2,669    4,720    5,185
Seating capacity (predicted/actual)                   1.34     1.31     0.99        0.82     0.82     0.81     0.86
Share of fteftf in state in privates                 30.3%    30.7%    30.0%    31.1%       30.7%    30.2%    23.3%
Share of fteftf in state in two-years                45.7%    47.3%    44.0%    46.0%       44.9%    44.2%    41.9%
Share of population aged 18-24                       13.5%    13.3%    11.1%    10.2%        9.9%     9.6%     9.7%
Share of population with incomes below Pell          63.9%    57.5%    53.5%    49.3%       45.0%    44.9%    49.8%
Share of quality regional seats - private            37.8%    37.3%    39.4%    40.9%       40.0%    39.5%    39.5%
Unemployment rate                                     5.78     6.91     6.43        6.51     6.36     5.38     4.80
Weighted rank of privates in state                    2.56     2.64     2.90        2.74     2.98     2.98     2.98
Weighted rank of publics in state                     2.38     2.39     2.60        2.60     2.66     2.67     2.67

* for those variables not in earlier tables
