                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     TIME IN PURGATORY:
                               DETERMINANTS OF THE GRANT LAG
                                FOR U.S. PA TENT APPLICATIONS

                                                David Popp
                                                 Ted Juhl
                                            Daniel K.N. Johnson

                                            Working Paper 9518
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9518


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       February 2003




We thank the patent examiners and members of the United States Patent and Trademark Office Staff who
made the interviews included in this work possible. Special thanks to Catherine Gerard and Bo Bounkong
for their efforts in getting the interviews started, and to Willow Jacobson for sharing her insights on the Patent
Office. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by David Popp, Ted Juhl, and David K. N. Johnson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Time in Purgatory: Determinants of the Grant Lag for U.S. Patent Applications
David Popp, Ted Juhl, and David K. N. Johnson
NBER Working Paper No. 9518
February 2003
JEL No. O3, O32, O34

                                            ABSTRACT

The impacts of two recent changes in US patent policy depend on the length of time it takes for an
invention to go through the examination process. Concerns over the distributional effects of these
changes were expressed during policy debates. We use data on U.S. patent applications and grants
to determine the factors influencing the length of the patent examination process. We augment this

analysis with interviews of patent examiners, leading to a better understanding of the examination

process. Our analysis finds that differences across technology are most important. Inventor
characteristics have statistically significant effects, but the magnitudes are small.


David Popp                                                     Ted Juhl
Department of Public Administration                            Department of Economics
Center for Technology and Information Policy                   University of Kansas
The Maxwell School                                             213 Summerfield Avenue
Syracuse University                                            Lawrence, KS 66045
400 Eggers Hall                                                juhl@ku.edu
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
Daniel K.N. Johnson
Department of Economics
Pnedelton East
Room 415
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481-8260
djohnson@wellesley.edu
Time In Purgatory

       O thou full man, barley-bread pleases thee not.
       She is my sweetheart who appears ugly to thee.
       To the huris of paradise purgatory seems hell.
       Ask the denizens of hell. To them purgatory is paradise.
               Sheykh Moslehodd Sadi, Gulistan Chapter 1 Story 7

       The grant lag, or period of time between an initial patent application and its final

granting, can often be seen as a period of purgatory for the applicant. It is a time of uncertainty,

not only regarding which (if any) claims will be protected, but about the length of time until that

decision is finalized. However, this paper argues that the length of the grant lag is not entirely

exogenous to the applicant, but instead is partially determined by characteristics of the

application itself. In fact, we must remember that a shorter lag is not always preferable, as the

opening quotation conveys.

       Because of recent changes to U.S. patent law, the length of examination time has become

an important factor. First, as a result of the Uruguay round of GATT, in 1995 the U.S. changed

the duration of patent protection to coincide with other industrialized countries. Before 1995, the

length of patent protection in the U.S. extended for 17 years after the date of issue. After 1995,

protection extended for 20 years, but from the application date. Thus, whether a patent receives

more or less protection under the new rules depends on whether the examination process takes

more or less than three years. To the extent that inventor characteristics may influence the grant

lag, this policy change may have important distributional effects.

       Similarly, the American Inventors Protection Act (AIPA) of l999 also includes changes

that are influenced by pendency time. Unlike other countries, patent applications in the United

States have traditionally been kept secret until the patent is granted. The AIPA changed US law

so that all pending applications are published after 18 months, as is done in most other countries.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                        2


Thus, patents that take more than 18 months to be granted lose some secrecy as a result of the

AIPA.

          During debate over the AIPA, independent inventors argued against publication of patent

applications, arguing that they would be hurt more than large firms. With more limited legal

resources, independents and small firms are less able to obtain redress if a larger firm infringes,

and are less able to keep pace if larger firms attempt to invent around the patent. As the period

of secrecy shrinks, and the applications are published before being granted, independent

inventors fear that they will become even more vulnerable. In particular, they argued that the

patents most affected by early disclosure are breakthrough inventions, often made by

independent inventors, that often require a long time to progress from application to granted

patent.

          There have been several recent pieces in the economics literature which explore patent

grant lags, but none that look at how the grant lag varies by patent characteristics. Thus, these

studies can tell us about the overall impact of the aforementioned policies, but cannot tell us

anything about the distribution of effects. For instance, Johnson and Popp (forthcoming) clearly

show that patents with long lags are more cited by subsequent inventors, so in some sense can be

considered more socially valuable. Thus, the concern that breakthrough inventions are impacted

more by early disclosure has merit. However, although their work reveals that more valuable

patents are affected more, it does not reveal who is affected by this change. Furthermore,

Johnson and Popp also show that knowledge diffusion effectively begins with publication, so in

a system where publication occurs only at the grant date, shorter grant lags would speed

subsequent innovation and reduce duplicative effort.1


1
  While the American Inventors Protection Act of 1999 requires that most patent applications be published after
eighteen months regardless of grant status, that requirement is waived for U.S. applicants who agree not to pursue
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                     3


        King (2002) provides an institutional view of the U.S. Patent Office, using internal

timesheets and activity reports to confirm that while inputs to the U.S. patent examination

process have remained roughly constant over time, there have been ever-increasing examiner

workloads. As a result, grant lags have risen and other measures of output quality (from the

point of view of the U.S. Patent Office) have fallen. GAO (1996) reported that “patent pendency

is likely to become a more important concern to those outside PTO (the Patent Office) in the

future.”

        This paper enters that literature with some new results, based on interviews with U.S.

patent examiners and on patent data themselves. We outline the granting process, paying special

attention to the elements which add significantly to grant lags, including discussion of how the

process has changed over time. Although a primary interest is learning how different types of

inventors are affected by the examination process, to do this it is important to control for other

features of the patent that affect pendency. Thus, we also highlight some institutional factors

responsible for different grant lags between technology classes. Most importantly, we use

quantile regression analysis to identify the sensitivity of grant lags to attributes of the

applications themselves, with an interest not just in the average relationships, but also in how

that sensitivity changes across the spectrum of patents.

        Section II outlines the granting process of the United States Patent and Trademark Office

(USPTO) and describes the results of interviews with examiners from that office. Section III

presents summarizes the data, while Section IV presents quantile regression results. Section V

concludes and offers suggestions for further research.




patent protection outside of the U.S. Thus, a shorter grant lag would still have a disclosure effect for purely
domestic U.S. patents.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                          4


II. The USPTO granting process

        During the fall of 2002, we interviewed five USPTO officers in varying levels of

authority, all with extensive patent examination experience. From those officers2 we obtained a

detailed view of the institutional process, and a review of the major issues which determine the

grant lag for any given patent.

        Upon arrival at the USPTO, an application is reviewed by the Office of Initial Patent

Examination (OIPE) to ascertain that all required disclosures, fees and claims are included. Any

searches for prior art, as completed by the applicant or his attorney, are included in this packet.

If an element is missing or incorrect, an additional fee is assessed and processing is delayed until

the application is correctly completed. The usual delays at this point are due to incorrect fee

submissions (an applicant using old fee schedules or failing to add charges for additional claims)

or missing chemical sequence information for biotechnology applications (required since 1990).

        When the application is complete, an application wrapper is assembled and the USPTO

clock starts. The USPTO guarantees processing in three years of less, with exceptions labeled

“failure.” Since patent protection lasts for 20 years from the application date, patents which take

longer than three years due to problems at USPTO are extended without cost to the applicant.

However, stretching of the process due to applicant (in)action is not included. Once the wrapper

is attached, an examiner at OIPE assigns the patent to a main U.S. patent classification (of which

there are currently 428). Based on that classification, the patent is then sent to one of 7

technology centers:3

        •    1600         Biotechnology, Organic Chemistry
        •    1700         Chemical and Materials Engineering

2
  We retain the anonymity of these officers, recognizing that their opinions are not necessarily those of the USPTO,
and were conveyed to us solely for the purposes of this research.
3
   For a complete list of both the Technology Centers and the individual Art Units within, see
http://www.uspto.gov/web/info/pat-tech.htm.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                            5


       •   2100      Computer Architecture, Software, & Electronic Commerce
       •   2600      Communications
       •   2800      Semiconductors, Electrical and Optical Systems and Components
       •   3600      Transportation, Construction, Agriculture, National Security and License
                     and Review
       •   3700/2900 Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, and Products and Designs

A processor at the technology center ensures that the initial OIPE-assigned classification is

correct, assigns a more precise subclassification, attaches any relevant amendments, and assigns

it to a docket for the center. Technical support staff in the technology center complete this initial

processing.

       Within each center are Individual Art Units, composed of nine to twenty examiners with

similar fields of technological expertise. Directors of the Art Units divide up the docket for the

center, assigning each patent to a specific examiner in their Unit. The application enters an

examiner’s electronic queue and waits for the backlog to clear. At any given time, an examiner

has an average of three to six amended documents on his docket (with a turnaround time ranging

from 10 days to two months, depending on the complexity of the amendments) on the docket,

plus new applications. This queuing time is the most time-consuming portion of the application

process, as current backlogs in some technologies are in excess of two years. Backlogs are

driven by the number of filings in a given technology, and problems arise when applications

arrive too quickly to keep up, often in unexpected or faddish areas. Not only is it a challenge for

the USPTO to hire more examiners in unexpected technological areas, but it is often a challenge

to retain those experts it has, when lucrative private sector opportunities call. This is particularly

a problem in emerging scientific fields, where a Ph.D. in the scientific field being examined is

helpful. In some years, Centers have hired 100 new examiners, only to see less than half of them

remain by the end of the same year. When combined with the multi-year maturation process for

examiners, hiring is a costly exercise.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                        6


       There are official goals for the number of hours each examiner will spend on an average

application, with incentives for superior performance. Usually the productivity goal is expressed

as the number of “balanced disposals”, or any two of the following for an application docket:

       a) first action – initial communication to applicant (see below)

       b) abandonment – the application is discontinued

       c) allowance – the application is accepted by the examiner, recommended to be granted

       d) interference count – competing claims by several applicants

       e) examiner answer – sent to higher court or authority, or recommended denial

The productivity goal differs by examiner rank.          In most technology centers, the base

productivity goal is 17 hours, which is then adjusted up or down based on each examiner’s level

of experience. Recognizing that the complexity of computer and biotechnology patents require

more examination time, the USPTO allots more time for patents at these technology centers. For

example, the base productivity goal for computers is 31.6 hours. Naturally, supervisors give

authority to spend additional time on more difficult applications, and they use discretion in

assigning those applications to the more junior examiners in their Unit. In addition, they usually

build up expertise in one or more subfields in particular examiners, to exploit comparative

advantage within the Unit. However, they may also reassign cases to keep backlogs consistent.

In rapidly changing fields, or fields where it is difficult to hire and retain examiners, it is a

perpetual challenge to maintain Unit expertise in each subfield.

       Each Art Unit sets goals based on standard work weeks with their full staff, but

Congressional goals are set for the USPTO as a whole, and tend to run five to fifteen percent

higher in terms of numbers of disposals. Since the plan is always to meet the Congressional

goals, performance bonuses are integral parts of the system.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                              7


         A first action is guaranteed within 14 months of application, and begins with the

examiner construing the claim, determining what is being claimed in order to develop a search

for prior art. This can be completed in five minutes for a well-written application, but may take

several hours for a poor one, especially in a complex technology. Next, the examiner begins

with a simple search for the state of the art in the technology, including the mandatory search

through the US patent class to which the application belongs. The search usually extends to non-

U.S. patents and non-patent literature (e.g. trade journals) for which each Technology Center has

a dedicated staffed library, called the Science and Technology Information Center (STIC).

Biotechnology has an additional set of research tools, including online services (journals,

MedLine, BioSys, STN Dialog, Chemical Abstract Service, Agricola, USDA, germplasm

databases) and access to the locally situated National Institutes of Health libraries.                             The

Computer Technology Center has a separate Electronic Information Center, and provides

mandatory training in non-patent literature searches through databases including copyrights.4

Delays may build up around the end of the fiscal year, as firms file amendments to beat

deadlines, but researchers at STIC can usually respond to any request within a few days. That

response time delays the application only marginally and does not count on an examiner’s

productivity clock. The first action ends when the examiner has communicated to the applicant

all problems with the application, including challenges of art repetition (too close to prior art) or

enablement (too little disclosure). At this point, the USPTO clock stops, and the applicant has

six months in which to respond in order to keep the application’s priority.




4
  Non-patent literature searches are particularly important for computers and software. Since patenting in these
fields have just recently taken off, the prior art often consists of innovations that were not patented. As a result, in
the Computer Architecture, Software & Information Security technology center, searches of the non-patent literature
are mandatory.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                         8


       Along with queuing time, communication delays are the most important component of

the grant lag. Each time that amendments or clarification are required from the applicant,

months elapse in the exchange – the applicant has at most six months to respond to the USPTO,

the examiner has at most two months to respond to the applicant. While most of an examiner’s

productive time is spent on first actions, time which includes the initial search for relevant

patents or non-patent literature, often a substantial amount is also spent reworking and updating

searches for cases where amendments have delayed the process. Sometimes the amendments are

severe enough to require an entirely new first action.

       The scientific qualifications of examiners differ greatly by technology, with doctorates

highly desirable in some fields and unnecessary in others. Legal training is provided by the

USPTO during the first two months of employment. During their first five or six years at the

USPTO, junior examiners do not have signatory authority. After this initial period, they may

elect to join the “signatory program”, and are promoted to GS-13. A one-year probationary

signatory period begins. In the first six months as a GS-13, an examiner is allowed to sign off

on initial actions, but not final actions. After review, the examiner is given a signatory position

with another six month trial period for final actions. Again, after review, the examiner may be

granted full signatory privileges, a permanent promotion.

       When asked for the attributes of an application which most delayed processing, USPTO

officers listed four general topics: the type of technology, the breadth of the application, the

nature of the applicant, and the list of references. We explore each in turn.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                         9


        i) Type of technology

        There are clearly large variations between technologies, with greater complexity of

applications in biotechnology and computers than in other fields (examiner productivity

standards recognize this explicitly). More importantly, by all accounts that complexity has been

rising rapidly in absolute and relative terms.

        For example, currently chemical sequences are doubling in size and complexity every 9-

15 months. While computational speed has been rising as well, making processing of searches

easier, speed has not kept pace with applicant complexity. The result is that search times have

risen from roughly 10 minutes (a decade ago) to 20-30 minutes now. A decade ago, one inch of

paper would list all known “hits” in the patent and non-patent literature, while now the total runs

4-6 feet of paper, or 1 inch for the top 15 hits alone. Complexity problems are particularly acute

in cross-disciplinary fields, such as bioinformatics (the threshold of computing and

biochemistry), as applications require examiners with expertise in two or more disparate

technologies. While it is possible to parse an application between examiners, that presents

additional coordination challenges which also delay processing.

        As a mixed blessing, the time guidelines for examiner productivity have not changed for

more than fifteen years. On one hand, the USPTO seems to be expecting the grant lag to remain

constant if the examiner-to-application ratio remains constant. On the other hand, we might infer

that examiners must be more experienced, more knowledgeable, or less thorough than they once

were.

        There was mixed opinion about whether examination is easier or harder in a “crowded

technology”. While crowded fields make the search for prior art quick, they make reading for

competing claims more painstaking. Interference delays usually occur in densely packed fields,
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                 10


but may occur in open fields as well, with equally devastating delays.5 For example, early

biotechnology firms often shared laboratory space, researchers and even legal counsel, leading to

long interference delays in a relatively young and uncrowded technology.

        Different requirements across technologies may also lead to differences in pendency time

across technologies. For example, since October of 1990 all applicants for biotechnology patents

have been required to list chemical sequences for claims regarding polynucleotides and

polypeptides.     A software package was designed to help applicants prepare the correct

information, and the USPTO has a counterpart program which converts paper documents to an

electronic version of the sequence information. While the goal was to make searching for prior

art quicker (via computer), it created a huge bottleneck in the process, along with a learning

curve for applicants, their legal representation, and examiners. Many applications during the

first year were rejected by OIPE for lacking sequence information, with each communication

adding up to six months to the process. The ruling on sequences was revised in late 1998, and

has undergone several minor revisions since that time.

        When a patent claims two or more independent and distinct inventions, the examiner may

require that the applicant choose just one of the inventions to qualify for patent protection. This

is known as restriction. If the applicant wishes, he or she may then file a divisional application

for the remaining invention.        According to examiners in the field, restrictions (as well as

subsequent related or divisional applications) are definitely more common in relatively complex

technologies like computers. While longer lags may not be due directly to greater complexity,

technologies which incorporate a variety of inventions or encompass a broad scope tend to

require more related applications, and more paperwork means more processing time.


5
  Interference claims occur when two or more patent applications make the same claim. In this case, only one
applicant can be awarded a patent for the claim.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                         11


          Subsequent divisions and related applications are also more common in the chemical and

biotechnology areas because of the way in which those technologies need to be claimed. Claims

in these fields which have a biological or chemical resemblance to other granted or pending

claims (in a similar Markush group, similar nucleotide sequence, or share a genus-species

relationship) require examiners to review all relevant claims in the entire category.

          Technologies which rely more heavily on patents as prior art (e.g. mechanical devices)

are easier to examine, in that examiners can obtain the information they need more readily from

other patents than from non-patent literature. Since pre-existing patents present an obstacle to

new patents, they make rejection decisions easier. Moreover, since patents are required to

include

                  “a written description of the invention, and of the manner and process of
          making and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any
          person skilled in the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly
          connected, to make and use the same, and should set forth the best mode
          contemplated by the inventor of carrying out his invention” (United States Code
          Title 35, Section 112)

it is easier to compare the claims of a new patent with those of prior patent art than with those of

non-patent literature.

          Examination is also more difficult for patents without an obvious “searchable key word.”

That may be due to the nature of the innovation itself (e.g. process patents are more difficult than

product patents, as examiners are searching for similar verbs instead of similar nouns). It may

also be due to the nature of the field (e.g. a new field with non-standardized terms is more

difficult to search).
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                         12


        ii) Breadth of application

        Unequivocally, broader applications are more time-consuming, although an application

of many well-written claims may be faster than an application of a few poorly-written ones. In

general, since each claim must be researched and evaluated, more claims require more time. In

particular, applications with “unduly multiplied” claims require a large amount of

communication and clarification. Overly broad or multiple claims can be an indicator of either an

inexperienced or very experienced applicant. Inexperienced applicants often merit a quick first

action, followed by a lengthy series of subsequent actions and communication.                                More

strategically broad claims, filed by very experienced applicants or very experienced attorneys,

require an enormous amount of communication as well, but for different reasons. In fact,

experienced applicants (or legal representation) often aim to submit many independent claims,

deliberately of different scope. The object is to form a portfolio of claims, offering the applicant

choices about which to litigate, which to pursue through the entire patenting process, and which

to renew to full term. By creating a choice set, the applicant is not limited by the financial costs

imposed by a claim of large scope, so does not risk forfeit of all intellectual property associated

with the application if one claim is lost.6



        iii) Nature of applicant

        Applicant experience with the patent system was consistently listed by examiners as a

critical determinant of the grant lag, and is linked to the clarity and breadth of the claims

presented.




6
  As a result of this, the patent office is currently considering a proposal to charge inventors extra for claims in
excess of 20.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                        13


       Foreign applications are seen as taking no longer or shorter than domestic applications,

with the exception of translation difficulties. However, any communication requires more time

than for a domestic application, as it is usually routed through two attorneys, one in each nation

involved. There may also be formatting issues, as European-style claims are unacceptable in the

U.S. and Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) applications often involve multiple claims, so might

be divided in the U.S., perhaps even to be processed by separate examiners.             There are

regulations governing the division of PCT documents in particular, so applications may take

slightly longer for logistical reasons.

       There is no evidence from our interviews that small or independent inventors bear a

longer lag than firms do, holding experience levels constant. In fact, an experienced attorney can

even make up for an inexperienced inventor/applicant, so any differences between small and

large firms may condense to a difference in legal counsel. There are also resources available to

independent inventors, to help with the application process.



       iv) List of references

       When a patent is granted, it contains citations to earlier patents that are related to the

current invention. These citations are analogous to references in a journal article, conveying a

list of ideas that the inventor may have accessed during the inventive process. To aid the patent

examiner’s search, the applicant is required to list any references to previous patents that are

related to the current invention. Furthermore, should the examiner finds previous inventions that

narrow the scope of the current patent, he must list those patents as well. Patent citations narrow
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                      14


the scope of a new patent by placing cited patents outside the realm of the current patent, so it is

important for the legal system that all relevant patents be cited.7

        There was unanimous agreement that a long list of references is not preferable to a short

list, but that it is the quality, not quantity, of the references that truly matters. It is quickly

obvious to the examiner if the reference list includes only the obvious prior patents, or

everything the applicant knows about the technology, rendering the entire reference list virtually

useless. An overly long list may simply be roughly filtered by the examiner, with only the more

recent references read. All of the examiners we interviewed complained about applications

which arrive with boxloads of supporting references.                 Examiners often suggested that an

application with no references at all would be preferable, since the examiner could research it

himself instead of being saddled with the existing reference list to edit.

        At the very least, granted patents with many citations are a sign that the examiner needed

to search through substantial prior art (regardless of whether the initial reference list was

accurate and informative) before ruling on the application. Finally, computerization of patent

records has made finding such patent references easier, both for examiners and applicants. Thus,

the average number of citations per patent has risen over time, muddying the waters about how

to compare the length of reference lists over time.

        Thus it seems clear that there are identifiable characteristics that may be associated with

longer grant lags, at least some of which are within the control of applicants. In the next section,

we turn to the empirical evidence relating those characteristics to observed grant lags.




7
  “Outside the realm” means that a patent holder cannot file an infringement suit against someone whose invention
infringes on qualities also included in the cited patents.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                      15


III. Data

        Our analysis focuses on all utility patents granted in the United States between 1976 and

1996. Descriptive patent data are from the NBER patent database (Hall et al., 2001).8 During

this time period, only granted patents were published in the United States, so applications that

did not become patents are thus not part of the public record.9 After removing observations with

clearly erroneous data (such as grant dates before the application date), we have 1,653,854

patents in our data set. To calculate the full pendency time of each application, the USPTO

provided us with the date of the earliest related application for each patent, as opposed to the

published application date on the front page of each patent, which reflects merely the arrival date

of the current version, thus omitting time spent in previous revisions. In addition, they provided

data on the number of claims, drawings, and sheets for each patent.

        Looking first at pendency time itself, Figure 1 presents the distribution of grant lags

through the first 12.5 years, which covers 99.9% of all patents. The actual tail of the distribution

continues beyond what is shown in the graph, as our data set includes patents with lags up to

1143 months long. As Table 1 indicates, the mean grant lag is 28 months, but with such a highly

skewed distribution, the median grant lag is just 23 months.

        Our goal is to determine which features of a patent affect pendency time, and we focus on

the following elements. First, we use several variables to measure the complexity of each patent.

As noted earlier, each patent consists of several claims that describe the features of the invention

and how it improves upon the prior art, and examiners indicated that the number of claims have a

positive effect on pendency time. Similarly, we would expect the number of sheets and drawings

8
  In addition to data taken from the NBER web site, we also use additional data on the type of assignee made
available to the authors. Unlike the other data, this variable is only complete through 1996. We thank Adam Jaffe
for making this available to us.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                           16


included to increase pendency time, so each are included in our analysis.10 As Table 1 reports,

the average patent has roughly 12 claims, less than four sheets, and seven drawings.

         Examiners also voiced a possible positive relationship between pendency time and the

length of the reference list appended to a patent. Since an examiner must search all prior art in

the field to ensure novelty, we would expect patents with more citations to take longer to be

processed.11 As noted in Table 1, while the average patent has only seven references, an average

of one citation per claim, there is a wide range to patents citing over four hundred references. To

control for the rise in the length of citation lists over time, we include in our regressions an

interaction term as the product of the issue year (defined as the last two digits of the year of

issue) and the number of patent citations on the patent.

         Using data on patent assignees12 from the NBER database, we identify the type and

origin of each assignee as follows:

         Assignee types:        Unassigned, Individual, Firm, Government, University, Hospital, Non-
                                Government Research Lab, Non-Profit Organization



9
   Since the passage of the American Inventors Protection Act of 2000, applications are now published 18 months
after the initial filing, unless the inventor agrees not to file for patent protection abroad.
10
    Actual correlations between these variables are smaller than expected. For example, the correlation between
claims and drawings is just 0.17, and between claims and sheets is 0.15. Drawings are often used to illustrate
technical concepts that are not easily summarized in writing. Thus, both can serve as an indicator of the complexity
of a patent, yet there need not be a one-to-one correspondence between them.
11
    Note that the data set only includes citations made to other granted U.S. patents. This is not the only source of
prior art. In addition, patents granted in other nations and other published scientific literature (called NPL, or non-
patent literature, by examiners) must be searched. Although counts of such references are not included in our data
set, counts of references to U.S. patents provide a good measure of the amount of prior art related to the invention.
An examiner need only find one existing reference that anticipates an application’s claim to invalidate or narrow
said claim. Since examiners are most familiar with U.S. patents in their field, examiners typically begin by
searching the prior art in U.S. patents first. Thus, in most fields, citations to U.S. patents are the most frequently
used prior art.
12
    Typically, the front page of a patent lists both the inventors, who are responsible for creating the invention, and
the assignees, who hold the property rights bestowed by the invention. Occasionally, such as in the case of an
independent inventor, these will be the same. More typically, the assignee(s) will be the firm or organization for
which the inventor works. For example, most academic institutions require faculty to sign an agreement transferring
to the university the rights to any patents derived from the faculty member’s work. In this case, the faculty member
would be the inventor, and the university would be the assignee. In some instances, assignment has yet to be made
when the patent is granted. These patents are classified as unassigned.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                         17


        Home country of assignee: United States, Japan, Germany, France, United Kingdom,
                                  Canada, Other member states of the European Patent
                                  Organization, Other countries

        In addition, we use the assignee codes provided in the NBER database to identify all

patents granted to each assignee since 1963.13                We then create an experience variable by

calculating the number of successful patent applications filed in the three years prior to the

application date of each patent in the data set.14 The mean of the experience variable, shown in

Table 1, is 320. Note, however, that this is also a highly skewed distribution, as the median

experience value is just 25.

        Table 2 presents descriptive statistics by assignee type.                   78 percent of patents are

assigned to private firms, either from the U.S. or abroad while another 18 percent of patents are

unassigned at the time the patent is published. Patents assigned to individuals make up just one

percent of our sample. Figure 2 shows that this distribution has remained stable over time.

While the percentage of university patenting has risen over time, as a result of the 1982 Bayh-

Dole Act, they never rise above two percent of our sample.

        Note that there are some significant differences among variables across assignee types.

In particular, patents from hospitals, labs, and universities take longer to be granted. Patents

from the government contain fewer citations than other patents, perhaps indicating that they are

more “basic,” in that they occur in less crowded technology fields. However, such patents also

contain fewer claims, so that the number of citations per claim is similar to other patents.



13
   We use successful applications only, as these are the only patents contained in our data set. However, we base the
experience variable on application dates in order to proxy for the experience at the time the application was filed.
Presumably, experience at the time of filing, rather than at the time of grant, would better enable the applicant to
avoid common errors in the application process. Unfortunately, we are unable to construct an experience variable
for independent inventors or unassigned patents. All independent inventors are given a single code in the NBER
database, and, of course, all unassigned patents are similarly grouped.
14
   We also tried experience variables using patents from the previous year or previous five years. Results were
similar in all cases.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                      18


          We can describe the technology field of each patent using the USPTO patent class and

category definitions defined in Hall et al. (2001), placing each patent in one of 10 technology

groups:       Chemicals, Organic Chemicals, Organic Chemistry, Computers, Software,

Biotechnology, Medical, Drugs, Mechanical, Electrical, and Miscellaneous. As Figure 3 shows,

the Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical, and Miscellaneous fields contain the most patents but the

shares accounted for by other technologies have been rising.        This is particularly true for

Biotechnology, Computers, and Software, where court rulings in the 1980s and 1990s cleared the

way for patents.

          The differences in pendency time across groups are almost entirely predictable, as they

reflect the underlying complexity values assigned to them by the USPTO for examiner

productivity measurement. The average grant lag ranges from 25.2 months for miscellaneous

patents to 1.77 times that amount, or 44.6 months for biotechnology. However, recall that the

average examination times allocated for miscellaneous patents is 12-17 hours, and the average

time allocated for biotechnology is 1.75 times that amount, or 21-29 hours. In short, the USPTO

productivity guidelines appear remarkably well constructed, leaving only the surprise that one

hour of examiner time translates almost exactly into two months of pendency time.

          There is little difference in the number of claims across technologies, but bigger

differences in the number of citations. Also, note that drawings are important for fields such as

computers (which have an average of 6.7 claims, but 10.6 drawings), and are less so for others.

Interestingly, even though fields such as software and biotechnology are relatively new, the

mean (and median) experience levels in those fields are quite high due to high numbers of

applications in recent years.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                        19


       We also consider differences across nations of origin, displayed in Table 4. Fifty six

percent of our sample patents are assigned to U.S. entities, Japan is next at 18 percent, and

Germany ranks third at 8 percent. With the exception of Canada and Other countries, nearly all

foreign patents assignees are firms (e.g. 96 percent of Japanese patents are so assigned). Grant

lags vary somewhat by country, although not as much as across technology or inventor type.

Surprisingly, the mean grant lag of U.S. patents (28.8) is second highest. While U.S. patents

contain more citations than other patents, this may be an artifice of the data, since we count only

citations to other U.S. patents. As some citations are made by the applicant, it is likely that

foreign applicants tend to cite non-U.S. patents more frequently, which is not captured by our

measures. Of course, there are also interesting differences across technologies (e.g. percentage of

computer patents from Japan is twice as high of the other countries, France and the UK have a

higher percentage of drug patents than other countries).

       Finally, as Figure 4 shows, the average grant lag has also changed fairly dramatically

over time. There are several reasons for this – for example, budget cuts at the USPTO in 1979

led to fewer examinations being done that year (Griliches, 1990), and the resulting backlog

slowed the application process for several years, resulting in higher mean grant lags during the

early 1980s. In recent years, a rapid increase in patent applications has once again increased

pendency time. To control for such changes over time, our regressions include dummy variables

for each issue year.



IV. Regression Results

       To determine the effect of these characteristics on the grant lag, we use a hazard

regression. The specification of the regression is:
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                            20


(1)      lagi = e(Xiβ+ εi)

where lagi represents the grant lag of patent i, and Xi represents the vector of patent

characteristics defined in section X. Taking logs to linearize the model gives us:

(2)      log(lagi) = Xiβ + εi.

         We begin with ordinary least squares (OLS) results, which fit the model based on the

conditional means of the independent variables. However, since the distributions of both the

grant lag and many of the independent variables are quite skewed, such regression results may

inadequately reflect the behavior of patent characteristics at other points on the distribution.

Thus, we also use quantile regression techniques to provide a more complete picture of the

behavior of the model.



A. OLS Regression Results

         Table 5 presents the results of an OLS regression on the patent grant lag of the variables

discussed above. Because of the log-linear form of the hazard regression, column 3 shows the

calculation eβ- 1.15 For each dummy variable, eβ-1 tells us the percentage increase from the base

for a patent having that characteristic. For other variables, eβ - 1tells us the percentage increase

for a one-unit increase in that variable. To aid interpretation, we also present the total change

based on the mean and median values for the continuous independent variables.

         The signs of most coefficients in Table 5 are as expected. Given that we have over 1.6

million observations, nearly every parameter estimate is statistically significant. Nonetheless, as

we will see below, many of the estimated effects are of a negligible magnitude. Unassigned and

government patents are somewhat faster than applications filed by firms, but successful

15
  For the constant, we simply present eβ, which tells us the estimated grant lag for a hypothetical base patent with
no citations, drawings, or sheets, assigned to an inexperienced U.S. firm, in the electrical field, and granted in 1976.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                         21


applications from other assignee types take longer to process.             Except for patents from

universities, hospitals, or laboratories, the magnitude of this effect is small, albeit significant.

For instance, a patent application from an independent inventor takes just two percent more time.

For the mean lag, this is an increase from 28.37 to 28.94 months, or approximately 17 days. We

can strongly reject the null hypothesis that assignee types have no effect, as the F-statistic for

this test is 543.82.

        Country effects are generally as expected, with one counterintuitive twist. Although the

average grant lag for U.S. patents was higher than most other countries, this effect is apparently a

function of other patent features. Only patents from Canada and other non-EPO countries go

through the process more quickly, and it is a small advantage – just two percent in each case.

Still, this is a surprising result. If it is a translation issue that separates Canada from the EPO,

then why is it faster than the U.S., and even more striking, faster than the United Kingdom by a

large margin? In fact, United Kingdom patents experience the biggest increase in time, as they

take nine percent longer. Once again, the overall differences are statistically significant. The F-

statistic for the null hypothesis that all country coefficients equals 0 is 491.56.

        Year effects are also as expected. Because of the backlog resulting from USPTO budget

cuts in 1979, patents granted in the mid-1980s bore the longest pendency periods. Grant lags

shortened in the late 1980s, aided both by the reduction of the backlog and the computerization

of patent searches. By the late 1990s, grant lags begin to increase again as application volume

rose.    Even after controlling for increases in applications from technologies such as

biotechnology and computer software, patents granted in 1996 took nine percent longer than the

base year. Increases in patenting activity across all sectors have placed added strain on the

limited resources available at USPTO.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                            22


         With the exception of the number of sheets, which is insignificant, the continuous

variables all have the expected signs. Increases in number of citations, claims, and drawings all

increase examination time, all with small marginal effects. The largest increase is for citations,

where each additional citation adds 5 percent to the examination time. As expected, additional

experience speeds the examination process, but results are only significant at the 10 percent

level, and the magnitude of the effect is trivial. Even the average experience of 320 patents in

the last three years reduces the grant lag by less than one percent.16

         By far the biggest differences in examination times come across sectors. As discussed in

the interviews, technologies such as biotech and computers are more complex, and require more

examination time. Indeed, we see that, controlling for other factors such as longer reference

lists, biotechnology patents still take 69 percent longer than electrical patents, and drug patents

take 43 percent longer. Software and organic chemistry patents each take 30 percent longer.

Note that there is little difference across the more traditional technology classes of electrical,

mechanical, and miscellaneous technologies.



B. Quantile Regressions

         OLS regression estimates give the change in the conditional mean of log(grantlag) if we

change a variable by one unit. However, given that the distribution of grant lags is highly

skewed, and that patents in the upper tail are those most affected by policies that relate to the


16
   One possible concern is endogeneity between the experience variable and other patent characteristics. For
instance, more experienced inventors might know how to best craft a patent for quick review, and thus adjust
features such as claims and citations accordingly. Unfortunately, lacking a good instrument for experience, we are
unable to directly test for such endogeneity. However, we did do two indirect tests which support including each
variable in the regression. First, omitting experience from the regression has little effect on the other parameter
estimates. Second, we regressed each of the explanatory variables on the number of claims and citations. Although
statistically significant, the magnitude of the effect is essentially zero. An additional patent of experience decreases
citations by 0.00037767, and claims by 0.00005568. Thus, even a patent with the maximum experience (3755
patents) would only have 0.2 fewer claims.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                             23


grant lag (such as basing protection on the priority date, rather than the issue date), looking at the

behavior of patents throughout the distribution is valuable.

         Quantile regression allows examination of inter-variable relationships at various parts of

the conditional distribution. For example, as noted above, experience has no effect on the

conditional mean (the OLS coefficient is not significant at the 5% level). However, as we will

see below, the lower and upper parts of the conditional distribution are affected. In other words,

those patents that tend to be quick (given conditioning variables) are going to be quicker for

experienced inventors, and those that tend to take a long time will take longer with experienced

inventors.

         A formal explanation of quantile regression follows (for more, see the recent survey by

Koenker and Hallock, 2001).                Suppose we would like to calculate the median of a set

{y1 , y 2 ,K, y N }.       It is well known that the median of the set is the solution to minimizing the

problem

                       N
(3)      R(ξ ) = ∑ ρ .5 ( y i − ξ ) ,
                   i =1



where ρ τ (ε ) = ε (τ − I (ε < 0)) and I is the indicator function taking the value of 1 if the argument

is true. Koenker and Bassett (1978) use this function for general values of τ to find “quantiles”

of the distribution, so that the median is only a special case. Hence, to find the 95th percentile,

one chooses τ=0.95 and solves the above minimization problem for ξ.

         To find the sample mean of {y1 , y 2 , K, y N }, we minimize

          N                 2

(4)      ∑ ( yi − µ )
          i =1


         and we find the conditional mean by minimizing
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                            24

                             2

        ∑ (y                )
         N
(5)            i   −x β T
                        i
        i =1



with respect to β. Analogously, Koenker and Bassett show that conditional quantiles can be

estimated by minimizing


        ∑ ρτ (y                   )
         N
(6)                 i   − xiT β
        i =1



so that the estimated conditional τth quantile is xiT β̂ (τ ) . Each coefficient of β(τ) represents the

effect of a one unit change in the independent variable on the conditional τth quantile of the

dependent variable yi. Hence, it is possible to estimate parameters over a range of quantiles and

examine how the independent variables affect various parts of the distribution. This is in direct

contrast to OLS estimators, where each coefficient of β measures the response of the conditional

mean to a one-unit change in the corresponding independent variable. In this section, we

estimate all parameters and provide standard errors for quantiles 0.05 to 0.95 using 0.05

increments.

       Figure 5 presents the quantile regression results for each parameter.17            Each figure

presents both the estimated parameter value for each quantile and the 95th percent confidence

intervals for the estimates. For easy comparison, the figures also show the OLS estimates and

95th percent confidence intervals.

       On each graph, the x-axis represents quantiles of the error term for each patent. That is,

even after controlling for all factors in our regression, some patents will take a shorter time to be

examined, so have errors in the lower quantiles. Similarly, patents with errors in the upper

quantiles take a long time to be examined, even after accounting for the proposed list of

explanatory variables. The y-axis of each figure depicts the result of a one-unit increase in the
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                             25


independent variable on the log of the grant lag. For example, the figure for independent

inventors relates that, up until the 70th percentile of the error distribution, the effect of being an

independent inventor is constant. In each case, it adds about two percent to the grant lag, and the

parameter value is consistent with the OLS estimate of 0.023. However, for patents with errors

in the upper quantiles (that is, patents that, even controlling for each explanatory variable, simply

take longer anyway), being an independent inventor has a much stronger effect.

           Comparing the quantile results to the OLS results discussed above, we see that in many

cases, the quantile results provide substantial additional information about the behavior of grant

lags. We begin by looking at the effect of the assignee, recalling that the excluded variable is the

firm dummy. Note that the behavior in the upper tail of the distribution is significantly different

from lower levels.           For instance, in general, government patents go through the process

somewhat faster. However, in the very upper quantiles, government patents take much longer.

At the 75th percentile, a government patent application is processed five percent faster than other

patents. The results are similar at lower quantiles. However, at the 95th percentile, a government

patent is processed 22 percent slower than other patents. The OLS results pick up neither

extreme, as they find government patents to be just two percent faster than other patents. A

likely interpretation is that patents with extremely long grant lags include patents that were kept

secret for reasons of national security.                 In testimony before Congress in 1994, Patent

Commissioner Bruce Lehman reported that of the 627 patents issued from 1971-1993 that fit the

definition of a submarine patent (that is, an application that is kept active at the USPTO for

several years before surfacing), 41% were patents held by the U.S. government and kept secret

for security reasons. Another 12% were privately held patents that the government ordered



17
     To save space, we have omitted plots of the year dummy variables. These plots are available from the authors.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                            26


secret for security reasons (Blount 1999).18 Similarly, as discussed above, independent inventors

are delayed more frequently when the patent would naturally take a long time. Conversely, the

effect for universities and laboratories drops somewhat in the upper quantiles, although it is still

larger than most other categories.

         Looking at country trends (the excluded variable is for patents granted to U.S. assignees),

we see an interesting pattern. Not surprisingly, for most patents, being from a foreign country

slows the application process somewhat, due to translation issues, dual-attorney delays and

formatting issues for claims from another system (all noted in the interview section above).

However, among patents that naturally take a long time, domestic patents take longer than

foreign ones.19 Why might this occur? Simply put, patenting in multiple countries is a sign of a

valuable patent. Since patent protection is only valid in the country in which a patent is granted,

an applicant desiring protection in multiple countries must obtain a patent in each, paying a fee

for each. Patent applications are nearly always filed first in the inventor’s home country, after

which the inventor has one year in which to apply elsewhere. Thus, the applicant only chooses to

file abroad if the expected value of the patent justifies the extra expense. Previous work (see, for

example, Lanjouw, Pakes, and Putnam 1998) shows that the number of countries in which patent

protection is obtained is a good proxy for the value of an invention. Inventions of higher quality

are likely to be clearer inventive steps, and thus easier to examine. Questionable patents would

be less likely to have broad commercial appeal. Thus, foreign inventors considering applications




18
   For example, patent number 4956612 was granted to the U.S. Navy in 1990. The application was filed in 1945,
and the other patents cited by this patent were granted during the 1940s. The patent refers to a firing circuit for a
mine. Since the granting of a patent requires that the invention be disclosed, it is likely that the government did not
want this invention disclosed until its military usefulness had passed.
19
   The one exception is patents from the United Kingdom, which always take longer than domestic patents. The
results of U.K. patents suggest that language issues are not the only barriers faced by foreign patent applicants in the
U.S.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                          27


of patents which tend to have long pendency periods would be less likely to apply for protection

in the U.S. as well as their home country.

       Turning next to the technology variables, we see that technology differences become

more important for patents with errors in the upper quantiles. Compared to the base case of

electrical patents, the effect of technology rises in the upper quantiles for every technology

except software.20 One technology, mechanical patents, experiences a sign change in the upper

quantiles. However, the magnitude of the effect of mechanical patents is small (about a 2

percent increase or decrease to the typical grant lag) at both the upper and lower quantiles.

       There is a slightly rising effect for citations until the upper quantiles are reached. At that

point, adding additional citations doesn’t have much effect (because the damage has been done

and the 400th citation may not even be read carefully by an examiner). Similarly, the marginal

effect of an additional claim falls as we move to the upper quantiles, presumably because there

are economies of scale in one examiner evaluating many related claims. However, the marginal

effect of a drawing increases in the upper quantiles, suggesting that drawings may add more

complexity to the examination process. As with the OLS estimates, however, the magnitudes of

these estimates are small, so that the practical effects are near zero.

       One reason that the features of a patent have such a small effect is due to the strict time

allocation rules used by the USPTO. Adding more claims or more citations adds to the amount

of work to be done, but does not change the target number of hours an examiner has to allocate

to each patent. Rather, our interviews suggest that the complexity added by additional claims or

citations leads to the examiner spending less time on each part of the patent application.

Significant increases in time arise when additional communication is needed between the
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                         28


examiner and the applicant. Such communications may occur, for example, when a claim is

unclear or is too broadly defined, and having more claims may increase the probability of this

occurring. However, interviewed examiners said that this need not be the case. A patent may

have many claims because each claim is carefully written and defined in a specific, detailed

manner. For the examiner, this is more desirable than having a few claims that are too broadly

written and are thus open to challenge from the prior art.

        Finally, the results for the experience variable are particularly interesting, confirming

precisely the responses of patent examiners. Moreover, these results would not be seen without

using the quantile technique. Recall that the experience variable was insignificant in the OLS

regression. However, that is only the case around the middle of the error distribution. For

patents that are likely to get through quickly, having more experience helps to speed the process

even further. Conversely, for patents that naturally take a long time to be examined, experience

slows the process. Our interviews with patent examiners suggest a possible explanation. Many

of the things that can slow an application are simple things that an experienced inventor should

be able to avoid. Examples range from simple acts such as not filing the proper paperwork to

more complicated tasks such as writing claims in a way that are clear to the examiner. Thus, our

expectation beginning this research was that experience would help speed the process. However,

experienced applicants may slow the process down by deliberately aiming for broad claims,

forming a portfolio with claims of different formats, and acting strategically to eke out every

nugget of value from the patenting process. Our results suggest that experience offers some aid

to getting through quickly, if that is your goal. However, experience also better enables you to



20
  Note that, although the effect of being a software patent is smaller in the upper quantiles, software patents still
experience longer delays than most patents. Rather, the grant lag increases by only 20%, rather than 30% in the
lower quantiles.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                     29


stay and fight a long, drawn out application. In short, experience helps to get out of purgatory

faster or stay there longer, depending on your intentions.



C. Further Analysis

        Given the large differences across sectors, further exploration of effects within

technologies is desirable.       One particular interest is to see whether time effects vary by

technology. As noted earlier, grant lags have been rising in recent years. Part of this may be due

to an overall increase in patent applications. However, the sharp rise in applications for complex

technologies is also a factor. An important question is whether the pendency time for these

patents has continued to rise as applications rise, or whether the development of the prior art in

these fields reduces uncertainty in the patenting process, allowing the grant lag to fall over time.

        To check this, we re-ran the OLS regression with an interaction term between the year

dummies and dummy variables indicating a patent for each of four technologies: biotechnology,

drugs, computers, and software.21            Figure 6 plots the time dummies for each of these

technologies, as well as the overall time dummy from this regression.22 The overall trend

controls for year-specific events affecting all patents, such as the budget cuts at USPTO. Note

that although the overall trend has been rising over time, it is higher for three of the other four

technologies. Drug patents were actually somewhat quicker than other patents during the 80s,

and their year effects did not differ from other technologies in the 90s. However, for the other

three technologies, grant lags have been increasing over time more rapidly than for patents as a

whole. There is little evidence that experience in these fields has lowered pendency time.



21
   These four technologies were chosen because they are the technologies that have experienced the most dramatic
growth in recent years.
22
   Other results are similar to the earlier OLS estimation. These results are available from the authors.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                           30


       Finally, to get a better understanding of the cause of processing delays, we present the

results of a logit regression on the probability of a patent having a related application. As noted

earlier, a major factor increasing pendency time is the need for communication between the

examiner and the applicant. While we do not have a record of each time this occurs, our data

include one indicator of such communication.          When modifications to the application are

required, the applicant is given the choice to abandon the original application and file a new,

modified version of the original application. As long as the new application is filed on the same

day as the original application is withdrawn, it is labeled a continuation of the original

application and given the same priority date as the first application. If the continuation also

includes new elements, it is labeled as a “continuation in part.” As long as the new claims are

substantially related to the original ones, the applicant can keep the original priority date of the

patent. Information on related applications is included on the front page of a patent. We use the

presence of one or more related applications as an indicator that extra communication between

the applicant and the examiner was needed.

       Table 6 presents the results of this regression. The last column shows the marginal

effects of each independent variable. With the exception of government patents, assignee types

have little effect on the probability of having a related application. Foreign applicants are three

to nine percent less likely to require a related application. This helps to explain the results in the

upper quantiles found for the country dummies – foreign patents are less likely to have

applications requiring continuing communication. Once again, technology differences are most

important. Biotechnology, chemistry, and organic chemistry patents are more likely to have

related applications. Examiners we interviewed say that both the complexity and the pace of

technology lead to more related applications. For example, an applicant in biotech may initially
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                       31


file very broad claims, but be unable to provide support for each claim. The applicant can then

file a continuation for those claims that are supported while continuing to work on the remaining

claims. Given these results, we do not anticipate that pendency times will fall over time in these

fields. Furthermore, as noted earlier, restrictions (and subsequent divisional applications) are

more common in chemical and biotech fields because of the way those technologies need to be

claimed. For instance, the patent office places limits on the number of distinct nucleotide

sequences that can be claimed in a single patent.

       On the other hand, computer and software patents are not more likely to need related

applications. Rather, the backlog of existing applications seems to be problematic here. In fact,

one examiner in this field noted that the Technology Center was currently working on

applications that were over two years old. As a result, increasing the number examiners assigned

to these technologies could lower pendency times in these fields, by allowing examiners to work

on fewer applications, and thus allowing them to meet the same productivity goals set for other

technologies.



V. Conclusions

       In recent years, both increases in average pendency time and policy changes that are

affected by the length of pendency time have led to increased attention of the issue at USPTO.

However, little economic research on the subject exists. Both our quantitative research and our

interviews with patent examiners suggest that the biggest factor influencing the expected

examination time of a patent application is its technological field. Applications in newer, more

complex technologies such as biotechnology or computers take significantly longer than other

patent applications. Interestingly, there are even differences across these fields. In particular,
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                     32


biotechnology patents are more likely to have related applications, suggesting that the

complexity of these applications leads to more frequent communications between the examiner

and the applicant than in other fields. Since these delays add substantial time to the process

(potentially up to eight months for each communication), we do not anticipate that pendency

times will fall over time in these fields. On the other hand, computer and software patents are

not more likely to need related applications. As a result, increasing the number examiners

assigned to these technologies could lower pendency times in these fields, by allowing examiners

to work on fewer applications, and thus allowing them to meet the same productivity goals set

for other technologies. Furthermore, despite the concerns of independent inventors expressed

during debate over the American Inventors Protection Act of 1999, we find little evidence that

applications from independent inventors take longer to process than other applications.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                   33


                                         References

Blount, S., 1999. The use of Delaying Tactics to Obtain Submarine Patents and Amend Around a
       Patent that a Competitor has Designed Around. Journal of the Patent and Trademark
       Office Society 81(1), 11-32.

General Accounting Office, 1996. Enhancements Needed In Computing and Reporting Patent
      Examination Statistics. Report to the Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary (U.S. Senate,
      Washington, DC).

Hall, B.H., A.B. Jaffe and M. Trajtenberg, 2001. The NBER Patent Citations Data File: Lessons,
       Insights and Methodological Tools. NBER Working Paper No. 8498.

Johnson, D.K.N. and D. Popp (forthcoming). Forced Out of the Closet: The Impact of the
      American Inventors Protection Act on the Timing of Patent Disclosure. Rand Journal of
      Economics, Spring 2003.

King, J.L., 2002. Patent Examination Procedures as Inputs to Patent Quality. unpublished
       working paper, United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service.

Koenker, R. and G. Bassett, 1978. Regression Quantiles. Econometrica 46(1), 33-50.

Koenker, R. and K.F. Hallock, 2001. Quantile Regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives
      15(4), 143-156.

Lanjouw, J.O., A. Pakes and J. Putnam, 1998. How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual
      Property: Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data. The Journal of Industrial
      Economics 46(4), 405-433.
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                34


Table 1 – Overall Descriptive Statistics


                                  Mean     minimum   median   maximum
Grant lag (months)                28.4         1      23       1143
Number of claims                  11.7         0       9        868
Number of sheets                   3.7         0       2       4011
Number of drawings                 7.1         0       5        997
Number of patents cited            7.2         0       6        454
Number of citations per claim      1.1         0      0.6       216
Experience                        319.7        0      25       3755
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                          35


Table 2 – Descriptive Statistics by Assignee


                                    Firm     Government    Hospitals   Independent   Laboratory        Non-profit   Unassigned   Universities
Number                           1,288,213     31,132        663          17,209       2,037            1,278        294,350       18,972
Percent of total                  77.89%       1.88%        0.04%         1.04%        0.12%            0.08%        17.80%        1.15%
Grant lag (months)                  28.6        31.1         40.5          28.7         35.8             30.3          26.4         37.3
Number of claims                    12.0         9.6         14.7          12.4         15.2             13.9          10.6         15.7
Number of sheets                    3.8          2.8          4.6           3.6          3.6              3.5          3.2           4.4
Number of drawings                  7.0          5.2          7.1           8.2          6.3              6.2          7.7           7.5
Number of patents cited             7.1          5.9          6.6           8.1          7.1              8.0          7.8           6.8
Number of citations per claim        1.0         1.1          0.7           1.2          0.8              0.9           1.4          0.7
Experience                         397.5        487.4        14.9           0.0         32.1             63.8          0.0          73.0



Table 3 – Descriptive Statistics by Technology


                                                                                                                               Org.
                                Biotech   Chemicals   Computers   Drugs    Electrical Mechanical        Medical      Misc.    Chem.     Software
Number                          17,009     283,102     114,574    55,961   282,972     375,533          55,349      355,878   62,843     50,633
Percent of total                  1%        17%          7%         3%       17%        23%              3%          22%        4%         3%
Grant lag (months)               44.6       30.2        30.7       37.8      26.5        26.3            29.8        25.2      34.7       35.4
Number of claims                 13.1       12.4        12.7       12.9      11.9        10.9            13.5        11.1      10.0       13.9
Number of sheets                  3.9        1.9         6.3        0.9       4.4        4.1              3.9         3.3       0.5         8.9
Number of drawings                5.2        3.6        10.6        1.2       8.6        8.2              9.3         7.4       0.7        12.8
Number of patents cited           4.2        7.4         6.7        4.7       6.4        7.3             10.1         8.3       4.0         8.3
Number of citations per claim     0.6        1.0         0.9        0.6       0.9         1.2             1.3         1.3       0.8         1.1
Experience                       136.8      344.0       687.5      187.5     520.0      239.1            89.7        107.7     362.5      725.7
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                           36


Table 4 – Descriptive Statistics by Country


                                  U.S.     Japan      Germany    France    U.K.     Canada    Other EPO   Other
Number                          929,977   298,752     137,382    52,117   52,068    29,635     102,892    51,031
Percent of total                 56%        18%         8%         3%      3%         2%         6%        3%
Grant lag (months)               28.8       28.1        26.8      28.2     30.2      26.5        28.4      25.8
Number of claims                 12.8       10.1        10.9      10.7     11.1      12.2        10.3      9.1
Number of sheets                  3.4        5.8        2.3        2.8     2.8        3.7        2.5        3.7
Number of drawings                6.9       10.5        4.2        5.6     5.1        7.0        5.1        6.7
Number of patents cited           8.4        5.4        5.4        5.5     5.9        7.9        5.7        6.0
Number of citations per claim     1.2        1.0        0.8        0.8     0.9        1.1         0.9       1.3
Experience                       276.6     635.6       319.3     111.9    153.7      61.9       180.3      69.3
Percentage by assignee
Firm                             71%          96%          90%    82%      87%          60%     84%        56%
Government                        3%           0%           0%     7%       3%           2%      0%         1%
Hospital                          0%           0%           0%     0%       0%           0%      0%         0%
Individual                        1%          0%           1%     1%        1%           1%      1%         2%
Laboratory                        0%          0%           0%     0%       0%           0%       0%         0%
Non-Profit                        0%          0%           0%     0%        0%           0%      0%         0%
Unassigned                       23%          3%           9%     11%      10%          36%     15%        41%
University                        2%           0%           0%     0%       0%           0%      0%         0%
Percentage by technology
Biotechnology                     1%           1%           1%    1%        1%           1%      1%         1%
Chemicals                        17%          17%          21%    17%      17%          16%     18%        14%
Computers                         6%          12%           3%     7%       6%           6%      4%         5%
Drugs                             3%           2%           4%     6%       8%           3%      5%         4%
Electrical                       16%          22%          15%    19%      17%          13%     14%        18%
Mechanical                       21%          26%          27%    22%      22%          24%     24%        23%
Medical                           4%           1%           2%     2%       2%           3%      3%         4%
Miscellaneous                    25%          12%          18%    18%      19%          32%     23%        27%
Organic Chemistry                 3%           3%           7%     5%       5%           2%      6%         3%
Software                          3%           5%           1%     3%       2%           2%      1%         2%
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                37


Table 5 – OLS Results
                                                                              median
                      Estimate       T-stat      exp(β) - 1     mean effect    effect
Intercept              2.99407      1325.65       19.97*
Unassigned            -0.03509         -33         -0.03
Individual             0.02357         6.42         0.02
Government            -0.01578        -5.72        -0.02
University             0.16228         45.8         0.18
Hospital               0.20177         10.9         0.22
Laboratory             0.14257        13.49         0.15
Non-profit             0.05632         4.22         0.06
Japan                  0.02729        24.99         0.03
Germany                0.00857         6.09         0.01
France                 0.04066        18.79         0.04
United Kingdom         0.08852        40.98         0.09
Canada                -0.02459        -8.73        -0.02
Other EPO               0.0523        33.01         0.05
Other Country         -0.02495        -11.4        -0.02
Chemicals              0.10726        83.02         0.11
Organic Chemistry      0.26069      121.78          0.30
Computers               0.1258        75.07         0.13
Software               0.26074       112.38         0.30
Biotechnology          0.52534      138.33          0.69
Medical                0.08423        37.39         0.09
Drugs                 0.35688       158.89          0.43
Mechanical            -0.01743       -14.45        -0.02
Miscellaneous         -0.06458       -51.55        -0.06
issue year 1977         -0.046       -17.77        -0.04
issue year 1978       -0.04204       -16.28        -0.04
issue year 1979        0.00176         0.63         0.00
issue year 1980        0.10135        38.53         0.11
issue year 1981        0.08881        34.29         0.09
issue year 1982        0.13197        49.18         0.14
issue year 1983         0.1751        64.78         0.19
issue year 1984         0.1609        62.02         0.17
issue year 1985        0.11417        44.56         0.12
issue year 1986        0.07077        27.42         0.07
issue year 1987        0.02316         9.25         0.02
issue year 1988       -0.01792        -7.02        -0.02
issue year 1989       -0.05226       -21.17        -0.05
issue year 1990       -0.08035        -31.9        -0.08
issue year 1991       -0.06092       -24.23        -0.06
issue year 1992       -0.04021       -15.81        -0.04
issue year 1993       -0.01738        -6.74        -0.02
issue year 1994       -0.00298        -1.14         0.00
issue year 1995        0.01865         6.98         0.02
issue year 1996        0.08285        30.56         0.09
                                 Table continued on next page
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                          38


Table 5 – OLS Results (continued)
                                                                                       median
                         Estimate         T-stat         exp(β) - 1     mean effect     effect
Experience             -0.00000114         -1.71         -1.14E-06       -3.64E-04    -2.85E-05
Issue year * cites     -0.00044104        -39.96         -4.41E-04          -0.21        -0.18
# of Citations           0.05023           49.86            0.05            0.44         0.35
# of Claims            0.00066735         17.08          6.68E-04           0.01         0.01
# of Drawings            0.00632          103.28            0.01            0.05         0.03
# of Sheets            -0.00005925         -0.67         -5.92E-05       -2.16E-04    -1.18E-04
* -- For the intercept, we report e(β). This value is the expected grant lag for a
    "base patent," which is assigned to a U.S. firm, was issued in 1976, in the
    electrical sector, has no experience, and no citations, claims, drawings,
    or sheets.

Number of observations:                  1653854
Adjusted R-square                         0.1047
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications         39


Table 6 – Probability of a Related Application – Logit Results
                               Standard         Chi-    marg
Variable            Estimate       Error      Square    effect
Intercept             -1.726      0.012    21480.307   -0.281
Unassigned            -0.193      0.006     1139.541   -0.032
Individual            -0.004      0.019        0.051   -0.001
Government            -0.719      0.018     1682.429   -0.117
University             0.159      0.016       96.583    0.026
Hospital               0.082      0.083        0.967    0.013
Laboratory             0.166      0.049       11.405    0.027
Non-profit            -0.077      0.067        1.328   -0.013
Japan                 -0.339      0.006     3448.931   -0.055
Germany               -0.566      0.008     4901.995   -0.092
France                -0.469      0.012     1430.170   -0.076
United Kingdom        -0.177      0.011      243.942   -0.029
Canada                -0.208      0.015      190.003   -0.034
Other EPO             -0.308      0.009     1304.882   -0.050
Other Country         -0.467      0.013     1369.625   -0.076
Chemicals              0.890      0.007    17316.304    0.145
Organic Chemistry      1.471      0.010    21464.050    0.240
Computers             -0.005      0.009        0.328   -0.001
Software               0.105      0.012       71.895    0.017
Biotechnology          1.394      0.017     6759.936    0.227
Medical                0.395      0.011     1190.749    0.064
Drugs                  1.617      0.010    24213.820    0.263
Mechanical             0.169      0.007      626.358    0.027
Miscellaneous          0.097      0.007      190.297    0.016
issue year 1977       -0.078      0.013       34.318   -0.013
issue year 1978       -0.110      0.013       66.939   -0.018
issue year 1979       -0.127      0.015       75.536   -0.021
issue year 1980       -0.209      0.014      227.244   -0.034
issue year 1981       -0.255      0.014      345.150   -0.041
issue year 1982       -0.241      0.014      287.886   -0.039
issue year 1983       -0.263      0.014      333.716   -0.043
issue year 1984       -0.305      0.014      484.752   -0.050
issue year 1985       -0.341      0.014      616.852   -0.056
issue year 1986       -0.340      0.014      601.105   -0.055
issue year 1987       -0.235      0.013      315.655   -0.038
issue year 1988       -0.149      0.013      125.728   -0.024
issue year 1989       -0.099      0.013       60.628   -0.016
issue year 1990       -0.049      0.013       14.215   -0.008
issue year 1991       -0.079      0.013       36.694   -0.013
issue year 1992       -0.006      0.013        0.190   -0.001
issue year 1993        0.016      0.013        1.475    0.003
issue year 1994        0.040      0.013        9.002    0.007
issue year 1995        0.127      0.014       86.953    0.021
issue year 1996        0.206      0.014      224.047    0.033
                                 Table continued on next page
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                     40


Table 6 – Probability of a Related Application – Logit Results (continued)
                            Standard        Chi-   marg
Variable         Estimate       Error     Square   effect
Experience          0.000      0.000     445.960   0.000
Issue year *
cites               0.000      0.000       0.818    0.000
# of Citations      0.027      0.005      27.346    0.004
# of Claims        -0.005      0.000     736.044   -0.001
# of Drawings       0.029      0.000    4910.565    0.005
# of Sheets        -0.007      0.001      95.401   -0.001
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                    41


Figure 1 – Distribution of Grant Lags


           80000



           70000



           60000



           50000
  Number




           40000



           30000



           20000



           10000



              0




                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                              6
                       11

                            16

                                 21

                                      26

                                           31

                                                36

                                                     41

                                                          46

                                                               51

                                                                    56

                                                                         61

                                                                              66

                                                                                   71

                                                                                        76

                                                                                             81

                                                                                                  86

                                                                                                       91

                                                                                                             96
              1

                   6




                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                            12

                                                                                                            12

                                                                                                            13

                                                                                                            13

                                                                                                            14

                                                                                                            14
                                                                               Grant lag (in months)
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                             42


Figure 2 – Number of Patents by Assignee Type


           120000




           100000




           80000
  Number




           60000




           40000




           20000




               0
               1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
                                                                        Year

                                       firm   gov   hospital   independent     lab   nonprofit   unassigned   univ
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                             43


Figure 3 – Number of Patents by Technology


           120000




           100000




           80000
  Number




           60000




           40000




           20000




               0
               1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
                                                                         Year

                       Biotech   Chemicals   Computers   Drugs   Electrical   Mechanical   Medical   Org. Chem.   Misc.   Software
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                 44


Figure 4 – Mean Grant Lag by Year

                          32




                          31




                          30
  Grant lag (in months)




                          29




                          28




                          27




                          26




                          25
                           1976   1978   1980   1982   1984       1986     1988   1990        1992   1994   1996
                                                                  Year


The figure shows the mean grant lag for patents granted in a given year.
                                   Germany                                                           Hospital                                                           Unassigned

                   -0.10              0.0      0.05      0.10                     0.05      0.10      0.15      0.20    0.25                                  -0.040       -0.030            -0.020




           0.0
                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                 0.0




           0.4
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.4




Quantile
                                                                Quantile
                                                                                                                                      Quantile




           0.8
                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                   France                                                           Laboratory                                                          Independent

                 -0.10         0.0     0.05     0.10     0.15                        0.05            0.10          0.15                                         0.02      0.04        0.06       0.08




           0.0
                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                 0.0




           0.4
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.4




Quantile
                                                                Quantile
                                                                                                                                      Quantile




           0.8
                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 5 -- Quantile Regression Results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications




                                    U.K.                                                            Non-profit                                                          Government

                 0.0        0.05        0.10           0.15                      -0.05      0.0       0.05       0.10     0.15                            -0.05          0.05           0.15




           0.0
                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                 0.0




           0.4
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.4




Quantile
                                                                Quantile
                                                                                                                                      Quantile




           0.8
                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 0.8




                                   Canada                                                             Japan                                                              University

                    -0.10     -0.06         -0.02       0.02                     -0.10      -0.05       0.0        0.05        0.10                    0.10      0.12     0.14        0.16     0.18




           0.0
                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                 0.0




           0.4
                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                 0.4




Quantile
                                                                Quantile
                                                                                                                                      Quantile




           0.8
                                                                           0.8
                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  45
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                                                                                                           46


                     Figure 5 -- Quantile Regression Results (continued)




                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                    0.0
                     0.10




                                                                                                                   0.2




                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                  Organic Chem.
                                                    Other Country
         Other EPO




                                                                                                   Chemicals
                                                                    -0.05
                     0.05




                                                                                                                   0.1




                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                     0.0




                                                                    -0.10




                                                                                                                   0.0




                                                                                                                                                                  0.0
                     -0.05




                             0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                             0.0   0.4        0.8

                                   Quantile                                       Quantile                                       Quantile                                         Quantile




                                                                                                                                                                  0.14
                     0.130




                                                                                                                   0.7
                                                                    0.26




                                                                                                                                                                  0.12
                                                                                                                   0.6
                     0.120




                                                                                                   Biotechnology
         Computers




                                                    Software




                                                                                                                                                  Medical
                                                                                                                   0.5




                                                                                                                                                                  0.10
                                                                    0.22
                     0.110




                                                                                                                   0.4




                                                                                                                                                                  0.08
                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                    0.18
                     0.100




                                                                                                                                                                  0.06
                             0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                             0.0   0.4        0.8

                                   Quantile                                       Quantile                                       Quantile                                         Quantile




                                                                                                                                                                  2*10^-5
                     0.6
                     0.5




                                                                    0.02




                                                                                                                   -0.02




                                                                                                                                                                  10^-5
                                                                                                   Miscellaneous
                     0.4




                                                    Mechanical




                                                                                                                                                  Experience
         Drugs




                                                                    0.0




                                                                                                                   -0.06
                     0.3




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                    -0.02
                     0.2




                                                                                                                   -0.10




                                                                                                                                                                  -10^-5
                     0.1




                             0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                           0.0   0.4        0.8                             0.0   0.4        0.8

                                   Quantile                                       Quantile                                       Quantile                                         Quantile
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                                                                                                                     47


                         Figure 5 -- Quantile Regression Results (continued)




                                                                                                                                                              0.010
                                                                        0.06




                                                                                                                 0.0020




                                                                                                                                                              0.008
                                                                        0.05
                         -0.0003
         Issyear * cit




                                                                                                                                                 # Drawings
                                                          # Citations




                                                                                                                 0.0010
                                                                                                      # Claims
                                                                        0.04




                                                                                                                                                              0.006
                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                                        0.03
                         -0.0005




                                                                                                                                                              0.004
                                   0.0   0.4        0.8                        0.0   0.4        0.8                       0.0   0.4        0.8                        0.0   0.4        0.8

                                         Quantile                                    Quantile                                   Quantile                                    Quantile
                         0.001




                                                                        3.5
                                                          Constant
         # Sheets

                         -0.001




                                                                        3.0
                         -0.003




                                                                        2.5




                                   0.0   0.4        0.8                        0.0   0.4        0.8

                                         Quantile                                    Quantile
Determinants of the Grant Lag for US Patent Applications                                       48


Table 6 – Time Effects by Technology Sector

                0.8




                0.6




                0.4
  Coefficient




                0.2




                  0
                       1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996




                -0.2




                -0.4
                                                                         Year

                                                    overall   biotech   drugs    computers    software
