                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WHAT CAN BE LEARNED FROM SKELETONS
                          THAT MIGHT INTEREST ECONOMISTS,
                       HISTORIANS AND OTHER SOCIAL SCIENTISTS?

                                          Richard H. Steckel

                                         Working Paper 9519
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9519


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Richard Steckel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
What Can Be Learned from Skeletons that Might Interest Economists, Historians and Other
Social Scientists?
Richard H. Steckel
NBER Working Paper No. 9519
February 2003
JEL No. N0, O0

                                           ABSTRACT

Economists and other scholars have long sought to measure and analyze long-term trends and

differences in social performance. Average stature supplements and lengthens data series on

traditional measures of life expectancy and real GDP per capita. This paper presents a methodology

for using skeletal remains to greatly extend the chronological and cultural reach of anthropometric

measures. Bones are widely available for study and unlike stature, they portray health over the life

cycle, depicting both childhood and processes of aging and degeneration. The paper briefly explains

seven skeletal measures widely used in physical anthropology and discusses procedures for

summarizing community health in the form of an index. Results are based on a sample of over

12,000 individuals who lived at 65 localities in the Western Hemisphere over the past several

millennia. Results challenge conceptions of the pre-Columbian disease environment, and the

methods can be used to test models of very long-term economic growth and to study important

aspects of human welfare during climate change.


Richard H. Steckel
Economics and Anthropology Departments
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
steckel.1@osu.edu
        Economists and historians generally agree on the considerable value of investigating

long-term trends and differences in the standard of living or quality of life. They have

displayed ingenuity in estimating and analyzing GNP and life expectancy for many countries

back to the nineteenth century (or earlier, in a few cases). Using height data from military

records and other sources, anthropometric historians have extended the study of health aspects

of the standard of living into the eighteenth century.

        This paper discusses a methodology for considerably expanding the chronological and

geographic reach of anthropometric history by utilizing skeletal remains as the basic data

source. Bones are far more informative about health than heights alone and they are available

in substantial quantities for people who lived in many parts of the world over the past several

millennia. Among other things, these remains depict aspects of health over the life cycle, as

opposed to the growing years in the case of stature, and they are available for women and for

children, two groups whose condition and activities are often excluded from traditional

historical sources such as military documents, voting tallies and property records.

        Skeletons can therefore be used to chart important aspects of the human experience,

embracing its enormous diversity in the lengthy journey from the era of hunter-gathers onward

to settled agriculture, the rise of cities, global exploration and colonization, and eventual

industrialization. Study of the possible causes and consequences of these changes is facilitated

by archaeological artifacts, evidence collected by climate historians, GIS (Geographic

Information System) data, and a variety of historical records. Sampling issues inevitably arise

in their comparative study and there are ambiguities in interpreting this biological evidence.

Confidence in the approach is bolstered, however, by comparing results with patterns of health

that are well established from other sources.

I. Skeletal Indicators of Health

        Skeletal furnish the best and, in many cases, the only picture of health available over

the millennia. To understand this evidence it is useful to begin with a general discussion of

skeletal manifestations of stress.1 Unlike dental enamel, bones are living tissues that receive

blood and adapt to mechanical and physiological stress. Habitual physical activity that requires


                                                 1
exertion leads to a readily visible expansion of the related muscle attachments on the skeleton.

If the action is repetitive in a particular direction, the bones adapt to the load by following

Wolff’s Law, or thickening in the direction of the plane of motion.2 Hunter-gatherers who

walked long distances, for example, had oval-shaped femurs but these bones are nearly circular

among settled agriculturalists who had diverse activity patterns. Similarly, professional athletes

such as tennis players and baseball pitchers develop extensive muscles, tendons and bones in

the shoulders and arms on the side that they use.

        Net nutrition has been an effective concept for understanding the environmental factors

that influence human growth. The body is a biological machine that requires fuel for basal

metabolism, to perform work and to combat infection, all of which claim dietary intake.3 If net

nutrition is insufficient, growth slows or ceases, and linear growth of the skeleton is stunted if

the deprivation is chronic and severe.

        In principle, anthropologists could use any bone to estimate stature but the femur is

most widely used because it is often well preserved and is easily measured. It also has the

greatest correlation with stature in part because it comprises about one quarter of standing

height. Seeking information useful in forensics, Mildred Trotter and Goldine Gleser (1952)

estimated the relationship between the two variables using femur lengths of the deceased whose

living height was known from muster rolls or other sources. The equations vary somewhat by

sex (females are a few centimeters shorter than males for a given femur length), and accurate

height estimates require anthropologists to draw upon sexually dimorphic characteristics of the

pelvis and the skull that appear in adolescence. Growth plates obfuscate the bone lengths of

juveniles, and height estimates are correspondingly problematic until the bony components of

the femur fuse late in the teenage years.

        As a group, physical anthropologists collect hundreds of skeletal measures, many of

which are very specialized in nature and some of which reflect rare or unusual forms of

physiological stress.4 In designing a study of community health with a large number of

collaborators, it is important to select general health indicators that are understood and reported

by virtually all physical anthropologists, regardless of specialty. In The Backbone of History:


                                                 2
Health and Nutrition in the Western Hemisphere (Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose,

2002), which investigated skeletal health over the past several thousand years, these included

three indictors of health during childhood (stature, linear enamel defects, and skeletal signs of

anemia), two measures of decline among adults (dental decay and degenerative joint disease),

and two that could affect any age group, but are more prevalent among older children and

adults (skeletal infections and trauma). Stature has already been discussed as a child health

indicator, and the others are briefly explained below (for more information see Clark S. Larsen

(2000) and Tim D. White and Pieter A. Folkens, 2000 and references therein).

            A. Enamel hypoplasias (linear enamel defects). Hypoplasias are lines or pits of

enamel deficiency commonly found in the teeth (especially incisors and canines) of people

whose childhood was biologically stressful. They are caused by disruption to the cells

(ameloblasts) that form the enamel. The disruption is usually environmental, commonly due to

either poor nutrition or infectious disease or a combination of both. Although nonspecific,

hypoplasias are informative about physiological stress in childhood in archaeological settings.

            B. Indicators of iron deficiency anemia (porotic hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia).

Iron is essential for many body functions, such as oxygen transport to the body’s tissues. In

circumstances where iron is deficient—owing to nutritional deprivation, low body weight,

chronic diarrhea, parasite infection, and other factors—the body attempts to compensate by

increasing red blood cell production. The skeletal manifestations appear in those areas where

red blood cell production occurs, such as in the flat bones of the cranium. The associated

pathological conditions are sieve-like lesions called porotic hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia for

the cranial vault and eye orbits, respectively. The lesions can also be caused by other factors,2

but iron deficiency is among the most common causes. In infancy and childhood, iron

deficiency anemia is associated with impaired growth and delays in behavioral and cognitive

development. In adulthood, the condition is associated with limited work capacity and physical

activity.

            C. Dental health. Dental health is an important indicator both of oral and general

health. Dental health in archaeological skeletons is assessed from dental caries, antemortem


                                                   3
tooth loss, and abscesses. Dental caries is a disease process characterized by the focal

demineralization of dental hard tissues by organic acids produced by bacterial fermentation of

dietary carbohydrates, especially sugars. In the modern era, the introduction and general

availability of refined sugar caused a huge increase in dental decay. In the more distant past,

the adoption of agriculture led to a general increase in tooth decay, especially from the

introduction of maize. The agricultural shift and the later use of increasingly refined foods

have resulted in an increase in periodontal disease, caries, tooth loss, and abscesses.

        D. Degenerative joint disease. Degenerative joint disease (DJD) is commonly caused

by the mechanical wear and tear on the joints of the skeleton due to physical activity.

Generally speaking, populations engaged in habitual activities that are physically demanding

have more DJD (especially buildup of bone along joint margins and deterioration of bone on

articular joint surfaces) than populations that are relatively sedentary. Studies of DJD have

been valuable in documenting levels and patterns of activity in past populations.

        E. Skeletal infections (osteoperiostitis). Skeletal lesions of infectious origin, which

commonly appear on the major long bones (especially the tibia), have been documented

worldwide. Most of these lesions are found as plaque-like deposits from periosteal

inflammation, swollen shafts, and irregular elevations on bone surfaces. Most lesions are

nonspecific but they often originate with Staphylococcus or Streptococcus organisms. These

lesions have proven very informative about patterns and levels of community health in the

human past.

        F. Trauma. Fractures, weapon wounds, and other skeletal injuries provide a record of

accidents or violence. Accidental injuries, such as ankle and wrist fractures, reflect difficulty of

terrain and the hazards of specific occupations. Injuries caused by violence, such as weapon

wounds or parry fractures of the forearm, provide a barometer of domestic strife, social unrest,

and warfare.

II. Summarizing Community Health

        Demographers and medical personnel quantify health in many ways, but all agree that

it has two important elements: length of life and morbidity. The methodology for measuring


                                                4
the first, using life expectancy at birth (and at other ages), was refined during the nineteenth

century but much less agreement exists on principles for the second. While death is usually

well-defined, morbidity is much less precise. The incidence of various chronic diseases, days

lost from school or work, and assessments of physical capacity are used, but all have

conceptual limitations. Moreover, gathering reasonably comprehensive morbidity information

that is accurate is often time-consuming and expensive. Significant progress on the problem

may be made eventually by using devices that transmit information from receptors implanted in

the body.

        How effective are skeletons in capturing the elements of health? At most localities or

burial sites, a useful but incomplete picture is available for morbidity. Estimates of life

expectancy will be improved by new techniques of aging, but remain hazardous without good

contextual information about the population from archaeological and other sources. Lack of

information on life expectancy is less damaging than it might appear for the study of health,

however. To the extent that morbidity and mortality are positively correlated, health can still

be indexed or ranked across sites by using morbidity indicators from skeletons.

        A. Life expectancy. Research on life expectancy from skeletons is limited by reliable

estimates of age at death at advanced ages. The ages of children and young adults can be

accurately determined from dental development and from the pattern of fusion in various

growth plates, but the chronological sequence of skeletal changes is more subtle at older ages,

and sometimes these changes are obscured by poor skeletal preservation following burial.

Using techniques such as systematic changes in the public bone, some physical anthropologists

lump ages beyond 50 into a single category. Others believe that the pattern of cranial suture

closures is provides useful information at advanced ages. From one point of view, this

limitation is modest because few people were likely to have survived beyond age 50 in most

pre-modern societies. On the other hand, death rates rise rapidly at older ages, and the lack of

reliable ages in this range significantly constrains the information available for estimating

model life tables, thereby increasing confidence intervals.5 The outlook is promising, however,

because new techniques based on systematic growth in tooth cementum (a hard tissue that


                                                5
covers the external surface of tooth roots) can provide highly accurate estimates of ages, even

for very old adults.

        Physical anthropologists know that the bones of infants and very young children are

soft and frequently deteriorate after burial. Careful excavation is required to recount the deaths

at these ages. Sometimes more limiting is the geographic dispersion of burials, so that

excavations associated with new roads, buildings and other development projects recover only

a portion of the deaths in any society. This is not a problem if people are missing at random,

but it is an issue if infants or young children were buried in separate locations or there were

seasonal places of residence.

        Population growth rates were probably small in pre-modern times for continents or

large regions, and on this scale the assumption of a stationary population is plausible. If correct

and if all burials of a society are recovered and accurately aged, then life expectancy simply

equals the average age at death. Any particular society, however, may have grown or shrunk

from fluctuations in fertility or mortality relative to the regional or continental average. High

birth rates, for example, increase the relative number of deaths at young ages. Compensation

for these effects can be made if archaeological or other information is available as an ingredient

to estimating fertility rates. While this is a new area of paleodemography, it is likely that

considerable information gaps will remain for many burial sites.

        One may reasonably suppose that life expectancy ranged from roughly 20 to 40 years

for most societies prior to the late nineteenth century. Populations close to 20 years were

highly stressed and would have vanished quickly without very high fertility, which would have

been unlikely under the environmentally stressful conditions that produced high mortality. Life

expectancy in excess of 40 years is rarely observed without good nutrition, or in its absence, is

usually accompanied by aspects of the health revolution such as improved sanitation or other

practices inspired by the germ theory of disease. With complete excavation of a society’s

burials, accurate age estimates and considerable archaeological information, it is reasonable to

hope that life expectancy could be reliably placed into one of three categories within this range:




                                                6
low-to-mid 20s, high 20s to low 30s and mid-to-high 30s. Yet, even this is quite useful

information for understanding the quality of life in the past.

           B. Morbidity. Skeletons are good at summarizing several types of chronic morbidity,

with the exception of various soft-tissue conditions such as hernias or torn ligaments.

Degenerative joint disease and dental decay often develop over many years, and both have

adverse functional consequences. DJD is painful and limits mobility, whereas dental decay

limits the ability to chew and digest a coarse diet, which impairs net nutrition, weakens the

immune system, and increases vulnerability to illness. Signs of anemia (cribra orbitalia and

porotic hyperostosis) usually appear early in childhood and the adverse environmental

conditions that created these bony malformations tend to persist thereafter. Skeletal infections

are often painful and signal a weakened immune system that can lead to illness and functional

loss. Broken bones and weapon wounds are painful and require time to heal, and the loss of

mobility or dexterity associated with them can be permanent if they heal in a misaligned

fashion.

           Stunting and linear enamel hypoplasias (LEH) are not direct measures of morbidity, but

they signal a loss of functional capacity. Hunger is painful and limits physical activity in the

fashion of anemia, and hypoplasias are usually the direct result of severe bouts of disease or

malnutrition in early childhood. These skeletal lesions therefore index various types of

morbidity.

           C. Sampling issues. Physical anthropologists may have little control over the location

and extent of an excavation if it is the result of a development project that clears a small area of

ground. With the exception of the removal of entire cemeteries containing reasonably closed

populations, one can seldom argue that skeletons represent an entire society. Many collections

in Europe, for example, are disproportionately from cities and towns, where much construction

has occurred relative to rural areas.

           These constraints are a hindrance but far from disabling. In formulating a large

comparative project involving numerous sites, one may stratify to obtain adequate

representation from rural and urban areas. Post-weighting samples is a second option. As


                                                 7
discussed below, one may sidestep age bias by converting information to age specific rates if

the age distribution of deaths has been skewed by fertility, migration, or excavation.

        D. A health index. At this stage of research, numerous simplifying assumptions and

approximations are required to distill diverse skeletal data into a single number for comparative

ranking and study of populations.6 Ideally both life expectancy and morbidity would be

available, so that one might roughly approximate a measure such as quality-adjusted life years.

Unfortunately, many sites in The Backbone of History, the largest comparative skeletal study

undertaken to date, lack reliable estimates of life expectancy. Therefore the health index

discussed here includes only morbidity as expressed in the frequency and severity of skeletal

lesions, but the index could be modified to incorporate length of life. A positive correlation

between morbidity and mortality is likely, however, which mitigates the lack of data on life

expectancy in ranking health across sites.

        The index was estimated from the 12,520 skeletons of individuals who lived at 65

localities in the Western Hemisphere over the past several thousand years (see the introduction

to Steckel and Rose, 2002). For each individual, the 7 skeletal measures discussed above were

graded on a scale of 0 (most severe expression) to 100 (no lesion or deficiency). Age-specific

rates of morbidity pertaining to the health indicators during childhood (stature, LEH and

anemia) were calculated by assuming that conditions persisted from birth to death, an

assumption justified by knowledge that childhood deprivation is correlated with adverse health

as an adult.7 The duration of morbidity prior to death is in fact unknown for the remaining 4

components (infections, trauma, DJD, and dental decay) and will be the subject of future

research, but was approximated by an assumption of 10 years. Results are grouped into age

categories of 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-24, 25-34, 35-44 and 45+.

        Next, the age-specific rates for each skeletal measure were weighted by the relative

number of person-years lived in a reference population that is believed to roughly agree with

pre-Columbian mortality conditions in the Western Hemisphere (Model West, level 4), and the

results were multiplied by life expectancy in the reference population (26.4 years) and

expressed as a percent of the maximum attainable (26.4, which corresponds to a complete lack


                                               8
of skeletal defects or lesions). The 7 components of the index were then weighted equally to

obtain the overall index.

        Numerous assumptions underlying the index can be challenged, modified and refined,

which cannot be pursued in a short paper. It would be appropriate to weight the elements of the

index, such as dental decay and trauma, by their functional consequences but this is

complicated by the nature of the social safety net, medical technology and other factors that

vary in unknown ways across societies. Thus, equal weighting is questionable but it is also

difficult to justify an alternative scheme given the present state of knowledge. In addition, the

index is an additive measure that ignores interactions, but having both a skeletal infection and

trauma could have been worse than the sum of their independent effects on health.

III. Plausibility of Results

        Comparing results with patterns well established in historical studies is a useful

technique for assessing the health index as a work in progress.8 Settlement size is a suitable

category of analysis; demographers widely report that mortality rates were higher in urban as

opposed to rural areas prior to the adoption of public health measures inspired by the germ

theory of disease.

        Because European exploration and colonization distorted Native American mortality

patterns in ways that could have obscured the effects of settlement size, comparisons are

limited to pre-Columbian sites, which include skeletons of 4,078 individuals who lived at 23

localities in North, Central and South America. Archaeological evidence was used to arrange

the settlements into three types: mobile (essentially hunter gatherers); village, or settled but

dispersed populations; and town or paramount urban center. The estimated regression of the

health index on settlement type is:

                     HI = 78.98 -8.71 Village -14.91 Urban, N = 23, R2 = 0.42

                     (0.000) (0.021)        (0.001)

where significance levels are given in parentheses, and the mean and standard deviation of the

dependent variable are 70.5 and 8.0, respectively.




                                                9
        That the health index systematically declined (by a roughly two standard deviations) as

settlement size increased is welcome news. The index has passed an important preliminary test,

suggesting it is credible even in its crude form. Presumably refinements in the methodology

will sharpen the quantification of important aspects of health.

IV. Implications

        Although focus of the paper is methodology, it is worth mentioning results that

challenge interpretations of the distant past. Some historians have noted the absence of many

prominent European diseases such as smallpox, measles and typhoid in arguing that native

populations were generally healthy, perhaps living in an epidemiological Garden of Eden.9

Such conditions might have allowed an enormous population to flourish. Instead, the skeletons

examined with the health index reveal enormous diversity, with pre-Columbian Native

Americans occupying the highest and the lowest slots in the rankings at 65 localities, which

also include 14 groups of European-Americans and African Americans. The absence of several

major European diseases does not prove there was a benign disease environment or good health

in pre-Columbian America. Numerous native populations, particularly ones that lived late in

the pre-Columbian period, were riddled with pathological lesions. The natives encountered by

Columbus either brought or evolved with enough pathogens to shorten life and cause

substantial morbidity.

V. Research Frontiers

        Astronomy has been greatly invigorated by newly deployed telescopes, which allow

observers to peer deep into space, gathering light emitted from vast distances and recording

events early in the history of the universe. In a similar but smaller way, skeletons and related

artifacts can be powerful for the social sciences, allowing observers to measure and analyze

important aspects of social performance deep into human history, prior to the dawn of

civilization. Neither astronomy nor economic history is an experimental science; both operate

within the confines of observational evidence from which the intellectually curious can

nevertheless learn much about astronomical or human origins and evolution.




                                               10
         Study of skeletons can satisfy far more than natural intellectual curiosity about the

contours of the human past, however. Not only a basic ingredient in the quality of life, health is

intertwined with demographic, social, economic and political change and with the outcomes of

wars and other conflicts. Health affects work capacity and the incentives to invest in skills that

contribute to economic growth. Economists, historians and political scientists have identified

inequality, not only in income or wealth, but also in the form of disparities in health and

nutrition, as a driving force in social, political and economic change. Thus, health has played a

central role in human history, both as an agent of change and as an outcome measure indicating

the quality of life.

         Skeletal health will be useful, for example, in debates over the prime movers of very

long-term economic growth. A growing literature has sought to model technological progress

as arising from endogenous choices of profit-maximizing innovators. Gary D. Hansen and

Edward C. Prescott (1998) posit two technologies for producing output in which the constant-

returns technology progressively supplants the diminishing returns technology. Oded Galor

and David N. Weil (2000) conclude that there was a very long-lived growth path in which per

capita consumption was constant, population grew slowly, and technology improved slowly.

Eventually, the long-run features of technology kicked in, a demographic transition occurred,

and a new growth path was approached. Charles I. Jones (2001) uses a model of fertility choice

to argue that a strong positive relationship between income and fertility existed at low incomes

but a negative relationship existed at moderate to high incomes. Jones combines these

preferences with a technology that exhibits decreasing short-run returns to labor and weakly

increasing long-run returns. Ultimately, the level of per capita income is determined by the

condition that the induced level of fertility must just suffice for zero population growth.

         Insofar as skeletal health is an adequate proxy for human welfare, it will be possible to

test explanations flowing from this line of research. According to the Hansen/Prescott and

Galor/Weil models, per capita consumption should have been essentially constant before the

era of modern growth, but the Jones model allows for periods during which human welfare

improved measurably because of bursts in innovative activity or unusually favorable


                                               11
institutional changes. Jones’ model can therefore be regarded as proposing the alternative

hypothesis to the null hypothesis proposed by the Hansen/Prescott and Galor/Weil models.

        A second promising application concerns human adaptation to climate, a topic inspired

by growing concerns over global warming. Using tree rings, ice cores and other sources,

climate historians have made considerable progress in measuring important aspects of climate

over many thousands of years (Fagan, 2000). Economists such as Jeffrey Sachs (2001) have

engaged the debate over climate and economic performance, and climate historians such as

Peter deMenocal (2001) have used the new evidence to link climate change to the fall of the

Maya. While the fall of civilizations is interesting, it is a crude measure of social performance.

By linking skeletal health with new climate data, it will be possible to measure the connection

between climate and human welfare with greater precision.




                                               12
                                         References



Barker, David James Purslove. Mothers, babies, and health in later life. Edinburgh: Churchill

      Livingstone, 1998.

Buikstra, Jane E. and Ubelaker, Douglas H. Standards for data collection from human skeletal

      remains. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archeological Survey, 1994.

deMenocal, Peter B. “Cultural Responses to Climate Change during the Late Holocene.”

      Science April 27, 2001, 292, pp. 667-673.

Fagan, Brian. The Little Ice Age: How Climate Made History, 1300-1850. New York: Basic

      Books, 2002.

Fogel, Robert W. and Costa, Dora L. “A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, with Some

      Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs and Pension Costs.”

      Demography 1997(1), 34, pp. 49-66.

Galor, Oded and Weil, David N. “Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthusian

      Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review,

      2000, 90(4), pp. 806-828.

Goodman, Alan S. and Martin, Debra L. “Reconstructing Health Profiles from Skeletal

      Remains,” in Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, eds., The backbone of

      history: health and nutrition in the Western Hemisphere. New York: Cambridge

      University Press, 2002, pp. 11-60.

Hansen, Gary D., and Prescott, Edward C. “Malthus to Solow.” National Bureau of Economic

      Research Working Paper No. 6858, 1998.

Jones, Charles I. “Was an Industrial Revolution Inevitable? Economic Growth Over the Very

      Long Run.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7375, 1999.

Kiple, Kenneth F., and Beck, Stephen V., eds. Biological consequences of the European

      expansion, 1450-1800. Brookfield, Vt.: Ashgate, 1997.




                                             13
Larsen, Clark Spencer, Bioarchaeology: interpreting behavior from the human skeleton.

      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. “Tropical Underdevelopment.” National Bureau of Economic Research

      Working Paper No. 8119, 2001.

Steckel, Richard H. “Stature and the Standard of Living.” Journal of Economic Literature,

     1995, 33(4), pp. 1903-40.

Steckel, Richard H., and Rose, Jerome C., eds. The backbone of history: health and nutrition in

      the Western Hemisphere. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Steckel, Richard H., Sciulli, Paul W. and Rose, Jerome C. “A Health Index from Skeletal

      Remains,” in Richard H. Steckel and Jerome C. Rose, eds., The backbone of history:

      health and nutrition in the Western Hemisphere. New York: Cambridge University

      Press, 2002, pp. 61-93.

Tanner, James M., Fetus into Man: Physical Growth from Conception to Maturity. Cambridge:

     Harvard University Press, 1978.

Trotter, Mildred and Gleser, Goldine C. “Estimation of Stature from Long Bones of American

     Whites and Negroes.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 1952, 10(4). pp. 463-

     514.

White, Tim D. and Folkens, Pieter A. Human osteology. New York: Academic Press, 2000.




                                             14
                                                  Footnotes




1
    For discussion and references to the literature, see Tim D. White and Pieter A. Folkens (2000) and

Alan S. Goodman and Debra L. Martin (2002).
2
    Clark Spencer Larsen (1997, p. 195).
3
    James M. Tanner (1978); Richard H. Steckel (1995).
4
    For a discussion see Jane E. Buikstra and Douglas H. Ubelaker (1994).
5
    There is also the problem of selecting a suitable model life table, which is complicated by lack of

detailed information on age patterns of death in ancient populations. One can make informed

conjectures but this adds to the uncertainty of results.
6
    A short paper necessarily conveys only a flavor of the methodology; for additional details and

justification see Steckel, Paul W. Sciulli, and Rose (2002). Presumably future research will lead to

more appropriate assumptions and an improved health index.
7
    The effect of fetal and early childhood health on adult health is sometimes called the Barker

hypothesis (Barker, 1998). For a general discussion see Robert W. Fogel and Dora L. Costa (1997, 56-

57).
8
    Various types of sensitivity analysis and formulation of standard errors are also planned, following

public reaction to the methodology of the health index.
9
    For a general discussion of health in pre-Columbian America see Kenneth F. Kiple and Stephen V.

Beck (1997).




                                                     15
