                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DEFLATION, SILENT RUNS, AND BANK HOLIDAYS,
                           IN THE GREAT CONTRACTION

                                           Hugh Rockoff

                                        Working Paper 9522
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w9522


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Hugh Rockoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Deflation, Silent Runs, and Bank Holidays, in the Great Contraction
Hugh Rockoff
NBER Working Paper No. 9522
February 2003
JEL No. N12

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper argues that the banking crises in the United States in the early 1930s were similar
to the "twin crises" -- banking and balance of payments crises -- which have occurred in developing
countries in recent years. The downturn that began in 1929 undermined banks that had made risky
loans in the twenties. The deflation that followed further weakened the banks, especially in rural
areas where the deflation in prices and incomes was the greatest. Depositors in those areas began
transferring their deposits to banks they regarded as safer, or purchasing bonds. These "silent runs,"
essentially a capital flight, have been neglected in many accounts of the banking crises. But evidence
from the Gold Settlement Fund (which recorded interregional gold movements) and from regional
deposit movements suggests that silent runs were important, especially in the crucial year 1930.
When the crisis worsened, state and local authorities began declaring "bank holidays," which limited
the right of depositors to make withdrawals, a movement that culminated in the declaration of a
national bank holiday by President Roosevelt.



Hugh Rockoff
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
rockoff@econ.rutgers.edu
          Deflation, Silent Runs, and Bank Holidays, in the Great Contraction1

                          1. Separate Regions with Separate Banking Systems

        The Great Contraction of 1929 to 1939, as Friedman and Schwartz (1963)

designated it, must surely be the most carefully studied episode in American monetary

history. Their work, and that of Charles Kindleberger (1973), Peter Temin (1976, 1989),

Barry Eichengreen (1995), and many other scholars focusing on particular aspects of the

contraction, has done much to clarify the causes and consequences of the collapse, and to

clarify the policy mistakes made by the Federal Reserve System. Nevertheless, the flood of

books and papers on monetary problems during the Depression shows no signs of abating,

suggesting that we have not yet reached the point where we believe that existing

explanations are entirely sufficient.

        This is especially the case when we turn to the causes of the collapse of the banking

system. Important advances have been made in determining the role of panic as opposed to

fundamentals. Yet there is perhaps still room for an attempt to provide a narrative

framework for understanding the crisis. Here I will argue that the banking crises of the early

1930s were similar to the “twin crises” – banking and balance of payments crises – that have

occurred in developing countries in recent years. The rural regions of the United States were

like the developing countries today: dependent on the export of a few commodities in which

they had a comparative advantage, and with independent, and relatively weak banking

systems. Declining demand and export prices after 1929 weakened the banking systems in

rural regions because they raised doubts about the ability of bank borrowers to repay their

loans, and led to balance of payments deficits. Since the banks in rural regions were linked

by fixed exchange rates to separate banking systems in more developed regions, there was a

                                                3
natural desire, moreover, on the part of people who had deposits in rural banks to move their

funds to stronger banks in the financial centers, a capital flight. The interregional movement

of funds further weakened the banking system in the regions experiencing the "external"

drain. Eventually, as bank failure rates rose, runs developed. In the end, governments

intervened by imposing restrictions on withdrawals.2

        To be sure, the analogy between the “twin crises” in developing countries and the

banking crises of the 1930s can be taken only so far. The crises in developing regions today

have involved elements, such as short term capital flows and currency mismatches that we

do not find among regions of the United States in the 1930s. Most developing countries,

moreover, can devalue their currencies relative to others. This option was not open to

regions within the United States. Minnesota dollars were not going to be reduced to .75 in

New York dollars. Nevertheless, the analogy with the twin crises of recent years, I believe,

helps provide a vocabulary for understanding the banking crises in the early 1930s. This

paper, in other words, examines the banking crises from a regional perspective. It attempts

to demonstrate that there were important forces at work that have been somewhat neglected

because they do not show up clearly when the problem is viewed from a purely macro-

economic or purely micro-economic perspective.3

        Although regional aspects of the Depression have been neglected in recent

discussions of the monetary side of the contraction, with the important exception of Wicker

(1996), regional differences were important to people at the time for a number of good

reasons. (1) During the 1930s there were important cultural barriers to the mobility of labor.

African Americans faced enormous racial discrimination wherever they went, and even

white southerners were branded as lazy and inferior workers. As Gavin Wright (1996) has


                                                 4
shown, while the labor markets of Birmingham England and Pittsburgh Pennsylvania were

integrated, those of Birmingham Alabama and Pittsburgh Pennsylvania were not. (2) Banks

were not permitted to branch across state lines, and often were prohibited from branching

within states. Many banks in rural areas, therefore, had most of their resources tied up in

assets that depended on the price of a single agricultural product. (3) Federal programs that

transfer income from regions that are doing well to regions that are not, such as agricultural

price support programs, did not exist on a modern scale when the depression began. (4)

Monetary-policy was influenced strongly by the individual Governors of the Federal

Reserve Banks. By design the District Banks represented the interests of separate regions,

and were given far more power to adopt independent policy actions than is the case today.

This was changing. Indeed, soon after the Federal Reserve was established it was recognized

that open market purchases had to be coordinated by a system-wide committee because the

interests of a particular district (to avoid the drain of reserves to central money markets

produced by a purchase of securities) might differ from the interests of the system as a

whole. But the tendency of governors from predominantly rural districts to see a conflict

between what was good for their district and what was good for the eastern money markets

persisted.

        The experience of the United States during the early 1930s is unlikely to be repeated

in detail. Nevertheless, it does throw into sharp relief some of the problems that face a

monetary authority that must find the right path for a group of diverse regions when things

go bad. Certain rural regions of the United States were hit especially hard by the downturn

of 1929 because the prices of food, fibers, and minerals fell especially rapidly. The banking

systems in those regions then experienced a silent, but nonetheless destructive loss of


                                                 5
deposits because their rudimentary banking systems were linked by a common currency to

powerful financial centers. Had policymakers been alert to the signs of interregional capital

flight, they might have intervened successfully. Instead, the banking crisis was allowed to

fester. Hopefully, this paper then may be of some relevance to the current debate over

whether to extend existing monetary unions, and possibly to future debates about how to

conduct monetary policy within a monetary union.


                                          2. The Role of Deflation

        The cyclical downturn that began in late 1929 (August, according to the NBER

chronology) ushered in a strong downward trend in prices and income: The NNP deflator

fell 4.6 percent between 1929 and 1930, and nominal NNP fell 16.1.4 The deflation, of

course, was far from uniform. The prices of some of the major agricultural products dropped

steeply in real terms.5 This is shown in Table 1, which reports the real prices of some of the

important agricultural products, real net farm income, and the real value of mineral products,

starting in 1925 when the real prices of a number of these crops and real net farm income

reached their postwar peaks. The real price of wheat experienced the most dramatic decline.

It fell steadily year after year until by 1932 it had lost 60 percent of its 1925 value. The other

series show a rebound in the late 1920s. So real net farm income reached another peak in

1929, although at a lower level than in 1925. Between 1929 and 1930, however, all of the

key farm prices dropped in real terms, and real net farm income declined about 29 percent.

Between 1929 and 1932 real farm income declined about 60 percent. Such a decline was

bound to have enormous consequences for regions that were highly specialized in the

production of basic agricultural products, and for banks in those regions because it raised

serious questions about the ability of farmers to service their debts.

                                                  6
        The impact of these movements in real prices can be seen in the regional terms of

trade shown in Table 2. The West North Central, a wheat-growing region, and the West

South Central, a cotton-growing region, were hard hit. Perhaps somewhat more surprising

are the substantial declines in the terms of trade of the Pacific and Mountain regions. The

fall in mineral prices may be the explanation here. The price of silver fell from $.53 per fine

oz. in 1929 to $.28 in 1932, a fall of 64 percent in nominal terms, and 38 percent in real

terms (using the GNP deflator).6 The price of lead fell from about $.068 per pound in 1929

to $.032 in 1932, a fall of 76 percent in nominal terms, and 50 percent in real terms. The

price of copper fell from $.184 per pound in 1929 to $.058 in 1932 a staggering fall of 115

percent in nominal terms, and 89 percent in real terms. There are, however, some surprises

in the table. The South Atlantic region, for example, actually experienced an improvement

in its terms of trade.

        What caused the relative price shocks of the early 1930s? A boom-and-bust cycle

associated with World War I is one candidate. The war added greatly to the demand for

these basic commodities while destroying productive capacity in Europe. Farmers and

businessmen in neutral countries, such as the United States, went into debt in order to

expand capacity. Later demand declined to more normal levels, and supply expanded as

European producers came back on line. The result was a decline in commodity prices that

became a rout in the early 1930s. Barry Eichengreen’s (2002) argument that the monetary

shock was worldwide provides a second candidate: if the world shock was greater initially

than the U.S. shock it would explain why the prices of internationally traded goods fell

faster and farther than the prices of domestically traded goods. But to explain the origins of

these relative price shocks in adequate detail would take us far a field. Kindleberger (1973,


                                                 7
chapter 4, 83-107) provides a detailed commodity-by-commodity account going back to

World War I. For our purposes it is sufficient to take these shocks as given.

        How did the deterioration in the terms of trade and the contraction in income affect

the stability of the banking system? Table 3 summarizes some information. The first column

of data shows the cumulated amount of suspended bank deposits as a percentage of 1929

deposits. In other words, the figure for New England shows total suspended deposits from

1930 through 1933 as a percentage of total deposits in all commercial banks in the region in

1929. This column illustrates the wide regional differences in the experience of the crisis.

Evidently, the regions containing the eastern financial centers (New England and Middle

Atlantic) along with the Pacific Coast suffered the least damage.

        The second column of data shows the percentage change in the terms of trade of

each region – “the prices of goods sold by census divisions to other parts of the United

States” divided by "the prices of goods bought by census divisions from other parts of the

United States" – based on Warren Waite’s (1942) estimates. This column shows that

movements in interregional terms of trade were dramatic, but not always in the same

direction as suspended deposits.7 In fact, the simple correlation between changes in the

terms of trade and the amount of suspended deposits, shown in the last row of the column,

goes the “wrong” way. 8

        The change in total personal income, shown in column 3, goes directly to the

question of how much income borrowers had with which to repay loans. This variable is

correlated in the right direction with the amount of suspended deposits. The correlation,

however, is far from perfect. The simple correlation between suspended deposits and

personal income change, -.50, is not statistically significant in such as small sample. Over all


                                                 8
four years, for example, the South Atlantic region experienced the smallest fall in personal

income, “only” 44.97 percent, but it experienced the second highest level of bank

suspensions, 20.91 percent . The institutional advantage of containing the large money center

banks evidently could offset, in some measure, the disadvantage of a large decline in

personal income.

        There were precedents for the deflation of the early 1930s. Prices and real incomes,

including farm prices and real incomes, fell dramatically in the 1890s and after World War

I. The deflation of the 1890s was associated with banking crises, particularly the crisis of

1893. The depression associated with the deflation and banking crises of the 1890s was

severe in terms of output and employment, although as Neal et al. (this volume) point out

the deflation and banking crises may have produced reforms in the financial system that set

the stage for more rapid economic growth. The post World War I deflation, on the other

hand, did not produce anything like the crack-ups in the 1890s and early 1930s. One

difference may be that rural regions were coming off of a long period of prosperity, and so

the rural banking problems and capital flight we observe in the early 1930s did not emerge

following World War I.



                                  3. Silent Runs and Noisy Runs

        There has been a tendency in the literature to focus on what might be called “noisy

runs.” Depositors literally run down to the bank, stand in line with their scared fellow

depositors, and withdraw cash, perhaps forcing the bank to close its doors. Equally

damaging to banks, and to the economy in a particular region, was a “silent run.” Depositors

simply write checks on a bank they consider weak and deposit them in another bank they


                                                 9
consider stronger. Noisy runs lead naturally to a decline in the deposit currency ratio. This is

one reason why Friedman and Schwartz, and subsequent authors, tended to focus on the

deposit currency ratio as an indicator of distrust of the banking system.9 A silent run, by way

of contrast, need not produce any change in the aggregate deposit-currency ratio. As I will

try to show below silent runs of substantial magnitude seem to have preceded the noisy runs

of the early 1930s. Silent runs are familiar from more recent banking crises, such as the

savings and loan crisis, but their role in the Great Contraction has been neglected compared

with the attention paid to noisy runs.

        A silent run could be intraregional (the transfer of deposits from a small local bank

to a bigger bank in a nearby city) or interregional (the transfer of deposits from a small bank

in the interior of the country to a large bank in the Eastern financial centers.) Both drains

create a liquidity problem for the bank losing deposits, and both types of run were important

during the contraction. Here, however, I will focus on the interregional runs. First,

interregional runs probably created more economic distress in the region losing funds.

Borrowers, for example, may have been able to follow depositors when the run was intra-

regional, but not when it was interregional. Second, monetary policy during the contraction

was controlled by the Governors of the Federal Reserve Banks. And finally, focusing on the

interregional runs may provide some useful examples for current debates about dollarization

and monetary unions.

        There has been a good deal of attention paid in the literature to whether bank runs

were sometimes the result of a “contagion of fear,” that is a panic, or whether they always

resulted from rational concerns about the solvency of banks. The latest research by

Calomiris and Mason (1997, 2000), based on a large microeconomic sample of banks,


                                                 10
suggests that a “contagion of fear” may not have been very prominent -- that the weakest

banks experienced the most intense runs. A silent interregional run, almost by definition, is

up to a point at least, a measured and rational response to concerns about the solvency of the

banking system, and therefore also inconsistent with a "contagion of fear." It could be that

fundamentals were misjudged, although given the subsequent course of events this would be

a hard position to defend. And it could be that the people making the decision to move

deposits were taking their clue from other people they regarded as informed and prudent,

rather than looking themselves at fundamentals. Still, a run based on these considerations

would be better described as a “demonstration effect,” than as a contagion of fear.

        At times the term panic is used to refer not so much to the behavior of individuals as

to the behavior of the group. One can imagine events in which the behavior of each

individual separately is rational even though the behavior of the group as a whole is self-

destructive. Someone yells fire in a crowded auditorium. Each individual separately takes

the rational action of running straight for the exit. No one is running around in a random

fashion. But the aggregate effect is to create a dangerous congestion at the exit. If people

were disciplined and filed out in order, more lives could be saved. Perhaps this definition of

a panic applies to the runs of the early 1930s. The decision to remove deposits from rural

areas in the face of a sharp downturn in real agricultural prices and incomes may have been

prudent from the point of view of each depositor taken separately, but the aggregate effect

was to undermine the banking system in those regions.

        To get a sense of the magnitude of silent interregional runs we can turn to the Gold

Settlement Fund. The Fund (its name was changed to the Interdistrict Settlement Fund after

the United States went off the gold standard) was the set of accounts that recorded the flow


                                                11
of funds among Federal Reserve districts. If a check was drawn on a bank in San Francisco

and deposited in New York, the Gold Settlement Account would record the increase in the

assets of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the decrease in the assets of the

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. The accounts also showed, on separate lines, the

effects of federal government transfers and external gold flows.

        The accounts of the Gold Settlement Fund do not provide a complete record of

interdistrict movements of funds because some interregional transactions might have been

completed by shipping gold or cleared through private clearing arrangements. Although the

Federal Reserve had hoped that its clearing facilities would quickly supplant private

clearinghouses and correspondent relationships, private arrangements remained important in

the 1920s and 1930s. In 1929, for example, clearings through private clearinghouses were

nearly double clearings through the Federal Reserve System. (White 1983, 108-110). Many

of the private clearings through clearinghouses, however, must have involved local

transactions. In the long run, moreover, transactions that produced sustained increases or

decreases in correspondent balances would probably give rise, as Hartland (1949, 396)

contended to clearings through the Gold Settlement Fund. So it is safe to assume that the

Fund provides a clear picture of the direction that private funds were moving, at least for the

period we are examining. It should also be kept in mind that changes in the Gold Settlement

Fund do not correspond directly to changes in bank reserves because other variables, such as

bank borrowing from the Federal Reserve, will affect bank reserves.

        Figure 1 shows a summary measure of the extent of interregional gold flows from

1926 to 1937: the sum of all regional gold outflows (equal to the sum of gold inflows from

regions gaining gold) divided by the average of amount of gold in the Gold Settlement


                                                12
Fund. For example, if Minnesota and other rural districts lost $10 in gold (while New York

and other eastern districts gained $10) and if there was on average $100 in the gold

settlement fund, the figure plotted would be 10%. In other words, 10% of the gold stock had

moved from one region to another during the year.

        It is clear from the figure that there were extraordinary interregional movements of

gold during the Great Contraction. There was little change in the denominator during the

early years of the Depression so the spike is largely due to interregional gold flows. The

picture in the post 1934 figure is complicated by the influx of European gold. The low level

of the ratio in these years compared with those immediately proceeding reflects an increase

in the denominator.10

        How could these gold movements exceed the amount in the Fund, as they did from

1930 to 1932? It would seem, at first thought that the highest this ratio could go would be to

one. Suppose that initially all the gold was held by one group of Banks designated A, while

group B held none. If no new gold was deposited in the fund and all the gold held by A was

transferred during the year to B, the ratio would be one. To put the question differently, why

didn’t some districts simply run out of gold? One offset was the deposit of new gold in the

fund from inflows of foreign gold, and domestic gold mining, which was revived in early

1930s.11 In addition, the Federal Reserve, may have exercised its authority to simply

reallocate part of the Fund to Reserve Banks that were exhausting their accounts. The

accounting justification was that district banks losing gold had their “participation” in the

ownership of Federal Reserve Assets increased. The Fund, in other words, could act as

lender of last resort to individual Reserve Banks.12




                                                 13
         Figure 1 distinguishes between interregional gold flows resulting from private

transactions and net gold flows, the sum of private and Federal government transactions.

Clearly, net gold flows were always less than private gold flows. This means that, in

general, gold flows produced by Federal government transactions tended to offset private

gold flows and preserve the internal balance of payments. I had expected to find this result

only during the later years of the Depression. New Deal programs such as agricultural price

supports that produced transfers to rural areas became important after 1933. The data shows,

however, that interregional Federal transfers helped to preserve the internal monetary union

even in the period 1930 to 1932; Federal transfers were simply insufficient to offset the

other forces undermining the banking system.13

         What was causing these interregional gold flows? I believe that in large part they

reflected the transfer of funds from banks in the interior to banks in the traditional financial

centers, most importantly New York, but also Boston and Philadelphia, by deposit holders

seeking greater safety for their funds. In some cases, the flow might have been the result of

someone writing a check on a bank in one region and depositing it in a bank in another

region. In other cases, the flow might have been the result of someone writing a check in

order to purchase a security owned in another region. In either case, the transfers could be

termed a silent run, or to use a term more familiar from discussions of international crises, a

capital flight.

         Some additional evidence is provided in Figure 2, which shows the flow of gold into

the Eastern Financial Centers (the all important New York District, Boston, and

Philadelphia) from 1926 to 1933. Figure 2 throws the influx of funds in 1930, 1931, and

1932 into dramatic relief. Some inflow might have been expected because of changes in the


                                                  14
terms of trade. If rural regions had to pay only slightly less for their imports, but got

substantially less for their exports, they would, other things equal, run a balance of payments

deficit. Figure 2 therefore shows the terms of trade between the Eastern Financial Centers

and the rest of the country as an index, to be read against the right-hand axis, with 1926

=100. 14 The eastern terms of trade did improve somewhat during 1930 and 1931, and that

might account for some of the inflow, although there is a sharp drop in 1932, while gold

continued to flow in. Figure 2 also shows total personal income in the Eastern financial

centers relative to total personal income in the remainder of the country, beginning in 1929

when the figures become available.15 This is also an index (1929=100) to be read against

the right-hand side. Eastern incomes it turns out rose steadily relative to those in the rest of

the country during 1930-1932. Other things equal, the relative strength of income in the East

would have drained funds from the East, because eastern exports would fall more than

imports. So this factor was working in the direction opposite to the dominant flows and

cannot explain them.

        The effect of these movements, along with other factors such as the lending by

Federal Reserve district banks to their members, can be seen in figure 3, which shows the

growth of deposits by district between June 1929 and June 1930.16 The dates here are

important. The Gold settlement fund data shows end of year figures, and things were to

deteriorate substantially between June and December 1930. Evidently, the experience varied

dramatically from district to district during the first year of the contraction.17 Some had

experienced substantial contraction; others had experienced substantial growth. New York,

in particular had experienced a 15% gain in deposits. The districts have been arranged by

total 1929 deposits from smallest (Minneapolis) to largest (New York). So the chart


                                                  15
illustrates the tendency of deposits to move from the smaller, and therefore weaker, banking

systems to larger, and therefore stronger, systems.

            Figure 4 shows the following year, the change in deposits by region from June 1930

to June 1931. The picture is now very different. What had been a retreat in some regions and

an advance in others had become a general rout. Only San Francisco and Philadelphia were

able to keep their heads above water. In most cases, the decline in deposits was due to both a

decrease in reserves and to a fall in the deposit-currency ratio. New York, however, was an

exception. It experienced a small increase in reserves.

            We can also see the redistribution of funds if we look simply at the balance sheets of

the four largest New York National Banks – First, National City, Chase, and Public. End-of-

year values for deposits, loans, and reserves of the Big Four are shown in Figure 5. All three

categories were higher at the end of 1930 than at the end of 1929. The gains started in the

late 1920s and were probably produced during that period by the boom in the stock market

rather than banking difficulties in the interior. This may mean that there was an organic link

between the stock market boom and the deterioration of the condition of the banks in the

interior.

            Who was moving their funds? It seems unlikely to me that individual depositors

contributed very much to the interregional capital flight of the early 1930s by directly

moving funds from one bank to another. Individuals might move their funds to a larger bank

in the same city, or divide their funds among several banks, or purchase financial assets, or

withdraw cash. They were unlikely, one would think, to move their funds to a bank in

another district. It seems more likely that when funds were moved directly to a bank in a

different district, they were in the main business or bank funds. It would be sensible for the


                                                   16
chief financial officer of a nationwide corporation to move the working funds at a small

local bank to a larger bank in a financial center, especially if that is where the corporate

headquarters were located. It is possible that some of the funds in flight were bank funds. A

bank that had traditionally divided the funds it held in other banks between regional centers

and the Eastern financial centers might have shifted more of its funds to the latter as local

conditions worsened.

        Individuals would be involved, however, when the interregional transfer resulted

from the purchase of financial assets on the stock exchange. The purchase of a government

bond, for example, might lead to the removal of funds from a bank in the interior by the

individual purchasing the bond, and their redeposit in a bank in the east by the person selling

the bond. World War I, by creating a large widely held public debt, and by creating

familiarity with the government bond market, may have contributed to the development of

this channel for disintermediation and capital flight.

        Although the capital flight has not received much attention in recent years, a number

of careful observers noted it at the time. (1) E. A. Goldenweiser was the director of the

Division of Research and Statistics of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve

System during the contraction. In his retrospective assessment of the period Goldenweiser

(1951, 164) cites two factors to explain the tide of bank failures: (1) "commodity price

declines and shrinkage of real-estate values" and (2) "lack of confidence in the solvency of

banks [that] resulted in large-scale withdrawals of deposits and in transfers of funds from

smaller to larger banks, particularly to banks in reserve and central reserve cities." While

Goldenweiser tends to discount actions that the Federal Reserve might have taken to end the




                                                  17
crisis (and so to make the case for the advice that he gave at the time?) there is no reason to

think that his account of the causes of the crisis was biased.

        (2) James W. Angell was one of the leading monetary economists of the day and an

original member of Roosevelt’s Brain trust. In one study he (1969 [1936], 66-68) examined

regional deposit data. There he noted the rise in New York and Philadelphia’s shares of total

deposits and attributed the increases to “interior funds seeking safety after 1929.”

        (3) Fred L. Garlock was an economist with the Bureau of Agricultural Economics of

the Department of Agriculture. He conducted detailed studies of country banks in Arkansas

(Garlock and Gile, 1935) and Wisconsin (Garlock 1941) that included interviews with bank

officials as well as more conventional examinations of bank balance sheets and income

statements. In his study of Wisconsin banks he noted (1941, 10) that there had been “a

general movement of funds from agricultural areas to the large financial and industrial areas

during the early 1930s.” And he attributed this to an adverse balance of payments, and in

1932, although not before, to withdrawals for “hoarding or for transfer to other points where

it was felt the funds would be more secure.”

        (4) Calvin Hoover and B.U. Ratchford (1951, 171) claimed that large insurance and

railroad companies transferred working balances from small local banks in the South to

larger, safer banks nearer their home offices.

        More recently, Elmus Wicker (1996, 102) describes the problem under the term

“seepage.” He notes: “Data on bank deposits show a general movement of funds from

agricultural to financial and industrial centers during the Great Depression.” As evidence he

offers the decline in the ratio of nonmember bank total deposits to total deposits of all

commercial banks, and the increase in the ratio of total deposits of 101 weekly reporting


                                                 18
member banks to total deposits of all commercial banks. One advantage of the Gold

Settlement Fund data is that rather than simply showing the ratio of deposits in two different

kinds of banks, or two different areas, it shows dollars that we know were actually

transferred from one region to another.

           All in all, the evidence, although admittedly sketchy, suggests that we are dealing

with a substantial drain of gold from the interior motivated by the search for deposit safety.

From the point of view of the banks and regions losing the gold, of course, the liquidity

problems are the same whether the loss was due to a capital flight or to a balance of trade

deficit.

           A capital flight to the East is the opposite of the traditional picture of drain on the

East produced by banks in the South and West drawing on Eastern correspondents, the

picture made famous by Sprague (1968 [1910]) in his classic history of bank failures under

the National Banking Act. It would be surprising if we could not find individual examples of

banks in the interior that were under pressure from depositors liquidating deposits held in

eastern banks during 1929 to 1932. So again the eastern movement of funds remains hard to

explain in the absence of a capital flight. Perhaps what had changed from an earlier day, was

the growth of national corporations with the ability to move funds from one region to

another, and growth of widespread holdings of government bonds that could be liquidated

(on eastern markets) in an emergency, a point I will return to below.

           How significant were these flows for the system as a whole? One metric is bank

reserves. In 1929 bank reserves outside New York totaled $1.405 billion. The net flow of

gold toward New York averaged about 36 percent of this amount. Partly these private flows

were offset by gold flows resulting from federal taxes and expenditures. Then as now, more


                                                    19
taxes were collected in the eastern financial centers than were spent there. Partly also these

flows were offset by loans extended by the various Federal Reserve banks. Nevertheless, the

net flow of gold must have placed a severe burden on banks in other regions, and helped

intensify the crisis.

         To clinch the argument that silent runs undermined the banking systems in the

interior regions and contributed to the banking crises it would be necessary to show in detail

how losses of deposits due to interregional transfers affected individual banks. And this I

must confess, I have not done. That real harm was done is, I would argue, plausible. The

story would be, essentially, the usual textbook story of a multiple contraction of loans and

deposits. Borrowers who could not renew loans or borrow working capital would be forced

to default, undermining the solvency of their lender, and creating deterioration in local

economic conditions that would undermine other banks. But I have no ground level

examples of banks that actually experienced this sequence of events. It is possible, as a

matter of arithmetic, that the banks that lost reserves due to the interregional capital flows

were the ones that survived the crisis.

         A natural question to ask, for someone seeking confirmation that the capital flight

mattered, is whether the interregional gold flows produced liquidity effects on interest rates.

In other words, did rates rise in regions losing gold relative to regions gaining gold? The

answer, it must be admitted, is no. Gene Smiley (1981) and Howard Bodenhorn (1995)

estimated bank loan rates by region, and their series do not reveal distinct liquidity effects

from the gold flows in the first half of 1930. On a regional level, this is the same finding --

declining interest rates in the face of a declining stock of money -- that was at the center of

Peter Temin's critique of Friedman and Schwartz's interpretation of the Depression.


                                                  20
Evidently, the demand for loans was declining rapidly, even as losses of deposits deprived

banks of the ability to make them. Real rates, of course, were rising rapidly. For example,

the nominal loan rate for country national banks in the West North Central region, a wheat-

growing region, was 7.58 percent in 1929 and 7.04 percent in 1930. No evidence here of a

liquidity effect.18 But the "wheat rate of interest" was 3.65 percent in 1929 and 51.96

percent in 1930!19

        To form a complete picture of the banking crisis one must move from the silent runs

to the noisy runs, and the bank failures. This part of the story, however, has been well-told

elsewhere, most recently, and most thoroughly by Wicker (1996). The first banking crisis,

according to Wicker, was associated with the failure of a chain of banks, the Caldwell

banks, headquartered in St. Louis. The St. Louis district was hit hard by the deflation and the

collapse of agricultural incomes. But the high rate of failure in this region was also due to

factors specific to the Caldwell banks, and it would not do to exaggerate the correlation that

existed at this stage in the crisis between specific events and the deflation. While the St.

Louis district experience a momentous decline in personal income between 1929 and 1930,

other districts such as Dallas experienced a similar decline, but did not suffer to the same

extent in the first noisy crisis. The right metaphor might be a cloth stretched to the breaking

point. All of the cloth is under pressure, but where the first tear occurs will depend on

particular structural weaknesses.

        Wicker details the growing crisis, but the exact roles played by deflation, declining

income, bank insolvency, fear itself, and so on are in doubt. Wicker, for example, suggests

that Britain’s departure from gold in September 1931 might have undermined confidence in

the U.S. banking system by creating the fear of an external drain of gold, the more familiar


                                                 21
analog of the interregional drains highlighted here. But in the nature of things he is unable to

uncover evidence of a direct link between that event and the particular failures that followed

in the United States on the heels of the British decision. Although there was some

improvement in 1932 over 1931, bank failures and deposits in failed banks remained at very

high levels, and the supply of money and bank credit contracted dramatically.




                                          4. The Banking Holidays

        Inevitably, governments intervene when financial crises become sufficiently severe.

On the international scene intervention may take various forms: central banks may act as

lenders of last resort, currency pegs may be abandoned, and capital controls may be

imposed. In the early 1930s local and state government intervened by declaring “bank

holidays.” During the holidays depositors were prevented from making withdrawals from

banks, or the amount that they could withdraw at one time was limited in some fashion, say

to five percent of the account per month. 20 There were several rationales. In most cases the

banks were suffering heavy withdrawals. The goal was to protect the remaining assets while

loans were arranged from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Federal Reserve, or

private lenders. In many cases, state and local officials also felt pressured into declaring

holidays because holidays had already been declared in neighboring states. If depositors

couldn’t get cash in one state they might turn to banks in neighboring states. Our earlier

discussion of silent runs suggests that this was a reasonable fear. There was probably also

the hope that a “cooling off” period would allow the banks to reopen without suffering

panicky withdrawals.



                                                 22
        The rash of bank holidays was clearly a sign of how bad things had got. Whether

the holidays made things better or worse is a more difficult question. When we discuss a

more conventional bank panic we note that an action that is separately sensible – get your

money out of a weak bank – leads to actions that in the aggregate undermine the system.

The same was true with the bank holidays. Actions that were rational in a given state had an

external effect and led to a rash of holidays, accurately labeled a panic, which undermined

the payments system in the aggregate.

        Table 3 chronicles the state and local bank holidays. I do not make any claim that

this list is complete. I put it together mainly from a perusal of the New York Times and the

Financial Chronicle simply to enable one to get a sense of the timing and regional diffusion

of the crisis. It is clear from the table that the holidays began in the regions that had lost

reserves earlier because of price and confidence shocks. The first signs were municipal

holidays declared in the upper Midwest. On November 1 came the first statewide

moratorium in Nevada, and on February 12, a one-day holiday in Louisiana.21 The final

dissolution of the banking system was ushered in by the holiday declared in Michigan in

mid-February. Most of the larger Michigan banks belonged to one of two holding

companies. The smaller, the Guardian Detroit Union Group, was teetering on the edge of

bankruptcy. A desperate effort was launched to save this group through a Reconstruction

Finance Corporation loan combined with aid from the Ford interests. But the plan foundered

on demands that the Reconstruction Finance Corporation hold adequate collateral for its

loan and the unwillingness of Henry Ford to take part, Ballantine (1948).22

        The final spurt of holidays was caused, in part, by the fear in some states that

holidays in neighboring states would lead to unsustainable withdrawals in those states that


                                                  23
dared to keep their banks open. Governor Ruby Laffoon of Kentucky, obviously a politician

of some imagination, spoke for many when he declared a bank holiday on March 1, 1933.

His proclamation, given below, also describes the nature of the restrictions typically

imposed.

        Whereas many banks in the cities and towns contiguous to the borders of the
        State of Kentucky are closed or are only permitting limited withdrawals of
        their deposits.

        Whereas, a result of this situation will be that the funds of the banks of
        Kentucky will be withdrawn to supply the needs of these other communities,
        thus weakening the resources of the people of the Commonwealth, and,

        Whereas legal holidays may only be declared in the State of Kentucky by the
        Governor appointing certain days as days of thanksgiving.

        Now, therefore in consideration of the nation-wide banking situation and in
        view of the fact that the people of the State of Kentucky, though suffering
        from the general depression, may perhaps in comparison with the people of
        other states have reason for thanksgiving.

        I as Governor of the State of Kentucky, appoint the days of March 1, 2, 3
        and 4 1933, as days of thanksgiving in the State of Kentucky and declare
        such days legal holidays and do further provide as follows:

        (1) That during said holidays all banks and trust companies shall be closed in
        the State of Kentucky for the regular transaction of business except.

        (a) Said banks and trust companies may during the ordinary business hours
        of said holiday pay to their depositors (whether time or demand) not
        exceeding an aggregate of 5 % of the respective deposits of such depositors
        at close of business on Feb. 28, 1933, provided that such payments shall only
        be made on checks, drafts or receipts dated subsequent to Feb. 28, 1933.

        (b) During the banking hours of the last three days of the holiday period, said
        banks and trust companies may accept new deposits but such deposits shall
        be held in trust funds and may be insofar as they are represented by deposits
        of cash, withdrawn in full during said period.

        (c) During said holiday period, said banks and trust companies, may transact
        any and all other business which does not involve the paying out of
        deposited funds other than herein authorized.... (Commercial and Financial
        Chronicle, March 4, 1933, 1484-85).

                                                24
        It is obvious from table 3 that by late February or early March 1933 a large fraction

of deposits had been restricted by official actions and a good portion of the remainder had

been restricted in some measure by individual bank actions. Table 4, makes this point in a

different way by showing a snapshot of the banking system on the eve of President

Roosevelt's announcement of the national banking holiday: virtually all deposits in the

country were subject in some measure to restriction.

        The rapid diffusion of the bank holidays also raises the question of whether it would

be correct to speak of a bank-holiday “panic” or a “contagion of fear.” Again, much depends

on how we define these terms. If what we mean by panic is simply foolish unreasoning

behavior, then this was not the case. Governor Laffoon, at least, was clearly nobody’s fool.

His concern, that banks in Kentucky would be drained of gold if they remained open while

other systems closed, was reasonable in the circumstances, although whether this drain

would actually have happened is hard to say. On the other hand, if what we mean by panic is

a situation in which people are making rational decisions that create negative externalities,

and that could be channeled into a more socially responsible direction by alternative

institutional arrangements, then it is reasonable to speak of a bank-holiday panic. If governor

Laffoon and the other politicians declaring holidays could have been dissuaded from issuing

these proclamations by promises of lender of last resort loans to the banks in their

jurisdiction from the Federal Reserve, the ultimate breakdown of the payments mechanism

might have been avoided. The chain leading from deflation to silent runs to noisy runs to

bank holidays might have been interrupted by the Federal Reserve at many points. Early on

the Federal Reserve could be excused for failing to act because the underlying process was



                                                25
hard to recognize, but surely when bank holidays erupted the case for vigorous action was

clear.

         Barry Wigmore (1987) suggests that the final denouement, the national bank

holiday, was also due to the fear that President Roosevelt would take the United States off

the gold standard. This fear, according to Wigmore, produced an external gold drain, which

determined, at the least, the timing of the national holiday. As with Wicker’s suggestion that

Britain’s departure from gold in September 1931 had repercussions for American banks, the

external drain in 1933 created problems for eastern banks similar to those faced earlier by

banks in the interior experiencing a drain to the eastern financial centers.



                       5. Regional Aspects of the Conflict Over Monetary Policy

         As is well known, there was a divide, partly along regional lines, within the Federal

Reserve between those who favored aggressive open market operations and those who

thought that large-scale open market purchases would be futile or counterproductive. The

former group included, at times, the governor of the influential Federal Reserve Bank of

New York, and the latter included most of the governors of the other district banks,

including the governor of the influential Chicago bank. It is natural, therefore, to ask

whether the interregional balance of payments problems discussed above played a role in

undermining support for open market purchases.

         The opposition to open market operations undoubtedly reflected psychological

predispositions and political infighting. As Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 415) astutely

noted: “The other Banks [other than New York] were much more parochial in both situation

and outlook, more in the position of reacting to financial currents originating elsewhere,


                                                 26
more concerned with their immediate regional problems, and hence more likely to believe

that the Reserve System must adjust to other forces than that it could or should take the

lead.” And as Friedman and Schwartz also noted, regional banks could assert their

independence by opposing the policies advocated by the New York Federal Reserve.

        But the governors did have to provide an intellectual justification of some sort for

the positions they took and they were influenced in some measure by ideas. One episode

discussed at length by Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 370-74) is particularly revealing. In

July 1930, George L. Harrison, Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, wrote

to the governors of the other district Banks asking for support for a policy of open market

purchases.23 The reason he needed their support is simply that the power to make decisions

regarding open market operations had recently been placed in the hands of the Open Market

Policy Committee, which consisted of the 12 Governors of the Federal Reserve Banks. The

Committee had held its first meeting in May 1930. Harrison, in other words, had to persuade

a majority of his fellow governors to support a policy of buying government bonds in the

open market, if the United States was to follow an expansionary open market policy.

        Only two governors supported open market purchases: the Governors of the

Richmond and Atlanta Banks. Those happen to be the two districts that had witnessed the

largest decreases in deposits, so to this limited extent there is some support for the notion

that opposition or support was based on the district level experience. (Figure 3 shows the

picture of the districts shortly before Harrison called on the other governors for support.) But

the list of opponents of open market purchases also included Governors in districts that had

already begun to experience a loss of deposits, including Chicago, the second largest Bank

in the system. Most of the opponents justified their opposition to open market operations


                                                27
with what might be characterized as versions of the real bills doctrine: the idea that

monetary policy should simply accommodate to the needs of trade. This doctrine, always

congenial to bankers, had to some extent been institutionalized at the Federal Reserve

Board, as Allan H. Meltzer has shown, in a relatively sophisticated version that Meltzer

dubbed the Burgess-Riefler doctrine. (Wheelock 1998; Meltzer, 2002). The views of some

of the Governors, however, seemed to reflect relatively primitive versions of the doctrine:

(1) that low levels of nominal interest rates were proof that credit was already abundant, or

simply (2) that open market operations intended to buoy the economy were attempts at

tampering with supply and demand.24

        Several of the governors expressed concerns that open market operations at that time

would reignite speculation. Frederic H. Curtiss, the chairman of the Boston Bank “expressed

strong opposition to further purchases on the grounds that they were likely to feed the stock

market rather than the bond market” (as summarized by Friedman and Schwartz, 1963,

373). James McDougal, Governor of the Chicago Bank, the second largest in the system,

warned that if open market purchases were made “speculation might easily arise in some

other direction” (as quoted by Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, 371). And Lynn P. Talley of

the Dallas bank seemed to refer with some bitterness to the failure of the Federal Reserve to

stop speculation in 1929. Fear of reigniting speculation may seem fanciful in retrospect. The

stock market (measured by the Dow Jones average) was then about 70 percent below its

peak, and was about back to where was in 1924. Nevertheless, it is clear, if we are willing to

take these Governors at face value, that this is what they believed. (Calomiris and

Wheelock, 1998).




                                                28
        As the contraction worsened, and as deposits in all regions began to shrink, support

for open market operations grew among the governors, but McDougal of Chicago remained

a persistent opponent. In one famous episode in 1932 he refused to allow the Federal

Reserve Bank of Chicago to join in open market purchases. Since the New York Federal

Reserve might then have run short of gold, McDougal's intransigence undermined the effort

to continue open market operations begun in 1932. (Eichengreen 1992, pp. 30-31)

        The fear of reigniting speculation may have been based simply on a general feeling

that speculation was bad, and had produced the downturn. But it is possible that the fear of

speculation was based on an understanding, perhaps intuitive, that a boom on Wall Street

would attract funds from the interior, as had happened in 1928 and 1929, further weakening

banks in the interior. One is then led to ask whether the Governors would have been more

receptive to another policy, say cuts in required reserve ratios, that was less biased toward

New York and Wall Street? Given their general conservatism, and their reliance on interest

rates as the ultimate test of the ease or tightness of monetary policy, it seems unlikely.

Nevertheless, it is probably fair to say that open market purchases, which were perceived as

attracting money from the interior into New York, may have faced more difficulties in

winning support than a policy that promised a more even geographical distribution of the

benefits.



            6. The Banking Crises of the Early 1930s from a Regional Perspective

        The banking crises of the early 1930s seem to have much in common with the twin

crises of recent years. In 1929-1930 the United States experienced a sharp cyclical decline

in income that was especially severe in some of the agricultural regions because of decreases


                                                 29
in the real prices of foods, fibers, and minerals. There was, moreover, a silent run on the

interior banks, as corporations and banks moved funds to the eastern financial centers for

precautionary purposes, and as institutions and individuals purchased non-bank assets held

in the east. Banks in the rural regions therefore came under intense pressure. A number of

failures, some of them large, occurred, but since the failures were concentrated among the

banks that had taken undue risks in the twenties, their regional locus was somewhat

idiosyncratic. Eventually, silent runs were joined by noisy runs as individual depositors,

alarmed by the growing tide of bank closures, and by the continual decline in economic

activity, began converting deposits into cash, producing a catastrophic contraction in the

number of banks, and in the supply of money and credit. The final denouement was

produced by a rash of bank holidays declared by local and state governments that restricted

the convertibility of deposits into cash.

        The absence of nationwide branch banking has been pointed to as an important

structural weakness that lay behind the banking crisis (White, 1984). The analysis presented

here strengthens that conclusion. If the banks in the interior had been branches of major

banks with home offices in the eastern financial centers the story might have been very

different. Lending might have been curtailed in the interior and branches closed, as in

Canada.25 (Bordo, Rockoff, Redish, 1994). But there would have been no incentive for

corporations to move working balances from the interior to the financial centers. In

developing this argument it is important to distinguish between intraregional branching and

interregional branching. The problem for the interior banks was not so much that they were

small banks, although that didn't help, but rather that they were separated from the banks in

the financial centers. When fears of bank illiquidity and insolvency increased, depositors


                                                30
tried to protect themselves by moving funds outside the affected regions. Partly, the decision

to move funds must have been based on the assumption that banks in the financial centers

held safer, better diversified portfolios of assets. But the decision may also have been based

simply on the assumption that banks in the financial centers were more sophisticated about

financial matters, and therefore better able to cope with uncertain times. The banking

situation, to put it somewhat differently, would not have been very different even if their had

been widespread intraregional branching, only interregional branching would do. Even a

large bank with branches throughout the wheat-growing region of the Middle West, for

example, might have fallen under a cloud and been subject to runs in the early 1930s when

the real price of wheat was falling 60 percent. Only a bank with branches in both the Middle

West and the eastern financial centers could hope to whether the storm.

        It is always possible, one must admit, that if interregional branching had been

widespread things might have gone wrong in another way. Recent evidence (Carlson 2001),

suggests that in the 1930s banks with branches were more likely to fail rather than less

likely, because the banks with branches had assumed more risk than banks without

branches. There was no banking across state lines in the 1930s, but Carlson’s data does

include California, where banks could branch across different economic regions. So it is

possible that had cross state branching been permitted, banks would have assumed riskier

postures in the 1920s, and concern about bad loans in the interior in the early 1930s might

have undermined confidence in and led to the closure of some very large banks. We can’t be

sure. But the collapse of the system might have been avoided had interregional branch

banking been the norm, and if the collapse had occurred, it would have followed a very




                                                31
different path from the one actually followed, and might have generated a more appropriate

policy response.

            The regional nature of the crisis, especially during the early going, may have

contributed to the failure of the Federal Reserve to respond effectively to the crisis. The one

plan then seriously under consideration that might have alleviated the pressure on the

banking system was the proposal by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that the Federal

Reserve System buy bonds on the open market. The Governors of the other district Banks,

however, vetoed large-scale open market operations. Their opposition stemmed from a

variety of factors, including their reliance on a version (in some cases a rather crude version)

of the real bills doctrine. From their viewpoint, moreover, open market purchases may have

appeared to be a region-specific medicine, likely to reignite speculation on the stock market,

but unlikely to pay real dividends elsewhere. While we can fault the Federal Reserve for

failing to engage in open market operations in response to the general contraction of income,

it would be unreasonable to criticize it for failing to see the warning signs in the

interregional gold flows. The Federal Reserve was a young institution and these were

unprecedented gold movements. Nevertheless, it is interesting to recognize that had these

been international rather than interregional flows, they would have excited considerable

interest.

            There was a time when it would have appeared foolish to worry about the recurrence

of a crisis caused by a combination of depression, deflation, and a balkanized banking

system. In recent years, however, deflation -- already a fact of life in Japan -- has loomed on

the horizon for the United States and the European Monetary Union. And while the banking

system of the United States has been increasingly linked together through nation wide


                                                    32
branching, the European Monetary Union is still far from having a unified banking system.

The present analysis then, may serve as a cautionary tale showing how a banking-balance-

of-payments crisis can develop with great rapidity and virulence within what seems on the

surface to be a sound, progressive banking system.




                                              33
Table 1. Real Prices of Agricultural Commodities, and Real Farm and Mineral Income, 1925-32



              Price of      Price of      Price of Raw Price of Beef Net Income       Total Value
              Wheat per     Cotton per    Corn per     Steers Per    of Farm          of Mineral
              bushel        pound         bushel       Pound         Operators        Products
                                                                     from
                                                                     Farming per
                                                                     Farm
    1925           100           100           100           100           100            100

    1926           89            74            105            93            88            110

    1927           84            77            124           114            87            100

    1928           80            86            122           139            90             95

    1929           72            82            114           134            92            104

    1930           57            61             91           115            67             88

    1931           44            44             55            96            59             65

    1932           40            37             63            90            40             57


Note: the NNP deflator was used to deflate all prices and farm and mineral incomes.

Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975): series E123 (wheat), E126 (cotton), K504 (corn),
K585 (beef), K260 (farm income), and Friedman and Schwartz (1983, table 4.8, column 4, p.124)
(NNP deflator).




                                               34
Table 2. Terms of Trade by Census Divisions of the United States, 1925-1932 (1925=100)

        New        Middle     East North West       South      East South West      Mountain      Pacific
        England    Atlantic   Central    North      Atlantic   Central    South
                                         Central                          Central
 1925      100          100      100        100        100        100        100         100         100

 1926       96          97       100        105         96         94        102         102         105

 1927       98          97       105        106        101         99         89         102          96

 1928       99          94       105        112        101        102         89         104          90

 1929       98          95       110        109         96         98         87         107          91

 1930       99          94       117        106        102         97         81          95          91

 1931      103          96       136         98        103         93         61          82          78

 1932       95          99       148         86        125         86         73          74          86

 1933      105          103      136         84        115         94         65          79          86


Note. The regions are defined as follows. New England: Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts,
Rhode Island, and Connecticut. Middle Atlantic: New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
East North Central: Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin. West North Central: Minnesota, Iowa,
Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas. South Atlantic: Delaware, Maryland, Dist. Of
Columbia, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida. East South Central:
Kentucky, Tennessee, Alabama, and Mississippi. West South Central: Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and
Texas. Mountain: Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, and Nevada. Pacific:
Washington, Oregon, and California.

Source. Waite (1942).




                                               35
Table 3 Suspended Deposits, Terms of Trade, and Personal Income, by Region 1930-33.

                                    Suspended Deposits        Terms of  Total Personal
                                    (as a Percentage of         Trade       Income
                                      1929 deposits)        (Percentage  (Percentage
                                                            Change from Change from
                                                                1929)         1929)
New England                                  6.00%             6.94%       -48.76%
Middle Atlantic                                5.67              8.31        -55.61
East North Central                            25.17             21.76        -73.33
West North Central                            16.97            -26.72        -70.37
South Atlantic                                20.91             17.98        -44.97
East South Central                            19.89             -4.04        -63.34
West South Central                            17.04            -29.78        -61.33
Mountain                                      11.65            -30.01        -60.21
Pacific                                        4.87             -5.46        -54.69
             Correlation                                         0.15         -0.50
Notes: See table 2 for the regions
Sources: Suspended Deposits: U. S. Board of Governors (1943, pp. 25-33, 285). Export
Prices: Waite (1942, table 10, p. 30). Personal Income: Schwartz and Graham (1956).




                                              36
.



    Table 3      State and Local Bank Holidays in 1932-33


    Date                            State                           Action Taken

    17 October 1932                 Minnesota                       Municipal holidays declared

    1 November                      Nevada                          12 day moratorium; twice renewed

    January 1933                    Illinois                        Small towns declare local holidays
                                    Iowa

    20 January                      Iowa                            One-day Holiday

    4 February                      Louisiana                       One-day holiday

    14 February                     Michigan                        8-day holiday, renewed until
                                                                    federal holiday

    20 February                     New Jersey                      Legislature authorizes banking
                                                                    commission to declare a
                                                                    moratorium on February 21 this
                                                                    power is exercised for one bank

                                    Missouri                        One bank restricts withdrawals
                                                                    after mayor declares moratorium
    23 February                     New Jersey                      Limited withdrawals authorized at
                                                                    two banks

    25 February                     Maryland                        3-day holiday, subsequently
                                                                    extended

                                    Ohio                            Banks self-declare holidays

                                    Missouri                        Banks granted right to restrict
                                                                    withdrawals

    28 February                     Indiana                         Banks restrict withdrawals under
                                    Ohio                            the authority of new banking laws
                                    North. Kentucky


    28 February                     Arkansas,                       Banks initiate restrictions
                                    Pennsylvania

    1 March                         Philadelphia and Pittsburgh     Individual banks self-declare
                                                                    holidays

                                    Kentucky                        Bank holidays
                                    Mississippi
                                    Tennessee
    2 March                         Alabama, California,            Bank holidays
                                    Georgia Louisiana Mississippi
                                    Nevada, Oklahoma, Oregon,
                                    Texas,

                                                   37
                                  Utah, Washington
                                  Wisconsin

3 March                           Arizona, Georgia                    Bank holidays
                                  Idaho, Illinois
                                  New Mexico
                                  North Carolina
                                  Oklahoma, Virginia
                                  Wyoming

4 March                           Colorado, Delaware                  Virtually all remaining banks closed
                                  District of Columbia                by governor's proclamations at the
                                  Florida, Georgia                    request of Treasury officials.
                                  Illinois
                                  Kansas, Maine
                                  Massachusetts
                                  Minnesota
                                  Missouri
                                  Montana, Nebraska
                                  New Hampshire
                                  New Jersey
                                  New York
                                  North Dakota
                                  South Dakota
                                  Vermont
6 March                           United States                       Bank Holiday

Sources: Commercial and Financial Chronicle, the New York Times, and Kennedy (1973), passim.
The list is probably not complete, but it is probably sufficient for a broad brush picture of the extent and
timing of the Holiday movement.




                                                  38
Table 4 State Bank Restrictions, Sunday, March 5, 1933


State                  Description of Restrictions

Alabama                Closed until further notice

Arizona                Closed until March 13

Arkansas               Closed until March 7

California             Almost all closed until March 9

Colorado               Closed until March 8

Connecticut            Closed until March 7

Delaware               Closed indefinitely

District of Columbia   Three banks limited to 5%; nine savings banks invoke sixty days' notice

Florida                Withdrawals restricted to 5% plus $10 until March 8

Georgia                Mostly closed until March 7, closing optional

Idaho                  Some closed until March 18, closing optional

Illinois               Closed until March 8, then to be opened on 5% restriction basis for seven
                       days

Indiana                About half restricted to 5% indefinitely

Iowa                   Closed "temporarily"

Kansas                 Restricted to 5% withdrawals indefinitely

Kentucky               Mostly restricted to 5% withdrawals until March 11

Louisiana              Closing mandatory until March 7

Maine                  Closed until March 7

Maryland               Closed until March 6

Massachusetts          Closed until March 7

Michigan               Mostly closed, others restricted to 5% indefinitely; Upper peninsula banks
                       open

Minnesota              Closed "temporarily"

Mississippi            Restricted to 5% indefinitely

Missouri               Closed until March 7

Montana                Closed until further notice

Nebraska               Closed until March 8


                                               39
Nevada                 Closed until March 8, also schools

New Hampshire          Closed subject to further proclamation

New Jersey             Closed until March 7

New Mexico             Mostly closed until March 8

New York               Closed until March 7

North Carolina         Some banks restricted to 5% withdrawals

North Dakota           Closed temporarily

Ohio                   Mostly restricted to 5% withdrawals indefinitely

Oklahoma               All closed until March 8

Oregon                 All closed until March 7

Pennsylvania           Mostly closed until March 7, Pittsburgh banks open

Rhode Island           Closed yesterday

South Carolina         Some closed, some restricted, all on own initiative

South Dakota           Closed indefinitely

Tennessee              A few closed, others restricted, until March 9

Texas                  Mostly closed, others restricted to withdrawals of $15 daily until March 8

Utah                   Mostly closed until March 8

Vermont                Closed until March 7

Virginia               All closed until March 8

Washington             Some closed until March 7

West Virginia          Restricted to 5% monthly withdrawals indefinitely

Wisconsin              Closed until March 17

Wyoming                Withdrawals restricted to 5% indefinitely


Source: Commercial and Financial Chronicle, March 11, 1933, p. 1670.




                                               40
References

Alston, Lee J., Wayne A Grove, and David C. Wheelock. 1994. “Why Do Banks Fail?
Evidence from the 1920s.” Explorations in Economic History, Vol. 31 (4). (October): 409-
31.

Angell, James W. 1969 [1936]. The Behavior of Money: Exploratory Studies. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Reprinted by Augustus M. Kelley,

Ballantine, Arthur A. 1948. "When All the Banks Closed." Harvard Business Review 26:
129 - 43.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 1995. "A More Perfect Union: Regional Interest Rates in the United
States, 1880-1960." In Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds. Anglo-American Financial
Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century. New York: Irwin Professional
Publishing, New York University Solomon Center.

Brandt, Loren and Thomas J. Sargent. 1989. “Interpreting New Evidence about China and
U.S. Silver Purchases.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 23 (January): 31-51.

Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer. 1968. “What Did We Learn from the Monetary
Experience of the United States in the Great Depression?” Canadian Journal of Economics
1(May): 334-48.

Bordo, Michael D, Hugh Rockoff, and Angela Redish. 1994. “The U.S. Banking System
from a Northern Exposure: Stability versus Efficiency.” The Journal of Economic History.
Vol. 54 (June): 325-41.

Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason. 1997. “Contagion and Bank Failures during
the Great Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic Review,
Vol. 87 (December): 863-83.

__________. 2000. "Causes of U.S. Bank Distress During the Depression," NBER Working
Paper No. W7919, September.

Calomiris, Charles W. and David Wheelock. 1998. “Was the Great Depression a Watershed
for American Monetary Policy?” in Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene White
(eds.), The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
Twentieth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 23-66.

Carlson, Mark. 2001 "Are Branch Banks Better Survivors: Evidence from the Depression
Era?" No 2001-51 in Finance and Economics Discussion Series from the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).

Chandler, Lester V. 1970. America's greatest depression, 1929-1941. New York: Harper &
Row.

                                            41
Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. "Designing a Central Bank for Europe: A Cautionary Tale from
the Early Years of the Federal Reserve System." In Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in
Europe and Lessons from the US, eds. Matthew B. Canzoneri, Vittorio Grilli, and Paul R.
Masson. Cambridge [England], New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 13-33.

_________. 1995. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
1939. New York: Oxford University Press.

_________. 2002. “Still Fettered After All These Years,” NBER Working Paper, 9276.

Friedman, Milton. 1992. “Franklin D. Roosevelt, Silver, and China.” Journal of Political
Economy. Vol. 100 (February): 62-83.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, for the NBER.

_________. 1970. Monetary Statistics of the United States: Estimates Sources, Methods.
New York: Columbia University Press, for the NBER.

_________. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States and the United Kingdom. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Fels, Rendigs. “Interregional Payments: A Comment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Vol. 64, No. 3. (Aug., 1950), pp. 488-489.

Garlock, Fred L. “Country Banking in Wisconsin During the Depression.” Washington D.C:
U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Technical bulletin no.777, 1941.

Garlock, Fred L. and B.M. Gile. “Bank Failures in Arkansas.” Fayetteville, Ark.: University
of Arkansas, College of Agriculture, Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin no. 315,
1935.

Goldenweiser, E. A. 1951. American Monetary Policy. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Hartland, Penelope. “Interregional Payments Compared with International Payments.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 63, No. 3. (Aug., 1949), pp. 392-407.

_________. 1950. “Interregional Payments: Reply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
64, No. 3. (Aug., 1950), pp. 489-490.

Hartland-Thunberg, Penelope. 1950. Balance of Interregional Payments of New England.
Providence, Brown University.




                                              42
Heim, Carol E. 1998. “Uneven Impacts of the Great Depression: Industries, Regions, and
Nations.” In The Economics of the Great Depression, ed. Mark Wheeler. Kalamazoo, MI:
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 29-61.

__________. “Interregional Payments: Reply.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 64,
No. 3. (Aug., 1950), pp. 489-490.

Hoover, Calvin B. and B.U. Ratchford. 1951. Economic Resources and Policies of the
South. New York: The Macmillan Company.

Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems.” American Economic Review. Vol. 89 (3)
(June): 473-500.

Kennedy, Susan Estabrook. The Banking Crisis of 1933. 1973. Lexington: University Press
of Kentucky.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1973. The World In Depression, 1929-1933. Berkeley: University
of California Press.

Meltzer, Allan H. 2002. “Chapter 5: Why Did Monetary Policy Fail in the Thirties?,”
unpublished manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.

Miller, Victoria. 1998. “Banking Crises, Currency Crises, and Macroeconomic Uncertainty
The Double Drain with a Cross-Border Twist: More on the Relationship between Banking
and Currency Crises.” The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2, Papers and
Proceedings (May): 439-443.

Rawski, Thomas G. 1993. “Milton Friedman, Silver, and China.” 1993. The Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 101 (1993): 755-758.

Rosenbloom, Joshua L., and William A. Sundstrom. 1997. “The Sources of Regional
Variation in the Severity of the Great Depression: Evidence from the U.S. Manufacturing,
1919-1937.” NBER Working Paper 688, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Smiley, Gene. 1981. "Regional Variation in Bank Loan Rates in the Interwar
Years." The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 41, No. 4. (Dec.): 889-901.

Sprague, O.M.W. 1968 [1910] History of Crises Under the National Banking System. New
York: A.M. Kelley.

Schwartz, Charles F. and Robert E. Graham, Jr. 1956. Personal Income by States since
1929. Washington, U.S. Govt. Print. Off..

Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New York: Norton.

                                              43
__________. 1989. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge: MIT press.

U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1943. Banking and Monetary
Statistics. Washington, D.C., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times
to 1970, Bicentennial Edition. Washington D.C: GPO.

Waite, Warren C. 1942. “Indexes of the Terms of Trade between Areas in the United
States.” The Review of Economic Statistics, Vol. 24, No. 1. (Feb.): 22-30.

Wallis, John Joseph. 1987. “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery during the great
Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 69: 516-520.

Wheelock, David C. 1992. “Regulation and Bank Failures: New Evidence from the
Agricultural Collapse of the 1920s.” The Journal of Economic History. Vol. 52 (4).
(December): 806-25.

__________. 1998. “National Monetary Policy by Regional Design: The Evolving Role of
the Federal Reserve Banks in Regional Federal Reserve System Policy.” Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis, Working Paper, 1998-010B

White, Eugene. 1983. The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-
1929. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

__________. 1984. “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930.” The Journal of
Economic History 44 (March): 119-38.

Wicker, Elmus. 1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

__________. 2000. Banking Panics of the Gilded Age. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Wigmore, Barry. 1987. “Was the Bank Holiday of 1933 a Run on the Dollar Rather than the
Banks?” The Journal of Economic History 47 (September): 739-56.

Wright, Gavin. 1996. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy
Since the Civil War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.




                                            44
                                                         Figure 1
                                           Interregional Gold Flows, 1926-1937
                             (As a Percentage of Total Gold Held by the Gold Settlement Fund)

600



500



400



300



200



100



  0
      1926   1927   1928   1929       1930         1931        1932           1933     1934     1935   1936   1937




                                                 Private Accounts       Net




                                                     45
                                                                               Figure 2

                                      The Flow of Gold to Eastern Financial Centers on Private Accounts, 1926-1933



                      1,600                                                                                                              110

                      1,400                                                                                                              108

                      1,200
                                                                                                                                         106

                      1,000
                                                                                                                                         104
Millions of dollars




                       800




                                                                                                                                               Index Number
                                                                                                                                         102
                       600
                                                                                                                                         100
                       400
                                                                                                                                         98
                       200

                                                                                                                                         96
                         0
                              1926   1927            1928             1929             1930              1931        1932         1933
                       -200                                                                                                              94


                       -400                                                                                                              92




                                       The Flow of Gold to Eastern Financial Centers          Terms of Trade    Relative Income




                                                                              46
                                              Figure 3

                 Gains and Losses of Deposits by Federal Reserve District, 1929-1930


                      Minneapolis

                           Dallas

                           Atlanta

                       Richmond


                         St. Louis

                      Kansas City


                     Philadelphia

                          Boston


                    San Francisco

                       Cleveland


                         Chicago

                       New York


-10.00   -5.00                     0.00          5.00             10.00                15.00   20.00
                                          Percentage Change


                                              47
                                                   Figure 4

                  Gains and Losses of Deposits by Federal Reserve District, 1930-1931


                                                        Minneapolis

                                                              Dallas

                                                              Atlanta

                                                          Richmond

                                                           St. Louis

                                                        Kansas City

                                                        Philadelphia

                                                              Boston

                                                     San Francisco

                                                         Cleveland

                                                           Chicago

                                                         New York

-12.00   -10.00   -8.00     -6.00      -4.00          -2.00      0.00   2.00     4.00   6.00   8.00
                                               Percentage Change




                                                   48
                                                                              Figure 5
                                                                    The Big Four New York Banks


          8,000,000,000



          7,000,000,000
                                                                           The Great
                                                                           Contraction
          6,000,000,000



          5,000,000,000
Dollars




          4,000,000,000



          3,000,000,000



          2,000,000,000



          1,000,000,000



                     0
                          1923   1924   1925   1926   1927   1928   1929   1930     1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936   1937   1938   1939   1940   1941

                                                                              Deposits       Reserves      Loans




                                                                                   49
Endnotes


1. This paper was prepared for the Conference on the Anatomy of Deflations organized by Richard
Burdekin and Pierre Siklos in conjunction with the International Economic History Association
Meetings in Buenos Aires in 2002. Michael Bordo, Richard Burdekin, Kerry Odell, Pierre Siklos,
Anna J. Schwartz, and Eugene White graciously provided comments on a previous draft. They are
not to blame for the mistakes that remain.

2. There is a large literature on the “twin crises.” Some papers that started me thinking about the
analogy between the regional crises in the U.S. in the 1930s and more recent crises were Kaminsky
and Reinhart (1998), Miller (1998), and Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999).

3. Scholars addressing real as opposed to monetary aspects of the depression, however, have
frequently adopted a regional perspective: Wallis (1987), Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (1997), and
Heim (1998).

4. The data are from Friedman and Schwartz (1983, p. 124)

5. Bank failure rates were high in rural regions in the 1920s, partly as a result of agricultural
distress: (Wheelock, 1992; Alston, Grove, and Wheelock, 1994).

6. Roosevelt’s Silver Purchase Program reversed the plunge in silver prices. This Program, which
began in December 1933, and was accelerated under the Silver Purchase Act of June 1934, was
intended to raise the price of silver, a boon to western silver producing states, and to increase the
stock of money, through Treasury purchases of silver. As a result, the price of silver rose to a
temporary peak of $.64 per fine oz. in 1935. The price then slumped once more, although it
remained above the depths of 1930-32 in both nominal and real terms. It has been claimed that the
purchase program had a deleterious effect on China. (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963, 483-490;
Brandt and Sargent, 1989; Friedman 1992; Rawski 1993).
7. Paul Rhode brought this data to my attention.

8. Calomiris and Mason (2000, 24), using their rich microeconomic data set, found mixed results
from their agricultural variables. For example, monthly agricultural price change was significant in
some, but not all regressions explaining bank survival rates. A greater presence of small farms had a
negative effect on bank survival, but in their words the effect was not “highly significant or robust.”

9. The deposit currency ratio is also, of course, a determinant of the stock of money, which
Friedman and Schwartz consider the key variable.

10. We see some large private flows in the 1920-21 recession, if we extend the figure back to the
early 1920s. These flows, however, appear to be a winding down of flows produced by the war. The
net figures, moreover, show distinctly smaller interregional movements of gold, relative to the
                                                   50
existing stock than in the early 1930s. The form of the accounts was changed, however, in 1926.
And, I have not found a discussion of the pre-1926 accounts as thorough and authoritative as
Hartland’s (1949) discussion of the post-1926 accounts. So my reading of the early accounts is
tentative.

11. Gold mining was an exception to the general trend in mining because the government fixed the
nominal price. Thus, the real price of gold rose while the real price of other minerals fell.
12. The Settlement Fund accounts don't distinguish among the sources of additional gold. It is
known that latter on the Federal Reserve changed participations regularly to maintain district gold
balances.

13. This point was noted by Fels (1950), and Hartland (1950).

14. Trade weighted terms of trade by census region were computed by Waite (1942). I calculated
the terms of trade for the Eastern Financial districts by weighting his indexes for New England and
the Middle Atlantic states by their shares in regional personal income. I haven’t found the
explanation for the sharp drop in the terms of trade in 1932.

15. The per capita income figures by state are widely available. I created federal district estimates
simply by adding the personal incomes of each state in the district. Where only a part of a state was
included in a district I simply made a guess as to the fraction of the state’s economic activity that
occurred in a particular district. Overall the estimates do not appear sensitive to these guesses.

16. A chart of reserve growth is similar.

17. More precisely, the first 10 months of the contraction. The NBER business cycle peak occurs in
August 1929.

18. I examined the state level data that underlies Bodenhorn's regional estimates, but failed to turn
up obvious increases due to banking panics or liquidity shortages. I am grateful to Professor
Bodenhorn for sharing his state-level estimate.


19. The nominal rates are from Smiley (1981, 897). The wheat rate of interest was computed by
subtracting the percentage change in the price of a bushel of wheat (U.S. Bureau of the Census
1975, 511, series K508) between 1928 and 1929 from the 1929 nominal loan rate, and the
percentage change between 1929 and 1930 from the 1930 nominal loan rate.
20. Similar restrictions were adopted in Argentina in December 2001 during its financial crisis.

21. The holiday was declared in order to give the state’s largest bank time to apply for a
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Loan, a consideration that was also behind some of the other
holidays. The pressure on the bank determined the date; the occasion was found afterwards, the
anniversary of the severance of diplomatic relations with Germany prior to World War I! (Chandler
1970, 120).

22. Ballantine, the Under Secretary of the Treasury, took part in the negotiations with Henry Ford.
                                                    51
23. This section is based on Friedman and Schwartz (1963, 370-4).

24. The failure to distinguish between nominal and real rates was stressed by Brunner and Meltzer
(1968).

25. The success of the Canadian banking system in avoiding a U.S. style collapse does not mean
that Canada avoided the Great Contraction. Industrial production in Canada followed the same
downhill path as in the United States.




                                                  52
