                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       STRIKES, SCABS AND TREAD SEPARATIONS:
                          LABOR STRIFE AND THE PRODUCTION
                      OF DEFECTIVE BRIDGESTONE/FIRESTONE TIRES

                                            Alan B. Krueger
                                            Alexandre Mas

                                          Working Paper 9524
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9524


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




We are grateful to Colin Cameron, David Card, Henry Farber, Seth Harris, Alain Kornhauser, Paul
Rosenbaum, Chris Sims, Jim Sturm and seminar participants at Princeton University, Stanford Law School,
U.C. Berkeley, MIT, the NBER, the Biennial Hong Kong Economic Association Meeting, and the University
of Pennsylvania for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Alan B. Krueger and Alexandre Mas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.
Strikes, Scabs and Tread Separations: Labor Strife and the Production of Defective
Bridgestone/Firestone Tires
Alan B. Krueger and Alexandre Mas
NBER Working Paper No. 9524
February 2003
JEL No. J5, M1, M5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper provides a case study of the effect of labor relations on product quality. We consider
whether a long, contentious strike and the hiring of permanent replacement workers by
Bridgestone/Firestone in the mid-1990s contributed to the production of an excess number of
defective tires. Using several independent data sources we find that labor strife in the Decatur plant
closely coincided with lower product quality. Count data regression models based on two data sets
of tire failures by plant, year and age show significantly higher failure rates for tires produced in
Decatur during the labor dispute than before or after the dispute, or than at other plants. Also, an
analysis of internal Firestone engineering tests indicates that P235 tires from Decatur performed less
well if they were manufactured during the labor dispute compared with those produced after the
dispute, or compared with those from other, non-striking plants. Monthly data suggest that the
production of defective tires was particularly high around the time wage concessions were demanded
by Firestone in early 1994 and when large numbers of replacement workers and permanent workers
worked side by side in late 1995 and early 1996.


Alan B. Krueger                                Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section                   Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library                              Firestone Library
Princeton University                           Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                            Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                       amas@princeton.edu
akrueger@princeton.edu
      Do workers provide more effort and due diligence if they feel they are treated

better? Does the labor relations climate affect the quality of production? Economic

models of fairness (e.g., Rabin, 1993 and Fehr and Gächter, 2000) suggest that workers

are more cooperative and less prone to commit sabotage if they feel they are treated well

and in good faith. In addition, the dependence of worker effort on pay is an essential

feature of efficiency wage models. Yet a relationship between worker treatment and the

quality of production has proved difficult to establish. Quality is often unobserved or

hard to measure. This paper provides new evidence on the impact of labor strife on the

quality of production at the plant level by examining the incidence of defective

Bridgestone/Firestone (B/FS) tires.

        In August 2000, Firestone and Ford jointly announced the recall of 14.4 million

size P235/75R15 ATX, ATX II and Wilderness AT tires, some 6.5 million of them still

on the road, mostly on Ford Explorers. 1 The National Highway Traffic and Safety

Administration (NHTSA) issued an advisory concerning several other sizes and models

of Firestone tires in September 2000. NHTSA reported that the Firestone tires under

investigation were related to 271 fatalities and more than 800 injuries. The most common

source of failure of the recalled tires was tread separation; that is, a sudden detachment of

the rubber tread from the steel belts, causing the tire to blow out. One of every 400 tires

produced in the Decatur, IL plant in 1995 was returned under warranty because of a tread

separation by 2000. 2


1
  The recall pertained to size P235/75R15 Firestone ATX and ATX II tires made in all Firestone plants
from 1991 to 2000, and P235/75R15 Wilderness AT tires produced in the Decatur, IL plant from 1996 to
2000. On May 22, 2001 Ford announced plans to replace all Wilderness AT tires on certain Ford vehicles.
In October 2001 Firestone recalled additional P235/75R15 tires and P255/70R16 Wilderness AT tires.
2
  This figure is based on our calculations using warranty data provided by B/FS to NHTSA, and is an
underestimate of the overall incidence of tread separations because not all tires were covered by the
      As described in detail in the next section, three of Firestone’s 11 North American

tire production plants, including its Decatur, IL plant, which manufactured a large

number of P235/75R15 tires, underwent a severe strike beginning in July 1994. The

previous contract expired on April 1, 1994, and employees worked without a contract for

three months before going on strike. In negotiations, B/FS insisted on deviating from the

industry-wide pattern bargain by moving from an 8 to 12 hour shift that would rotate

between days and nights, as well as cutting pay for new hires by 30 percent. Almost

immediately after 4,200 workers walked out on strike, the company hired replacement

workers. In May 1995, the United Rubber Workers (URW) locals representing the

striking plants unconditionally offered to return to work without a contract, but B/FS had

announced that it would permanently retain the replacement workers and offered only to

recall the striking workers as need arose. In July 1995, the United Steelworkers, which

had absorbed the United Rubber Workers union, launched a worldwide campaign to force

B/FS to rehire some 1,000 strikers who remained out of work. A final contract, which

included provisions to recall all strikers, was not settled until December 1996.

      A unique vista into the possible effect of labor relations on product quality is

possible in this instance because the recall of Firestone tires, Congressional hearings, and

scores of liability lawsuits have made confidential, proprietary data publicly available.

Tires are still made in large part by hand, so there is scope for human error in producing

this product. In addition, because millions of tires are produced and in service each year,

failure rates can be calculated for an enormous sample.




warranty program at the time of a tread separation, and because some owners may not have returned
covered tires under the warranty program despite having a tread separation.


                                                   2
     Laboratory tests by Firestone and Ford have been unable to identify a single

manufacturing or design defect that is responsible for the high incidence of defective

tires. A variety of different types of defects were probably at work. Is it possible that the

labor dispute affected the safety of the tires? A number of observers – Congressmen,

plaintiffs’ attorneys, reporters – have hypothesized that under-trained replacement

workers or lax supervision during the strike contributed to the tire defects. It is also

possible that discord among replacement workers, union members who crossed the picket

line, and returning strikers contributed to the production defects. And workers may have

been fatigued and more prone to errors because Firestone introduced a 12-hour, rotating

shift to operate the plant 24 hours a day during the strike.

       At least five other hypotheses have been proposed as the source of defective tires.

First, B/FS executives blamed the defects in part on the design of the Ford Explorer,

which they argued was prone to roll over. Second, B/FS also argued that Ford

recommended that the air pressure of the tires be set at 26 pounds per square inch (PSI),

while the tire manufacturer recommended 30 PSI. At lower pressures tires become hotter

and are more prone to blow out. Third, others have conjectured that features of the

manufacturing process in the Decatur plant increased the risk of safety defects, including

a shortening of the vulcanization process (time that tires are cooked to imprint the tread)

and plant conditions that may have allowed moisture to seep into the rubber linings.

Fourth, some tire experts and workers have conjectured that faulty material inputs, such

as outdated rubber, weakened tires manufactured in Decatur. Finally, some have claimed

that the design of the tires was responsible for the high rate of tread separations.

     Anecdotal evidence is available for all these explanations. In sections 3-5 we try to

systematically sort through the possible reasons for the safety-related defects, focusing

                                              3
closely on whether the production of defective tires coincided with the labor dispute. We

examine three different data sets, and provide five types of evidence. We focus mostly

on P235/75R15 tires because they have more data available, but look at other tires as

well. Almost all of the P235 tires were produced in three plants: Decatur, IL; Joliette,

Canada; and Wilson, NC. For nearly three years -- from April 1994 to December 1996 --

union workers at the Decatur plant were either on strike or working without a contract;

tires were produced by 1,048 replacement workers, union members who crossed the

picket line, management and recalled strikers in this period. The Wilson plant was

nonunion, so it did not experience a strike. A Canadian union represents the Joliette

plant, but labor relations there were much less contentious. Joliette had a six- month

strike over fringe benefits at the end of 1995, but the plant did not hire replacement

workers (which are illegal in Quebec).

     The evidence that we have assembled suggests that the strike and associated labor

strife in Decatur was a major contributing factor to the production of defective tires.

First, descriptive analysis and count regression models using data on claims for

compensation for property damage or personal injuries show significantly higher defect

rates for tires manufactured in Decatur during the labor dispute (defined as 1994-96) than

in Decatur at other times, or in other plants, conditional on production and other

variables. Second, NHTSA data on complaints involving Firestone P235/75R15 tires

indicate a similar pattern: a significantly higher incidence of complaints filed concerning

tires manufactured in Decatur during the strike period than at other times, or at other

plants. Third, engineering tests conducted by Firestone – which hold conditions such as

speed, load, tire pressure and ambient temperature constant – indicate a higher failure rate



                                              4
for tires manufactured in Decatur during the strike compared with tires manufactured in

Decatur during non-strike years or in other plants.

     Fourth, we more closely examine the timing of the production of defective tires,

using data on the number claims disaggregated by the month the tires were produced.

This analysis finds an excess number of claims for tires produced in Decatur in the few

months before the contract expired, when B/FS demanded concessions, and in the period

when many replacement workers and recalled union workers worked side by side. This

finding leads us to a somewhat nuanced conclusion on the role of replacement workers: it

is not simply that under trained or poorly supervised replacement workers produced

defective tires. Instead, the timing suggests that the concurrence of replacement workers

and union members working side by side before the contract was settled, as well as labor

strife in the months leading up to the strike, coincided with the production of a high

number of defective tires.

     Fifth, we examine other models of Firestone tires, which have not been recalled by

Firestone. If labor strife contributed to the production of defective P235/75R15 tires,

then one would expect the quality of other Firestone tires manufactured under the same

labor relations environment to have been affected as well. Results for these tires also

suggest that a higher rate of defective tires were produced in Decatur during the strike

years than in Decatur before or after the strike, or in other plants.

     Although these findings suggest that labor strife contributed to the problems with

Bridgestone/Firestone tires, it is unclear whether one can generalize from our results to

other settings because tire manufacturing may be different from other industries and

because the investigation into the problems with P235 tires made our case study possible

in the first place, so “selection bias” may be an issue. Our findings were not preordained,

                                               5
however, because at the start of our work we were unaware that an excess number of

defective tires were produced during the dispute period in the Decatur plant, or that the

precise timing would indicate a major role for union workers as opposed to replacement

workers, or that there was an unusual number of problems with non-P235 tires

manufactured in the Decatur plant during the dispute. Still, we would recommend that

the reader exercise caution in extending our results to other settings; our paper only

provides a detailed case study of one firm in one unique period of its history.



1. Background and Industrial Relations Environment

         In 1988, the Japanese tire manufacturer Bridgestone purchased Firestone, making

Bridgestone/Firestone the largest tire manufacturer in the world. Initially, labor relations

went smoothly. For example, Bridgestone upheld Firestone’s agreement to allow its new

plant in Warren County, TN to organize by means of a card sign-up, foregoing a secret

ballot. In 1991, the three- year contract negotiated between Bridgestone and the URW

became the pattern for the tire industry, and the company and union established a much

ballyhooed “Partnership for Involvement” program. 3 When negotiations began in

January 1994, however, B/FS sought to deviate from the industry-wide practice of pattern

bargaining, asking for what a company negotiator called “a turnaround agreement”.

Since the 1940s, Firestone plants had adhered to the industry wide pattern bargain. Peter

Schofield, Firestone’s former Director of Labor Relations, said the January 1994

bargaining session “certainly didn’t make the union happy” (Meyer, 2002; p. 337).




3
    The material in this paragraph draws heavily from Franklin (2001) and Meyer (2002).


                                                      6
      Bridgestone/Firestone demanded that the union move from 8-hour to 12-hour shifts

that rotated between day and night, that it operate the plant seven days a week, that the

pay of new hires be reduced by 30 percent (although the cut would be made up by faster

seniority increases over a three- year period), that hourly workers contribute to their

health care costs, that the piece rate system be moved to a plant-wide performance pay

system, and that vacations be cut by two weeks for senior workers. This request for

concessions came at a time of falling national unemployment and just after B/FS’s first

profitable year since being acquired by Bridgestone (Whitford, 1994). The URW

proposed that Bridgestone/Firestone follow the master pattern agreement set with

Goodyear, which called for no wage increases other than cost-of- living adjustments. 4

      After the contract expired on April 1, 1994, union members continued working

without an agreement. On July 12, 1994, URW locals representing 4,200 workers in

three of B/FS’s production plants (Des Moines, Decatur, and Oklahoma City), the Akron

research center, and the Noblesville air springs plant went on strike. Bridgestone almost

immediately began to hire temporary replacement workers and operate the plants with

managerial and supervisory workers. Replacement workers were paid 30 percent less

than the union rate. 5 By January 1995, when the company converted temporary

replacement workers to permanent replacement worker status, it had hired a total of 2,300

replacement workers. 6

        The union set up pickets outside the struck plants. In Decatur, the union posted

the names of each member who crossed the picket line under the title, “Hall of Shame.”


4
  The previous agreement at Goodyear also expired in April 1994, and the new contract was settled as soon
as the old one expired.
5
  Franklin (2001; p. 140).
6
  Franklin (2001; p. 140).


                                                   7
The list included a previous president of the local union. 7 More than 300 of the 1,209

members of Local 713 in Decatur eventually crossed the picket line. By May of 1995,

the Decatur plant employed 1,048 replacement workers and 371 permanent workers. 8

The company initiated 12-hour, rotating shifts, and operated the plant 24 hours a day.

      On May 7, 1995, members of the URW Local 713 in Decatur voted by a 2-1 margin

to officially end their strike against B/FS. The other plants quickly followed suit. 9 On

May 22nd, the URW unconditionally offered to return to work. According to Local 713

President Roger Gates, the union offered to unconditionally end the strike as a strategy to

prevent B/FS from hiring additional replacement workers and to forestall a union

decertification election. 10 The strike was the longest in the history of the URW; its strike

fund was depleted. Bridgestone/Firestone unilaterally imposed its last offer from July

1994, which cut wages for some job classifications by $5.34 an hour, to about $12 per

hour, moved piece rate pay to a flat hourly rate plus plant-wide performance pay, paid

new hires 30 percent less than before the strike, froze pension benefits, and required

workers to contribute a portion of their health care premiums. 11 The company also

continued operating 12-hour shifts.

      Although the strike officially ended in May 1995, the labor dispute continued. The

company notified the union that it intended to permanently retain the replacement

workers and that it would “advise the URW of the number of employees for whom we




7
  Franklin (2001; p. 127).
8
  Statistics included in a letter submitted by Theodore Hester on behalf of B/FS, contained in House
Committee on Commerce (2001) documents, p. 107.
9
  In January 1995 the local representing the research facility in Akron had voted to end the strike.
10
   U.S. Department of Labor (1996; p. 2).
11
   U.S. Department of Labor (1996; p. 2).


                                                     8
have work.”12 In July 1995, the financially bankrupt URW voted to merge into the

United Steel Workers of America (USWA). The URW ceased to exist. The USWA

made the rehiring of all striking workers a priority for future negotiations, but B/FS and

USWA did not reach a new agreement until December 1996. On July 18, 1995 the

USWA announced a worldwide boycott of Bridgestone/Firestone and Sears Roebuck &

Co., its largest domestic retailer. The union said it initiated the boycott because the

company insisted on retaining replacement workers instead of recalling some 2,000

strikers who were willing to return to work. 13 The USWA broke off contract talks in

January 1996 because B/FS would not agree to a system of pattern bargaining.

      A final settlement, which included an agreement to recall all strikers, was ratified in

December 1996. The new contract gave an across-the-board wage increase of 35 cents

compared to the 1994 levels, a $750 bonus, and restored pension benefits. Hourly wages

were about $1 below the rate at Goodyear. 14 A 12-hour shift remained in place, but it no

longer rotated between day and night for the same worker.

      Most strikers had been recalled prior to the final contract agreement. 15 By early

November 1996, all but 40 strikers were recalled. Bridgestone/Firestone increased the

operation of its plants to 24 hours a day, seven days a week during the strike, so total

employment increased. Because B/FS gradually recalled strikers after the union

unconditionally agreed to return to work, replacement workers and returning strikers




12
   Statement of B/FS spokesperson Trevor Hoskins.
13
   U.S. Department of Labor (1996; p. 3). Among other activities, the USWA staged an anti-Firestone
protest at the Indianapolis 500.
14
   Sabath (1997).
15
   John Lampe, B/FS’s Executive Vice President, testified that “by 1996, over half of our work force in the
Decatur plant was unionized workers that had gone on strike and come back, and less than half were then
replacement or temporary workers” (House Committee on Commerce, 2000; p. 1391).


                                                     9
worked side by side for several months before a new contract was reached. A USWA

document described conditions during this period as follows:16

        Working conditions for the returning strikers were brutal. Forced to work
        alongside scabs who had taken their jobs and unprotected by a contract,
        the strikers were assigned to the hardest jobs on the worst machines, rather
        than the jobs the y had held for 10, 20 and even 30 years. The company
        supervisors had a field day harassing, intimidating and firing union
        members for the smallest infractions.

      The antagonism between the union and those who crossed the picket line is also

illustrated by the fact that the union imposed a $4,500 fine on anyone who crossed the

picket line who wanted to rejoin the union. Only one Decatur worker, who crossed the

picket line in the last week of the strike, paid the fine and was taken back by the union. 17

Greenhouse (1996) observed, "Organized labor made the dispute one of its crusades

largely because it involved one of the largest uses of permanent replacement workers in

the nation's history."18


Tire Production

      Column 1 of Table 1 reports the number of ATX, ATX II and Wilderness size-

P235/75R15 tires produced in each of the six Firestone plants that manufactured such

tires from 1991 to 2000. (Henceforth, we use P235 to refer to size P235/75R15 tires and

ATX to refer to both ATX and ATX II models.) The Decatur, Joliette and Wilson plants

produced the vast majority of these tires. Wilderness tires were not produced until 1996.



16
   United Steel Workers, “One Day Longer: The road to victory at Bridgestone/Firestone,” undated,
available from http://www.uswa.org/news/bridgestone.html.
17
   Franklin (2001; p. 283).
18
   There are many other notable examples where labor strife has arisen during strikes in which replacement
workers were hired. Examples include the Hormel strike of 1985-1986 in Austin, MN (Green, 1990), the
Iowa Beef Packers strike of 1987 in Dakota City, IA (Craypo, 1994) the Phelps Dodge Corporation strike
of 1983 in Phelps Dodge, AZ (Rosenblum, 1995), and the International Paper Strike of 1988 in Jay, ME,
which coincided with toxic gas leaks leading to the evacuation of the town (Bierecree, 1991).


                                                   10
A smaller number of ATX tires continued to be produced after Wilderness tires were

introduced. The last column summarizes the labor relations situation in the 1990s.

        Tire manufacturing remains a highly complex, labor-intensive task. According to

Firestone’s former CEO, Masatoshi Ono, “A typical tire can have more than 26

components, 14 different rubber compounds and require 29 separate steps to

manufacture.”19 The Decatur plant is Firestone’s oldest manufacturing facility. The

plant was originally used by Caterpillar to build large engines for the U.S. military during

World War II. It was next used as a U.S. Army Signal Depot until 1961. In 1962

Firestone purchased the 160-acre site and converted it to produce tires. Local 713 of the

URW immediately organized it. Franklin (2001; p. 117) describes the plant as, “dark,

brooding, and smoky in places, a noisy monument to the almost unchanging way most

tires are still made: with much reaching and lifting and cutting, a lot of human muscle

power, and an endless demand for unflinching robot- like concentration.” Particularly in

the Decatur plant, tire production was not automated. For example, workers had much

discretion over the amount of effort exerted to wrap the steel belts, the condition of the

rubber used to produce the tread and sidewall, and the implementation of the

vulcanization process.

        There is much anecdotal evidence that replacement workers were less skilled tire

makers, and perhaps more prone to build defective tires. According to William Newton,

a retired tire builder from the Decatur, “It takes two years to become a good tire builder.”

When Mr. Newton returned to work after the strike, he said he “saw a lot of people who




19
     Quoted in Adams (2000).


                                             11
didn’t know how to build tires.”20 Joe Roundtree, another retired worker from Decatur,

reportedly testified in a civil case that he doubted the ability of replacement workers to

match the quality of experienced union workers and that he thought moving to 12- hour

shifts compromised product quality. 21

      Other employees have testified that they were ordered to remove blisters from tire

sidewalls by piercing them with an awl, a small, handheld pointed instrument, and that

production pressures during the labor dispute impaired quality. "I protested it, but I done

it," Jan S. Wagoner said. "I didn't like sticking an awl all the way through the sidewall of

a tire."22 The Decatur plant manager, Harry McMillan, testified that the plant “was not

producing the volume of tires it was expected to produce [during the dispute], and waste

and scrap levels were higher than the company expected them to be.”23 Tires are

scrapped if a defect is detected. "They preached quality,” Lonnie Dart, a retired Decatur

worker testified, “but if you didn't make the numbers, you was in trouble."24 According

to one news account, production quotas made thorough inspections nearly impossible

(Barboza, 2000).


Tire Safety

      Tires are more likely to fail if they run at higher speeds, at higher temperatures, or

carry heavier loads. Older tires are also more likely to suffer a tread separation. A large

majority of tread separations occurred in the Southwestern part of the United States,

almost certainly because of the higher average temperature there. We are not aware of


20
   Quoted in Barboza (2000).
21
   Fogarty (2000).
22
   Skertic (2000).
23
   Quoted in Pinkerton (2001a).
24
   Skertic (2000).


                                             12
any evidence indicating a change in the regional distribution of Firestone tires produced

in different plants, but the location of tires that are installed as original equipment, as

opposed to replacement tires, is determined by the auto manufacturer.

      One possibly relevant development was that Ford began producing Explorers at a

new plant that opened in St. Louis in 1995, and many of these vehicles were sent to

dealers in the Southwest. The other Explorer plant was in Louisville, Kentucky.

Firestone’s Decatur plant likely supplied tires to both plants, because of its proximity.

There are several reasons why we doubt that the temporal pattern of defective tires

originating from Decatur that we document below was caused by a change in distribution

to warmer states during the dispute, however. First, the St. Louis plant began producing

in 1995, but there was already an excess number of defective tires produced in Decatur in

early 1994. Second, our results are robust if we limit the analysis to replacement tires,

which are unaffected by the new Ford plant. Third, the excess number of defects from

Decatur abated after 1996, while the St. Louis plant continued to operate. Fourth, and

perhaps most importantly, engineering tests that hold constant temperature and other

environmental factors point in the same direction as the field data.

      Historically, Firestone has monitored tire safety by running product tests, studying

warranty adjustment information, and analyzing failed tires that were returned from the

field. Another source of information is claims paid for property damages and personal

injuries. According to Congressional testimony, the company did not closely monitor

these data for safety purposes until July 2000, in a joint effort with Ford. 25



25
  House Committee on Commerce (2001; p. 137). In a deposition for a civil suit in Texas, Allen Rauner, a
Ford engineer, testified that he requested claims data in 1999 from Firestone, but was told the company did
not have such data (Pinkerton, 2001b).


                                                    13
     The third column of Table 1 reports the number of claims for property damages or

personal injuries involving Firestone ATX tires. It is clear that the Decatur plant has a

much higher rate of claims per million tires produced. A key question is: was the claims

rate elevated for tires made during the labor dispute.



2. Firestone Claims and NHTSA Complaints Data Sets and Descriptive Analysis

     We obtained Firestone’s internal claims data from NHTSA. These data consist of a

brief description of claims filed before 2000 for property damage or personal injuries

stemming from tire failures. About 70 percent of the claims involved problems related to

tread separations. The data we analyze includes claims concerning 2,597 P235 tires

produced between 1991 and 1999. The data set includes micro data on tire model and

size, date of failure, and the 10-digit Department of Transportation (DOT) tire code, from

which plant and week of production can be inferred.

     We use these data to construct a cell- level data set, where the cell is a production

year by age by plant. We also have added information for each cell on the number of

P235 tires produced (by model), the share of tires that were used as original equipment,

and the share of tires that are ATX model, which were all provided by Safety Forum, a

non-profit organization that works with trial attorneys involved in lawsuits against

Firestone and Ford.

     The second set of data on failures was collected by NHTSA. These data are

described in detail in the Data Appendix. Briefly, NHTSA recorded information reported

by consumers, police authorities, insurance companies and other organizations on

Firestone tires that failed. The NHTSA data also include information on the tire model

and size, date of failure, and DOT tire code. We use these data to construct a cell- level

                                             14
data set on the number of complaints by year of production, plant and age. One

advantage of the NHTSA data set is that it indicates whether the tire failure resulted in a

fatality or injury, allowing us to calculate failure rates depending on the severity of the

incident. Another advantage is that we can analyze data on P235 and non-P235 tires.

And unlike the claims data, the complaints data indicate whether the tire was installed as

original equipment or as a replacement tire.

     There are three major shortcomings with the NHTSA complaints data, however.

First, the records contain many missing values for the variables of interest. Of 5,189

reported complaints (on all tire sizes), only 1,076 have complete data, 3,524 have partial

data, and 586 are missing data on the production year, plant and calendar year of failure

of the tire. Second, many complaints were filed after the recall was announced, and may

involve routine use-related failures, such as running over a nail. Third, there is no

financial incentive to report complaints to NHTSA, as opposed to claims data, so

underreporting is probably common. We limited the data to complaints filed before the

August 2000 recall to avoid an avalanche of frivolous complaints, or complaints that

were sparked because the recall singled out Wilderness tires made in Decatur. Before the

recall, it was not publicly known that Decatur tires might have a higher defect rate.

     As explained in detail in the Data Appendix, to handle the missing values we

multiply imputed missing data using the conditional distribution for the available data

using a technique based on Rubin (1987). If, say, a randomly chosen half of all

complaints had missing data, we could just double the number of complaints with

complete data. But this would not make use of the partially reported data, and we could

probably do better filling in the missing data by conditioning on the information that we



                                               15
do have. For example, if a tire’s age was missing, we randomly assigned the age from

the set of tires with the same year of production and vehicle miles.

         Although it is possible to utilize a more sophisticated technique to impute missing

values, given the strong likelihood that data are randomly missing (e.g., a tire was so

badly damaged that the DOT code was not visible) we implemented a simple, transparent

hot-decking technique that relied on a priori expectations of which variables contain

information on the missing values. We created 10 micro complaints data sets imputing

missing values in this way, and then aggregated each micro data set into plant-by- year-of-

production-by-age cells. We report summary statistics for the average of the 10 cell- level

data sets. The advantage of proceeding in this way (as opposed to assigning conditional

expected values to missing data) is that the standard errors that we compute take into

account sampling variability introduced by the imputation method (see Data Appendix).

The assumption that is required for the consistency of the estimates using both imputed

and non- imputed data is that the missing data are missing at random conditional on the

variables used in the imputation. It is reassuring to note that none of our conclusions is

qualitatively altered if we use only the non- missing observations. 26

         Although both the claims and complaints data sets have limitations, they

complement each other and have the virtue of being independently collected. For

example, while the claims data are more complete and claimants have a financial

incentive to file a claim, they lack information on the severity of resulting injuries.

Moreover, there is no industry-wide standard definition of a claim, so the claims data rely

on Firestone’s interpretation and recording of claims.


26
     Estimates using the sample of complaints without imputed data are available on request.


                                                      16
Descriptive Analysis

      Figure 1 reports the cumulative number of claims against Bridgestone/Firestone per

million ATX tires produced by the year the tires were produced and the age of the tires.

The left panel displays data for the Decatur plant and the right panel for Joliette and

Wilson, the two other main producers. 27 The three years of the labor dispute – 1994,

1995, and 1996 – stand out in the figure for Decatur. Four years after production, tires

that were made in Decatur during the labor dispute were at least 15 times more likely to

have resulted in a claim than were tires manufactured in other plants. Such a large

discrepancy in failure rates is not evident for other production years, although the claims

rate was about double for Decatur tires than other tires for the 1993 production year.

      Figures 2 and 3 report similar figures using the complaints data for ATX and

Wilderness size-P235 tires combined. Figure 2 uses only the subsample with complete

data for year, plant and age, while Figure 3 uses the average of 10 data sets with

allocations for missing data, as described previously. The number of complaints is about

half as large as the number of claims, even after imputations are made for missing data.

Nonetheless, both figures tell a similar story, and a story similar to the claims data: tires

produced during the labor dispute (1994-96) at the Decatur plant have a much higher

failure rate than those produced at Joliette or Wilson, although before and after the

dispute period the rate of complaints is similar for tires manufactured in Decatur and in

the other plants.




27
  Ford submitted a similar graph in Congressional testimony, although it pertained just to tread separations
and combined all plants other than Decatur (see House Committee on Commerce, 2001; p. 153).


                                                    17
        Figure 4 displays cumulative incidence rates for cases in the NHTSA database

involving at least one fatality. 28 That is, we report the cumulative number of recorded

tire failures linked to a fatality per million tires produced, by year of production, plant

and age of tire. This sample was selected because fatalities are unlikely to be under

counted in the NHTSA data and because records for cases involving fatalities were less

likely to have missing data. Even with a small number of counts, these graphs convey a

similar message: a higher rate of fatal accidents involving tires produced in Decatur

during the labor dispute than tires produced in other plants, or tires produced in Decatur

during a more tranquil period of labor relations. To put the numbers in perspective, note

that before the recall tires made in Decatur during the labor dispute had a fatal accident

rate of 10 to 30 per million tires produced. As a benchmark, we note that the risk of

death from parachuting is estimated at 13 per million jumps (Poytner, 1992). 29



3. Count Data Models

      To model tire failures conditional on other variables, we estimate a series of count

data regression models. Specifically, we model yijt , the number of claims (or complaints)

for tires produced in plant i in year j that failed in calendar year t as:

(1)                                     E(yijt | xijt ) = exp(x'ijt $) ,




28
   The figure uses imputed data for missing values. The results are quite similar if records with incomplete
data are eliminated.
29
   Because tires are driven on frequently over several years, these statistics admittedly compare apples and
oranges to dramatize the risk from tire failure. A common but still unsatisfactory alternative is to put both
risks per mile traveled. One way to put the figures reported in the text in comparable context, however, is
to note that the risk of a fatal tire blowout is reduced by changing one’s tires, and each car has four tires
with more or less mutually exclusive risks, so the reduction in risk for a driver from replacing P235 tires
manufactured during the labor dispute surely exceeded the risk reduction from refraining from one
parachute jump.


                                                      18
where the x-vector of explanatory variables includes the logarithm of tires produced in

plant i in year j, a dummy variable indicating tires manufactured in Decatur, a dummy

indicating tires manufactured during the labor dispute (defined as 1994-96), an

interaction between the Decatur dummy and labor dispute dummy, a quadratic in tire age,

and possibly other variables such as the fraction of tires in the cell that were installed as

original equipment on new vehicles. The vector of parameters is denoted $.

         The “law of rare events” holds that the total number of events of some kind

occurring in a time interval will approximately follow a Poisson distribution if a single

event may occur in any of a large number of trials, but the probability of the event

occurring in any one trial is small. Tire failures would seem a natural to model as a

Poisson process because they are rare events and there are a large number of trials, with

hundreds of thousands of cars driving on tires made in the same plant and year. A

testable restriction of the Poisson model is that the conditional mean, E(yijt | xijt ), equals

the conditional variance, Var(yijt | xijt ). Even if this restriction does not hold, however,

Poisson maximum likelihood estimates of $ are still consistent if equation (1) is a correct

specification, although the standard errors are inconsistent.

         A common feature of count data – and one that we find in our tire failure data – is

that the conditional variance exceeds the conditional mean. As a consequence, to avoid

understating the standard errors we compute robust standard errors that are consistent in

the presence of over dispersion. 30 Specifically, we allow:

                                     Var( y i| x i ) = α exp( x i ' β ) ,   α > 1,




30
     See Cameron and Trivedi (1998; p. 63-65) on robust Poisson.


                                                       19
where " is an over dispersion parameter. The robust standard errors thus equal the usual

Poisson standard errors multiplied by α . We estimate α by:

                               αˆ = (n − k ) −1 ∑i=1 ( y i − yˆ i ) 2 / yˆ i .
                                                      n




In addition, we present estimates of Negative Binomial models for our first set of

specifications. The Negative Binomial model does not impose the restriction that the

mean equal the variance, and are also consistent if equation (1) holds.

      Table 2 reports means of the two cell- level data sets we use to estimate count

models. The first two columns present summary statistics for the Firestone claims data

set and the next two for the NHTSA complaints data set. In both data sets, we have

combined data on ATX and Wilderness tires. The dependent variable (yijt ), shown in the

first row, is the total number of failures in either ATX or Wilderness P235 tires in a

particular plant-by-year-of-production-by-calendar-year. Cells in the claims and

complaints data sets are for three plants (Decatur, Joliette, and Wilson), by nine

production years (1991-99), and nine calendar years (1991-99). The first and third

columns present unweighted means, and the second and fourth columns use as weights

the number of claims or complaints in the cell. Thus, columns 2 and 4 provide some

information on the characteristics of tires that failed.

      Complaints are only about half as common per cell as claims. This finding

probably reflects under reporting of complaints in the NHTSA data. Nevertheless, the

characteristics of the failed tires are quite similar. In both data sets, for example, more

than 90 percent of the failed tires are ATX models, reflecting the fact that ATX tires have

a higher failure rate and are older (and therefore more likely to fail) in these samples.

The average failed tire is around 3.5 years old at the time of the incident. About half of


                                                    20
the failed P235 tires were produced in Decatur during the period of the labor dispute

(1994-96); by comparison, only 9 percent of all P235 tires manufactured from 1991 to

1999 were produced in Decatur in this period.

     Table 3 presents Poisson models for the Firestone claims data (columns 1-3) and for

the NHTSA complaints data (columns 4-6). The first model conditions on log production

and includes dummy variables indicating tires made in Decatur, made during the labor

dispute in any plant, and the interaction between the two. The second model also

conditions for the age and age-squared of the tire. The third model adds controls for the

proportion of tires produced in the plant that year that are ATX model and the fraction of

tires that were installed as original equipment.

     In all the models, tires produced in Decatur during the labor dispute are found to

have a statistically significantly higher rate of claims or complaints. First consider the

results for claims. In column (3), for example, the Decatur-dispute interaction has a

coefficient of 1.48, with a t-ratio of 2.79. This coefficient is a “difference- in-differences”

estimate in that it measures the difference in claims between the dispute period and non-

dispute period in Decatur less the difference over the corresponding time periods in the

other plants, conditional on the other variables. To interpret the magnitude of the

interaction effect, note that exp(1.48) = 4.39, which implies that the incidence of claims is

339 percent higher for tires produced in Decatur during the labor dispute, other things

held constant. The Decatur main effect is statistically insignificant in column (3),

suggesting that, before and after the dispute, chance cannot be ruled out as the

explanation for the difference in claims rates between tires manufactured in Decatur and

those manufactured in Joliette and Wilson. Furthermore, the dispute period dummy is



                                              21
insignificant, suggesting that tires from Joliette and Wilson did not result in an increase in

claims if they were manufactured during the labor dispute.

      The coefficient on the log production variable can be interpreted as a “defect-scale”

elasticity. Interestingly, in the models in columns 2 and 3, the number of claims rises

more than in proportion with the number of tires produced, suggesting that failures

exhibit “increasing returns to scale,” perhaps because of (accelerating) fatigue in the

production process. But in column (3) the coefficient is statistically indistinguishable

from 1.0, so constant returns to scale cannot be rejected.

      Surprisingly, the proportion of tires in a cell that are ATX models has a small and

statistically insignificant, though positive, effect on the incidence of claims. The

proportion of tires installed as original equipment has a negative coefficient, which is also

statistically insignificant.

      Insofar as the labor dispute is concerned, the results for complaints are similar to

those for claims. The Decatur-dispute interaction is highly statistically significant, with a

t-ratio of 4.89 in column (6). The model in column (6) indicates that tires made in

Decatur during the labor dispute were associated with exp(1.71+.20) = 6.75 times more

complaints than tires made in Decatur before or after the dispute. Similarly, tires

manufactured in Decatur during the strike were associated with exp(1.71+.20-.15) = 5.81

times more complaints than tires manufactured in Wilson or Joliette in non-dispute years.

The number of complaints concerning tires produced during the dispute in Joliette and

Wilson is insignificantly higher than that for tires produced there in other years. And it is

worth noting that for both claims and complaints we cannot reject that the plant main

effect and dispute- interaction are equal for Wilson and Joliette if we estimate a model

that allows their coefficients to differ.

                                             22
     As with the claims, the production variable has close to a unit elasticity in the

complaints models in column (5) and (6). The coefficient on proportion new equipment

is negative in the complaints equation, and statistically significant in this case.

     For both dependent variables, the coefficients on the age variables display an

inverted-U shaped pattern, with the number of failures peaking when tires are around 5

years old. Note that we have made no adjustment to production for tires that are no

longer in service. Older tires are more likely to be removed from the road, so the age

variables in part reflect obsolescence. We could adjust production by assuming some

depreciation rate each year. If we include unrestricted age dummies, however, they

would completely absorb any (cross-plant) age-specific obsolescence rate because of the

logarithmic specification of production. When we included unrestricted age dummies the

coefficients on production and the Decatur and labor dispute dummies were hardly

changed, and the pattern of age effects indicated that the quadratic specification of age fit

the data reasonably well. For example, if the model in column (3) of Table 3 is estimated

with unrestricted age dummies, the coefficient on production is 1.28 (versus 1.27) and the

coefficient on the Decatur-dispute interaction is 1.45 (versus 1.48). Because the results

are so similar if age dummies are included, we have used the more parsimonious

quadratic specification.

     If we limit the sample of complaints to those involving replacement tires – which

are not subject to the regional distribution decisions of the auto manufacturer – the results

are very similar. For example, the coefficient on the Decatur-dispute interaction in the

model in column (5) of Table 3 rises from 1.73 to 2.30 (with a t-ratio of 4.6) if the

analysis is limited to spare tires. The other coefficients are also qualitatively similar.



                                              23
This finding suggests that possible changes in Ford’s distribution practices are unlikely to

account for the results in Table 3.

     As mentioned previously, the Poisson models impose the constraint Var[y|x] =

E[y|x] = exp(x'$). A generalization of the Poisson, the Negative Binomial II model,

specifies the conditional variance as Var[y|x] = (1+8) exp(x'$) while maintaining

equation (1). If 8=0 the Negative Binomial is equivalent to a Poisson. A common test

for over dispersion is a likelihood ratio test of whether 8 > 0. Table 4 presents MLE

estimates of Negative Binomial regression models corresponding to those in Table 3.

Both the claims and complaints data exhibit over dispersion. This causes the standard

errors on many of the coefficients to roughly double in the Negative Binomial model

compared to a conventional Poisson model. The parameter estimates are fairly similar in

the Negative Binomial regressions, however, as one would expect because both models

are consistent if equation (1) holds.

     In Table 5 we present additional Poisson models where the unit of observation is

disaggregated into finer cells, delineated by ATX or Wilderness tires as well as year of

production, plant, and calendar year of failure. We pool the ATX and Wilderness cells

together in the sample, and include a dummy variable indicating whether the cell pertains

to ATX or Wilderness tires. These models provide a more precise assessment of whether

ATX tires have a higher failure rate than Wilderness tires. Indeed, the results for both

claims and complaints indicate a substantially higher failure rate for ATX tires, other

things equal. The other results are fairly similar to those for the more aggregate cells in

Tables 3 and 4.




                                             24
Incidents with Fatal and Nonfatal Injuries; NHTSA Data

      Table 6 presents estimates of Poisson models using the NHTSA complaints

database, where we provide separate estimates for the number of cases involving at least

one fatal accident, number of cases involving a non- fatal injury, and number of cases

without a reported injury. The unit of observation is a cell defined by plant-by-year-by-

age, as in Tables 3 and 4. Because we are less concerned about reporting biases in cases

involving injuries or fatalities, we use the full reporting period to calculate counts in this

Table. We continue to limit the sample to tires that failed in 1999 or earlier, however.

For comparison, the Appendix Table A3 reports the corresponding results for the

unallocated data.

       Interestingly, the coefficient on the Decatur-dispute-period interaction is positive

and statistically significant -- and of roughly equal magnitude -- in all of the models.

Likewise, the Decatur and dispute period main effects are statistically insignificant in all

of the models. To estimate the excess number of fatal incidents involving tires

manufactured in Decatur during the labor dispute, denoted ), we calculated

(2)      ) = Eijt { exp(x'ijt $ + Sj" + Di(+ Sj*Dij*) - exp(x'ijt $ + Sj" + Di() },

where x'ijt is a vector of explanatory variables such as log production and proportion

original equipment, Sj is a dummy variable indicating production during the dispute

period (1994-96), Di is a dummy variable indicating production in Decatur, and Sj*Dij is

the Decatur-dispute-period interaction. 31 In our hypothetical calculation, we set the

Decatur-dispute interaction to zero, but otherwise keep production and the other variables

the same. The results suggest that 35.2, or 53 percent, of the 67 fatal accidents linked to




                                              25
P235 tires were due to the excess number occurring on tires manufactured in Decatur

during the labor dispute. The number of fatalities is higher because fatal accidents had

1.30 victims, on average. Thus, these results suggest that about 46 lives were lost

because of the excessive number of defects occurring in P235 tires manufactured in the

Decatur plant during the labor dispute.

       Using the model in column (2) we can also predict the number of fatalities that were

avoided because of the recall of all P235 Firestone tires. Specifically, we predicted the

number of fatal accidents that would occur over the period 2000-2004 by:

(3)     Eijq{ exp(x'ij$ + Sj" + Di (+ S*Dij* + (Aj0 + q)61 + (Aj0 + q)2 62 } for q= 1,…,5,

where A0 is tire age in 1999 and 61 and 62 are the coefficients on age and age squared in

the Poisson model. This calculation gives an estimate that 191.4 additional fatal

accidents would have occurred on the recalled P235 tires over five years. 32 Using the

assumption of 1.30 deaths per fatal accident, these results suggest that 249 deaths were

avoided as a result of the recall.



4. Engineering Tests

         Firestone performs “advanced aging” tests on tires that are selected off the

production line. These stress tests are designed to detect production defects before tires

are in the field, and are also required for certain tire ratings. We obtained data on 106

high-speed stress tests Firestone performed on size-P235 tires, and two identical tests on




31
   Notice that equation (2) also equals Eijt yijt - Eijt exp(x'ijt $+ Sj "+Di () because the exponential of the fitted
Poisson values replicate the total count.
32
   Of course, it is possible that the replacement tires could also contribute to fatalities. We have no way of
quantifying this effect, and suspect that it is small in any event.


                                                         26
size P255 tires, that Firestone submitted to Congress. 33 The high-speed stress test is used

by tire manufacturers to obtain a Society of Automotive Engineers “S” speed rating. The

test data pertain to tires produced from 1989 to 1998, although most of the data are from

1995-98, and there are only two tests available for Decatur prior to 1995, both conducted

in 1990. Three of the 108 tests were either missing variables or unreadable and were

therefore dropped from the analysis.

      According to the protocols, the high-speed test is conducted by over inflating a tire

to 38 PSI and running it on a lab machine at specified (accelerating) speeds for prescribed

lengths of time, at 100 degrees Fahrenheit (plus or minus 5 degrees) with a load of 80

percent of the maximum load stamped on the tire sidewall. For the first five minutes, the

tire is run at 50 miles per hour (MPH), then the speed increases to 75 MPH for the next

five minutes, then to 87 MPH for 10 minutes, then to 93 MPH for 10 minutes, and

thereafter the speed increases in increments of 6 MPH after each 10 minute period. The

tire undergoes this test until it bursts. The most common type of failure was a tread

separation. To receive an “S” speed rating the tire must exceed 112 MPH for 10 minutes

before breaking.

      The advantage of analyzing these test results is that they hold many factors

constant, including the load, temperature, tire pressure, speed, and driving conditions. A

disadvantage of this (and other) engineering tests is that it is unclear whether failures

caused by the extreme conditions in laboratory settings can be extrapolated to everyday,

normal use; the types of conditions (e.g., driving speeds) encountered in practice are



33
  Firestone refers to these as “Indoor Test U1”. It is possible that more than 108 test results were
submitted to the Congressional record, but we could only obtain 108 results from the information the
committee made publicly available. Results are robust if we exclude the two tests on P255 tires.


                                                   27
different. Nevertheless, the laboratory tests provide another check on the quality of the

tires produced during the labor dispute vis-à-vis other tires.

     Figure 5 presents box plots for the high-speed test results. The outcome measure

used to summarize test performance is distance traveled before the tire developed a

problem, as this reflects both the amount of time the tire ran and its speed. The figure

indicates that tires made in Decatur during the labor dispute had lower performance on

the high-speed stress test than did tires made in Decatur after the labor dispute, or tires

made in Joliette or Wilson either during or after the dispute. The median tire produced in

Decatur during the dispute traveled less distance before bursting than the tire ranked at

the bottom 25th percentile from the Decatur plant after the dispute or the other plants

either during or after the dispute. Indeed, the tire that performed at the top 75th percentile

from Decatur during the dispute performed about as well as the 25th percentile tire

produced at other plants at the same time. Also, tires produced in Decatur during the

dispute have a positively skewed distribution, while the other tires are more symmetric,

which tends to exaggerate the performance of Decatur tires in least squares compared to

median regression models.

     Table 7 presents regression estimates where the dependent variable is the number of

miles traveled on the stress test before failing, and the key explanatory variables are a

Decatur dummy, dispute period dummy, Decatur-dispute-period interaction. We also

control for pre-production model tires; for example, the Wilderness tire was a pre-

production tire before it was marketed in 1996. Although one could argue that the pre-

production tires should be excluded because they have a different design, they do provide

an indication of the skill and care of the employees who built the tires at the various

plants. We vary the years covered by the sample, as well as present results in the last two

                                              28
columns excluding the pre-production tires. In all cases, however, the results are similar

to the box plots: tires made in Decatur did not perform as well on the stress tests as tires

produced in Decatur after the dispute or tires produced in the other plants. For example,

in column (3) the Decatur-dispute interaction has a coefficient of -17 miles, with a t-ratio

of 3.18. Interestingly, these tires all passed the standard for an “S” speed rating, so one

could reasonably question whether the standard is set at an appropriately stringent level.



5. Precise Timing

     The NHTSA complaints data set can be used to determine the particular week in

which tires that tires that resulted in a claim were produced. Although we do not have

weekly production figures, we can examine whether there was an excess number of

complaints generated by tires around key dates, such as when replacement workers were

hired. In addition, we can make a crude adjustment for scale by interpolating annual

production figures. Because the data are noisy, we examine the month the tires were

produced instead of the week, but the weekly data suggest the same patterns.

     Figure 6 displays the number of complaints concerning tires produced each month

in Decatur. Figure 7 makes an attempt to scale complaints by monthly production; the

procedure for estimating monthly production is described in the Data Appendix. The

figure displays the number of complaints relative to estimated monthly production (in

millions) as well as our best estimate of the number of replacement workers and

permanent workers working in the Decatur plant each month. Interestingly, there was a

spike in the number of tires that generated complaints in the first half of 1994, around the

time when concessions were demanded and the old contract expired. Tires produced

early in the strike were cited in a relatively small number of complaints, even when we

                                             29
scale by production. Continuing through early 1995, when a large number of

replacement workers were building tires, the number of complaints remained relatively

low. It was not until the end of 1995, when large numbers of replacement workers and

returning strikers worked sid e by side, that the complaints rate reached its highest level. 34

Complaints remained high for tires made through the first half of 1996.

      For Figure 8 we constructed monthly production estimates for Joliette and Wilson

tires combined, and then subtracted their monthly complaints rate from the Decatur rate

to net out any temporal company-wide effects that may have existed. Figure 8 displays

the difference in the complaints rate by month of production between the Decatur plant

and Joliette and Wilson plants. This figure displays a similar pattern to that in Figure 7.

      The monthly complaints data are somewhat noisy and sparse, and possibly affected

by retrospective reporting biases. One reason we have confidence that the pattern

displayed in Figures 6- 8 is not spurious, however, is that the claims data by production

month show a strikingly similar pattern: an excess number of complaints in the first half

of 1994 and an even larger peak in the second quarter of 1996. Figure 9, for example,

displays the claims rate by month, for the Decatur plant minus the Joliette and Wilson

plants.

      These results suggest that faulty workmanship by novice replacement workers is not

the sole source of problem tires. A more complicated dynamic is required to explain the

timing of the production of defective tires. It appears likely to us that something about


34
   Roger Gates, former president of the URW local in Decatur, has argued that not until December 1996,
when a new contract was settled, were most strikers back at work, so there was no period of time when a
significant number of returning strikers worked with replacement workers (Ginsbach, 2002). This claim,
however, is at odds with press releases from the AFL-CIO, which report that of the 4,200 Firestone workers
who went on strike company-wide, all but 700 to 800 had been recalled by March 1996, and all but 150 had
been recalled by October 1996 (see Parks, 1996a,b).


                                                   30
the chemistry between the replacement workers and recalled strikers, or the cumulative

impact of labor strife in general, created the conditions that led to the production of many

defective tires. Frictions among production workers, supervisors and inspectors

engendered by the strike and request for labor concessions might also have played a role.

It is also possible that the Decatur plant became less vigilant at monitoring and scrapping

defective tires in the second half of 1995, which may have contributed to the

dissemination of faulty tires. The fact that a multitude of different types of defects appear

to have been responsible for the tire problems is consistent with our interpretation that the

human element was important.



6. Other Tire Models and Sizes

     If labor strife and ill will among replacement workers, recalled strikers and

management contributed to the production of defective P235/75R15 tires, then one would

expect these factors to have compromised the quality of other Firestone tires as well. The

NHTSA database includes complaints concerning non-P235 tires covered by their EA00-

023 investigation. These data are probably not as complete as the P235 samp le, but

nonetheless provide information as to whether the number of complaints for other tires

produced during the labor dispute was elevated. 35

     Table 8 presents estimates of Poisson regression models where the dependent

variable is the number of occurrences of complaints concerning non-P235 Firestone tires.

The sample consists of three-plants-by-9-production- years-by-9-calendar-year cells. As

explained in the Data Appendix, we use a variety of sources to derive the total number of




                                             31
non-P235 tires produced in each plant each year. This variable is likely to be measured

with error, so we constrain the coefficient to one in column 3. In view of the likely

impact of measurement error, it is surprising that the unconstrained production elasticity

exceeds one (see column 2 and 5). The estimated effect for the Decatur-dispute period is

reduced somewhat if we constrain the coefficient on log production to one.

      Most importantly for our purposes, in all of the models the coefficient on the

Decatur-plant-dispute-period interaction term indicates that Decatur had an elevated

number of complaints involving tires produced during the labor dispute, other things

equal. These results suggest that the high incidence of defective tires in the Decatur plant

during the labor dispute was not unique to P235, as one would expect if labor strife was

an important reason for the production of defective tires.


7. Conclusion

        The evidence we have assembled suggesting that the labor dispute contributed to

the production of many defective Firestone tires in the 1990s is circumstantial but broad

and consistent; we think that the evidence pointing toward the role of labor strife is more

persuasive and comprehensive than that in favor of the alternative hypotheses that have

been proposed. The temporal patterns in all of the data sets we have examined indicate

that a higher than expected rate of problems occurred in tires produced in Decatur, the

plant with the most contentious labor relations, during their labor dispute. We can also

rule out many other explanations – for example, the fact that high-speed stress tests

conducted under uniform conditions indicated that tires produced in Decatur during the


35
  To avoid contaminating the sample by including P235 tires because of through the allocation of missing
values, when we constructed the sample we eliminated all tires that might have been P235 tires, and then
imputed the missing values for this subsample.


                                                   32
labor dispute performed less well weighs against the hypothesis that changes in regional

distribution patterns or the Ford Explorer was the root cause of the elevated defect rate

during the labor dispute – but we cannot be certain that some unobserved factor did not

change, causing defect rates to rise in the struck Decatur plant in the 1994-96 period, and

then changed back. This would be a remarkable coincidence, and no such factor has yet

been identified, but it is a possibility.

      Unless another factor can be found that explains the sudden rises in defects in tires

produced when B/FS demanded contract concessions from the union in stalled

negotiations and again when replacement workers and recalled strikers worked side-by-

side, we think the weight of the evidence points to labor strife as being at the root of

many of the defective tires.

      Our results complement other findings concerning labor- management conflict.

Freeman and Medoff (1984, p. 167) cite evidence suggesting that the union productivity

effect in the underground bituminous coal industry varies sharply over time with the state

of labor relations and management policies. Kleiner, Leonard and Pilarski (2002) study

the impact of the industrial relations climate on productivity at a plant that assembles

large aircraft. The evidence they present suggests that industrial relations events had

short-term effects on productivity, which dissipated in the longer term. Katz, Kochan and

Gobeille (1983) study the relationship between various plant- level measures of industrial

relations and economic performance at General Motors, and find strong correlations

between the industrial relations climate and productivity. Additionally, they find a strong

correlation between some measures of industrial relations performance and the quality of

production. Interestingly, the industrial relatio ns measure with the strongest negative



                                             33
correlation with production of automobiles that did not pass inspection is the negotiation

time required to reach a new contract agreement.

      Ironically, an internal Bridgestone document obtained by the URW reportedly

stated, “while it was nice to share a good relationship [with the union], it would no longer

be in the company’s interest.”36 The stock market valuation of B/FS fell from $16.7

billion to $7.5 billion in the four months after the recall was announced, and the top

management of Bridgestone/Firestone has been replaced. The company also closed the

Decatur plant in December 2001, and considered abandoning the Firestone brand name.

If antagonistic labor relations were responsible for many of the defects, even indirectly,

this episode would serve as a useful reminder that a good relationship between labor and

management can be in both the company’s and the union’s interests.

      More speculatively, our results raise the possibility that there may be costs

associated with hiring replacement workers and labor strife that are not internalized or

anticipated by labor or management, especially in industries that affect the public safety.

We estimate that more than 40 lives were lost as a result of the excessive number of

problem tires produced in Decatur during the labor dispute, and that number probably

would have been more than twice as high if it were not for the tire recall. If the external

costs were not taken properly into account by labor and management, then public policy

could possibly play a valuable role by requiring more safety inspections for products

manufactured during a strike or period of labor strife.




36
   See Franklin (2001; p. 122). This document was obtained by the union from an anonymous source, so it
is unclear how much stock to put in it.


                                                  34
                                           References

Adams, Larry. “Software Helps You Mind Your APQPs.” Quality Magazine, October 2000,
ava ilable from http://www.qualitymag.com/articles/2000/oct00/1000f3.asp.

Barboza, David. “Firestone Workers Cite Lax Quality Control.” The New York Times,
September 15, 2000, p. C1.

Bierecree, Adrienne, “Capital Restructuring and Labor Relations: The International Paper
Strike.” In International Contributions to Labour Studies, Vol. 1, edited by Gerald Berk.
Notre Dame, I.N.: Academic Press, 1991.

Bishop, Yvonne M.M.,; Fienberg, Stephen E.; and Holland, Paul W. Discrete Multivariate
Analysis: Theory and Practice, Cambridge, M.A.: MIT Press, 1975.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Trivedi, Pravin. Regression Analysis of Count Data. Cambridge,
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, Econometric Society Monograph, 1998.

Craypo, Charles. “Meathpacking: Industry Restructuring and Union Decline.” In
Contemporary Collective Bargaining in the Private Sector, edited by Paula B. Voos.
Madison, W.I.: Industrial Relations Research Association, 1994.

Fehr, Ernst and Gächter, Simon. “Fairness and Retaliation.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14 (Fall 2000): 159-182.

Fogarty, Thomas. “Retirees cite production practices: Depositions in '92 case may shed light
on recent problems, but company, unions dispute claims.” USA Today, August 24, 2000.

Franklin, Stephen. Three Strikes. New York, N.Y.: The Guilford Press, 2001.

Freeman, Richard and Medoff, James. What Do Unions Do?. New York, N.Y.: Basic Books,
1984.

Ginsbach, Pam. “Labor Strife Found Key Factor in Production of Defective Tires at
Bridgestone/Firestone.” Daily Labor Report, Washington, D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs,
January 11, 2002: AA-1.

Green, Hardy. On Strike at Hormel. Philadelphia, P.A.: Temple University Press, 1990.

Greenhouse, Steven. “Accord Reached in Dispute at Tire Company.” The New York Times,
November 7, 1996, p. A16.

House Committee on Commerce. “The Recent Firestone Tire Recall Action, Focusing on the
Action As It Pertains To Relevant Ford Vehicles.” Hearings before the Subcommittee on
Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection and the Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations, September 6 and 21, 2000, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office, Serial No. 106-165, 2001.



                                             35
Katz, Harry C.,; Kochan, Thomas A.,; and Gobeille, Kenneth R. “Industrial Relations
Performance, Economic Performance, and QWL Programs: An Interplant Analysis.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37 (October 1983): 3-17.

Kleiner, Morris M.,; Leonard, Jonathan S.,; and Pilarski, Adam M. “How Industrial
Relations Affect Plant Performance?: The Case of Commercial Aircraft Manufacturing.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55 (January 2002): 195-218.

Meyer, Bruce. The Once and Future Union: The Rise and Fall of the United Rubber
Workers, 1935- 1995. Akron, O.H.: University of Akron Press, 2002.

Parks, James B. “Bridgestone face worldwide worker solidarity.” AFL-CIO News, March 22,
1996a.

Parks, James B. “Bridgestone calls most back; USWA fight will continue on fair labor
practices.” AFL-CIO News, October 11, 1996b.

Pinkerton, James. “Firestone attorneys put blame on Ford in rollover lawuit.” The Houston
Chronicle, August 14, 2001 a, Business Section, p. 1.

_____________. “Doctor tells jurors how Firestone tires failed.” The Houston Chronicle,
August 15, 2001 b, p. A21.

Poynter, Dan. Parachuting: A Skydiver's Handbook , 6th edition. Santa Barbara, C.A.: Para
Publishing, 1992.

Rabin, Mathew. “Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics.” American
Economic Review 83 (December 1993): 1281-1303.

Rosenblum, D. Jonathen. Copper Crucible. Ithica, N.Y.: ILR Press, 1995.

Rubin, Donald. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York, N.Y.: John
Wiley, 1987.

Sabath, Donald. “Goodyear Workers Stand Firm.” The Plain Dealer, April 22, 1997, p. C1.

Skertic, Mark. “Firestone retirees cite pressure to produce.” Chicago Sun Times, October 27,
2000.

Tire Business, “Workers Strike Quebec Plant”, October 30, 1995.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Compensation and Working
Conditions, January 1996, pp. 2-3.

Whitford, Marty, “Bridgestone Unit to Show First Full-Year Profit,” Rubber & Plastics
News, Crain Communications, January 17, 1994, p. 6.




                                             36
Data Appendix

A. NHTSA complaints data

        The NHTSA micro data set is publicly available from the NHTSA web page. 37

NHTSA began compiling complaints regarding Firestone tires in February 2000, and

ceased in June 2001. The data set consists of self- reported consumer complaints from the

Office of Defect Investigation (ODI) Consumer Complaint Database, insurance company

records (eg. State Farm Insurance), police reports, reports by safety organizations (eg.

Safety Forum), and the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS).

        The data set includes a variable for the date that the complaint was submitted. This

variable is somewhat mislabeled as conversations with NHTSA employees revealed that

in many cases the reporting date is listed as the first instance the consumer reported the

problem to authorities, though not necessarily to NHTSA, when such initial records exist.

For example, if a consumer filed a report with the police in February 1994, and the police

contacted NHTSA in July 2000 regarding this report, the reporting date is listed as

February 1994.

        Each record in the NHTSA data set includes a summary of the events leading to the

complaint. We reviewed each summary and dropped 4 of the 5,193 records whose

summary did not indicate a problem with a tire, or concerned problems with other brands

of tires.

        The tires in the NHTSA database were grouped into P235/75R15’s (P235) and non-

P235/75R15’s (non-P235). There were records where only some fragment of


37
     www.nhtsa.dot.gov/hot/Firestone/Update.html


                                                   37
“P235/75R15” was reported. These partial reports were coded as missing, unless the

corresponding tire model was something other than ATX, ATX II or Wilderness AT, in

which case the size was coded as non-P235.

      In 3,374 cases the DOT code of the failed tire is reported. If the DOT code is

complete it is possible to infer the plant in which the tire was produced, as well as the

week and the year of production. The first two characters of the ten-digit DOT code

indicate the plant code, while the last three digits give the week and year of production.

In many cases only parts of the DOT code are reported. In 11 cases only the date of

production are included in the DOT code; in 652 cases partial DOT codes include the

plant identification and omit the date of production.

      There are six records in which the failure date occurs before the year of production

– at least one must be wrong. Both dates are coded as missing in this instance.


Multiple Imputations

      In many cases the NHTSA data lacked information on the seven variables that were

used as variables directly in the discrete count models, or were used to identify the

relevant sub-samples used for our analysis. The variables for which complete data are

required to conduct our analysis are tire size, tire model, plant, year of failure, year of

production, month reported and year reported. Within the sub-sample of complaints that

are missing at least one of the seven variables, about twenty-five percent are missing

plant, year of production and age, i.e. the DOT code. Table A1 summarizes the missing

values of the key variables in the data set for the seven variables used in our analysis.

      To handle missing data, ten data sets were created, each drawing a new value for

the missing records. For each observation, the missing values were randomly assigned


                                              38
from the joint distribution of those variables, conditional on a set of non- missing

variables that depended on the particular missing variables. Specifically, the NHTSA

micro data set on tire complaints include variables y1 ,..., y7 , which we use to impute, and

variables z1 ,..., z L , which we use to condition on. Variables y1 through y 7 are year of

production, plant, year of failure, year reported, month reported, tire size and tire model.

Variables z1 through z L include vehicle model year, vehicle mileage at time of failure,

vehicle model and vehicle make as well as the non- missing variables from y1 through

y 7 . Values of z may be missing as well.

      The goal for imputation is to construct a fully classified y1 × y 2 × L × y 7

contingency table. Assume m observations are fully classified in the NHTSA data, and

n − m are partially classified because of missing data. We begin by partitioning the

records according to which of the y -variables are missing, so within some partition P j

all the records are missing values for the same variables; P0 is the set of records with

nonmissing data for this set of variables. Let Y j denote the set of variables that are

missing in partition P j . We assign to each partition P j a set of conditioning variables

Z j that are a subset of the variables z1 ,..., z L and the y1 ,..., y7 variables. Next we link the

records in P j to the non-missing records in set P0 by matching on the conditioning

variables in Z j to form the empirical distribution of Y j conditional on Z j , P( Y j | Z j ) .

We then randomly draw values to impute the missing values of records in P j from this

conditional distribution. This process is repeated 10 times to generate 10 data sets.




                                                39
     We chose different conditioning sets for each combination of missing variables to

exploit a priori information on how variables covary, resulting in more efficient

imputations. For example, to impute the age variable we used year of production and

vehicle miles (in bins), as these will account for more variation in age than, say, tire size

and plant. Table A2 summarizes the conditioning variables for each set of missing

variables in the original micro data set. For continuous conditioning variables we

grouped variables into bins, choosing bin sizes large enough to ensure that the empirical

distributions arising from the non- missing sub-sample were not degenerating to a few

points. For observations that were missing all seven variables we drew from the

empirical unconditional joint distribution of the available data.

     As an example, consider all observations for which just the DOT code is missing,

implying that we are missing records for plant and year of production for these

observations. As seen in table A1, plant and year of production represent the most

common set of missing values in the data set, with 1,285 missing observations for these

two variables. To impute these variables, we conditioned on the reported vehicle model

year and number of miles on the vehicle. Vehicle model year clearly covaries with year

of production, and together with vehicle miles may account for significant variability in

tire age. It is possible that plant is essentially orthogonal to both of these conditioning

variables, suggesting that a large part of the imputation variability is coming from the

plant dimension in the draws. Both conditioning variables were grouped into bins. The

vehicle miles variable was grouped into six bins: 0-14,999, 15,000-29,999, 30,000-

59,999, 60,000-89,999, >89,999, and miles missing. Vehicle model year was grouped

into six bins with cut points at 1991, 1994, 1997, 2000 and missing. The mechanics of the

imputation first involves grouping the subset of records with complete year of

                                              40
production, plant, and age data by the conditioning variables to create an empirical

distribution of year of production, plant and age conditional on vehicle miles and vehicle

model year. For each missing observation we then match the conditioning variables in

the missing sub-sample with the corresponding variables in the complete data set and

randomly assign values from the correspond ing conditional distribution. Provided that

data are missing at random conditional on the Z’s, our approach should provide

consistent estimates.

     The imputed data sets for the non-P235 tires differed from the P235’s. To ensure

that no P235 tires were inadvertently mixed into the non-P235 sub-sample, and perhaps

drive the estimates, we used only observations know to be non-P235’s and imputed on

the remaining variables. Because the non-P235 sample was smaller, we used somewhat

different sets of conditioning variables, as well as bin sizes. As such, the non-P235

estimates are based on ten different complete micro data sets than the P235’s.

     Once ten micro data sets were created we aggregated each data set into plant-by-

year-of-production-by-age cells. The outcome variable (number of complaints, fatal

accidents, or injurious accidents) is a count variable recording the number of failures per

plant-by- year-of-production-by-age. Because we then aggregate the imputed micro data

sets into cells that determine most of the right-hand side variables in the estimation, our

multiple imputation method is different than the ones commonly used in the literature.

     Count regression models were estimated for each of the 10 imputed data sets.

                        ∧
Coefficient estimates ( β ) reported in the paper are simply the average of the 10

estimates. An essential feature of the multiple imputation method is that the variance-

               ∧
covariance of β is the sum of between and within- imputation variability. Specifically,


                                             41
                                        1 10 2
standard errors were computed as          ∑
                                       10 i=1
                                              si + σ β2 , where s i2 is the sampling variance of


each individual estimate and σ β2 denotes the within- imputation variance, which is just

                                                                         ∧     ∧
the variance of the estimates across the 10 imputed data sets, Var( β 1 ,..., β 10 ).

        An alternative to the imputation technique we utilize is the Expectation Maximum

(EM) algorithm. For our problem this would involve constructing a complete

y1 × y 2 × L × y 7 contingency table from the fully classified records, and partially

classified contingency tables from the partially classified records. Cell probabilities

would be computed from the relative proportions of cell entries in the complete

contingency table and tires would be allocated according to these probabilities,

conditional on belonging to a partially classified table. A practical drawback to this

approach, however, is that it becomes difficult to take advantage of the additional

information available from the conditioning variables, z1 ,..., z L . We could estimate the

full y1 × L × y 7 × z 1 L × z L contingency table, but we lack sufficient degrees of freedom

to do so. In our multiple imputation approach we simplified this by imposing conditional

independence assumptions for certain associations of the z ’s and y ’s. It is possible to

impose such assumptions using the EM-algorithm by distributing partially classified

counts into the fully classified contingency table using estimated conditional probabilities

subject to a set of constraints on the estimated probabilities [Bishop, Fienberg and

Holland, 1975]. Nevertheless, we chose to use a simpler hotdecking- type approach

because it is transparent and easy to implement. Because the estimates are similar in the

non- imputed data, we suspect our results would be similar had we used an EM algorithm.



                                               42
B. Non-P235 Production Data

           Total production, or production of non-P235 tires, by plant and year is

unavailable. However, using a combination of different sources we can construct what

we believe is a reasonable estimate. The non-P235 production data were constructed by

combining plant capacity figures provided by Modern Tire Dealer with historical

capacity utilization rates for motor vehicles and parts obtained from the Federal Reserve

web page. 38 Additional adjustments were made to account for documented reductions in

capacity utilization at the Decatur plant during the strike.

           Modern Tire Dealer, a trade magazine, provided us with manufacturer’s reported

capacity numbers for all Firestone plants from 1990 through 2000. The capacity figures

represent the number of tires plants can produce per day. We multiplied these capacities

by the Federal Reserve motor vehicles and parts capacity utilization rates for January of

each year, yielding estimated daily production by year and plant. These capacity

utilization rates range from 60% in 1991 to 84% in 1995. We multiplied these resulting

daily productio n figures by 350, which was required to match our 2000 estimate of total

Firestone production to an independent estimate of total production obtained by

calculating Firestone’s share of total US tire production in 2000.

        We adjusted Decatur’s 1995 production to account for reduced production in this

period as documented in the trial documents of Bridgestone/Firestone v. Doherty, a court

case involving unemployment insurance eligibility. 39 Trial records suggest that

production at the Decatur plant in 1995 was 62% of production in 1994. Decatur’s

production in the second half of 1994, after the strike began, was 641,325 tires, according

38
     http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G17/download.htm



                                                   43
to Congressional testimony. 40 We assumed production equaled the daily capacity rate

times the Federal Reserve utilization rate before the strike commenced in July 1994, and

that 641,325 tires were produced in the remainder of the year. Joliette’s production

estimates were adjusted to account for the fact that the plant was on strike for two months

in 1995 and four months in 1996. During this time salaried workers and management

produced a smaller number of tires. An article in Tire Business quotes the president of

the local union at Joliette, Jim Bourret, indicating that production was down 87% as

compared to before the strik e. 41 Thus, production at Joliette for 1994 and 1995 was

calculated as the weighted average of regular production (capacity times utilization) and

thirteen percent of regular production, using as weights the number of months of the year

the plant was on strike. Finally, non-P235 production was calculated as total production

less P235 production.


C. Monthly Production Data

        We have annual P235 production by plant, but not monthly data. We used the

annual data and other sources to construct our best guess for monthly production of P235

tires in the Decatur, Joliette and Wilson plants.

        Within the year, monthly production in 1993 was assumed to follow a linear trend

proportional to the annual trend in P235 production from 1991 to 1993. A constant was

then added so that the sum of monthly production in 1993 matched the yearly figure.

        As noted above, Decatur’s production in 1994 after the strike began was at

641,325 tires, about 14 percent of Decatur’s total production for the year. We assumed


39
   Opinion of the court, Bridgestone/Firestone v. Doherty, No. 4-98-0029.
www.state.il.us/court/Opinions/A…t/1999/4thDistrict/May/HTML/4980029.html
40
   House Committee on Commerce (2000; p. 139).


                                               44
that P235 production for August through December of 1994 was 14 percent of total P235

production for 1994. We assumed that there was a nominal amount of production in

August and September 1994, the first two months of the strike. For both months we set

production at 5,000 tires. This is probably a reasonable assumption because employment

data indicate that there were very few workers in the Decatur plant during these first

months (see Figure 7). Since the strike began approximately in the middle of July 1994,

we assumed production in the first half of July was half of June production, and

production in the second half of July was half of August production.

           For the first six months of 1994 we assume that monthly production follows the

same linear trend as 1993, rescaled so that the sum of production for the first seven

months of 1994 equals 86 percent of total P235 production for the year. For the last three

months we linearly interpolated the remaining 14 percent of total P235 production for the

year and rescaled.

           Information from the trial documents of Bridgestone/Firestone v. Doherty (a case

involving unemployment benefits) were used to construct monthly production for the first

five months of 1995. These documents specify the plant productivity (in terms of pounds

of tires produced) for each of the first six months of 1995 relative to the corresponding

months in 1994. For example, production in March of 1995 was 57% of production in

March 1994. For the remaining seven months of 1995 we linearly interpolated and

rescaled to match the total. Monthly production estimates for Decatur in 1996 were

obtained by interpolating annual production.




41
     Tire Business, “Workers Strike Quebec Plant”, October 30, 1995.


                                                     45
       Production over the months of 1993 in the Wilson and Joliette plants was

assumed to follow the same linear trend in annual production in those plants that held

from 1991 to 1993, and the first month of the year was set to make the annual 12- month

total match the total production for the year. Production for 1994, 1995 and 1996 were

linearly interpolated and rescaled. Production for the last four months of 1995 and first

two months of 1996 in Joliette were adjusted to take account of the strike at that plant;

information in Tire Business indicated production was down 87% during the strike.

       Although our procedure for estimating monthly production undoubtedly is

imperfect, in each plant the sum of production over the 12 months of every calendar year

is controlled to equal the known annual production figure for that calendar year, so it is

unlikely that the estimates are very far off.




                                                46
Figure 1: Claims per Million Firestone ATX Tires Produced,
by Age of Tire at Failure, Production Year and Plant


                                 900


                                                            Decatur                                         Joliette & Wilson
                                 800

                                                                1994
                                 700                                                                                                1991
  Cumulative Claims Rate (ppm)




                                                                                                                                    1992
                                 600                                                                                                1993
                                                          1995                                                                      1994
                                 500                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                    1997
                                 400
                                                     1996                                                                           1998
                                                                                                                                    1999
                                 300


                                 200


                                 100


                                  0
                                       New   1   2    3     4    5     6   7   8   9                  New   1   2   3   4   5   6    7     8   9

                                                                                   Age of Tire at Failure

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Firestone claims data submitted to NHTSA. Claims are for personal injury or
property damage involving Firestone ATX tires prior to 2000.




                                                                                          47
Figure 2: Complaints Registered by NHTSA per Million P235/75R15 Firestone Tires
Produced, by Age of Tire, Production Year and Plant, Non-Imputed Data
                                     160


                                                                    Decatur                                                             Joliette & Wilson
                                     140


                                                                                  1994
                                     120                                                                                                                            1991
  Cumulative Complaints Rate (ppm)




                                                              1995                                                                                                  1992
                                     100                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                                                                                    1995
                                     80
                                                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                                    1997
                                     60
                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                    1999
                                     40



                                     20



                                      0
                                           New   1   2    3     4     5       6     7    8   9                            New   1   2    3     4    5       6   7    8     9
                                                                                                 Age of Tire at Failure



Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA and Safety Forum data. Complaints are concerning defects in 1991-
99, reported prior to August 2000. Observations with missing data are excluded. Sample includes ATX and
Wilderness P235/75R15 tires.




                                                                                                     48
Figure 3: Complaints Registered by NHTSA per Million P235/75R15 Firestone Tires
Produced, by Age of Tire, Production Year and Plant; Average of 10 Imputed Data Sets
                                     400


                                                                 Decatur                                                             Joliette & Wilson
                                     350

                                                                               1994
                                     300
  Cumulative Complaints Rate (ppm)




                                                                                                                                                             1991
                                                               1995                                                                                          1992
                                     250                                                                                                                     1993
                                                                                                                                                             1994

                                     200                                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                         1996                                                                                                1997
                                     150                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                             1999
                                     100



                                     50



                                       0
                                           New   1   2     3    4     5    6     7    8   9                            New   1   2      3    4    5      6   7      8   9
                                                                                              Age of Tire at Failure




Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA and Safety Forum data. Complaints are concerning defects in 1991-99,
reported prior to August 2000. See text for explanation of how missing values were allocated. Sample includes ATX
and Wilderness P235/75R15 tires.




                                                                                                    49
Figure 4: Number of Accidents with Fatalities per Million Firestone P235/75R15
Tires Produced by Age of Tire, Production Year and Plant; Average of 10 Imputed Data
sets

                                     40

                                                                   Decatur                                                                 Joiette & Wilson
                                     35
                                                            1995
                                                                                 1994
                                     30                                                                                                                           1991
  Cumulative Fatalities Rate (ppm)




                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                  1993
                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                                  1997
                                     15                                                                                                                           1998
                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                                  1999

                                     10


                                      5


                                      0
                                          New   1   2   3     4      5       6    7     8   9                            New   1   2   3   4     5    6       7     8    9
                                                                                                Age of Tire at Failure




Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA and Safety Forum data. Sample includes ATX and Wilderness
P235/75R15 tires. Accidents occurred between 1991 and 1999, and could have been reported at any time after 1991.




                                                                                                     50
Figure 5: High speed stress tests: Box plots of miles traveled before burst
                     Miles/Burst PSI
           144

           138

           132

           126

           120
 Miles




           114

           108

           102

            96

            90

            84
                              1                        2                        3                        4
                         Decatur              Joliette & Wilson             Decatur             Joliette & Wilson

                                    During Dispute                                     After Dispute


Source: Authors’ calculations from Firestone U1 test data reported to House Committee on Commerce (2001). Tests
in this sample were conducted 1995-98. The bottom of each box represents the value at the 25th percentile, and the top
represents the value at the 75th percentile. The middle line indicates the distance traveled before the median tire burst.
The vertical lines (known as upper and lower adjacent hinges) extend to the first data point encountered within 1.5
times of the interquartile range from the edge of the box. Observations that lie beyond the upper and lower adjacent
hinges are indicated by a circle.




                                                           51
Figure 6: Number of Complaints Concerning P235 Tires Produced in Decatur, by Month.
 40
                                                                                     Decatur Local Votes                           Union and B/FS settle
                                                   Contract Expires
                                                                                     to Return to Work                             on New Contract
 35
                                     Concessions                 Strike Begins
                                     Demanded
 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

  5

  0
     1                   4       7       10         1        4       7     10      1         4        7        10     1    4         7       10        1        4        7       10
   1993                                            1994                           1995                              1996                             1997

Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA complaints data. Records with missing data are excluded.

Figure 7: Number of Permanent Workers, Replacement Workers and Estimated
Complaints per million tires produced by Month, Decatur Plant.

                   800                                                                                                                                                       1800



                                                                                                                                                                             1600
                   700                                                                                                                     Complaints
                                                                                                                                           Series3
                                                                                                                                           Series4                           1400

                   600           Permanent Workers
                                                                                                                                                                             1200
                                                                                 Replacement Workers
                   500
                                                                                                                                                                             1000
      Complaints




                                                                                                                                                                                      Workers
                   400                                                                                                                                                       800



                                                                                                                                                                             600
                   300


                                                                                                                                                                             400

                   200

                                                                                                                                                                             200


                   100
                                                                                                                                                                             0



                     0                                                                                                                                                       -200
                             4       7        10       1         4    7    10      1     4        7       10     1     4       7      10     1       4      7       10
                                                      1994                        1995                          1996                        1997




Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA complaints data, estimated monthly production (see
Appendix), press reports and Firestone documents submitted to House Committee on Commerce (2001).
Dashed lines indicate estimates of employment; blocks indicate specific data points.




                                                                                                 52
Figure 8: Difference in the Number of Complaints per million Tires Produced by Month:
Decatur Plant minus Joliette and Wilson Plants.

  600
                                 Contract Expires
                                                               Decatur Local Votes                 Union and B/FS settle
                          Concessions                          to Return to Work                   on New Contract
  500                     Demanded          Strike Begins




  400




  300




  200




  100




    0




 -100
          1    4   7      10     1      4      7      10      1     4        7   10     1    4     7     10     1        4   7   10
        1993                   1994                         1995                      1996                    1997


Source: Authors’ calculations based on NHTSA complaints data. Records with missing data are excluded.


Figure 9: Difference in the Number of Claims per million Tires Produced by Month:
Decatur Plant minus Joliette and Wilson Plants
 2250
                                Contract Expires
                                                               Decatur Local Votes               Union and B/FS settle
                       Concessions
                                                               to Return to Work                 on New Contract
                       Demanded           Strike Begins

 1750




 1250




  750




  250




 -250
          1    4   7      10     1      4       7     10      1     4        7   10     1    4     7     10     1        4   7   10
        1993                    1994                        1995                      1996                    1997


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Firestone claims data.




                                                                        53
Table 1: Total Production of Size P235/75R15 Tires, Bridgestone/Firestone Plants,
January 1991-March 2000


                                                                  Claims per
                     Number of ATX &                            Million ATX
Plant                 Willderness Tires    Percent of Total   Tires Produced   Notes

Aiken, SC                     1,442,115               6.9%              NA     Plant began operation in
                                                                               1999



Decatur, IL                   6,408,584               30.5%            356.0   Strike from July 1994
                                                                               to December 1996;
                                                                               1,048 replacement
                                                                               workers

Joliette, Quebec              5,638,302               26.9%             58.9   Strike from August
                                                                               1995 to February 1996;
                                                                               no replacement workers

La Vergne, TN                   455,157               2.2%              NA     No strike



Oklahoma City,                  530,515               2.5%              44.1   Strike from July 1994
OK                                                                             to December 1996



Wilson, NC                    6,503,642               31.0%            142.0   Nonunion; no strike



Total                        20,978,315            100.0%




Notes: P235/75R15 tires include ATX, ATXII and Wilderness AT tires. Aiken produced only Wilderness
tires.

Data Sources: Production derived from Safety Forum spreadsheet. Claims per million taken from chart
submitted by Firestone to House Committee on Commerce, and pertains to property damage and personal
injury claims for ATX size P235/75R15 tires.




                                                 54
Table 2: Means of Data used in Aggregate Analysis of ATX and Wilderness AT
P235/75R15 Tires


                                                                                             Complaints (with imputations
                                                          Claims                                for missing values)
                                          Unweighted                                                                   Weighted
                                                             Weighted Means            Unweighted Means
                                            Means                                                                       Means
                                                                   (2)                       (3)
                                             (1)                                                                         (4)


Number of Claims or                            12.10                   ---                       5.81                       ---
Complaints                                    [29.37]                                          [10.88]

Log Production                                13.11                 13.37                       13.11                     13.35
                                              [0.71]                [0.56]                      [0.70]                    [0.55]

Proportion ATX                                 0.84                  0.90                        0.84                      0.89
                                              [0.32]                [0.19]                      [0.32]                    [0.21]

Proportion Original                            0.62                  0.52                        0.62                      0.53
Equipment                                     [0.24]                [0.28]                      [0.24]                    [0.28]

Age                                            2.67                  3.83                        2.67                      3.55
                                              [2.22]                [1.40]                      [2.22]                    [1.54]

Age Squared                                     12                   16.63                       12                       15.24
                                              [15.47]               [12.02]                    [15.47]                   [12.21]

Decatur dum. (1=yes)                           0.33                  0.57                        0.33                      0.53
                                              [0.47]                [0.50]                      [0.47]                    [0.50]

Dispute period dum., defined                   0.33                  0.62                        0.33                      0.63
as 1994-96 (1=yes)                            [0.47]                [0.49]                      [0.47]                    [0.49]

Decatur*Dispute period                         0.11                  0.50                        0.11                      0.47
                                              [0.32]                [0.50]                      [0.32]                    [0.50]

N                                               135                   135                         135                      135

Notes: Standard deviations in brackets. Weighted means are weighted by the number of claims (column 2) or complaints (column 4),
thus giving the average characteristics of tires that failed. In column 2 there were 24 cells with a weight of zero (i.e., no claims), and
in column 4 there were 43 cells with a weight of zero (i.e., no complaints.) Source: authors’ calculations.




                                                                   55
Table 3: Poisson Regression Models for Number of Defective P235/75R15 Tires by
Plant, Production Year and Calendar Year; Aggregate Analysis of ATX and Wilderness
AT Tires
                                                                                  Dependent Variable:
                                                                                  Complaints, with imputations
                                  Dependent Variable: Claims                      for missing values


Explanatory Variables:                 (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)                (6)


Constant                             -8.71          -22.45         -18.69            -8.26          -15.60             -12.78
                                     (2.15)         (2.89)         (3.62)            (2.34)         (1.78)             (2.17)

Log Production                        0.80           1.49           1.27              0.72           1.08               0.92
                                     (0.16)         (0.19)         (0.23)            (0.18)         (0.12)             (0.14)

Proportion ATX                                                      0.19                                                0.52
                                                                   (0.85)                                              (0.49)

Proportion Original                                                -1.40                                               -1.58
Equipment                                                          (0.96)                                              (0.65)

Age                                                  2.09           2.16                             1.17               1.22
                                                    (0.28)         (0.30)                           (0.13)             (0.13)

Age Squared                                         -0.21          -0.21                            -0.11              -0.11
                                                    (0.03)         (0.04)                           (0.02)             (0.02)

Decatur (1=yes)                      -0.14           1.31           0.65             -0.36           0.43              -0.15
                                     (0.36)         (0.44)         (0.58)            (0.43)         (0.30)             (0.38)

Labor dispute                         -0.10          0.25           0.07              0.13           0.38               0.20
period (1=yes)                       (0.30)         (0.31)         (0.33)            (0.29)         (0.19)             (0.19)

Decatur*Dispute period                2.40           1.39           1.48              2.29           1.73               1.71
                                     (0.45)         (0.48)         (0.53)            (0.50)         (0.33)             (0.35)

Mean Dep. Var.                       12.10          12.10          12.10              5.81           5.81                5.81
[S.D.]                              [29.37]        [29.37]        [29.37]           [10.88]        [10.88]             [10.88]

N                                    135             135            135               135            135                135
Pseudo R2                            0.40            0.81           0.82              0.42           0.68               0.69
Log Likelihood                     -1417.21        -452.82        -436.66           -559.28        -304.93            -294.43

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations of dependent variable in brackets. Dependent variable corresponds
to incidents per year of production, plant of production and calendar year of failure. Incidents in the NHTSA data set (columns 4-6)
correspond to reporting periods prior to August 2000, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999. Incidents in
the Firestone Claims data set (columns 1-3) occurred between January 1991 and December 1999 and claims were made before
January 2000. Proportion Original Equipment denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were original equipment for
Ford, Mercury, or Mazda vehicles. Proportion ATX denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were ATX tires. To adjust
for incomplete reporting in the NHTSA data set, missing values were imputed by assigning values from other observations with
complete data, conditional on available data. Ten imputed data sets were generated. Reported estimates were obtained by averaging
the estimates derived from each imputed data set. Standard errors were calculated by taking the square root of the sum of the average
sampling variance across data sets and the variance of the estimates across the ten imputed data sets (to account for variability due to
imputation). Other summary statistics reported for columns 4-6 are the average of the estimates across the imputed data sets.



                                                                  56
Table 4: Negative Binomial Regression Models for Number of Defective P235/75R15
Tires by Plant, Production Year and Calendar Year; Aggregate Analysis of ATX and
Wilderness AT Tires
                                                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                  Dependent Variable:                        Complaints with imputations
                                                       Claims                                    for missing values
    Explanatory Variables:                  (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)

Constant                                  -2.31           -19.95         -16.55             -6.50          -14.86          -11.62
                                          (2.40)          (2.11)         (2.19)             (2.24)         (1.83)          (2.12)

Log Production                             0.35            1.34            1.15              0.59           1.04             0.86
                                          (0.18)          (0.14)          (0.14)            (0.17)         (0.13)           (0.14)

Proportion ATX                                                             0.27                                              0.42
                                                                          (0.55)                                            (0.51)

Proportion Original                                                       -1.71                                             -1.77
Equipment                                                                 (0.72)                                            (0.72)

Age                                                        1.91            2.01                             1.07             1.14
                                                          (0.17)          (0.18)                           (0.13)           (0.13)

Age Squared                                               -0.19           -0.19                            -0.10            -0.10
                                                          (0.02)          (0.02)                           (0.02)           (0.02)

Decatur (1=yes)                           -0.13            1.12            0.37             -0.04           0.43            -0.26
                                          (0.33)          (0.31)          (0.38)            (0.33)         (0.30)           (0.38)

Labor dispute period (1=yes)              -0.17            0.24           -0.03              0.23           0.45             0.23
                                          (0.29)          (0.21)          (0.23)            (0.26)         (0.19)           (0.20)

Decatur*Dispute period                     1.32            1.46            1.60              1.62           1.69             1.74
                                          (0.48)          (0.34)          (0.36)            (0.41)         (0.33)           (0.36)

Mean Dep. Var.                            12.10           12.10           12.10              5.81            5.81            5.81
[S.D]                                    [29.37]         [29.37]         [29.37]           [10.88]         [10.88]         [10.88]

N                                          135             135             135               135            135              135
Pseudo R2                                  0.02            0.23            0.24              0.07           0.23             0.25
8                                         43.49*          6.30*           5.81*             8.07*          1.61*            1.47*
Log Likelihood                           -391.44         -307.89         -303.40           -335.29        -277.30          -270.45
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations of dependent variable in bracket s. Dependent variable corresponds to
incidents per year of production, plant of production and calendar year of failure. Incidents in the NHTSA data set (columns 4-6)
correspond to reporting periods prior to August 2000, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999. Incidents in
the Firestone Claims data set (columns 1-3) occurred between January 1991 and December 1999 and claims were made before January
2000. Proportion Original Equipment denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were original equipment for Ford,
Mercury, or Mazda vehicles. Proportion ATX denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were ATX tires. To adjust for
incomplete reporting in the NHTSA data set, missing values were imputed by assigning values from other observations with complete
data, conditional on available data. Ten imputed data sets were generated. Reported estimates were obtained by averaging the
estimates derived from each imputed data set. Standard errors were calculated by taking the square root of the sum of the average
sampling variance across data sets and the variance of the estimates across the ten imputed data sets (to account for variability due to
imputation). Other summary statistics reported for columns 4-6 are the average of the estimates across the imputed data sets. The
symbol 8 represents the scaling parameter for the conditional variance in the negative binomial model. The conditional variance of
the negative binomial model equals the conditional variance of the Poisson model when 8 equals zero. Starred values of 8 indicate
that we can reject the null hypothesis that 8 equals zero at a .05 level with the likelihood ratio test.



                                                                   57
Table 5: Poisson Regression Models for Number of Defective P235/75R15 Tires by Tire
Model (ATX or Wilderness), Plant, Production Year and Calendar Year; Pooled Sample

                                                                                            Dependent Variable: NHTSA
                                                  Dependent Variable:                      Complaints with imputations for
                                                       Claims                                     missing values

Explanatory Variables:                      (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)


Constant                                  -13.36          -25.57          -21.09            -9.38           -13.61          -11.35
                                          (2.41)          (3.31)          (1.05)            (2.52)          (2.39)          (2.01)

Log Production                             1.15            1.72            1.44              0.79            0.94            0.80
                                          (0.18)          (0.06)          (0.25)            (0.19)          (0.17)          (0.14)

ATX (1=yes)                                                                0.57                                              0.60
                                                                          (0.45)                                            (0.29)

Proportion                                                                -1.64                                             -1.48
Original Equipment                                                        (0.22)                                            (0.51)

Age                                                        2.07            2.12                              1.17            1.22
                                                          (0.28)          (0.29)                            (0.16)          (0.15)

Age Squared                                               -0.20           -0.21                             -0.11           -0.11
                                                          (0.01)          (0.03)                            (0.02)          (0.02)

Decatur (1=yes)                           -0.01            1.63            0.87             -0.36            0.29           -0.26
                                          (0.36)          (0.13)          (0.17)            (0.45)          (0.39)          (0.39)

Labor dispute period (1=yes)              -0.02            0.32            0.12              0.13            0.34            0.17
                                          (0.30)          (0.09)          (0.09)            (0.31)          (0.25)          (0.22)

Decatur*Dispute period                     2.32            1.26            1.25              2.27            1.82            1.81
                                          (0.45)          (0.14)          (0.50)            (0.52)          (0.41)          (0.37)

Mean Dep. Var.                             9.96             9.96           9.96              4.61            4.61            4.61
[S.D.]                                   [25.62]          [25.62]        [25.62]            [8.68]          [8.68]          [8.68]

N                                         164              164             164               164             164             164
Pseudo R2                                 0.42             0.81            0.82              0.40            0.66            0.67
Log Likelihood                          -1483.96         -490.20         -461.93           -591.45         -339.36         -323.08
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations of dependent variable in brackets. Dependent variable corresponds
to incidents per year of production, plant of production, tire model, and calendar year of failure. Cells corresponding to less than 200
units of production were dropped. Incidents in the NHTSA data set (columns 4-6) correspond to reporting periods prior to August
2000, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999. Incidents in the Firestone Claims data set (columns 1-3)
occurred between January 1991 and December 1999, and claims were made before January 2000. Proportion Original Equipment
denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were original equipment for Ford, Mercury, or Mazda vehicles. To adjust for
incomplete reporting in the NHTSA data set, missing values were imputed by assigning values from other observations with complete
data, conditional on available data. Ten imputed data sets were generated. Reported estimates were obtained by averaging the
estimates derived from each imputed data set. Standard errors were calculated by taking the square root of the sum of the average
sampling variance across data sets and the variance of the estimates across the ten imputed data sets (to account for variability due to
imputation). Other summary statistics reported for columns 4-6 are the average of the estimates across the imputed data sets.




                                                                   58
Table 6: Poisson Regression Models for Number of Incidents with Defective Tires, By
Type of Accident, NHTSA Complaints Data; Full Reporting Period
Aggregate Analysis of ATX and Wilderness AT Tires;
                        Dependent Variable:             Dependent                Dependent Variable:
                                                                                                                 Dependent Variable:
                          Accident with                  Variable:                 Non-Injurious
                                                                                                                   All complaints
                             Fatality                 Non-fatal Injuries            Complaints
Explanatory
Variables:                   (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)

Constant                   -17.33        -13.56        -17.98       -11.02         -13.55          -8.45           -13.61          -8.40
                           (4.06)        (4.94)        (3.59)       (3.28)         (2.04)          (1.64)          (2.01)          (1.61)

Log Production              1.05          0.84          1.15          0.76          1.02            0.74            1.03            0.75
                           (0.29)        (0.33)        (0.25)        (0.22)        (0.14)          (0.11)          (0.14)          (0.11)

Proportion                               -0.74                       -1.31                         -0.87                           -0.91
ATX                                      (1.25)                      (1.12)                        (0.41)                          (0.40)

Proportion                               -0.77                       -1.72                         -1.58                           -1.54
Original                                 (1.71)                      (1.53)                        (0.59)                          (0.58)
Equipment

Age                         0.98          1.08          0.95          1.21          0.89            1.11            0.90            1.11
                           (0.30)        (0.32)        (0.26)        (0.25)        (0.14)          (0.11)          (0.14)          (0.11)

Age Squared                -0.09         -0.10         -0.09         -0.10         -0.08           -0.10           -0.09           -0.10
                           (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.03)        (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.01)

Decatur                    -0.07         -0.62          0.82         -0.22          0.31           -0.52            0.35           -0.48
                           (1.08)        (1.20)        (0.55)        (0.60)        (0.33)          (0.28)          (0.32)          (0.27)

Labor dispute               0.42          0.27          0.17         -0.13          0.26            0.02            0.26            0.02
Period                     (0.56)        (0.60)        (0.55)        (0.54)        (0.23)          (0.19)          (0.22)          (0.18)

Decatur*Dispute             2.39          2.71          1.62          2.22          1.67            2.05            1.68            2.08
                           (1.15)        (1.15)        (0.73)        (0.70)        (0.38)          (0.31)          (0.37)          (0.30)

Mean Dep. Var.              0.49          0.49          0.88          0.88          9.35            9.35           10.73           10.73
[S.D.]                     [1.21]        [1.21]        [2.08]        [2.08]       [16.57]         [16.57]         [19.39]         [19.39]

N                            135           135           135          135            135            135             135             135

Pseudo R2                   0.41           0.43          0.42         0.48          0.63            0.70            0.65            0.73

Log Likelihood             -88.26        -85.89        -135.85      -120.84       -495.21         -392.18         -534.38        -416.42
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations of dependent variable in brackets. All specifications correspond to
NHTSA complaints data. Dependent variable corresponds to incidents per year of production, plant of production and calendar year of
failure. Incidents correspond to reportin g periods prior to June 2001, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999.
Proportion Original Equipment denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were original equipment for Ford, Mercury, or
Mazda vehicles. Proportion ATX denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were ATX tires. To adjust for incomplete
reporting in the NHTSA data set, missing values were imputed by assigning values from other observations with complete data,
conditional on available dat a. Ten imputed data sets were generated. Reported estimates were obtained by averaging the estimates
derived from each imputed data set. Standard errors were calculated by taking the square root of the sum of the average sampling
variance across data set s and the variance of the estimates across the ten imputed data sets (to account for variability due to imputation).
Other summary statistics reported are the average of the estimates across the imputed data sets.



                                                                      59
Table 7: High-Speed Stress Test Results: OLS Estimates
Dependent Variable: Miles Traveled to Burst

                                                                                                                 No Pre -
                                                                                                    No Pre -
     Explanatory         Means:                                                                                 Production
                                          Full Sample        1994-1998          1995-1998          Production
      Variables:       Full Sample                                                                                Tires,
                                                                                                      Tires
                                                                                                                1995-1998
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)         (5)


Constant                                     108.83             110.16             110.16            108.83       110.16
                                              (2.30)             (2.65)             (2.66)            (2.37)       (2.86)


Decatur (1=yes)             0.47               2.13               1.57              1.99              -0.63       -1.41
                           [0.50]             (3.72)             (4.18)            (4.22)             (4.37)      (5.25)


Dispute period              0.61               4.93              3.74               4.61               4.88        5.34
(1=yes)                    [0.49]             (3.36)            (3.66)             (3.92)             (3.91)      (4.87)


Decatur*Dispute             0.30              -16.85            -16.34             -17.29             -12.63      -13.64
period                     [0.46]              (4.80)            (5.22)             (5.43)             (5.96)      (7.13)


Pre-Production              0.35              -1.19              -1.43              -2.31
Models                     [0.48]             (2.55)             (2.64)             (2.81)


Mean Dep. Var.            107.28             107.28             107.48             107.07            107.28       107.49
[S.D.]                    [12.57]            [12.57]            [12.97]            [13.08]           [12.35]      [13.37]


N                                              105                 98                 90                68          57

R2                                             0.23               0.24              0.25               0.15        0.18

F-stat                                         7.40               7.31              7.00               3.90        3.82

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations in brackets. Years refer to years of production.




                                                                 60
Table 8: Poisson Regression Model for Non-P235/75R15 Firestone Tires Under NHTSA
EA00-023 Investigation
Dependent Variable: Number of Complaints with imputatio ns for missing values
Explanatory Variables:                    Means                                 (1)                                (2)


Constant                                                                      -38.37                            -14.60
                                                                              (9.21)                            (0.31)

Log Total NonP235                          15.49                               2.49                                1^
Tires Produced                             [0.45]                             (0.58)

Age                                         2.67                               0.35                               0.28
                                           [2.22]                             (0.26)                             (0.26)

Age Squared                                 12                                -0.08                              -0.08
                                          [15.47]                             (0.05)                             (0.05)

Decatur                                     0.33                              -0.87                              -1.12
                                           [0.47]                             (0.57)                             (0.54)

Dispute                                     0.33                              -0.48                              -0.19
                                           [0.47]                             (0.39)                             (0.35)

Decatur*Dispute                             0.11                               1.98                               1.34
                                           [0.32]                             (0.80)                             (0.74)

Mean Dep. Var.                              2.12                               2.12                               2.12
[S.D.]                                     [5.14]                             [5.14]                             [5.14]

N                                           135                                135                                135

Pseudo R2                                                                      0.33                               0.26

Log Likelihood                                                               -339.44                           -376.79

Notes: Robust Standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations of dependent variable in brackets. All specifications use NHTSA
complaints data. Dependent variable corresponds to incidents per year of production, plant of production and calendar year of failure.
Incidents correspond to reporting periods prior to August 2000, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999. To
adjust for incomplete reporting in the NHTSA data set, missing values were imputed by assigning values from other observations with
complete data, conditional on available data; tire size was not imputed, however. Ten imputed data sets were generated. Reported
estimates were obtained by averaging the estimates derived from each imputed data set. Standard errors were calculated by taking the
square root of the sum of the average sampling variance across data sets and the variance of the estimates across the ten imputed data
sets (to account for variability due to imputation). Other summary statistics reported are the average of the estimates across the
imputed data sets. The specifications in column (2) constrains the coefficient of log production to one.

^Coefficient constrained to one.




                                                                 61
Table A1: Summary of Missing Values
                                                                              All Reporting   Reported Before
                             All Reporting Reported Before Reported After        Periods,         Recall,
                                Periods,        Recall,    Recall, All Tire   P235/75R15       P235/75R15
Missing:                     All Tire Sizes All Tire Sizes     Sizes              Tires            Tires
None                     1        780           186               594             443              180
YR, MR                   2         31           N/A              N/A               28                0
F                        3         55             5                50              19                4
YR, MR, F                4          4           N/A              N/A                3              N/A
YP                       5        468            20               448             261               19
YP, YR, MR               6          6           N/A              N/A                6              190
YP, F                    7         68             0                68              37              N/A
YP, F, YR, MR            8          1           N/A              N/A                0              N/A
PL                       9          5             0                 5               1                0
PL, YP                  10       1285           218              1067             646                0
PL, YP, YR, MR          11         28           N/A              N/A               22              N/A
PL, YP, F               12        269             9               260             111                6
PL, YP, F, MR           13          1             0                 1               1                0
PL, YP, F, YR           14          2           N/A              N/A                2              N/A
PL, YP, F, YR, MR       15          6           N/A              N/A              133              N/A
TM                      16        151           126                25               4              125
TM, YR, MR              17          5           N/A              N/A                3              N/A
TM, F                   18          9             0                 9              17                0
TM, YP                  19         23             8                15               1                8
TM, YP, F               20          1             1                 0               2                1
TM, PL                  21          3             2                 1             172                2
TM, PL, YP              22        245           157                88              14              150
TM, PL, YP, YR, MR      23         17           N/A              N/A               14              N/A
TM, PL, YP, F           24         44             4                40               0                4
TS                      25         95            22                73             N/A              N/A
TS, YR, MR              26          3           N/A              N/A              N/A              N/A
TS, F                   27          6             1                 5             N/A              N/A
TS, YP                  28         69             2                67             N/A              N/A
TS, YP, F               29         14             0                14             N/A              N/A
TS, PL                  30          3             1                 2             N/A              N/A
TS, PL, YP              31        793            85               708             N/A              N/A
TS, PL. YP, YR          32          1           N/A              N/A              N/A              N/A
TS, PL. YP, YR, MR      33         13           N/A              N/A              N/A              N/A
TS, PL, YP, F           34        260            14               246             N/A              N/A
TS, PL, YP, F, YR, MR   35          3           N/A              N/A              N/A              N/A
TS, TM                  36         11             7                 4             N/A              N/A
TS, TM, F               37          1             0                 1             N/A              N/A
TS, TM, F, YR, MR       38          1           N/A              N/A              N/A              N/A

Continued -




                                               62
Table A1: Summary of Missing Values (cont.)
                                                                                     All Reporting   Reported Before
                                    All Reporting Reported Before Reported After        Periods,         Recall,
                                       Periods,        Recall,    Recall, All Tire   P235/75R15       P235/75R15
Missing:                            All Tire Sizes All Tire Sizes     Sizes              Tires            Tires
TS, TM, YP                     39         2               0                  2             N/A             N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP                 40       304             121                183             N/A             N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP, YR, MR         41        17             N/A               N/A              N/A             N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP, F              42        85               5                 80             N/A             N/A
All                            43         1             N/A               N/A              N/A             N/A
None                                    780             186                594              443            180
One                                     774             173                601              414            148
Two                                    1508             239               1238              733            200
Three                                  1343             252               1073              297            157
Four                                    641             139                470               37             4
Five                                    122               5                 80               16            N/A
Six                                      20             N/A               N/A                 0            N/A
Seven                                     1             N/A               N/A              N/A             N/A
TS = Tire Size, TM = Tire Model, YP = Year of Production, F = Year of Failure, YR = Year of Report, MR = Month of
Report




                                                       63
Table A2: Summary of Conditioning Variables for Imputation Procedure




                                           P235/75R15 Data set    Non-P235/75R15 Data set
Observations
Missing:
None                                 1             N/A                       N/A
YR, MR                               2   F, YP(1)                F
F                                    3   YP(1)                   YP(3), YR
YR, MR, F                            4   YP(1)                   YP(3)
YP                                   5   VY, VM                  VY, VM
YP, YR, MR                           6   F                                   N/A
YP, F                                7   TM, YR                  TM, YR
YP, F, YR, MR                        8   TM                      TM
PL                                   9   TM                      YP(3)
PL, YP                              10   VY, VM                  VY, VM
PL, YP, YR, MR                      11   F                       TM
PL, YP, F                           12   VY, YR                  VY, YR
PL, YP, F, MR                       13   TM, YR                  YR
PL, YP, F, YR                       14   TS                      TM
PL, YP, F, YR, MR                   15   TS                      TM
TM                                  16   PL, YP(2)               PL, YP(2)
TM, YR, MR                          17   TS                      F
TM, F                               18   YP(1)                   YP(3)
TM, YP                              19   VY, VM                  F
TM, YP, F                           20   VY, YR                  TM, PL
TM, PL                              21   TS                      YP(2)
TM, PL, YP                          22   VY, VM                  VY, VM
TM, PL, YP, YR, MR                  23   VY                      F
TM, PL, YP, F                       24   TS, YR                  YR
TS                                  25   TM, EX                              N/A
TS, YR, MR                          26   EX, F                               N/A
TS, F                               27   EX, YP(2)                           N/A
TS, YP                              28   VY, VM, EX                          N/A
TS, YP, F                           29   VY, VM                              N/A
TS, PL                              30   TM, EX                              N/A
TS, PL, YP                          31   VY, VM                              N/A
TS, PL. YP, YR                      32   VY, VM                              N/A
TS, PL. YP, YR, MR                  33   VY, VM                              N/A
TS, PL, YP, F                       34   VY, VM                              N/A
TS, PL, YP, F, YR, MR               35   TM                                  N/A
TS, TM                              36   EX, YP(3)                           N/A
TS, TM, F                           37   YP(1), YR                           N/A
TS, TM, F, YR, MR                   38   PL                                  N/A

Continued -




                                         64
Table A2: Summary of Conditioning Variables (cont.)
TS, TM, YP                                       39          VY, VM              N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP                                   40          VY, VM              N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP, YR, MR                           41          F                   N/A
TS, TM, PL, YP, F                                42          YR                  N/A
All                                              43          None                N/A

TS = Tire Size,
TM = Tire Model,
MR = Month of Report,
PL = Plant
F = Ford Vehicle (1=yes)
EX = Explorer (1=yes)
F = Year of Failure with cut-points at 1991,1994,1997,2000.
YP(1) = Year of Production with cut-points at 0,1990,1992,1994,1996,1998,2000.
YP(2) = Year of Production with cut-points at 1996.
YP(3) = Year of Production with cut-points at 1990, 1994, 1996, 1998.
YR = Year reported with cut -points at 1991,1995,2000.
VM = Vehicle miles with cut-points at 15000,30000,60000,90000.
VY = Vehicle year with cut -points at 1994,1997,2000.




                                                              65
Table A3: Poisson Regression Models for Number of Incidents with Defective Tires, by
Type of Accident, NHTSA Complaints Data; Full Reporting Period without Imputing
Missing Data (Robust Standard Errors)

Aggregate Analysis of ATX and Wilderness AT Tires

                       Dependent Variable:            Dependent
                                                                              Dependent Variable:           Dependent Variable:
                         Accident with                 Variable:
                                                                              All other complaints            All complaints
                            Fatality                Non-fatal Injuries
    Explanatory
     Variables              (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
Constant                  -19.03        -17.58       -19.23       -13.37        -20.11         -14.72         -19.20         -14.14
                          (4.75)        (6.12)       (4.29)       (4.60)        (2.90)         (3.03)         (2.45)         (2.69)

Log Production             1.09          1.01         1.15         0.81          1.26           0.95           1.23           0.94
                          (0.33)        (0.40)       (0.30)       (0.31)        (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.17)         (0.18)

Proportion ATX                          -0.08                     -0.78                         0.12                         -0.05
                                        (1.51)                    (1.16)                       (0.76)                        (0.67)

Original                                -0.40                     -1.37                        -2.12                         -1.82
Equipment                               (1.72)                    (1.55)                       (0.96)                        (0.85)

Age                        1.23          1.26         1.04         1.20          1.59           1.73           1.47           1.60
                          (0.36)        (0.38)       (0.32)       (0.33)        (0.24)         (0.25)         (0.20)         (0.21)

Age Squared               -0.11         -0.11        -0.09        -0.10         -0.14          -0.15          -0.13          -0.14
                          (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.03)

Decatur                   -0.39         -0.61         1.13         0.27          0.63          -0.35           0.65          -0.23
                          (1.07)        (1.26)       (0.63)       (0.73)        (0.50)         (0.57)         (0.42)         (0.49)

Labor dispute              0.04         -0.03        -0.06        -0.31          0.60           0.33           0.50           0.25
Period                    (0.59)        (0.63)       (0.61)       (0.62)        (0.31)         (0.31)         (0.27)         (0.28)

Decatur*Dispute            3.07          3.14         1.68         2.09          1.69           1.86           1.74           1.93
                          (1.16)        (1.23)       (0.81)       (0.85)        (0.54)         (0.54)         (0.46)         (0.47)

Mean Dep. Var.             0.27          0.27         0.33         0.33          2.33           2.33           2.94           2.94
[S.D.]                    [0.76]        [0.76]       [0.86]       [0.86]        [5.77]         [5.77]         [6.95]         [6.95]

N                           135           135          135         135           135            135             135            135

Pseudo R2                   0.40         0.40          0.35        0.37          0.62           0.64           0.64           0.66

Log Likelihood            -58.80        -58.74       -73.41       -71.43       -205.54        -195.77        -227.09        -216.45
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard deviations in brackets. All specifications correspond to NHTSA complaints
data. Dependent variables correspond to incidents per year of production, plant of production and age of tires. Incidents correspond to
reporting periods prior to June 2001, for failures occurring between January 1991 and December 1999. Proportion Original Equipment
denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were original equipment for Ford, Mercury, or Mazda vehicles. P roportion ATX
denotes the proportion of tires produced in the cell that were ATX tires.




                                                                    66
