NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING CAPITAL
W. Erwin Diewert
Working Paper 9526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9526
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

Forthcoming chapter in “Measuring Capital in the New Economy,” edited by Carol Corrado, John Hatiwanger
and Dan Sichel. The author is indebted to Kevin Fox, Peter Hill, Ulrich Kohli, Alice Nakamura and Paul
Schreyer for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by W. Erwin Diewert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Capital
W. Erwin Diewert
NBER Working Paper No. 9526
February 2003
JEL No. C43, C82, D24
ABSTRACT
The paper revisits Harper, Berndt and Wood (1989) and calculates Canadian reproducible capital
services aggregates under alternative assumptions about the form of depreciation, the opportunity
cost of capital and the treatment of capital gains. Five different models of depreciation are
considered: (1) one hoss shay; (2) straight line depreciation; (3) declining balance or geometric
depreciation; (4) linearly declining efficiency profiles and (5) linearly increasing maintenance
profiles. The latter form of depreciation does not seem to have been considered in the literature
before. This model assumes that there is a known time profile of maintenance expenditures that can
be associated with each asset and the optimal time of retirement of the asset as well as the profile
of used asset prices becomes endogenous under this specification. It turns out if the maintenance
profile increases linearly, then the linearly declining efficiency profile model emerges; see (4) above.
We consider 3 alternative assumptions about the interest rate and the treatment of capital gains so
that we evaluate 15 models in all and compare their differences. Following Hill (2000), we also
consider the differences between cross section and time series depreciation and anticipated time
series depreciation (which adds anticipated obsolescence of the asset to normal cross section
depreciation of the asset). Finally, we follow the suggestion made by Diewert and Lawrence (2000)
that a superlative index number formula be used to aggregate up vintages of capital rather than the
usual assumption of linear aggregation, which implicitly assumes that the capital services yielded
by each vintage of a homogeneous type of capital are perfectly substitutable.

W. Erwin Diewert
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, Canada, V6N 1Z1
and NBER
diewert@econ.ubc.ca

1
MEASURING CAPITAL

by W. Erwin Diewert

April 18, 2002

Email: diewert@econ.ubc.ca
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction
2. Inflation and the Measurement of Economic Activity
3. The Fundamental Equations Relating Stocks and Flows of Capital
4. Cross Section Depreciation Profiles
5. The Empirical Determination of Interest Rates and Asset Inflation Rates
6. Obsolescence and Depreciation
7. Aggregation over Vintages of a Capital Good
8. The One Hoss Shay Model of Efficiency and Depreciation
9. The Straight Line Depreciation Model
10. The Declining Balance or Geometric Depreciation Model
11. The Linear Efficiency Decline Model
12. The Linearly Increasing Maintenance Expenditures Model
13. A Comparison of the Twelve Models
14. Conclusion
Appendix: Canadian Data for 1926-1999
1. Introduction1
“Capital (I am not the first to discover) is a very large subject, with many aspects; wherever one starts, it is
hard to bring more than a few of them into view. It is just as if one were making pictures of a building;
though it is the same building, it looks quite different from different angles.” John Hicks (1973; v).
“Perhaps a more realistic motive for reading earlier writers is not to rediscover forgotten truths, but to gain
a perspective of how present day ideas have evolved and, perhaps, by reading the original statements of
important ideas, to see them more vividly and understand them more clearly.” Geoffrey Whittington
(1980; 240).

In this paper, we discuss some of the problems involved in constructing price and
quantity series for both capital stocks and the associated flows of services when there is
general (and specific) price change in the economy.
In section 2, we discuss some of the problems that occur when an economy is
experiencing very high inflation. Under these conditions, it will be necessary for the
national price statistician to shorten the accounting period (or give up price measurement
altogether).

1

The author is indebted to Kevin Fox, Peter Hill, Ulrich Kohli, Alice Nakamura and Paul Schreyer for
helpful comments.

2
In section 3, we present the basic equations relating stocks and flows of capital assuming
that data on the prices of vintages of a homogeneous capital good are available. This
framework is not applicable under all circumstances2 but it is a framework that will allow
us to disentangle the effects of general price change, asset specific price change and
depreciation.
Section 4 continues the theoretical framework that was introduced in section 3. We show
how information on vintage asset prices, vintage rental prices and vintage depreciation
rates are all equivalent under certain assumptions; i.e., knowledge of any one of these
three sequences or profiles is sufficient to determine the other two.
Section 5 discusses alternative sets of assumptions on nominal interest rates and
anticipated asset price changes. We specify three different sets of assumptions that we
will use in our empirical illustration of the suggested methods.
Section 6 is a section that is not used in the remaining sections but it discusses the
significance of our assumptions made in the previous section and relates them to
controversies in national income accounting. In particular, we discuss whether
anticipated asset price decline should be an element of depreciation as understood by
national income accountants.
Section 7 discusses the problems involved in aggregating over vintages of capital, both in
forming capital stocks and capital services. Instead of the usual perpetual inventory
method for aggregating over vintages, which assumes perfectly substitutable vintages of
the same stock, we suggest the use of a superlative index number formula to do the
aggregation.
Sections 8 to 11 show how the general algebra presented in sections 3 and 4 can be
adapted to deal with four specific models of depreciation. The four models considered
are the one hoss shay model, the straight line depreciation model, the geometric model of
depreciation and the linear efficiency decline model. In each of these sections, we
illustrate the method by computing the corresponding stocks and flows using Canadian
data on two asset classes.
Section 12 considers a fifth type of depreciation model, one that is based on the
assumption that each vintage of the asset has a specific maintenance and operating cost
requirement associated with it. We show that this type of model can lead to the linear
efficiency decline model studied in section 11. However, the main use of the analysis
presented in section 12 is to suggest a reason why accelerated depreciation assumptions
are quite reasonable and likely to occur empirically.
Section 13 presents a graphical summary of the 12 empirical models considered in the
Annex.

2

Most notably, our framework cannot deal with unique or one of a kind assets, which by definition, do not
have vintages.

3
Section 14 concludes.
A data appendix lists the Canadian data we used in sections 8-11.
2. Inflation and the Measurement of Economic Activity
Our goal in this paper is twofold: (1) to measure the price and quantity of the stock of
reproducible capital held by a production unit (an establishment, a firm, an industry or an
entire economy) at a point in time and (2) to measure the price and quantity of the flow of
reproducible capital services utilized by a production unit over a period of time. In
particular, we want to extend the procedures for measuring capital stocks and flows to
cover situations where there is general price level change or inflation. In this section, we
shall review some of the general measurement problems that arise when inflation is high.
When capital flows are measured, the normal period of time is either a year or a quarter.
Under conditions of high inflation, the aggregation of homogeneous commodity flows
within a quarter or a year is complicated by the fact that the within period transactions are
valued at very different prices. The recent national income accounting literature explains
the problem as follows:
“Conventional index number theory is mostly concerned with comparisons between points of time whereas,
in national accounts, price and quantity comparisons have to be made between discrete periods of time.
Significant changes in price and quantity flows may occur not only between different periods but also
within a single accounting period, especially one as long as a year. Indeed, the central problem of
accounting under high inflation is that prices are much higher at the end of the accounting period than at the
beginning.” Peter Hill (1996; 11).
“The underlying problem is not a traditional index number problem. It stems from the use of current value
data as inputs into the calculation of indirect price or quantity measures under high inflation. Current
accounts permit identical quantities of the same homogeneous product to be valued at very different prices
during the course of the same year. Implicitly, quantities sold at higher prices later in the year are treated
as if they were superior qualities when they are not.” Peter Hill (1996; 12).
“Under high inflation, the monetary value of flows of goods and services at different points of time within
the same accounting period are not commensurate with each other because the unit of currency used as the
numeraire is not stable. Adding together different quantities of the same good valued at different prices is
equivalent, from a scientific point of view, to using different units of measurement for different sets of
observations on the same variable. In the case of physical data, however, it is rather more obvious that
adding quantities measured in grams to quantities measured in ounces is a futile procedure.” Peter Hill
(1996; 32).
“Before the preparation of the 1993 SNA, issues connected with high or significant inflation had not been
dealt with at all in international recommendations concerning national accounts. Uneasiness especially
with the recording of nominal interest had been often expressed, for instance in Europe and North America
at the time of two digit inflation and above all in countries, like in Latin America, experiencing high or
hyper inflation. In relation with the latter situations, uneasiness extended to the whole set of accounts,
because, due to the significant rate of inflation within each year, annual accounts in current values could no
longer be deemed homogeneous as regards the level of prices in each year. They combine intra-annual
flows that are valued at very different prices and are not, strictly speaking, additive. The effect of the intraannual change in the general price level can be neglected for the sake of simplicity only when the rate of
inflation is low. When it is high, the meaning of annual accounts in current values becomes fuzzy.” André
Vanoli (1998).

4

“When inflation is high, the aggregation of flows from different periods becomes very much a case of
‘adding apples and bananas’— the flows at the end of the period will carry a much greater weight than the
flows at the beginning of the period, so that the change on average will reflect development at the end of
the period disproportionately. Annual national accounts at current prices become virtually meaningless and
computation of national accounts at constant prices becomes very problematic.” Ezra Hadar and Soli Peleg
(1998; 2).

Of course, concern over the effects of general price level change has a much longer
history in the general cost accounting literature; see Baxter (1984), Tweedie and
Whittington (1984) and Whittington (1992) for example.3
We now discuss in more detail the accounting problems caused by high inflation that are
referred to in the above quotations. The basic problem is this: all discrete time economic
theories and most of index number theory assumes that all of the transactions of a
production unit in a homogeneous commodity within the accounting period can be
represented by a single price and a single quantity. It is natural to let the single quantity
be the sum of the quantities sold (in the case of an output) or the sum of the quantities
purchased (in the case of an input). But then, if we want the single price times the single
quantity to equal the value of transactions for the commodity in the period, the single
price must equal the value of transactions divided by the sum of quantities purchased or
sold; i.e., the single price must equal a unit value.4 But when there is substantial inflation
within the accounting period, unit values give a much higher weight to transactions that
occur near the end of the period compared to transactions that occurred near the
beginning; it is as if the end of period transactions are being artificially quality adjusted
to be more valuable than the beginning of the period transactions.
The obvious solution to this artificial implicit weighting problem is to choose the
accounting period to be small enough so that the general inflation within the period is
small enough to be ignored. This is precisely the solution suggested by the index number
theorist Fisher5 and the measurement economist Hicks: the length of the accounting
period should be the Hicksian “week”:
3

The inflation accounting literature extends back to Middleditch: “Today’s dollar is, then, a totally
different unit from the dollar of 1897. As the general price level fluctuates, the dollar is bound to become a
unit of different magnitude. To mix these units is like mixing inches and centimeters or measuring a field
with a rubber tape-line.” Livingston Middleditch (1918; 114-115).
4
The early index number theorists Walsh (1901; 96) (1921; 88), Fisher (1922; 318) and Davies (1924; 96)
all suggested unit values as the prices that should be inserted into a bilateral index number formula. Walsh
nicely sums up the case for unit values as follows: “Some nice questions arise as to whether only what is
consumed in the country, or only what is produced in it, or both together are to be counted; and also there
are difficulties as to the single price quotation that is to be given at each period to each commodity, since
this, too, must be an average. Throughout the country during the period a commodity is not sold at one
price, nor even at one wholesale price in its principle market. Various quantities of it are sold at different
prices, and the full value is obtained by adding all the sums spent (at the same stage in its advance towards
the consumer), and the average price is found by dividing the total sum (or the full value) by the total
quantities.” Correa Moylan Walsh (1921; 88).
5
“Essentially the same problem enters, however, whenever, as is usually the case, the data for prices and
quantities with which we start are averages instead of being the original market quotations. Throughout
this book, ‘the price’ of any commodity or ‘the quantity’ of it for any one year was assumed given. But
what is such a price or quantity? Sometimes it is a single quotation for January 1 or July 1, but usually it is

5

“I shall define a week as that period of time during which variations in price can be neglected.” John R.
Hicks (1946; 122).

Thus it seems that there is a simple solution to the problem of constructing meaningful
accounting period prices and quantities for homogeneous commodities when there is high
inflation: simply shorten the accounting period!
Hill (1996) however notes that there are at least three classes of problems associated with
the above solution:
“In order to keep these issues in perspective, it is useful to summarise the problems created by continually
shortening the accounting period.
1. The compilation of accounts for shorter time periods requires more information about the times at
which various transactions take place. Enquiries may have to be conducted more frequently thereby
creating additional costs for the data collectors. More burdens are also placed on the respondents
supplying the information. In many cases, they may be unable to supply the necessary information
because their own internal records and accounts do not permit them to do so, especially when they
traditionally report their accounts for longer time periods, such as a year.
2. As production is a process which can extend over a considerable period of time, its measurement
becomes progressively more difficult the shorter the accounting period. The problem is not confined
to agriculture or forestry where many production processes take a year or more. The production of
large fixed assets such as large ships, bridges, power stations, dams or the like can extend over several
years. The output produced over shorter periods of time then has to be measured on the basis of work
in progress completed each period. …
3. Because many transactions, especially large transactions, are not completed within the day, there are
typically many receivables and payables outstanding at any given moment of time. They assume
greater importance in relation to the flows as the accounting period is reduced. This makes it more
difficult to reconcile the values of different flows in the accounts, especially if the two parties to the
transaction perceive it as taking place at different times from each other and do not record it in the
same way required by the system. … Peter Hill (1996; 34-35).

Thus shortening the accounting period leads to increased costs for the statistical agency
and the businesses being surveyed. Moreover, firm accounting is geared to years and
quarters and it may not be possible for production units to provide complete accounting
information for periods shorter than a quarter. As the accounting period becomes shorter,
it is less likely that production, shipment, billing and payment for the same commodity
will all coincide within the accounting period. Also as the accounting period becomes
shorter, work in progress will tend to become ever more important relative to final sales,
creating difficult valuation problems.6 Put another way, more and more inputs will shift
from being intermediate inputs (inputs that are used up within the accounting period) to
being durable inputs (inputs whose contribution to production extends over more than
an average of several quotations scattered through the year. The question arises: On what principle should
this average be constructed? The practical answer is any kind of average since, ordinarily, the variations
during a year, so far, at least, as prices are concerned, are too little to make any perceptible difference in the
result, whatever kind of average is used. Otherwise, there would be ground for subdividing the year into
quarters or months until we reach a small enough period to be considered practically a point.” Irving Fisher
(1922; 318).
6
There are very few price indexes for work in progress! This is to be expected since there are very few
transactions involving partially completed products.

6
one period). In addition to these difficulties, there are others. For example, as the
accounting period becomes shorter, transactions tend to become more erratic and
sporadic. Many goods will not be sold in a supermarket in a particular day or week.
Normal index number theory breaks down under these conditions: it is difficult to
compare a positive amount of a good sold in one period with a zero amount sold in the
next period. A related difficulty is that many commodities are produced or demanded on
a seasonal basis. If the accounting period is a year, then there are no seasonal commodity
difficulties but as we shorten the period from a year, we will run into the problem of
seasonal fluctuations in prices and quantities. In many cases, a seasonal commodity will
not be available in all seasons and we again run into the problem of comparing positive
values with zero values in the periods when the commodity is out of season. Even if the
seasonal commodity does not disappear, the application of standard index number theory
is not straightforward.7
Nevertheless, even in the face of the above difficulties, it seems that the only possible
solution to the artificial implicit weighting problem that is generated by high inflation is
to shorten the accounting period so that normal index number theory can be applied in
order to construct meaningful economic aggregates.8
In addition to the above general problems associated with economic measurement of flow
variables under conditions of high inflation, there are some additional problems
associated with the measurement of capital. These additional problems are associated
with the stock and flow aspects of capital. We will conclude this section by explaining
these problems.
Given an accounting period of some predetermined length, we can associate with it at
least three separate points in time:
•
•
•

The beginning of the accounting period;
The middle of the accounting period; and
The end of the accounting period.

In interpreting the national accounts or the accounts of a business unit, we generally think
of all flow variables as being concentrated in the middle of the period. If we follow this
convention in the context of high inflation, then we require one (nominal) interest rate to
index the value of money or financial capital going from the beginning of the period to
the middle of the period and we require another (nominal) interest rate to index the value
of money going from the middle of the period to the end of the period. Given these two
interest rates, we could construct centered user costs of capital for each type of
7

Hadar and Peleg (1998; 5) comment on the importance of seasonal adjustment procedures in the context
of high inflation: “As a by-product of the emphasis on quarterly estimates at constant prices the seasonal
adjustment got large attention and many resources were spent to improve the adjustment.” Diewert (1996)
(1998) (1999) reviews possible approaches to the problems involved in treating seasonal commodities (and
suggests solutions) when there is high inflation.
8
Our discussion in the previous paragraph indicates that this cannot be done if the economy is experiencing
a hyperinflation. Thus meaningful economic measurement becomes impossible under very high inflation.
This is a hidden cost of inflation that is not discussed very much in the literature on the costs of inflation.

7
reproducible capital, which would be the appropriate flow variables that would match up
with the other flow variables in the production accounts of the production unit. However,
in order to reduce the notational complexity of this annex, we do not construct centered
user costs in what follows. Instead, for each type of asset, we construct either a
beginning of the period user cost (which measures the cost of using the asset for the
period under consideration from the perspective of the price level prevailing at the
beginning of the period) or an end of the period user cost (which measures the cost of
using the asset for the period under consideration from the perspective of the price level
prevailing at the end of the period). Of course, armed with a knowledge of the
appropriate half period interest rates, it is easy to convert these “bookend” user costs into
centered user costs.
In the following section, we explain the fundamental equations relating stocks and flows
of capital.
3. The Fundamental Equations Relating Stocks and Flows of Capital
Before we begin with our algebra, it seems appropriate to explain why accounting for the
contribution of capital to production is more difficult than accounting for the
contributions of labour or materials. The main problem is that when a reproducible
capital input is purchased for use by a production unit at the beginning of an accounting
period, we cannot simply charge the entire purchase cost to the period of purchase. Since
the benefits of using the capital asset extend over more than one period, the initial
purchase cost must be distributed somehow over the useful life of the asset. This is the
fundamental problem of accounting.9 Hulten (1990) explains the consequences for
accountants of the durability of capital as follows:
“Durability means that a capital good is productive for two or more time periods, and this, in turn, implies
that a distinction must be made between the value of using or renting capital in any year and the value of
9

“The difficulty of imputing expenses to individual sales or even to the gross earnings of the accounting
period, the month or year, is an ever present problem for the accountant in the periodic determination of
enterprise income. The longer the period for which the income is to be determined, the smaller the relative
amount of error. Absolute accuracy can be attained only when the venture is completed and the enterprise
terminated.” William T Crandell (1935; 388-389).
“Early enterprises and partners working in the main in isolated trading ventures, needed only an irregular
determination of profit. But before the business corporation had been very long in operation it was evident
that it needed to be treated as a continuing enterprise. For example, calculating dividends by separate
voyages was found impractical in the East India Company by 1660. Profit calculation therefore became a
matter of periodic estimates in place of the known results of completed ventures.” A.C. Littleton (1933;
270).
“The third convention is that of the annual accounting period. It is this convention which is responsible for
most of the difficult accounting problems. Without this convention, accounting would be a simple matter
of recording completed and fully realized transactions: an act of primitive simplicity.” Stephen Gilman
(1939; 26).
“All the problems of income measurement are the result of our desire to attribute income to arbitrarily
determined short periods of time. Everything comes right in the end; but by then it is too late to matter.”
David Solomons (1961; 378). Note that these authors do not mention the additional complications that are
due to the fact that future revenues and costs must be discounted to yield values that are equivalent to
present dollars.

8
owning the capital asset. This distinction would not necessarily lead to a measurement problem if the
capital services used in any given year were paid for in that year; that is, if all capital were rented. In this
case, transactions in the rental market would fix the price and quantity of capital in each time period, much
as data on the price and quantity of labor services are derived from labor market transactions. But,
unfortunately, much capital is utilized by its owner and the transfer of capital services between owner and
user results in an implicit rent typically not observed by the statistician. Market data are thus inadequate
for the task of directly estimating the price and quantity of capital services, and this has led to the
development of indirect procedures for inferring the quantity of capital, like the perpetual inventory
method, or to the acceptance of flawed measures, like book value.” Charles R. Hulten (1990; 120-121).

In a noninflationary environment, the value of an asset at the beginning of an accounting
period is equal to the discounted stream of future rental payments that the asset is
expected to yield. Thus the stock value of the asset is set equal to the discounted future
service flows10 that the asset is expected to yield in future periods. Let the price of a new
capital input purchased at the beginning of period t be P0t. In a noninflationary
environment, it can be assumed that the (potentially observable) sequence of (cross
sectional) vintage rental prices prevailing at the beginning of period t can be expected to
prevail in future periods. Thus there was no need to have a separate notation for future
expected rental prices for a new asset as it ages. However, in an inflationary
environment, it is necessary to distinguish between the observable rental prices for the
asset at different ages or vintages at the beginning of period t and future expected rental
prices for assets of various vintages.11 Thus let f0t be the (observable) rental price of a
new asset at the beginning of period t, let f1t be the (observable) rental price of a one
period old asset at the beginning of period t, let f2t be the (observable) rental price of a 2
period old asset at the beginning of period t, etc. Then the fundamental equation relating
the stock value of a new asset at the beginning of period t, P0t, to the sequence of cross
sectional vintage rental prices prevailing at the beginning of period t, {fnt : n =
0,1,2,…}12 is:
(1) P0t = f0t + [(1+i1t)/(1+r1t)] f1t + [(1+i1t)(1+i2t)/(1+r1t)(1+r2t)] f2t + …
In the above equation,13 1+i1t is the rental price escalation factor that is expected to apply
to a one period old asset going from the beginning of period t to the end of period t (or
equivalently, to the beginning of period t+1), (1+i1t)(1+i2t) is the rental price escalation
10

Walras (1954) (first edition published in 1874) was one of the earliest economists to state that capital
stocks are demanded because of the future flow of services that they render. Although he was perhaps the
first economist to formally derive a user cost formula as we shall see, he did not work out the explicit
discounting formula that Böhm-Bawerk (1891; 342) was able to derive.
11
Note that these future expected rental prices are not generally observable due to the lack of futures
markets for these vintage future rentals of the asset.
12
The sequence of (cross sectional) vintage rental prices {fnt} is called the age-efficiency profile of the
asset.
13
It should be noted that Irving Fisher (1897; 365) seemed to be well aware of the complexities that are
imbedded in equation (1): “There is not space here to discuss the theory in greater detail, nor to apply it to
economic problems. A full treatment would take account of the various standards in which income is or
may be expressed, of the case in which the rates of interest at different dates and for different periods does
not remain constant, of the fact that the services of capital which are discounted in its value are only
expected services, not those which actually materialise, and of the consequent discrepancy between income
anticipated and income realised, of the propriety or impropriety of including man himself as a species of
income-bearing capital, and so on.”

9
factor that is expected to apply to a 2 period old asset going from the beginning of period
t to the beginning of period t+2, etc. Thus the int are expected vintage rental price
inflation rates that are formed at the beginning of period t. The term 1+r1t is the discount
factor that makes a dollar received at the beginning of period t equivalent to a dollar
received at the beginning of period t+1, the term (1+r1t)(1+r2t) is the discount factor that
makes a dollar received at the beginning of period t equivalent to a dollar received at the
beginning of period t+2, etc. Thus the rnt are one period nominal interest rates that
represent the term structure of interest rates at the beginning of period t.14
We now generalize equation (1) to relate the stock value of an n period old asset at the
beginning of period t, Pnt, to the sequence of cross sectional vintage rental prices
prevailing at the beginning of period t, {fnt}; thus for n = 0,1,2,…, we assume:
(2) Pnt = fnt + [(1+i1t)/(1+r1t)] fn+1t + [(1+i1t)(1+i2t)/(1+r1t)(1+r2t)] fn+2t + …
Thus older assets discount fewer terms in the above sum; i.e., as n increases by one, we
have one less term on the right hand side of (2). However, note that we are applying the
same price escalation factors (1+i1t), (1+i1t)(1+i2t), …, to escalate the cross sectional
rental prices prevailing at the beginning of period t, f1t, f2t,…, and to form estimates of
future expected rental prices for each vintage of the capital stock that is in use at the
beginning of period t.
The vintage rental prices prevailing at the beginning of period t, f0t, f1t, … are potentially
observable.15 These cross section rental prices reflect the relative efficiency of the
various vintages of the capital good under consideration at the beginning of period t. It is
assumed that these rentals are paid (explicitly or implicitly) by the users at the beginning
of period t. Note that the sequence of vintage asset stock prices at the beginning of
period t, P0t, P1t, … is not affected by general inflation provided that the general inflation
affects the expected asset inflation rates int and the nominal interest rates rnt in a
proportional manner. We will return to this point later.
The physical productivity characteristics of a unit of capital of each vintage are
determined by the sequence of cross sectional rental prices. Thus a brand new asset is
characterized by the vector of current vintage rental prices, f0t, f1t, f2t, … , which are
interpreted as “physical” contributions to output that the new asset is expected to yield
during the current period t (this is f0t), the next period (this is f1t), and so on. An asset
14

Peter Hill has noted a major problem with the use of equation (1) as the starting point of our discussion:
namely, unique assets will by definition not have vintages and so the cross sectional vintage rental prices fnt
will not exist for these assets! In this case, the fnt should be interpreted as expected future rentals that the
unique asset is expected to generate at today’s prices. The (1+int) terms then summarize expectations about
the amount of asset specific price change that is expected to take place. This reinterpretation of equation
(1) is more fundamental but we chose not to make it our starting point because it does not lead to a
workable method for national statisticians to form reproducible estimates of these future rental payments.
However, in many situations (e.g., the valuation of a new movie), the statistician will be forced to attempt
to implement Hill’s (2000) more general model.
15
This is the main reason that we use the vintage approach to capital measurement rather than the more
fundamental discounted future expected rentals approach advocated by Hill.

10
which is one period old at the start of period t is characterized by the vector f1t, f2t, …,
etc.16
We have not explained how the expected rental price inflation rates int are to be
estimated. We shall deal with this problem in section 5 below. However, it should be
noted that there is no guarantee that our expectations about the future course of rental
prices are correct.
At this point, we make some simplifying assumptions about the expected rental inflation
rates int and the interest rates rnt. We assume that these anticipated vintage rental inflation
factors at the beginning of each period t are all equal; i.e., we assume:
(3) int = it ;

n = 1,2,…

We also assume that the term structure of interest rates at the beginning of each period t
is constant; i.e., we assume:
(4) rnt = rt ;

n = 1,2,…

However, note that as the period t changes, rt and it can change.
Using assumptions (3) and (4), we can rewrite the system of equations (2), which relate
the sequence or profile of vintage stock prices at the beginning of period t {Pnt} to the
sequence or profile of (cross sectional) vintage rental prices at the beginning of period t
{fnt}, as follows:
(5) P0t = f0t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] f1t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]2 f2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]3 f3t + …
P1t = f1t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] f2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]2 f3t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]3 f4t + …
P2t = f2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] f3t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]2 f4t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]3 f5t + …
…
Pnt = fnt + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] fn+1t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]2 fn+2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]3 fn+3t + …
On the left hand side of equations (5), we have the sequence of vintage asset prices at the
beginning of period t starting with the price of a new asset, P0t, moving to the price of an
asset that is one period old at the start of period t, P1t, then moving to the price of an asset
that is 2 periods old at the start of period t, P2t, and so on. On the right hand side of
equations (5), the first term in each equation is a member of the sequence of vintage
rental prices that prevails in the market (if such markets exist) at the beginning of period
t. Thus f0t is the rent for a new asset, f1t is the rent for an asset that is one period old at
the beginning of period t, f2t is the rent for an asset that is 2 periods old, and so on. This
sequence of current market rental prices for the assets of various vintages is then
extrapolated out into the future using the anticipated price escalation rates (1+it), (1+it)2,
(1+it)3, etc. and then these future expected rentals are discounted back to the beginning of
period t using the discount factors (1+rt), (1+rt)2, (1+rt)3, etc. Note that given the period t
expected asset inflation rate it and the period t nominal discount rate rt, we can go from
16

Triplett (1996; 97) used this characterization for capital assets of various vintages.

11
the (cross sectional) sequence of vintage rental prices {fnt} to the sequence of vintage
asset prices {Pnt} using equations (5). We shall show below how this procedure can be
reversed; i.e., we shall show how given the sequence of vintage asset prices, we can
construct estimates for the sequence of vintage rental prices.
It seems that Böhm-Bawerk was the first economist to use the above method for relating
the future service flows of a durable input to its stock price:
“If the services of the durable good be exhausted in a short space of time, the individual services, provided
that they are of the same quality— which, for simplicity’s sake, we assume— are, as a rule, equal in value,
and the value of the material good itself is obtained by multiplying the value of one service by the number
of services of which the good is capable. But in the case of many durable goods, such as ships, machinery,
furniture, land, the services rendered extend over long periods, and the result is that the later services
cannot be rendered, or at least cannot be rendered in a normal economic way, before a long time has
expired. As a consequence, the value of the more distant material services suffers the same fate as the
value of future goods. A material service, which, technically, is exactly the same as a service of this year,
but which cannot be rendered before next year, is worth a little less than this year’s service; another similar
service, but obtainable only after two years, is, again, a little less valuable, and so on; the values of the
remote services decreasing with the remoteness of the period at which they can be rendered. Say that this
year’s service is worth 100, then next year’s service— assuming a difference of 5 % per annum— is worth
in today’s valuation only 95.23; the third year’s service is worth only 90.70; the fourth year’s service,
86.38; the fifth, sixth and seventh year’s services, respectively, worth 82.27, 78.35, 74.62 of present money.
The value of the durable good in this case is not found by multiplying the value of the current service by
the total number of services, but is represented by a sum of services decreasing in value.” Eugen von
Böhm-Bawerk (1891; 342).

Thus Böhm-Bawerk considered a special case of (5) where all service flows fn were equal
to 100 for n = 0,1,…,6 and equal to 0 thereafter, where the asset inflation rate was
expected to be 0 and where the interest rate r was equal to .05 or 5 %.17 This is a special
case of what has come to be known as the one hoss shay model and we shall consider it in
more detail in section 8 of this below.
Note that equations (5) can be rewritten as follows:18
(6) P0t = f0t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P1t ;
P1t = f1t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P2t ;
P2t = f2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P3t ;
…
Pnt = fnt + [(1+it)/(1+rt)] Pn+1t ; …

17

Böhm-Bawerk (1891; 343) went on and constructed the sequence of vintage asset prices using his special
case of equations (5).
18
Christensen and Jorgenson (1969; 302) do this for the geometric depreciation model except that they
assume that the rental is paid at the end of the period rather than the beginning. Variants of the system of
equations (6) were derived by Christensen and Jorgenson (1973), Jorgenson (1989; 10), Hulten (1990; 128)
and Diewert and Lawrence (2000; 276). Irving Fisher (1908; 32-33) derived these equations in words as
follows: “Putting the principle in its most general form, we may say that for any arbitrary interval of time,
the value of the capital at its beginning is the discounted value of two elements: (1) the actual income
accruing within that interval, and (2) the value of the capital at the close of the period.”

12
The first equation in (6) says that the value of a new asset at the start of period t, P0t, is
equal to the rental that the asset can earn in period t, f0t,19 plus the expected asset value of
the capital good at the end of period t, (1+it) P1t, but this expected asset value must be
divided by the discount factor, (1+rt), in order to convert this future value into an
equivalent beginning of period t value.20
Now it is straightforward to solve equations (6) for the sequence of period t vintage rental
prices, {fnt}, in terms of the vintage asset prices, {Pnt}:
(7) f0t = P0t − [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P1t = (1+rt)−1 [P0t (1+rt) − (1+it) P1t]
f1t = P1t − [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P2t = (1+rt)−1 [P1t (1+rt) − (1+it) P2t]
f2t = P2t − [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P3t = (1+rt)−1 [P2t (1+rt) − (1+it) P3t]
…
fnt = Pn+1t − [(1+it)/(1+rt)] Pn+1t = (1+rt)−1 [Pnt (1+rt) − (1+it) Pn+1t] ; …
Thus equations (5) allow us to go from the sequence of vintage rental prices {fnt} to the
sequence of vintage asset prices {Pnt} while equations (7) allow us to reverse the process.
Equations (7) can be derived from elementary economic considerations. Consider the first
equation in (7). Think of a production unit as purchasing a unit of the new capital asset at
the beginning of period t at a cost of P0t and then using the asset throughout period t.
However, at the end of period t, the producer will have a depreciated asset that is
expected to be worth (1+it) P1t. Since this offset to the initial cost of the asset will only
be received at the end of period t, it must be divided by (1+rt) to express the benefit in
terms of beginning of period t dollars. Thus the net cost of using the new asset for period
t21 is P0t − [(1+it)/(1+rt)] P1t.
The above equations assume that the actual or implicit period t rental payments fnt for
assets of different vintages n are made at the beginning of period t. It is sometimes
convenient to assume that the rental payments are made at the end of each accounting
period. Thus we define the end of period t vintage rental price or user cost for an asset
that is n periods old at the beginning of period t, unt, in terms of the corresponding
beginning of period t rental price fnt as follows:
(8) unt ≡ (1+rt) fnt ; n = 0,1,2,…

19

Note that we are implicitly assuming that the rental is paid to the owner at the beginning of period t.
Another way of interpreting say the first equation in (6) runs as follows: the purchase cost of a new asset
P0t less the rental f0t (which is paid immediately at the beginning of period t) can be regarded as an
investment, which must earn the going rate of return rt. Thus we must have [P0t − f0t](1+rt) = (1+it)P1t
which is the (expected) value of the asset at the end of period t. This line of reasoning can be traced back
to Walras (1954; 267): “A man who buys a house for his own use must be resolved by us into two
individuals, one making an investment and the other consuming directly the services of his capital.”
21
This explains why the rental prices fnt are sometimes called user costs. This derivation of a user cost was
used by Diewert (1974; 504), (1980; 472-473), (1992a; 194) and by Hulten (1996; 155).
20

13
Thus if the rental payment is made at the end of the period instead of the beginning, then
the beginning of the period rental fnt must be escalated by the interest rate factor (1+rt) in
order to obtain the end of the period user cost unt.22
Using equations (8) and the second set of equations in (7), it can readily be shown that
the sequence of end of period t user costs {unt} can be defined in terms of the period t
sequence of vintage asset prices {Pnt} as follows:
(9) u0t = P0t (1+rt) − (1+it) P1t
u1t = P1t (1+rt) − (1+it) P2t
u2t = P2t (1+rt) − (1+it) P3t
…
unt = Pnt (1+rt) − (1+it) Pn+1t ; …
Equations (9) can also be given a direct economic interpretation. Consider the following
explanation for the user cost for a new asset, u0t. At the end of period t, the business unit
expects to have an asset worth (1+it) P1t. Offsetting this benefit is the beginning of the
period asset purchase cost, P0t. However, in addition to this cost, the business must
charge itself either the explicit interest cost that occurs if money is borrowed to purchase
the asset or the implicit opportunity cost of the equity capital that is tied up in the
purchase. Thus offsetting the end of the period benefit (1+it) P1t is the initial purchase
cost and opportunity interest cost of the asset purchase, P0t (1+rt), leading to a end of
period t net cost of P0t (1+rt) − (1+it) P1t or u0t.
It is interesting to note that in both the accounting and financial management literature of
the past century, there was a reluctance to treat the opportunity cost of equity capital tied
up in capital inputs as a genuine cost of production.23 However, more recently, there is
an acceptance of an imputed interest charge for equity capital as a genuine cost of
production.24
In the following section, we will relate the vintage asset price profiles {Pnt} and the user
cost profiles {unt} to depreciation profiles. However, before turning to the subject of
depreciation, it is important to stress that the analysis presented in this section is based on
22

It is interesting that Böhm-Bawerk (1891; 343) carefully distinguished between rental payments made at
the beginning or end of a period: “These figures are based on the assumption that the whole year’s utility is
obtained all at once, and, indeed, obtained in anticipation at the beginning of the year; e.g., by hiring the
good at a year’s interest of 100 payable on each 1st January. If, on the other hand, the year’s use can only
be had at the end of the year, a valuation undertaken at the beginning of the year will show figures not
inconsiderably lower. … That the figures should alter according as the date of the valuation stands nearer
or farther from the date of obtaining the utility, is an entirely natural thing, and one quite familiar in
financial life.”
23
This literature is reviewed in Diewert and Fox (1999; 271-274).
24
Stern Stewart & Co. has popularized this concept of EVA, Economic Value Added. In a newspaper
advertisement in the Financial Post in 1999, it described this “new” concept as follows: “EVA measures
your company’s after tax profits from operations minus the cost of all the capital employed to produce
those profits. What makes EVA so revealing is that it takes into account a factor no conventional measures
include: the cost of the operation’s capital— not just the cost of debt but the cost of equity capital as well.”

14
a number of restrictive assumptions, particularly on future price expectations. Moreover,
we have not explained how these asset price expectations are formed and we have not
explained how the period t nominal interest rate is to be estimated (we will address these
topics in section 7 below). We have not explained what should be done if the sequence
of second hand asset prices {Pnt} is not available and the sequences of vintage rental
prices or user costs, {fnt} or {unt}, are also not available (we will address this problem in
later sections as well). We have also assumed that asset values and user costs are
independent of how intensively the assets are used. Finally, we have not modeled
uncertainty (about future prices and the useful lives of assets) and attitudes towards risk
on the part of producers. Thus the analysis presented in this paper is only a start on the
difficult problems associated with measuring capital input.
4. Cross Section Depreciation Profiles
Recall that in the previous section, Pnt was defined to be the price of an asset that was n
periods old at the beginning of period t. Generally, the decline in asset value as we go
from one vintage to the next oldest is called depreciation. More precisely, we define the
cross section depreciation Dnt 25 of an asset that is n periods old at the beginning of
period t as
(10) Dnt ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t ; n = 0,1,2,…
Thus Dnt is the value of an asset that is n periods old at the beginning of period t, Pnt,
minus the value of an asset that is n+1 periods old at the beginning of period t, Pn+1t.26
Obviously, given the sequence of period t vintage asset prices {Pnt}, we can use equations
(10) to determine the period t sequence of declines in vintage asset values, {Dnt}.
Conversely, given the period t cross section depreciation sequence or profile, {Dnt}, we
can determine the period t vintage asset prices by adding up amounts of depreciation:

25

This terminology is due to Hill (1999) who distinguished the decline in second hand asset values due to
aging (cross section depreciation) from the decline in an asset value over a period of time (time series
depreciation). Triplett (1996; 98-99) uses the cross section definition of depreciation and shows that it is
equal to the concept of capital consumption in the national accounts but he does this under the assumption
of no expected real asset inflation. We will examine the relationship of cross section to time series
depreciation in section 6 below.
26
Of course, the objections to the use of second hand market data to determine depreciation rates are very
old: “We readily agree that where a market is sufficiently large, generally accessible, and continuous over
time, it serves to coordinate a large number of subjective estimates and thus may impart a moment of
(social) objectivity to value relations based on prices forced on it. But it can hardly be said that the secondhand market for industrial equipment, which would be the proper place for the determination of the value
of capital goods which have been in use, satisfies these requirements, and that its valuations are superior to
intra-enterprise valuation.” L.M. Lachmann (1941; 376-377). “Criticism has also been voiced about the
viability of used asset market price data as an indicator of in use asset values. One argument, drawing on
the Ackerlof Lemons Model, is that assets resold in second hand markets are not representative of the
underlying population of assets, because only poorer quality units are sold when used. Others express
concerns about the thinness of resale markets, believing that it is sporadic in nature and is dominated by
dealers who under-bid.” Charles R. Hulten and Frank C. Wykoff (1996; 17-18).

15
(11) P0t = D0t + D1t + D2t + …
P1t = D1t + D2t + D3t + …
…
Pnt = Dnt + Dn+1t + Dn+2t + …
Rather than working with first differences of vintage asset prices, it is more convenient to
reparameterize the pattern of cross section depreciation by defining the period t
depreciation rate δnt for an asset that is n periods old at the start of period t as follows:
(12) δnt ≡ 1 − [Pn+1t/Pnt] = Dnt / Pnt ; n = 0,1,2,…
In the above definitions, we require n to be such that Pnt is positive.27
Obviously, given the sequence of period t vintage asset prices {Pnt}, we can use equations
(12) to determine the period t sequence of vintage cross section depreciation rates, {δnt}.
Conversely, given the cross section sequence of period t depreciation rates, {δnt}, as well
as the price of a new asset in period t, P0t, we can determine the period t vintage asset
prices as follows:
(13) P1t = (1 − δ0t) P0t
P2t = (1 − δ0t)(1 − δ1t) P0t
…
Pnt = (1 − δ0t)(1 − δ1t)…(1 − δn−1t) P0t ; …
The interpretation of equations (13) is straightforward. At the beginning of period t, a
new capital good is worth P0t. An asset of the same type but which is one period older at
the beginning of period t is less valuable by the amount of depreciation δ0t P0t and hence
is worth (1 − δ0t) P0t, which is equal to P1t. An asset which is two periods old at the
beginning of period t is less valuable than a one period old asset by the amount of
depreciation δ1t P1t and hence is worth P2t = (1 − δ1t) P1t which is equal to (1 − δ1t)(1 −
δ0t) P0t using the first equation in (13) and so on. Suppose L − 1 is the first integer which
is such that δL−1t is equal to one. Then Pnt equals zero for all n ≥ L; i.e., at the end of L
periods of use, the asset no longer has a positive rental value. If L = 1, then a new asset

27

This definition of depreciation dates back to Hicks (1939) at least and was used extensively by Hulten
and Wykoff (1981a) (1981b), Diewert (1974; 504) and Hulten (1990; 128) (1996; 155): “If there is a
perfect second hand market for the goods in question, so that a market value can be assessed for them with
precision, corresponding to each particular degree of wear, then the value-loss due to consumption can be
exactly measured…” John R. Hicks (1939; 176). Current cost accountants have also advocated the use of
second hand market data (when available) to calculate “objective” depreciation rates: “But as a practical
matter the quantification and valuation of asset services used is not a simple matter and we must fall back
on estimated patterns as a basis for current cost as well as historic cost depreciation. For those fixed assets
which have active second hand markets the problem is not overly difficult. A pattern of service values can
be obtained at any time by comparing the market values of different ages or degrees of use. The
differences so obtained, when related to the value of a new asset, yield the proportions of asset value which
are normally used up or foregone in the various stages of asset life.” Edgar O. Edwards and Philip W. Bell
(1961; 175).

16
of this type delivers all of its services in the first period of use and the asset is in fact a
nondurable asset.
Now substitute equations (12) into equations (9) in order to obtain the following formulae
for the sequence of the end of the period vintage user costs {unt} in terms of the price of a
new asset at the beginning of period t, P0t, and the sequence of cross section depreciation
rates, {δnt}:
(14) u0t = [(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δ0t)] P0t
u1t = (1 − δ0t)[(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δ1t)] P0t
…
unt = (1 − δ0t)… (1 − δn−1t)[(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δnt)] P0t ; …
Thus given P0t (the beginning of period t price of a new asset), it (the new asset inflation
rate that is expected at the beginning of period t), rt (the one period nominal interest rate
that the business unit faces at the beginning of period t) and given the sequence of cross
section vintage depreciation rates prevailing at the beginning of period t (the δnt), then we
can use equations (14) to calculate the sequence of vintage end of the period user costs
for period t, the unt. Of course, given the unt, we can use equations (8) to calculate the
beginning of the period user costs (the fnt) and then use the fnt to calculate the sequence of
vintage asset prices Pnt using equations (5) and finally, given the Pnt, we can use
equations (12) in order to calculate the sequence of vintage depreciation rates, the δnt.
Thus given any one of these sequences or profiles, all of the other sequences are
completely determined. This means that assumptions about depreciation rates, the pattern
of vintage user costs or the pattern of vintage asset prices cannot be made independently
of each other.28
It is useful to look more closely at the first equation in (14), which expresses the user cost
or rental price of a new asset at the beginning of period t, u0t, in terms of the depreciation
rate δ0t, the one period nominal interest rate rt, the new asset inflation rate it that is
expected to prevail at the beginning of period t and the beginning of period t price for a
new asset, P0t:
(15) u0t = [(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δ0t)] P0t = [rt − it + (1+ it)δ0t] P0t.
Thus the user cost of a new asset u0t that is purchased at the beginning of period t (and the
actual or imputed rental payment is made at the end of the period) is equal to rt − it (a
nominal interest rate minus an asset inflation rate which can be loosely interpreted29 as a
28

This point was first made explicitly by Jorgenson and Griliches (1967; 257): “An almost universal
conceptual error in the measurement of capital input is to confuse the aggregation of capital stock with the
aggregation of capital service.” See also Jorgenson and Griliches (1972; 81-87). Much of the above
algebra for switching from one method of representing vintage capital inputs to another was first developed
by Christensen and Jorgenson (1969; 302-305) (1973) for the geometrically declining depreciation model.
The general framework for an internally consistent treatment of capital services and capital stocks in a set
of vintage accounts was set out by Jorgenson (1989) and Hulten (1990; 127-129) (1996; 152-160).
29
We will provide a more precise definition of a real interest rate later.

17
real interest rate) times the initial asset cost P0t plus (1+ it)δ0tP0t which is depreciation on
the asset at beginning of the period prices, δ1tP0t, times the inflation escalation factor, (1+
it).30 If we further assume that the expected asset inflation rate is 0, then (15) further
simplifies to:
(16) u0t = [rt + δ0t] P0t.
Under these assumptions, the user cost of a new asset is equal to the interest rate plus the
depreciation rate times the initial purchase price.31 This is essentially the user cost
formula that was obtained by Walras in 1874:
“Let P be the price of a capital good. Let p be its gross income, that is, the price of its service inclusive of
both the depreciation charge and the insurance premium. Let µP be the portion of this income representing
the depreciation charge and νP the portion representing the insurance premium. What remains of the gross
income after both charges have been deducted, π = p − (µ+ν)P, is the net income.
We are now able to explain the differences in gross incomes derived from various capital goods having the
same value, or conversely, the differences in values of various capital goods yielding the same gross
incomes. It is, however, readily seen that the values of capital goods are rigorously proportional to their net
incomes. At least this would have to be so under certain normal and ideal conditions when the market for
capital goods is in equilibrium. Under equilibrium conditions the ratio [p − (µ+ν)P]/P, or the rate of net
income, is the same for all capital goods. Let i be this common ratio. When we determine i, we also
determine the prices of all landed capital, personal capital and capital goods proper by virtue of the
equation p − (µ+ν)P = iP or P = p/[i+µ+ν].” Léon Walras (1954; 268-269).

However, the basic idea that a durable input should be charged a period price that is equal
to a depreciation term plus a term that would cover the cost of financial capital goes back
much further32. For example, consider the following quotation from Babbage:
“Machines are, in some trades, let out to hire, and a certain sum is paid for their use, in the manner of rent.
This is the case amongst the frame-work knitters: and Mr. Hensen, in speaking of the rate of payment for
the use of their frames, states, that the proprietor receives such a rent that, besides paying the full interest
for his capital, he clears the value of his frame in nine years. When the rapidity with which improvements
succeed each other is considered, this rent does not appear exorbitant. Some of these frames have been
worked for thirteen years with little or no repair.” Charles Babbage (1835; 287).

Babbage did not proceed further with the user cost idea. Walras seems to have been the
first economist who formalized the idea of a user cost into a mathematical formula.
However, the early industrial engineering literature also independently came up with the
user cost idea; Church described how the use of a machine should be charged as follows:
30

This formula was obtained by Christensen and Jorgenson (1969; 302) for the geometric model of
depreciation but it is valid for any depreciation model. Griliches (1963; 120) also came very close to
deriving this formula in words: “In a perfectly competitive world the annual rent of a machine would equal
the marginal product of its services. The rent itself would be determined by the interest costs on the
investment, the deterioration in the future productivity of the machine due to current use, and the expected
change in the price of the machine (obsolescence).”
31
Using equations (13) and (14) and the assumption that the asset inflation rate it = 0, it can be shown that
the user cost of an asset that is n periods old at the start of period t can be written as unt = (rt + δnt)Pnt where
Pnt is the beginning of period t second hand market price for the asset.
32
Solomons (1968; 9-17) indicates that interest was regarded as a cost for a durable input in much of the
nineteenth century accounting literature. The influential book by Garcke and Fells (1893) changed this.

18

“No sophistry is needed to assume that these charges are in the nature of rents, for it might easily happen
that in a certain building a number of separate little shops were established, each containing one machine,
all making some particular part or working on some particular operation of the same class of goods, but
each shop occupied, not by a wage earner, but by an independent mechanic, who rented his space, power
and machinery, and sold the finished product to the lessor. Now in such a case, what would be the shop
charges of these mechanics? Clearly they would comprise as their chief if not their only item, just the rent
paid. And this rent would be made up of: (1) Interest. (2) Depreciation. (3) Insurance. (4) Profit on the
capital involved in the building, machine and power-transmitting and generating plant. There would also
most probably be a separate charge for power according to the quantity consumed.
Exclude the item of profit, which is not included in the case of a shop charge, and we find that we have
approached most closely to the new plan of reducing any shop into its constituent production centres. No
one would pretend that there was any insuperable difficulty involved in fixing a just rent for little shops let
out in this plan.” A. Hamilton Church (1901; 907-908).
“A production centre is, of course, either a mechanic, or a bench at which a hand craftsman works. Each of
these is in the position of a little shop carrying on one little special industry, paying rent for the floor space
occupied, interest for the capital involved, depreciation for the wear and tear, and so on, quite
independently of what may be paid by other production centres in the same shop.” A. Hamilton Church
(1901; 734).

Church was well aware of the importance of determining the “right” rate to be charged
for the use of a machine in a multiproduct enterprise. This information is required not
only to price products appropriately but to determine whether an enterprise should make
or purchase a particular commodity. Babbage and Canning were also aware of the
importance of determining the right machine rate charge:33
33

Under moderate inflation, the difficulties with traditional cost accounting based on historical cost and no
proper allowance for the opportunity of capital, the proper pricing of products becomes very difficult.
Diewert and Fox (1999; 271-274) argued that this factor contributed to the great productivity slowdown
that started around 1973 and persisted to the early 1990’s. The traditional method of cost accounting can
be traced back to a book first published in 1887 by the English accountants, Garcke and Fells, who
suggested allocating the “indirect costs” of producing a good proportionally to the amount of labour and
materials costs used to make the item: “In some establishments the direct expenditures in wages and
materials only is considered to constitute the cost; and no attempt is made to allocate to the various working
or stock orders any portion of the indirect expenses. Under this system the difference between the sum of
the wages and materials expended on the articles and their selling price constitutes the gross profit, which is
carried in the aggregate to the credit of profit and loss, the indirect factory expenses already referred to,
together with the establishment expenses and depreciation, being particularised on the debit side of that
account. This method has certainly simplicity in its favour, but a more efficient check upon the indirect
expenses would be obtained by establishing a relation between them and the direct expenses. This may be
done by distributing all the indirect expenses, such as wages of foremen, rent of factory, fuel, lighting,
heating, and cleaning, etc. (but not the salaries of clerks, office rent, stationery and other establishment
charges to be referred to later), over the various jobs, as a percentage, either upon the wages expended upon
the jobs respectively, or upon the cost of both wages and materials.” Emile Garcke and John Manger Fells
(1893; 70-71). Compare this rather crude approach to cost accounting to the masterful analysis of Church!
Garcke and Fells endorsed the idea that deprecation was an admissible item of cost that should be allocated
in proportion to the prime cost (i.e., labour and materials cost) of manufacturing an article but they
explicitly ruled out interest as a cost: “The item of Depreciation may, for the purpose of taking out the cost,
simply be included in the category of the indirect expenses of the factory, and be distributed over the
various enterprises in the same way as those expenses may be allocated; or it may be dealt with separately
and more correctly in the manner already alluded to and hereafter to be fully described. The establishment
expenses and interest on capital should not, however, in any case form part of the cost of production. There
is no advantage in distributing these items over the various transactions or articles produced. They do not

19

“The great competition introduced by machinery, and the application of the principle of the subdivision of
labour, render it necessary for each producer to be continually on the watch, to discover improved methods
by which the cost of the article he manufactures may be reduced; and, with this view, it is of great
importance to know the precise expense of every process, as well as of the wear and tear of machinery
which is due to it.” Charles Babbage (1835; 203).
“The question of ‘adequate’ rates of depreciation, in the sense that they will ultimately adjust the valuations
to the realities, is often discussed as though it had no effect upon ultimate profit at all. Of some modes of
valuing, it is said that they tend to overvalue some assets and to undervalue others, but the aggregate of
book values found is nearly right. If the management pay no attention at all to the unit costs implied in
such valuations, no harm is done. But if the cost accountant gives effect to these individually bad
valuations through a machine-rate burden charge, and if the selling policy has regard for apparent unit
profits, the valuation may lead to the worst rather than to the best possible policy.” John B. Canning (1929;
259-260).

The above equations relating vintage asset prices Pnt, beginning of the period vintage user
costs fnt, end of the period vintage user costs unt and the (cross section) vintage
depreciation rates δnt are the fundamental ones that we will specialize in subsequent
sections in order to measure both wealth capital stocks and capital services under
conditions of inflation. In the following section, we shall consider several options that
could be used in order to determine empirically the interest rates rt and the asset inflation
rates it.
5. The Empirical Determination of Interest Rates and Asset Inflation Rates
We consider initially three broad approaches34 to the determination of the nominal
interest rate rt that is to be used to discount future period value flows by the business units
in the aggregate under consideration:
•
•

Use the ex post rate of return that will just make the sum of the user costs exhaust the
gross operating surplus of the production sectors in the aggregate under
consideration.
Use an aggregate of nominal interest rates that the production sectors in the
aggregate might be facing at the beginning of each period.

vary proportionately with the volume of business. … The establishment charges are, in the aggregate, more
or less constant, while the manufacturing costs fluctuate with the cost of labour and the price of material.
To distribute the charges over the articles manufactured would, therefore, have the effect of
disproportionately reducing the cost of production with every increase, and the reverse with every
diminution, of business. Such a result is greatly to be deprecated, as tending to neither economy of
management nor to accuracy in estimating for contracts. The principles of a business can always judge
what percentage of gross profit upon cost is necessary to cover fixed establishment charges and interest on
capital.” Emile Garcke and John Manger Fells (1893; 72-73). The aversion of accountants to include
interest as a cost can be traced back to this quotation.
34
Other methods for determining the appropriate interest rates that should be inserted into user cost
formulae are discussed by Harper, Berndt and Wood (1989) and in Chapter 5 of Schreyer (2001). Harper,
Berndt and Wood (1989) evaluate empirically 5 alternative rental price formulae using geometric
depreciation but making different assumptions about the interest rate and the treatment of asset price
change. They show that the choice of formula matters.

20
•

Take a fixed real interest rate and add to it actual ex post consumer price inflation or
anticipated consumer price inflation.

The first approach was used for the entire private production sector of the economy by
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967; 267) and for various sectors of the economy by
Christensen and Jorgenson (1969; 307). It is also widely used by statistical agencies. It
has the advantage that the value of output for the sector will exactly equal the value of
input in a consistent accounting framework. It has the disadvantages that it is subject to
measurement error and it is an ex post rate of return which may not reflect the economic
conditions facing producers at the beginning of the period.
The second approach suffers from aggregation problems. There are many interest rates in
an economy at the beginning of an accounting period and the problem of finding the
“right” aggregate of these rates is not a trivial one.
The third approach works as follows. Let the consumer price index for the economy at
the beginning of period t be ct say. Then the ex post general consumer inflation rate for
period t is ρt defined as:
(17) 1 + ρt ≡ ct+1/ct .
Let the production units under consideration face the real interest rate r*t. Then by the
Fisher (1896) effect, the relevant nominal interest rate that the producers face should be
approximately equal to rt defined as follows:
(18) rt ≡ (1+r*t)(1+ρt) −1.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics assumes that producers face a real interest rate of 4
%. This is consistent with long run observed economy wide real rates of return for most
OECD countries which fall in the 3 to 5 per cent range. We shall choose this third
method for defining nominal interest rates and choose the real rate of return to be 4 % per
annum; i.e., we assume that the nominal rate rt is defined by (18) with the real rate
defined by
(19) r*t ≡ .04
assuming that the accounting period chosen is a year.35
We turn now to the determination of the asset inflation rates, the it, which appear in most
of the formulae derived in the preceding sections of this annex. There are three broad
approaches that can be used in this context:
•
35

Use actual ex post asset inflation rates over each period.

If we are in a high inflation situation so that the accounting period becomes a quarter or a month, then r*t
must be chosen to be appropriately smaller.

21
•
•

Assume that each asset inflation rate is equal to the general inflation rate for each
period.
Estimate anticipated asset inflation rates for each period.

In what follows, we will compute vintage user costs using Canadian data on investments
for two broad classes of assets (nonresidential construction and machinery and
equipment) for 4 different sets of assumptions about depreciation or the relative
efficiency of vintage assets. We will undertake these computations in an inflationary
environment and make each of the three sets of assumptions about the asset inflation rates
listed above for each of the 4 depreciation models, giving 12 models in all that will be
compared. If the various models give very different results, this indicates that the
statistical agency computing capital stocks and service flows under inflation must choose
its preferred model with some care.
When we assume that each asset inflation rate is equal to the general inflation rate ρt
defined by (17), the equations presented earlier simplify. Thus if we replace 1+it by 1+ρt
and 1+rt by (1+r*)(1+ρt), equations (5), which relate the vintage asset prices Pnt to the
vintage rental prices fnt, become:
(20) P0t = f0t + [1/(1+r*)] f1t + [1/(1+r*)]2 f2t + [1/(1+r*)]3 f3t + …
P1t = f1t + [1/(1+r*)] f2t + [1/(1+r*)]2 f3t + [1/(1+r*)]3 f4t + …
…
Pnt = fnt + [1/(1+r*)] fn+1t + [1/(1+r*)]2 fn+2t + [1/(1+r*)]3 fn+3t + …
Note that only the constant real interest rate r* appears in these equations.
If we replace 1+it by 1+ρt and 1+rt by (1+r*)(1+ρt), equations (14), which relate the end
of period vintage user costs unt to the vintage depreciation rates δnt, become:
(21) u0t = (1+ρt)[(1+r*) − (1 − δ0t)] P0t
= (1+ρt)[r* + δ0t] P0t
u1t = (1+ρt)(1 − δ0t)[(1+r*) − (1 − δ1t)] P0t = (1+ρt)(1 − δ0t)[r* + δ1t] P0t
…
unt = (1+ρt)(1 − δ0t)… (1 − δn−1t)[(1+r*) − (1 − δnt)] P0t
= (1+ρt)(1 − δ0t)…(1 − δn−1t) [r* + δnt] P0t.
Now use equations (8) and 1+rt = (1+r*)(1+ρt) and substitute into (21) to obtain the
following equations, which relate the beginning of period vintage user costs fnt to the
vintage depreciation rates δnt:
(22) f0t = (1+r*)−1[r* + δ0t] P0t
f1t = (1+r*)−1(1 − δ0t)[r* + δ1t] P0t
…
fnt = (1+r*)−1(1 − δ0t)…(1 − δn−1t) [r* + δnt] P0t.

22
Note that only the constant real interest rate r* appears in equations (22) but equations
(21) also have the general inflation rate (1+ρt) as a multiplicative factor.
As mentioned above, in our third class of assumptions about asset inflation rates, we want
to estimate anticipated inflation rates and use these estimates as our it in the various
formulae we have exhibited. Unfortunately, there are any number of forecasting methods
that could be used to estimate the anticipated inflation asset inflation rates. We will take
a somewhat different approach than a pure forecasting one: we will simply smooth the
observed ex post inflation rates and use these smoothed rates as our estimates of
anticipated asset inflation rates.36 A similar forecasting problem arises when we use ex
post actual consumer price index inflation rates (recall (17) and (18) above) in order to
generate anticipated general inflation rates. Thus in our third set of models, we will use
both smoothed asset inflation rates and smoothed general inflation rates as our estimates
for anticipated rates. In our first class of models, we will use actual ex post rates in both
cases.
Before we proceed to consider our four specific depreciation models, we briefly consider
in the next section a topic of some current interest: namely the interaction of (foreseen)
obsolescence and depreciation. We also discuss cross section versus time series
depreciation.
6. Obsolescence and Depreciation
We begin this section with a definition of the time series depreciation of an asset. Define
the ex post time series depreciation of an asset that is n periods old at the beginning of
period t, Ent, to be its second hand market price at the beginning of period t, Pnt, less the
price of an asset that is one period older at the beginning of period t+1, Pn+1t+1; i.e.,
(23) Ent ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t+1 ; n = 0,1,2,…
Definitions (23) should be contrasted with our earlier definitions (10), which defined the
cross section amounts of depreciation for the same assets at the beginning of period t, Dnt
≡ Pnt − Pn+1t.
We can now explain why we preferred to work with the cross section definition of
depreciation, (10), over the time series definition, (23). The problem with (23) is that
time series depreciation captures the effects of changes in two things: changes in time
(this is the change in t to t+1)37 and changes in the age of the asset (this is the change in n
to n+1).38 Thus time series depreciation aggregates together two effects: the asset
36

Unfortunately, different analysts may choose different smoothing methods so there may be a problem of
a lack of reproducibility in our estimating procedures. Harper, Berndt and Wood (1989; 351) note that the
use of time series techniques to smooth ex post asset inflation rates and the use of such estimates as
anticipated price change dates back to Epstein (1977).
37
This change could be captured by either Pnt − Pnt+1 or Pn+1t − Pn+1t+1.
38
This change could be captured by either Pnt − Pn+1t or Pnt+1 − Pn+1t+1.

23
specific price change that occurred between time t and time t+1 and the effects of asset
aging (depreciation). Thus the time series definition of depreciation combines together
two distinct effects.
The above definition of ex post time series depreciation is the original definition of
depreciation and it extends back to the very early beginnings of accounting theory:
“[There are] various methods of estimating the Depreciation of a Factory, and of recording alteration in
value, but it may be said in regard to any of them that the object in view is, so to treat the nominal capital in
the books of account that it shall always represent as nearly as possible the real value. Theoretically, the
most effectual method of securing this would be, if it were feasible, to revalue everything at stated
intervals, and to write off whatever loss such valuations might reveal without regard to any prescribed
rate… The plan of valuing every year instead of adopting a depreciation rate, though it might appear the
more perfect, is too tedious and expensive to be adopted … The next best plan, which is that generally
followed … is to establish average rates which can without much trouble be written off every year, to check
the result by complete or partial valuation at longer intervals, and to adjust the depreciation rate if
required.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 35).

Hotelling, in the first mathematical treatment of depreciation in continuous time, defined
time series depreciation in a similar manner:
“Depreciation is defined simply as rate of decrease of value.” Harold Hotelling (1925; 341).

However, what has to be kept in mind that these early authors who used the concept of
time series depreciation were implicitly or explicitly assuming that prices were stable
across time, in which case, time series and cross section depreciation coincide.
Hill (2000) recently argued that a form of time series depreciation was to be preferred
over cross section depreciation for national accounts purposes:
“The basic cost of using an asset over a certain period of time consists of depreciation, the decline in the
value of that asset, plus the associated financial, or capital cost. An alternative definition of depreciation
has been proposed in recent years in what may be described as the vintage accounting approach to
depreciation. In the context of vintage accounting, depreciation is defined as the difference between the
value of an asset of age k and one of age k+1 at the same point of time, the two assets being identical
except for their ages. This concept, although superficially the same as the traditional concept, is in fact
radically different because it effectively rules out obsolescence from depreciation by definition.
The issue is not a factual one about whether obsolescence does or does not cause the value of assets to
decline over time. The question is how should such a decline be interpreted and classified. Whereas the
traditional concept of depreciation treats expected obsolescence as an integral part of depreciation, in the
vintage approach it is treated as a separate item, a revaluation, which has to be treated as real holding loss
in the SNA. Reclassifying part of what has always been treated as depreciation in both business and
economic accounting as a holding loss would reduce depreciation and increase every balancing item in the
SNA from Net National Product and Income to net saving.” Peter Hill (2000; 6).

Since the depreciation rates δnt defined by (12) are cross section depreciation rates and
they play a key role in the beginning and end of period t user costs fnt and unt defined by
(14), (21) and (22), it is necessary to clarify their use in the context of Hill’s point that
these depreciation rates should not be used to measure depreciation in the national
accounts.

24

Our response to the Hill critique is twofold:
•
•

Cross section depreciation rates as we have defined them are affected by anticipated
obsolescence in principle but
Hill is correct in arguing that cross section depreciation will not generally equal ex
post time series depreciation or anticipated time series depreciation.

Let us consider the first point above. Provisionally, we define anticipated obsolescence
as a situation where the expected new asset inflation rate (adjusted for quality change) it
is negative.39 For example, everyone anticipates that the quality adjusted price for a new
computer next quarter will be considerably lower than it is this quarter.40 Now turn back
to equations (5) above, which define the profile of vintage asset prices Pnt at the start of
period t. It is clear that the negative it plays a role in defining the sequence of vintage
asset prices as does the sequence of vintage rental prices that is observed at the beginning
of period t, the fnt. Thus in this sense, cross sectional depreciation rates certainly embody
assumptions about anticipated obsolescence. In fact, Zvi Griliches had a nice verbal
description of the factors which explain the pattern of used asset prices:
“The net stock concept is motivated by the observed fact that the value of a capital good declines with age
(and/or use). This decline is due to several factors, the main ones being the decline in the life expectancy
of the asset (it has fewer work years left), the decline in the physical productivity of the asset (it has poorer
work years left) and the decline in the relative market return for the productivity of this asset due to the
availability of better machines and other relative price changes (its remaining work years are worth less).
One may label there three major forces as exhaustion, deterioration and obsolescence.” Zvi Griliches
(1963; 119).

Thus for an asset that has a finite life, as we move down the rows of equations (5), the
number of discounted rental terms decline and hence asset value declines, which is
Griliches’ concept of exhaustion. If the cross sectional rental prices are monotonically
declining (due to their declining efficiency), then as we move down the rows of equations
(5), the higher rental terms are being dropped one by one so that the asset values will also
decline from this factor, which is Griliches’ concept of deterioration. Finally, a negative
anticipated asset inflation rate will cause all future period rentals to be discounted more

39

Paul Schreyer and Peter Hill noted a problem with this provisional definition of anticipated obsolescence
as a negative value of the expected asset inflation rate: it will not work in a high inflation environment. In
a high inflation environment, the nominal asset inflation rate it will generally be positive but we will require
this nominal rate to be less than general inflation in order to have anticipated obsolescence. Thus our final
definition of anticipated obsolescence is that the real asset inflation rate i*t defined later by (28) be
negative; see the discussion just above equation (30) below.
40
Our analysis assumes that the various vintages of capital are adjusted for quality change (if any occurs)
as they come on the market. In terms of our Canadian empirical example to follow, we are assuming that
Statistics Canada correctly adjusted the published investment price deflators for machinery and equipment
and nonresidential construction for quality change. We also need to assume that the form of quality change
affects all future efficiency factors (i.e., the fnt) in a proportional manner. This is obviously only a rough
approximation to reality: technical change may increase the durability of a capital input or it may decrease
the amount of maintenance or fuel that is required to operate the asset. These changes can lead to
nonproportional changes in the fnt.

25
heavily, which could be interpreted as Griliches’ concept of obsolescence.41 Thus all of
these explanatory factors are imbedded in equations (5).42
Now let us consider the second point: that cross section depreciation is not really
adequate to measure time series depreciation in some sense to be determined.
Define the ex ante time series depreciation of an asset that is n periods old at the
beginning of period t, ∆nt, to be its second hand market price at the beginning of period t,
Pnt, less the anticipated price of an asset that is one period older at the beginning of
period t+1, (1+it) Pn+1t; i.e.,
(23) ∆nt ≡ Pnt − (1+it) Pn+1t ; n = 0,1,2,…
Thus anticipated time series depreciation for an asset that is t periods old at the start of
period t, ∆nt, differs from the corresponding cross section depreciation defined by (10),
Dnt ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t, in that the anticipated new asset inflation rate, it, is missing from Dnt.
However, note that the two forms of depreciation will coincide if the expected asset
inflation rate it is zero.
We can use equations (12) and (13) in order to define the ex ante depreciation amounts
∆nt in terms of the cross section depreciation rates δnt. Thus using definitions (23), we
have:
(24) ∆nt ≡ Pnt − (1+it) Pn+1t
= Pnt − (1+it)(1−δnt) Pnt
= [1 − (1+it)(1−δnt)] Pnt
= (1−δ1t)(1−δ2t) … (1−δn−1t)[1 − (1+it)(1−δnt)] P0t
= (1−δ1t)(1−δ2t) … (1−δn−1t)[ δnt − it(1−δnt)] P0t.

; n = 0,1,2,…
using (12)
using (13)

We can compare the above sequence of ex ante time series depreciation amounts ∆nt with
the corresponding sequence of cross section depreciation amounts:
(25) Dnt ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t
= Pnt − (1−δnt) Pnt
= [1 − (1−δnt)] Pnt
41

; n = 0,1,2,…
using (12)

However, it is more likely that what Griliches had in mind was Hill’s second point; i.e., that time series
depreciation will be larger than cross section depreciation in a situation where i*t is negative.
42
“Normal wear-and-tear in the course of production is clearly a reason why the value of a capital
instrument should be greater at the beginning of a year than at the end, even if the final value was foreseen
accurately. Normal wear-and-tear is therefore an element of true depreciation. So is exceptional wear-andtear, due to exceptionally heavy usage; if the exceptionally heavy usage had been foreseen, the gap between
the beginning-value and the end-value would have been larger. On the other hand, any deterioration which
the machine undergoes outside its utilisation does not give rise to true depreciation; if such deterioration
had been foreseen, the initial capital value would have been written down in consequence; the deterioration
which it undergoes is therefore not depreciation, but a capital loss.” John R. Hicks (1942; 178). In our
view, foreseen price declines in future rentals are reflected in initial capital values.

26
= (1−δ1t)(1−δ2t) … (1−δn−1t)[ δnt] P0t

using (13).

Of course, if the anticipated asset inflation rate it is zero, then (24) and (25) coincide and
ex ante time series depreciation equals cross section depreciation. If we are in the
provisional expected obsolescence case with it negative, then it can be seen comparing
(24) and (25) that
(26) ∆nt > Dnt

for all n such that Dnt > 0;

i.e., if it is negative (and 0 < δnt < 1), then ex ante time series depreciation exceeds cross
section depreciation over all in use vintages of the asset. If it is positive so that the rental
price of each vintage is expected to rise in the future , then ex ante time series
depreciation is less than the corresponding cross section depreciation for all assets that
have a positive price at the end of period t. This corresponds to the usual result in the
vintage user cost literature where capital gains or an ex post price increase for a new asset
leads to a negative term in the user cost formula (plus a revaluation of the cross section
depreciation rate). Here we are restricting ourselves to anticipated capital gains rather
than the actual ex post capital gains and we are focussing on depreciation concepts rather
than the full user cost.
This is not quite the end of the story in the high inflation context. National income
accountants often readjust asset values at either the beginning or end of the accounting
period to take into account general price level change. At the same time, they also want
to decompose nominal interest payments into a real interest component and another
component that compensates lenders for general price change.
Recall (17), which defined the general period t inflation rate ρt and (18), which related
the period t nominal interest rate rt to the real rate r*t and the inflation rate ρt. We rewrite
(18) as follows:
(27) 1 + r*t ≡ (1 + rt)/(1 + ρt).
In a similar manner, we define the period t anticipated real asset inflation rate i*t as
follows:
(28) 1 + i*t ≡ (1 + it)/(1 + ρt).
Recall definition (23), which defined the ex ante time series depreciation of an asset that
is n periods old at the beginning of period t, ∆nt. The first term in this definition reflects
the price level at the beginning of period t while the second term in this definition reflects
the price level at the end of period t. We now express the second term in terms of the
beginning of period t price level. Thus we define the ex ante real time series
depreciation of an asset that is n periods old at the beginning of period t, Πnt, as follows:
(29) Πnt ≡ Pnt − (1+it) Pn+1t/(1+ρt)
= Pnt − (1+it)(1−δnt) Pnt /(1+ρt)

; n = 0,1,2,…
using (12)

27
= [1 − (1+i*t)(1+ρt)(1−δnt)] Pnt /(1+ρt)
= (1−δ0t)(1−δ1t) … (1−δn−1t)[1 − (1+i*t)(1−δnt)] P0t
= (1−δ0t)(1−δ1t) … (1−δn−1t)[ δnt − i*t(1−δnt)] P0t.

using (28)
using (13)

The ex ante real time series depreciation amount Πnt defined by (29) can be compared to
its cross section counterpart Dnt, defined by (25) above. Of course, if the real anticipated
asset inflation rate i*t is zero, then (29) and (25) coincide and real ex ante time series
depreciation equals cross section depreciation.
We are now in a position to provide a more satisfactory definition of expected
obsolescence, particularly in the context of high inflation. We now define expected
obsolescence to be the situation where the real asset inflation rate i*t is negative. If the
real asset inflation rate is negative, then it can be seen comparing (29) and (25) that
(30) Πnt > Dnt

for all n such that Dnt > 0;

i.e., real anticipated time series depreciation exceeds the corresponding cross section
depreciation provided that i*t is negative.
Thus the general user cost formulae that we have developed from the vintage accounts
point of view can be reconciled to reflect the point of view of national income
accountants. We agree with Hill’s point of view that cross section depreciation is not
really adequate to measure time series depreciation as national income accountants have
defined it since Pigou:
“Allowance must be made for such part of capital depletion as may fairly be called ‘normal’; and the
practical test of normality is that the depletion is sufficiently regular to be foreseen, if not in detail, at least
in the large. This test brings under the head of depreciation all ordinary forms of wear and tear, whether
due to the actual working of machines or to mere passage of time— rust, rodents and so on— and all
ordinary obsolescence, whether due to technical advance or to changes of taste. It brings in too the
consequences of all ordinary accidents, such as shipwreck and fire, in short of all accidents against which it
is customary to insure. But it leaves out capital depletion that springs from the act of God or the King’s
enemies, or from such a miracle as a decision tomorrow to forbid the manufacture of whisky or beer.
These sorts of capital depletion constitute, not depreciation to be made good before current net income is
reckoned, but capital losses that are irrelevant to current net income.” A.C. Pigou (1935; 240-241).

Pigou (1924) in an earlier work had a more complete discussion of the obsolescence
problem and the problems involved in defining time series depreciation in an inflationary
environment. Pigou first pointed out that the national dividend or net annual income (or
in modern terms, real net output) should subtract depreciation or capital consumption:
“For the dividend may be conceived in two sharply contrasted ways: as the flow of goods and services
which is produced during the year, or as the flow which is consumed during the year. Dr. Marshall adopts
the former of these alternatives …. Naturally, since in every year plant and equipment wear out and decay,
what is produced must mean what is produced on the whole when allowance has been made for this process
of attrition. … In concrete terms, his conception of the dividend includes an inventory of all the new things
that are made [i.e., gross investment], accompanied as a negative element, by an inventory of all the decay
and demolition of old things [i.e., capital consumption]. A.C. Pigou (1924; 34-35).

28
Pigou then went on to discuss the roles of obsolescence and general price change in
measuring depreciation:
“The concrete content of the dividend is, indeed, unambiguous— the inventory of things made and (double
counting being eliminated) and services rendered, minus, as a negative element, the inventory of things
worn out during the year. But how are we to value this negative element? For example, if a machine
originally costing ₤1000 wears out and, owing to a rise in the general price level, can only be replaced at a
cost of ₤1500, is ₤1000 or ₤1500 the proper allowance? Nor is this the only, or, indeed, the principle
difficulty. For depreciation is measured not merely by the physical process of wearing out, and capital is
not therefore maintained intact when provision has been made to replace what is thus worn out. Machinery
that has become obsolete because of the development of improved forms is not really left intact, however
excellent its physical condition; and the same thing is true of machinery for whose products popular taste
has declined. If, however, in deference to these considerations, we decide to make an allowance for
obsolescence, this concession implies that the value, and not the physical efficiency, of instrumental goods
[i.e., durable capital inputs] is the object to be maintained intact. But, it is then argued, the value of
instrumental goods, being the present value of the services which they are expected to render in the future,
necessarily varies with variations in the rate of interest. Is it really a rational procedure to evaluate the
national dividend by a method which makes its value in relation to that of the aggregated net product of the
country’s industry depend on an incident of that kind? If that method is adopted, and a great war, by
raising the rate of interest, depreciates greatly the value of existing capital, we shall probably be compelled
to put, for the value of the national dividend in the first year of that war, a very large negative figure. This
absurdity must be avoided at all costs, and we are therefore compelled, when we are engaged in evaluating
the national dividend, to leave out of account any change in the value of the country’s capital equipment
that may have been brought about by broad general causes. This decision is arbitrary and unsatisfactory,
but it is one which it is impossible to avoid. During the period of the war, a similar difficulty was created
by the general rise, for many businesses, in the value of the normal and necessary holding of materials and
stocks, which was associated with the general rise of prices. On our principles, this increase of value ought
not to be reckoned as an addition to the income of the firms affected, or, consequently, to the value of the
national dividend.” A.C. Pigou (1924; 39-41).

The above quotation indicates that Pigou was responsible for many of the conventions of
national income accounting that persist down to the present day.43 He essentially argued
that (unanticipated) capital gains or losses be excluded from income and that the effects
of general price level change be excluded from estimates of depreciation. He also argued
for the inclusion of (foreseen) obsolescence in depreciation. Unfortunately, he did not
spell out exactly how all of this could be done in the accounts. Our algebra above can be
regarded as an attempt to formalize these Pigovian complications.
It should be noted that the early industrial engineering literature also stressed that the
possibility of obsolescence meant that depreciation allowances should be larger than
those implied by mere wear and tear:
“Machinery for producing any commodity in great demand, seldom actually wears out; new improvements,
by which the same operations can be executed either more quickly or better, generally superceding it long
before that period arrives: indeed, to make such an improved machine profitable, it is usually reckoned that
43

Colin Clark (1940; 31) echoed Pigou’s recommendations: “The appreciation in value of capital assets
and land must not be treated as an element in national income. Depreciation due to physical wear and tear
and obsolescence must be treated as a charge against current income, but not the depreciation of the money
value of an asset which has remained physically unchanged. Appreciation and depreciation of capital were
included in the American statistics of national income prior to 1929, but now virtually the same convention
has been adopted in all countries.”

29
in five years it ought to have paid itself, and in ten to be superceded by a better.” Charles Babbage (1835;
285).
“The possibility of New Inventions, processes, or machines coming into use, which may supercede or
render an existing plant Obsolete, is a contingency that presses on most manufacturing trades, principally
those which have long established, but sometimes also in new concerns where old methods have been
adopted or imitated just as they were being superceded elsewhere.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 38).
“A reserve beyond the ordinary depreciation above described may then become necessary, because the
original plant, when once superceded by such inventions, may prove unsaleable as second-hand plant,
except in so far as it may have a piecemeal or scrap value. … This risk sometimes arises, not from
improvements in the machinery, but from alterations in the kind of product, rendering new machines
necessary to suit new patterns or types. Contingencies such as these should encourage an ample reduction
of nominal value in the early years of working, so as to bring down the book value of the plant to a point
which will allow even of dismantling without serious loss. In such trades, profits should be large enough to
allow for a liberal and rapid writing off of capital value, which is in effect the establishment of a reservefund as distinct from depreciation for wear and tear.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 39-40).

Thus Matheson considered obsolescence that could arise not only from new inventions
but also from shifts in demand.
We will end this section by pointing out another important use for the concept of real
anticipated time series depreciation. However, before doing this, it is useful to rewrite
equations (5), which define the beginning of period t vintage asset prices Pnt in terms of
the vintage beginning of period t rental prices fnt, and equations (7), which define the
vintage user costs fnt in terms of the vintage asset prices Pnt, using definitions (27) and
(28), which define the period t real interest rate r*t and expected asset inflation rate i*t
respectively in terms of the corresponding nominal rates rt and it and the general inflation
rate ρt. Substituting (27) and (28) into (5) yields the following system of equations:
(31) P0t = f0t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] f1t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)]2 f2t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)]3 f3t + …
P1t = f1t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] f2t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)]2 f3t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)]3 f4t + …
…
Pnt = fnt + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] fn+1t + [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)]2 fn+2t + [(1+i*t)/(1+rt)]3 fn+3t + …
Similarly, substituting (27) and (28) into (7) yields the following system of equations:
(32) f0t = P0t − [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] P1t = (1+r*t)−1 [P0t (1+r*t) − (1+i*t) P1t]
f1t = P1t − [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] P2t = (1+r*t)−1 [P1t (1+r*t) − (1+i*t) P2t]
…
fnt = Pnt − [(1+i*t)/(1+r*t)] Pn+1t = (1+r*t)−1 [Pnt (1+r*t) − (1+i*t) Pn+1t] ; …
Note that the nominal interest and inflation rates have entirely disappeared from the
above equations. In particular, the beginning of the period vintage user costs fnt can be
defined in terms or real variables using equations (32) if this is desired. On the other
hand, entirely equivalent formulae for the vintage user costs can be obtained using the
initial set of equations (7), which used only nominal variables. Which set of equations is

30
used in practice can be left up to the judgement of the statistical agency or the user.44
The point is that the careful and consistent use of discounting should eliminate the effects
of general inflation from our price variables; discounting makes comparable cash flows
received or paid out at different points of time.
Recall definition (29), which defined Πnt as the ex ante real time series depreciation of an
asset that is n periods old at the beginning of period t. It is convenient to convert this
amount of depreciation into a percentage of the initial price of the asset at the beginning
of period t, Pnt. Thus we define the ex ante time series depreciation rate for an asset that
is n periods old at the start of period t, πnt, as follows:45
(33) πnt ≡ Πnt / Pnt
= [Pnt − (1+it) Pn+1t/(1+ρt)] / Pnt
= [Pnt − (1+it)(1−δnt) Pnt /(1+ρt)] / Pnt
= [1 − (1+i*t)(1−δnt)]

; n = 0,1,2,…
using (29)
using (12)
using (28).

Now substitute definition (12) for the cross section depreciation rate δnt into the nth
equation of (32) and we obtain the following expression for the beginning of period t user
cost of an asset that is n periods old at the start of period t:
(34) fnt = (1+r*t)−1 [Pnt (1+r*t) − (1+i*t) Pn+1t]
= (1+r*t)−1 [Pnt (1+r*t) − (1+i*t)(1−δnt) Pnt]
= (1+r*t)−1 [(1+r*t) − (1+i*t)(1−δnt)] Pnt
= (1+r*t)−1 [r*t + πnt] Pnt

n = 0,1,2,…
using (12)
using (33).

Thus the period t vintage user cost for an asset that is n periods old at the start of period t,
fnt, can be decomposed into the sum of two terms. Ignoring the discount factor, (1+r*t)−1,
the first term is r*t Pnt, which represents the real interest cost of the financial capital that
is tied up in the asset, and the second term is πnt Pnt = Πnt, which represents a concept of
national accounts depreciation.
The last line of (34) is important if at some stage statistical agencies decide to switch
from measures of gross domestic product to measures of net domestic product. If this
change occurs, then the user cost for each vintage of capital, fnt, must be split up into two
44

In particular, it is not necessary for the statistical agency to convert all nominal prices into real prices as a
preliminary step before “real” user costs are calculated. The above algebra shows that our nominal vintage
user costs fnt can also be interpreted as “real” user costs that are expressed in terms of the value of money
prevailing at the beginning of period t.
45
To see that there can be a very large difference between the cross section depreciation rate δnt and the
corresponding ex ante time series depreciation rate πnt, consider the case of an asset whose vintages yield
exactly the same service for each period in perpetuity. In this case, all of the vintage asset prices Pnt would
be identical and the cross section depreciation rates δnt would all be zero. Now suppose a marvelous new
invention is scheduled to come on the market next period which would effectively drive the price of this
class of assets down to zero. In this case, i*t would be − 1 and substituting this expected measure of price
change into definitions (33) shows that the ex ante time series depreciation rates would all equal one; i.e.,
under these conditions, we would have πnt = 1 and δnt = 0 for all vintages n.

31
terms as in (34). The first term, (1+r*t)−1 r*t Pnt times the number of units of that vintage
of capital in use, (the real opportunity cost of financial capital) could remain as a primary
input charge while the second term, (1+r*t)−1 πnt Pnt times the number of units of that
vintage of capital in use, (real national accounts depreciation) could be treated as an
intermediate input charge (similar to the present treatment of imports). The second term
would be an offset to gross investment.46
This completes our discussion of the obsolescence problem.47 In the next section, we
turn our attention to the problem of aggregating across vintages of the same capital good.
7. Aggregation over Vintages of a Capital Good
In previous sections, we have discussed the beginning of period t stock price Pnt of an
asset that is n periods old and the corresponding beginning and end of period user costs,
fnt and unt. The stock prices are relevant for the construction of real wealth measures of
capital and the user costs are relevant for the construction of capital services measures.
We now address the problems involved in obtaining quantity series that will match up
with these prices.
Let the period t−1 investment in a homogeneous asset for the sector of the economy
under consideration be It−1. We assume that the starting capital stock for a new unit of
capital stock at the beginning of period t is K0t and this stock is equal to the new
investment in the asset in the previous period; i.e., we assume:
(35) K0t ≡ It−1.
Essentially, we are assuming that the length of the period is short enough so that we can
neglect any contribution of investment to current production; a new capital good becomes
productive only in the period immediately following its construction. In a similar
manner, we assume that the capital stock available of an asset that is n periods old at the
start of period t is Knt and this stock is equal to the gross investment in this asset class
during period t−n−1; i.e., we assume:
(36) Knt ≡ It−n−1 ;

n = 0,1,2,…

Given these definitions, the value of the capital stock in the given asset class for the
sector of the economy under consideration (the wealth capital stock) at the start of period
t is
46

Using this methodology, we would say that capital is being maintained intact for the economy if the
value of gross investments made during the period (discounted to the beginning of the period) is equal to or
greater than the sum of the real national accounts depreciation terms over all assets. This is a maintenance
of financial capital concept as opposed to Pigou’s maintenance of physical capital concept: “Net income
consists of the whole of the annual output minus what is needed to maintain the stock of capital intact; and
this stock is kept intact provided that its physical state is held constant.” A.C. Pigou (1935; 235).
47
It should be noted that our discussion of the obsolescence issue only provides an introduction to the many
thorny issues that make this area of inquiry quite controversial. For further discussion, see Oulton (1995),
Scott (1995) and Triplett (1996) and the references in these papers.

32

(37) Wt ≡ P0t K0t + P1t K1t + P2t K2t + …
= P0t It−1 + P1t It−2 + P2t It−3 + …

using (36).

Turning now to the capital services quantity, we assume that the quantity of services that
an asset of a particular vintage at a point in time is proportional (or more precisely, is
equal) to the corresponding stock. Thus we assume that the quantity of services provided
in period t by a unit of the capital stock that is n periods old at the start of period t is Knt
defined by (36) above. Given these definitions, the value of capital services for all
vintages of asset in the given asset class for the sector of the economy under
consideration (the productive services capital stock) during period t using the end of
period user costs unt defined by equations (8) above is
(38) St ≡ u0t K0t + u1t K1t + u2t K2t + …
= u0t It−1 + u1t It−2 + u2t It−3 + …

using (36).

Now we are faced with the problem of decomposing the value aggregates Wt and St
defined by (37) and (38) into separate price and quantity components. If we assume that
each new unit of capital lasts only a finite number of periods, L say, then we can solve
this value decomposition problem using normal index number theory. Thus define the
period t vintage stock price and quantity vectors, Pt and Kt respectively, as follows:
(39) Pt ≡ [P0t,P1t,…,PL−1t] ; Kt ≡ [K0t,K1t,…,KL−1t] = [It−1,It−2,…,It−L−1] ; t = 0,1,…,T.
Fixed base or chain indexes may be used to decompose value ratios into price change and
quantity change components. In the empirical work which follows, we have used the
chain principle.48 Thus the value of the capital stock in period t, Wt, relative to its value
in the preceding period, Wt−1, has the following index number decomposition:
(40) Wt / Wt−1 = P(Pt−1,Pt,Kt−1,Kt) Q(Pt−1,Pt,Kt−1,Kt) ;

t = 1,2,…,T

where P and Q are bilateral price and quantity indexes respectively.
In a similar manner, we define the period t vintage end of the period user cost price and
quantity vectors, ut and Kt respectively, as follows:
(41) ut ≡ [u0t,u1t,…,uL−1t] ; Kt ≡ [K0t,K1t,…,KL−1t] = [It−1,It−2,…,It−L−1] ; t = 0,1,…,T.
We ask that the value of capital services in period t, St, relative to its value in the
preceding period, St−1, has the following index number decomposition:
(42) St / St−1 = P(ut−1,ut,Kt−1,Kt) Q(ut−1,ut,Kt−1,Kt) ;
48

t = 1,2,…,T

Given smoothly trending price and quantity data, the use of chain indexes will tend to reduce the
differences between Paasche and Laspeyres indexes compared to the corresponding fixed base indexes and
so chain indexes are generally preferred; see Diewert (1978; 895) for a discussion.

33

where again P and Q are bilateral price and quantity indexes respectively.
There is now the problem of choosing the functional form for either the price index P or
the quantity index Q.49 In the empirical work that follows, we used the Fisher (1922)
ideal price and quantity indexes. These indexes appear to be “best” from the axiomatic
viewpoint50 and can also be given strong economic justifications.51
It should be noted that our use of an index number formula to aggregate both vintage
stocks and vintage services is more general than the usual vintage aggregation
procedures, which essentially assume that the different vintages of the same capital good
are perfectly substitutable so that linear aggregation techniques can be used.52 However,
as we shall see in subsequent sections, the more general mode of aggregation suggested
here frequently reduces to the traditional linear method of aggregation provided that the
vintage prices all move in strict proportion over time.
Many researchers and statistical agencies relax the assumption that an asset lasts only a
fixed number of periods, L say, and make assumptions about the distribution of
retirements around the average service life, L. In our empirical work that follows, for
simplicity, we will stick to the sudden death assumption; i.e., that all assets in the given
asset class are retired at age L. However, this simultaneous retirement assumption can
readily be relaxed (at the cost of much additional computational complexity) using the
following methodology developed by Hulten:
“We have thus far taken the date of retirement T to be the same for all assets in a given cohort (all assets
put in place in a given year). However, there is no reason for this to be true, and the theory is readily
extended to allow for different retirement dates. A given cohort can be broken into components, or
subcohorts, according to date of retirement and a separate T assigned to each. Each subcohort can then be
characterized by its own efficiency sequence, which depends among other things on the subcohort’s useful
life Ti.” Charles R. Hulten (1990; 125).

We now have all of the pieces that are required in order to decompose the capital stock of
an asset class and the corresponding capital services into price and quantity components.
However, in order to construct price and quantity components for capital services, we
need information on the relative efficiencies fnt of the various vintages of the capital input
or equivalently, we need information on cross sectional vintage depreciation rates δnt in
order to use (42) above. The problem is that we do not have accurate information on
either of these series so in what follows, we will assume a standard asset life L and make
additional assumptions on the either the pattern of vintage efficiencies or depreciation

49

Obviously, given one of these functional forms, we may use (40) to determine the other.
See Diewert (1992b; 214-223).
51
See Diewert (1976; 129-134).
52
This more general form of aggregation was first suggested by Diewert and Lawrence (2000). For
descriptions of the more traditional linear method of aggregation, see Jorgenson (1989; 4) or Hulten (1990;
121-127) (1996; 152-165).
50

34
rates. Thus in a sense, we are following the same somewhat mechanical strategy that was
used by the early cost accountants:53
“The function of depreciation is recognized by most accountants as the provision of a means for spreading
equitably the cost of comparatively long lived assets. Thus if a building will be of use during twenty years
of operations, its cost should be recognized as operating expense, not of the first year, nor the last, but of all
twenty years. Various methods may be proper in so allocating cost. The method used, however, is
unimportant in this connection. The important matter is that at the time of abandonment, the cost of the
asset shall as nearly as possible have been charged off as expense, under some systematic method.” M.B.
Daniels (1933; 303).

However, our mechanical strategy is more complex than that used by early accountants in
that we translate assumptions about the pattern of cross section depreciation rates into
implications for the pattern of vintage rental prices and asset prices, taking into account
the complications induced by discounting and expected future asset price changes.
In the following sections, we will consider 4 different sets of assumptions and calculate
the resulting aggregate capital stocks and services using Canadian data.54 We illustrate
how the various depreciation models differ from each other using annual Canadian data
on two broad classes of asset:55
•
•

machinery and equipment and
nonresidential structures.

We use Canadian data on gross investment in these two asset classes (in current and in
constant dollars) because it extends back to 1926 and hence vintage capital stocks can be
formed without making arbitrary starting value assumptions.
Our first problem is to decide on the average age of retirement for each of these asset
classes. One source is the OECD (1993) where average service lives for various asset
classes were reported for 14 or so OECD countries. For machinery and equipment
(excluding vehicles) used in manufacturing activities, the average life ranged from 11
years for Japan to 26 years for the United Kingdom. For vehicles, the average service
lives ranged from 2 years for passenger cars in Sweden to 14 years in Iceland and for
road freight vehicles, the average life ranged from 3 years in Sweden to 14 years in
Iceland. For buildings, the average service lives ranged from 15 years (for petroleum and
gas buildings in the US) to 80 years for railway buildings in Sweden. Faced with this
wide range of possible lives, we decided to follow the example of Angus Madison (1993)
and assume an average service life of 14 years for machinery and equipment and 39 years
for nonresidential structures. The Canadian data that we used may be found in Appendix
1 below.
53

Canning (1929; 204) criticized this strategy as follows: “The interminable argument that has been carried
on by the text writers and others about the relative merits of the many formulas for measuring depreciation
has failed, not only to produce the real merits of the several methods, but, more significantly, it has failed to
produce a rational set of criteria of excellence whereby to test the aptness of any formula for any sub-class
of fixed assets.”
54
We also consider a fifth set of assumptions but we do not empirically implement this last model.
55
More realistic models would work with more disaggregated investment series.

35

We turn now to our first efficiency and depreciation model.
8. The One Hoss Shay Model of Efficiency and Depreciation
In section 3 above, we noted that Böhm-Bawerk (1891; 342) postulated that an asset
would yield a constant level of services throughout its useful life of L years and then
collapse in a heap to yield no services thereafter. This has come to be known as the one
hoss shay or light bulb model of depreciation. Hulten notes that this pattern of relative
efficiencies has the most intuitive appeal:
“Of these patterns, the one hoss shay pattern commands the most intuitive appeal. Casual experience with
commonly used assets suggests that most assets have pretty much the same level of efficiency regardless of
their age— a one year old chair does the same job as a 20 year old chair, and so on.” Charles R. Hulten
(1990; 124).

Thus the basic assumptions of this model are that the period t efficiencies and hence cross
sectional rental prices fnt are all equal to say ft for vintages n that are less than L periods
old and for older vintages, the efficiencies fall to zero. Thus we have:
(43) fnt = ft
=0

for n = 0,1,2,...,L−1;
for n = L, L+1,L+2,....

Now substitute (43) into the first equation in (5) and get the following formula56 for the
rental price ft in terms of the price of a new asset at the beginning of year t, P0t:
(44) ft = P0t/[1 + (γt) + (γt)2 + ...+ (γt)L−1]
where the period t discount factor γt is defined in terms of the period t nominal interest
rate rt and the period t expected asset inflation rate it as follows:
(45) γt ≡ (1 + it)/(1 + rt).
Now that the period t rental price ft for an unretired asset has been determined, substitute
equations (43) into equations (5) and determine the sequence of period t vintage asset
prices, Pnt:
(46) Pnt = ft [1 + (γt) + (γt)2 + ...+ (γt)L−1−n]
=0

for n = 0,1,2,...,L−1
for n = L, L+1,L+2,...

Finally, use equations (8) to determine the end of period t rental prices, unt, in terms of
the corresponding beginning of period t rental prices, fnt:

56

This formula simplifies to P0t[1−(γt)L]/[1−γt] provided that γt is less than 1 in magnitude. This last
restriction does not hold for our Canadian data, since for some years, it exceeds rt. However, (44) is still
valid under these conditions.

36
(47) unt = (1 + rt)fnt ;

n = 0,1,2,...

Given the vintage asset prices defined by (46), we could use equations (12) above to
determine the corresponding vintage cross section depreciation rates δnt. We will not
table these depreciation rates since our focus is on constructing measures of the capital
stock and of the flow of services that the stocks yield.
We have data in current and constant dollars for investment in nonresidential structures
and for machinery and equipment in Canada for the years 1926 to 1999 inclusive; see
Appendix 1 below for a description of these data. As was mentioned in the previous
section, we follow the example set by Madison (1993) and assume an average service life
of 14 years for machinery and equipment and 39 years for nonresidential structures.
Thus 1965 is the first year for which we will have data on all 39 vintages of
nonresidential structures. Now it is a straightforward matter to use the vintage asset
prices defined by (46) above (where L equals 39) and apply (40) in the previous section
to aggregate over the 39 vintages of nonresidential capital using the Fisher (1922) ideal
index number formula and form aggregate price and quantity series for the nonresidential
construction (wealth) capital stock, PNRt and KNRt, for the years 1965-1999. These series,
along with their annual average (geometric) growth rates, can be found in Table 1 at 5
year intervals. Similarly, we use (46) above (where L equals 14) and apply (40) in the
previous section to aggregate over the 14 vintages of machinery and equipment using the
Fisher ideal index number formula and form aggregate price and quantity series for the
machinery and equipment (wealth) capital stock, PMEt and KMEt, for the years 1965-1999.
These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth rates, can also be found
in Table 1 at 5 year intervals. In this first model, we assume that producers exactly
anticipate the asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, for nonresidential construction and for
machinery and equipment respectively; these ex post inflation rates are listed in Table A2
in Appendix 1 below.57 Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of
nonresidential capital, PNRt and KNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of
machinery and equipment, PMEt and KMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for the wealth stock, which we denote by P(1)t and K(1)t, where the 1 indicates that this is
our first model in a grand total of 12 alternative aggregate capital stock models.
Table 1: Model 1 Capital Stocks and Prices Assuming Perfect Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
57

PNR
1.0000
1.3255
2.1252
2.9598
4.4893
5.5418
5.6645
6.1071

PME
1.0000
1.1141
1.4242
2.4246
2.2414
2.0559
1.8213
1.8966

P(1)
1.0000
1.2483
1.8598
2.7743
3.5921
4.0632
3.9886
4.2533

KNR
37.2
49.3
62.6
80.4
101.3
118.2
131.2
141.8

KME
21.4
28.6
39.5
56.9
84.5
128.1
168.9
222.1

K(1)
58.5
77.9
101.8
135.5
179.4
226.1
263.5
302.7

Moreover, we assume that producers extrapolate the current asset inflation rates into the future.

37
Annual
Growth
Rates

1.0547

1.0190

1.0435

1.0402 1.0713

1.0495

The quantity units in Table 1 are in billions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen that
the aggregate (over vintages) stock price for nonresidential construction increased
approximately six fold from 1965 to 1999 while the aggregate machinery and equipment
stock price increased only approximately 90% over this period. The Fisher ideal
aggregate price for these two capital stock components increased from 1 to 4.2533 over
this period. The average annual (geometric) growth rate factors are listed in the last row
of Table 1. It can be seen that the price of a unit of nonresidential construction capital
increased by 5.47% per year and the price of a unit of machinery and equipment capital
increased by only 1.90% per year on average. The average rate of price increase for the
capital aggregate was 4.35% per year. On the quantity side, the stock of nonresidential
construction capital increased from $37.2 billion to $141.8 billion (constant 1965)
Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 4.02% while the stock
of machinery and equipment capital increased from $21.4 billion to $222.1 billion
(constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of 7.13%. The
capital aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of 4.95%.
Using equations (43), (44) and (47) along with the data tabled in Appendix 1 (see Tables
A1 and A2), we can construct the end of the period user costs for each of our 39 vintages
of nonresidential construction capital. Now use equation (38) to construct the service
flow aggregate for nonresidential construction for each year. Then we use (42) in the
previous section (where L equals 39) to aggregate over the 39 vintages of nonresidential
capital using the Fisher (1922) ideal index number formula and form the aggregate rental
price for nonresidential construction, uNRt, and the corresponding services aggregate, kNRt,
for the years 1965-1999.58 These series, along with their annual average (geometric)
growth rates, can be found in Table 2 at 5 year intervals. Similarly, we use (42) above
(where L equals 14) and aggregate over the 14 vintages of machinery and equipment
using the Fisher ideal index number formula and form aggregate capital services price
and quantity series, uMEt and kMEt, for the years 1965-1999. These series, along with their
annual average (geometric) growth rates, can also be found in Table 2 at 5 year intervals.
Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of nonresidential capital services,
uNRt and kNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of machinery and
equipment services, uMEt and kMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for capital services, which we denote by u(1)t and k(1)t, where the 1 again indicates that
this is our first model in a grand total of 15 alternative aggregate capital stock models.
Table 2: Model 1 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Perfect Foresight

58

Since all of the vintage rental prices are equal, it turns out that the aggregate rental price is equal to this
common vintage rental price and the service aggregate is equal to the simple sum over the vintages. This
result is an application of Hicks’ (1939; 312-313) aggregation theorem; i.e., if all prices in the aggregate
move in strict proportion over time, then any one of these prices can be taken as the price of the aggregate.

38
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.7182
3.2780
3.9591
7.8561
10.4455
9.5433
9.7617

uME
1.0000
1.1462
1.5913
4.7094
3.1499
2.8093
2.1670
2.8492

u(1)
1.0000
1.3363
2.1440
4.5559
4.6700
5.0818
4.3039
5.0056

1.0693

1.0313

1.0485

kNR
1572
2019
2638
3456
4449
5340
6102
6667

kME
3216
4069
5355
7810
11475
17290
23622
30973

k(1)
4789
6086
8008
11076
15224
20534
25424
30631

1.0434 1.0689

1.0561

The quantity units in Table 2 are in millions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen that
the aggregate (over vintages) capital services price for nonresidential construction
increased approximately ten fold from 1965 to 1999 while the aggregate machinery and
equipment services price increased approximately three fold over this period. These are
much greater increases than were exhibited by the corresponding stock prices in Table 1
above. The Fisher ideal aggregate price for these two capital services components
increased from 1 to 5.0056 over this period. The average annual (geometric) growth rate
factors are listed in the last row of Table 2. It can be seen that the price of a unit of
nonresidential construction capital services increased by 6.93% per year and the price of
a unit of machinery and equipment capital services increased by 3.13% per year on
average. The average rate of price increase for the capital services aggregate was 4.85%
per year, which is higher than our earlier estimate of 4.35% per year increase for the price
of a unit of the corresponding stock. On the quantity side, the flow of nonresidential
construction capital services increased from $1572 million to $6667 million (constant
1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 4.34% while
the flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased from $3216 million to
$30,973 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of
6.89%. The capital services aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of 5.61%
compared to the 4.95% annual average growth rate for the aggregate capital stock. The
fact that capital services grew faster than the corresponding stock is explained by the fact
that in constructing the services aggregate, the faster growing machinery and equipment
component gets a much larger price weight than in the corresponding capital stock
measure.
In order to save space, we have reported our estimates of the one hoss shay capital stocks
and service flows (using the perfect foresight assumption) for only every fifth year.
Unfortunately, this space saving benefit does come at a cost: the year to year volatility in
the user cost series is much greater than the numbers in Table 2 indicate. To get an
indication of this volatility, see Figure 3 below where the aggregate price of capital
services u(1) is graphed.
We turn now to our second one hoss shay depreciation model, which will eliminate the
volatility problem mentioned in the last paragraph. In this model, instead of assuming

39
that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation rates, it is assumed
that producers use the current CPI inflation rate as estimators of anticipated asset
inflation rates. This model turns out to be equivalent to the constant real interest rate
model that is frequently used by statistical agencies.59 In terms of computations, we
simply replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by the CPI inflation rate
ρt listed in Table A2 of the Appendix and then repeat all of the computations made to
implement Model 1 above. The counterparts to Tables 1 and 2 are Tables 3 and 4 below;
Table 3 lists the Model 2 prices and quantities for the Canadian capital stock at 5 year
intervals over the period 1965-1999 while Table 4 lists the rental prices and flows of
capital services over this same period.
Table 3: Model 2 Capital Stocks and Prices Assuming Constant Real Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

PNR
1.0000
1.2476
1.9319
2.8122
3.8861
4.6936
4.9227
5.3871

PME
1.0000
1.0932
1.3898
1.9324
1.9516
1.8136
1.6696
1.5889

P(2)
1.0000
1.1937
1.7400
2.4968
3.1498
3.5358
3.5758
3.7569

KNR
41.5
55.0
70.4
90.3
113.5
132.4
146.7
158.8

KME
22.1
29.8
41.1
59.3
88.2
134.2
176.4
232.2

K(2)
63.6
84.8
111.0
147.6
194.7
244.6
284.4
325.9

1.0508

1.0137

1.0397

1.0403

1.0716

1.0492

The constant real interest rate capital stocks in Table 3 are somewhat larger than their
counterparts in Table 1 and their rate of price growth is smaller; for example, the average
geometric rate of growth for the constant real interest rate capital stocks in Table 3 is
3.97% per year compared to the 4.35% per year rate of price increase reported in Table 1.
However, the average overall geometric growth rates for the capital stock aggregates are
similar: 4.92% per year in Table 3 (Model 2) versus 4.95% per year in Table 1 (Model 1).
Table 4: Model 2 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Constant
Real Interest Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
59

uNR
1.0000
1.2645
2.1003
3.0339
3.9615
4.8220
4.9283

uME
1.0000
1.1079
1.5109
2.0847
1.9895
1.8632
1.6715

u(2)
1.0000
1.1763
1.7693
2.4974
2.8136
3.0440
2.9366

kNR
2727
3502
4576
5995
7717
9263
10584

kME
3588
4539
5975
8713
12803
19289
26354

k(2)
6316
8040
10535
14557
19919
26480
32764

The nominal interest rate is still used in forming the end of the period user costs; otherwise, only real
interest rates are used in this model.

40
1999 5.3718
Annual
Growth 1.0507
Rates

1.5843

3.0023

11564

34556

38926

1.0136

1.0329

1.0434

1.0689

1.0549

When we compare the service prices and quantities in Table 2 (Model 1, the perfect
foresight model) with the corresponding service prices and quantities in Table 4 (Model
2, the constant real interest rate model), a number of things stand out:
•
•
•
•

The Model 2 user costs are much less volatile;
The Model 1 user costs grow much more quickly;
The Model 2 levels of capital services are much higher but
The Model 1 and 2 average growth rates for capital services are very similar.

Thus the two models give very different results overall. The average rate of price increase
for the Model 2 capital services aggregate was 3.29% per year, which is much lower than
our earlier Model 1 estimate of 4.85% per year. On the quantity side, the Model 2 flow of
nonresidential construction capital services increased from $2727 million to $11,564
million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate
of 4.34% while the Model 2 flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased
from $3588 million to $34,556 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual
average growth rate of 6.89%. The Model 2 capital services aggregate grew at an annual
average growth rate of 5.49% compared to the Model 1 5.61% capital services annual
average growth rate.
We turn now to our third one hoss shay depreciation model. In this model (Model 3),
instead of assuming that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation
rates, we assume that they can anticipate the trends in asset inflation rates. In the Data
Appendix below, we describe in detail how these trends were determined. In terms of
computations, we use exactly the same program that we used to implement Model 1
except that we replace the rather volatile nominal interest rate rt that was listed in Table
A2 of the Appendix by the smoothed nominal interest rate that is listed in Table A3 of the
Appendix. We also replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by their
smoothed counterparts listed in Table A3 in the Appendix. The counterparts to Tables 1
and 2 are Tables 5 and 6 below; Table 5 lists the Model 3 prices and quantities for the
Canadian capital stock at 5 year intervals over the period 1965-1999 while Table 6 lists
the rental prices and flows of capital services over this same period.
Table 5: Model 3 Capital Stocks and Prices using Smoothed Interest Rates and
Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980

PNR
1.0000
1.3178
2.0209
3.1309

PME
1.0000
1.1050
1.4318
2.1395

P(3)
1.0000
1.2387
1.7977
2.7548

KNR
37.8
50.0
63.6
81.7

KME
22.3
30.0
41.3
59.6

K(3)
60.1
80.0
104.4
139.1

41
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

4.5069
5.5886
5.2068
5.8415

2.0939
2.0006
1.7171
1.7278

3.5277
4.0531
3.6929
4.0058

103.0
120.2
133.6
144.4

88.5
134.0
177.1
232.6

184.1
231.9
270.7
310.8

1.0533

1.0162

1.0417

1.0402

1.0714

1.0495

Comparing the numbers in Tables 1, 3 and 5, it can be seen that there are some small
differences between the capital stocks generated by our three variants of the one hoss
shay model of depreciation but the average growth rates are virtually identical. There is
more variation across the three models in the movement of the stock prices with Model 1
giving the highest rate of price growth for the capital aggregate (4.35% per year),
followed by Model 3 (4.17% per year) and then Model 2 (3.97% per year). The Model
1,2 and 3 aggregate prices of capital are graphed in Figure 1 below and the corresponding
aggregate quantities are graphed in Figure 3 below.
Table 6: Model 3 Capital Service Prices and Quantities using Smoothed Interest
Rates and Smoothed Asset Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.6639
2.5619
5.0119
7.9464
10.7287
6.7931
8.1325

uME
1.0000
1.1410
1.6352
2.9973
2.5273
2.6100
1.7946
2.0749

u(3)
1.0000
1.3075
1.9287
3.6525
4.1699
4.9265
3.2684
3.8404

1.0636

1.0217

1.0404

kNR
1706
2191
2863
3751
4828
5795
6621
7234

kME
3707
4689
6172
9001
13226
19927
27225
35698

k(3)
5413
6880
9036
12533
17216
23177
28711
34606

1.0434 1.0689

1.0561

Comparing the numbers in Tables 2, 4 and 6, it can be seen that there are large
differences in the levels of capital services generated by the 3 models but the growth rates
are virtually identical. However, there is much more variation across the three models in
the movement of the service prices with Model 1 giving the highest rate of price growth
for the capital services aggregate (4.85% per year), followed by Model 3 (3.847% per
year) and then Model 2 (3.29% per year). The Model 1, 2 and 3 aggregate prices of
capital services are graphed in Figure 2 below and the corresponding aggregate quantities
of services are graphed in Figure 4 below.
We finish off this section by graphing the aggregate price and quantity series for the
Canadian capital stocks 1965-1999 (Figures 1 and 2 below) and for capital services
(Figures 3 and 4 below) for our three one hoss shay models.

42
Insert Figures 1,2,3,4.
Viewing Figure 1, it can be seen that the Model 1 stock prices, P(1), are more volatile
than the Model 2 and 3 prices and the Model 3 prices represent a smoothed version of the
Model 1 prices. The Model 2 prices, which assume a constant real interest rate of 4 per
cent and make no allowance for anticipated asset price changes, generally lie below the
other two series.
The tremendous volatility of the Model 1 rental prices, u(1), is evident from viewing
Figure 3. Thus the use of ex post asset inflation rates as ex ante or anticipated inflation
rates leads to user costs that are unreasonable. The Model 3 aggregate user costs, u(3),
while still more volatile than the constant real interest rate user costs, u(2), are reasonable
and smooth out the fluctuations in the u(1) series. The u(2) series lies below the other
two user cost series because the constant real interest rate user costs make no allowance
for the extra depreciation that arises from the anticipated price declines that are due to
obsolescence; i.e., the u(2) series ignores the systematic real price declines in the price of
machinery and equipment.
Examination of Figure 2 shows that all three one hoss shay models give rise to much the
same aggregate capital stocks. The constant real interest rate capital stocks K(2) are the
biggest, followed by the smoothed anticipated inflation stocks K(3) and the fully
anticipated inflation stocks K(1) are the smallest. The aggregate capital services graphed
in Figure 4 show much the same pattern but with more dispersion. The constant real
interest rate aggregated capital services k(2) are the biggest, followed by the smoothed
anticipated inflation capital services k(3) and the fully anticipated inflation capital
services k(1) are the smallest.
We turn now to our second model of depreciation and efficiency.
9. The Straight Line Depreciation Model
The straight line method of depreciation is very simple in a world without price change:
one simply makes an estimate of the most probable length of life for a new asset, L
periods say, and then the original purchase price P0t is divided by L to yield as estimate of
period by period depreciation for the next L periods. In a way, this is the simplest
possible model of depreciation, just as the one hoss shay model was the simplest possible
model of efficiency decline.60 The accountant Canning summarizes the straight line
depreciation model as follows:
“Straight Line Formula ... In general, only two primary estimates are required to be made, viz., scrap value
at the end of n periods and the numerical value of n. ... Obviously the number of periods of contemplated
use of an asset can seldom be intelligently estimated without reference to the anticipated conditions of use.
I the formula is to be respectable at all, the value of n must be the most probable number of periods that
will yield the most economical use.” John B. Canning (1929; 265-266).
60

In fact, it can be verified that if the nominal interest rate rt and the nominal asset inflation rate it are both
zero, then the one hoss shay efficiency model will be entirely equivalent to the straight line depreciation
model.

43

The following quotations indicate that the use of straight line depreciation dates back to
the 1800’s at least:
“Sometimes an equal installment is written off every year from the original value of the plant; sometimes
each machine or item of plant is considered separately; but it is more usual to write off a percentage, not of
the original value, but from the balance of the plant account of the preceding year.” Ewing Matheson
(1910; 55).
“In some instances the amount charged to revenue account for depreciation is a fixed sum, or an arbitrary
percentage on the book value.” Emile Garcke and John Manger Fells (1893; 98).

The last two quotations indicate that the declining balance or geometric depreciation
model (to be considered in the next section) also dates back to the 1800’s as a popular
method for calculating depreciation.
We now set out the equations which describe the straight line model of depreciation in
the general case when the anticipated asset inflation rate it is nonzero. Assuming that the
asset has a life of L periods and that the cross sectional amounts of depreciation Dnt ≡ Pnt
− Pn+1t defined by (10) above are all equal for the assets in use, then it can be seen that the
beginning of period t vintage asset prices Pnt will decline linearly for L periods and then
remain at zero; i.e., the Pnt will satisfy the following restrictions:
(48) Pnt = P0t [L − n]/L
=0

n = 0,1,2,...,L
n = L+1,L+2,...

Recall definition (12) above, which defined the cross sectional depreciation rate for an
asset that is n periods old at the beginning of period t, δnt. Using (48) and the nth
equation in (13), we have:
(49) (1 − δ0t)(1 − δ1t)…(1 − δn−1t) = Pnt / P0t = 1 − (n/L)

for n = 1,2,...,L.

Using (49) for n and n+1, it can be shown that
(50) (1 − δnt) = [L − (n+1)]/[L − n]

n = 0,1,2,...,L −1.

Now substitute (49) and (50) into the general user cost formula (14) in order to obtain the
period t end of the period straight line user costs, unt:61
n = 0,1,2,...,L −1
(51) unt = (1 − δ0t)… (1 − δn−1t)[(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δnt)] P0t
t
t
t
= [1 − (n/L)][(1+r ) − (1+i )([L − (n+1)]/[L − n])] P0 .
Equations (48) give us the sequence of vintage asset prices that are required to calculate
the wealth capital stock while equations (51) give us the vintage user costs that are
required to calculate capital services for the asset. It should be noted that if the
61

The user costs for n = L, L+1,L+2,... are all zero.

44
anticipated asset inflation rate it is large enough compared to the nominal interest rate rt,
then the user cost unt can be negative. This means that the corresponding asset becomes
an output rather than an input for period t.62
At this point, we can proceed in much the same manner as in the previous section. We
use the vintage asset prices defined by (48) above (where L equals 39) and apply (40) in
section 7 to aggregate over the 39 vintages of nonresidential capital using the Fisher
(1922) ideal index number formula and we form aggregate price and quantity series for
the nonresidential construction (wealth) capital stock, PNRt and KNRt, for the years 19651999. These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth rates, can be
found in Table 7 at 5 year intervals. Similarly, we use (48) above (where L equals 14)
and apply (40) to aggregate over the 14 vintages of machinery and equipment using the
Fisher ideal index number formula and we form aggregate price and quantity series for
the machinery and equipment (wealth) capital stock, PMEt and KMEt, for the years 19651999. These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth rates, can also be
found in Table 7 at 5 year intervals. In this fourth model, we assume that producers
exactly anticipate the asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, for nonresidential construction
and for machinery and equipment respectively; these ex post inflation rates are listed in
Table A2 in Appendix 1 below. Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of
nonresidential capital, PNRt and KNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of
machinery and equipment, PMEt and KMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for the wealth stock, which we denote by P(4)t and K(4)t.
Table 7: Model 4 Capital Stocks and Prices Assuming Perfect Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

PNR
1.0000
1.2476
1.9319
2.8122
3.8861
4.6936
4.9227
5.3871

PME
1.0000
1.0932
1.3898
1.9324
1.9516
1.8136
1.6696
1.5889

P(4)
1.0000
1.1916
1.7313
2.4822
3.1132
3.4765
3.5060
3.6713

KNR
36.4
48.0
60.8
77.5
97.0
112.0
122.5
131.7

KME
20.5
27.8
38.5
55.5
82.4
125.9
164.3
217.0

K(4)
56.9
75.8
98.7
131.1
172.8
216.9
250.3
287.3

1.0508

1.0137

1.0390

1.0385

1.0719

1.0488

The quantity units in Table 7 are in billions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen that
the aggregate (over vintages) stock price for nonresidential construction increased
approximately 5.4 fold from 1965 to 1999 while the aggregate machinery and equipment
stock price increased only approximately 59% over this period. The Fisher ideal
aggregate price for these two capital stock components increased from 1 to 3.6713 over
62

However, one is led to wonder if the model is reasonable if some vintages of the asset have negative user
costs while other vintages have positive one.

45
this period. The average annual (geometric) growth rate factors are listed in the last row
of Table 7. It can be seen that the price of a unit of nonresidential construction capital
increased by 5.08% per year and the price of a unit of machinery and equipment capital
increased by only 1.37% per year on average. The average rate of price increase for the
capital aggregate was 3.9% per year. This should be compared to the average rate of
price increase for the one hoss shay capital aggregate which was much higher at 4.35%
per year; see Table 1 above. On the quantity side, the stock of nonresidential
construction capital increased from $36.4 billion to $131.7 billion (constant 1965)
Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 3.85% while the stock
of machinery and equipment capital increased from $20.5 billion to $217.0 billion
(constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of 7.19%. The
capital aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of 4.88%. This was fairly close
to the average rate of growth of the one hoss shay capital aggregate, which grew at 4.95%
per year; see Table 1 above.
Using equations (51) along with the data tabled in Appendix 1 (see Tables A1 and A2),
we can construct the end of the period user costs for each of our 39 vintages of
nonresidential construction capital. Now use equation (38) to construct the service flow
aggregate for nonresidential construction for each year. Then we use (42) in the previous
section (where L equals 39) to aggregate over the 39 vintages of nonresidential capital
using the Fisher (1922) ideal index number formula and form the aggregate rental price
for nonresidential construction, uNRt, and the corresponding services aggregate, kNRt, for
the years 1965-1999.63 These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth
rates, can be found in Table 8 at 5 year intervals. Similarly, we use (42) above (where L
equals 14) and aggregate over the 14 vintages of machinery and equipment using the
Fisher ideal index number formula and we form aggregate capital services price and
quantity series, uMEt and kMEt, for the years 1965-1999. These series, along with their
annual average (geometric) growth rates, can also be found in Table 8 at 5 year intervals.
Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of nonresidential capital services,
uNRt and kNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of machinery and
equipment services, uMEt and kMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for capital services, which we denote by u(4)t and k(4)t.
Table 8: Model 4 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Perfect Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
63

uNR
1.0000
1.7715
3.2446

uME
1.0000
1.1506
1.6214

u(4)
1.0000
1.3611
2.1802

kNR
1621
2106
2813

kME
3209
4086
5349

k(4)
4830
6196
8164

It turned out that some of our rental prices were negative. This may not be a major theoretical problem
since in this case, the corresponding capital input becomes a net output. However, the computations were
carried out using the econometrics computer program SHAZAM and the index number option fails when
any price is negative. In this case, it was necessary to write up a subroutine that would compute the Fisher
indexes when some prices were negative. The four inner products that are building blocks into the Fisher
indexes must all be positive in order to take the positive square root. This condition was satisfied by the
data in all cases.

46
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

3.9663
7.5567
9.8516
9.1905
9.5117

3.9947
3.2111
3.0996
2.5327
3.1134

4.0790
4.6746
5.2371
4.5915
5.1915

3631
4593
5402
6043
6557

8214
10989
15533
20106
26578

11574
14974
19356
23187
27953

1.0685

1.0340

1.0496

1.0420

1.0642

1.0530

The quantity units in Table 8 are in millions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen that
the aggregate (over vintages) capital services price for nonresidential construction
increased approximately 9.5 times from 1965 to 1999 while the aggregate machinery and
equipment services price increased approximately 3.1 times over this period. These are
much greater increases than were exhibited by the corresponding stock prices in Table 7
above. The Fisher ideal aggregate price for these two capital services components
increased from 1 to 5.2 over this period. The average annual (geometric) growth rate
factors are listed in the last row of Table 8. It can be seen that the price of a unit of
nonresidential construction capital services increased by 6.85% per year and the price of
a unit of machinery and equipment capital services increased by 3.40% per year on
average. The average rate of price increase for the capital services aggregate was 4.96%
per year, which is higher than our earlier estimate of 3.90% per year increase for the price
of a unit of the corresponding stock. The straight line depreciation rate of capital services
price growth of 4.96% per year should be compared to the average rate of price increase
for the one hoss shay capital services aggregate which was somewhat lower at 4.85% per
year; see Table 2 above. The use of ex post asset inflation rates again leads to user costs
that are extremely volatile; see Figure 7 below. On the quantity side, the flow of
nonresidential construction capital services increased from $1621 million to $6557
million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate
of 4.20% while the flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased from
$3209 million to $26,578 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average
growth rate of 6.42%. The capital services aggregate grew at an annual average growth
rate of 5.3% compared to the 4.9% annual average growth rate for the aggregate capital
stock. . The straight line depreciation rate of capital services growth of 5.30% per year
should be compared to the average rate of growth for the one hoss shay capital services
aggregate which was higher at 5.61% per year; see Table 2 above.
We turn now to our second straight line depreciation model, which will eliminate the
volatility problem mentioned in the last paragraph. In this Model 5, instead of assuming
that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation rates, it is assumed
that producers use the current CPI inflation rate as estimators of anticipated asset
inflation rates. In terms of computations, we simply replace the two ex post asset
inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by the CPI inflation rate ρt listed in Table A2 of the
Appendix and then repeat all of the computations made to implement Model 4 above.
It turns out that the Model 5 constant real interest rate capital stocks (and prices) are
exactly equal to their Model 4 counterparts in Table 7. This follows from equations (48),

47
which describe the pattern of vintage asset prices: in both Models 4 and 5 (and 6 to be
considered shortly), these asset prices do not depend on rt or it and hence the resulting
asset prices and capital stocks will be identical. Hence there is no need to table the
capital stocks and prices for Model 5. However, the Model 5 vintage user costs and
capital service flows are very different from their Model 4 counterparts. Table 9 lists the
Model 5 rental prices and flows of capital services for the Canadian capital stock at 5
year intervals over the period 1965-1999.
Table 9: Model 5 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Constant Real
Interest Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.2645
2.1003
3.0339
3.9615
4.8220
4.9283
5.3718

uME
1.0000
1.1122
1.5242
2.1377
2.1646
2.1693
2.0080
1.9887

u(5)
1.0000
1.1808
1.7830
2.5377
2.9410
3.2782
3.2045
3.3398

kNR
2857
3718
4778
6175
7835
9222
10317
11185

kME
3542
4544
6026
8620
11971
16915
22136
27829

k(5)
6400
8262
10780
14645
19365
24758
29737
34561

1.0507

1.0204

1.0361

1.0410

1.0625

1.0508

When we compare the service prices and quantities in Table 8 (Model 4, the perfect
foresight model) with the corresponding service prices and quantities in Table 9 (Model
5, the constant real interest rate model), a number of things stand out:
•
•
•
•

The Model 5 user costs are much less volatile;
The Model 4 user costs grow much more quickly;
The Model 5 levels of capital services are much higher but
The Model 4 and 5 average growth rates for capital services are fairly similar.

This is the same pattern of differences that we found when we compared the capital
services aggregates generated by Models 1 and 2. The average rate of price increase for
the Model 5 capital services aggregate was 3.61% per year, which is much lower than our
earlier Model 4 estimate of 4.96% per year. On the quantity side, the Model 5 flow of
nonresidential construction capital services increased from $2857 million to $11,185
million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate
of 4.1% while the Model 5 flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased
from $3542 million to $27,829 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual
average growth rate of 6.25%. The Model 5 capital services aggregate grew at an annual
average growth rate of 5.08% compared to the Model 4 5.30% capital services annual
average growth rate.

48
We turn now to our third straight line deprecation model, which we call Model 6. In this
model, instead of assuming that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset
inflation rates, we assume that they can anticipate the trends in asset inflation rates. In
terms of computations, we use exactly the same program that we used to implement
Model 4 except that we replace the rather volatile nominal interest rate rt that was listed
in Table A2 of the Appendix by the smoothed nominal interest rate that is listed in Table
A3 of the Appendix. We also replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt,
by their smoothed counterparts listed in Table A3 in the Appendix.
As mentioned earlier, the Model 6 constant real interest rate capital stocks (and prices)
are exactly equal to their Model 4 counterparts in Table 7. Hence there is no need to
table the capital stocks and prices for Model 6. However, the Model 6 vintage user costs
and capital service flows are very different from their Model 4 and 5 counterparts. Table
10 lists the Model 6 rental prices and flows of capital services for the Canadian capital
stock at 5 year intervals over the period 1965-1999.
Table 10: Model 6 Capital Service Prices and Quantities using Smoothed Interest
Rates and Smoothed Asset Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.6894
2.5902
4.9631
7.6227
10.0280
6.9624
8.2162

uME
1.0000
1.1511
1.6322
2.9035
2.7076
2.9027
2.1156
2.4257

u(6)
1.0000
1.3303
1.9465
3.5908
4.2643
5.0611
3.6134
4.1992

kNR
1787
2321
3008
3885
4913
5773
6443
6991

kME
3646
4648
6241
8946
12226
17540
23087
29709

k(6)
5433
6969
9236
12604
16545
21498
25932
30841

1.0639

1.0264

1.0431

1.0409 1.0636

1.0524

On the quantity side, Model 6 gives much the same results as the other two straight line
depreciation models, Models 4 and 5. In particular, the average annual (geometric) rate
of growth of aggregate capital services for Models 4, 5 and 6 was 5.30 %, 5.08% and
5.24% per year respectively. However, on the user cost side, the three models give very
different results. The perfect foresight model, Model 4, gave the highest annual average
growth rate for the aggregate price of capital services, 4.96% per year, while the constant
real interest rate model, Model 5, gave the lowest average growth rate, 3.61% per year.
The smoothed anticipated prices model, Model 6, gave an intermediate growth rate for
the price of capital services, 4.31% per year. As can be seen from Figure 7 below, the
Model 5 and 6 aggregate user costs were much smoother than the volatile Model 4 user
costs.
We finish off this section by graphing the aggregate price and quantity series for the
Canadian capital stocks 1965-1999 (Figures 5 and 6 below) and for capital services

49
(Figures 7 and 8 below) for our three straight line depreciation models. Since the price
and quantity series for the capital stocks are all the same for our three straight line models
(i.e., P(4)t = P(5)t = P(6)t and K(4)t = K(5)t = K(6)t ), in Figure 5, we graph P(4) with the
three one hoss shay capital stock prices and in Figure 6, we graph K(4) with the three one
hoss shay aggregate capital stocks, K(1), K(2), and K(3).

50

Insert Figures 5, 6, 7 and 8

51

We turn now to our third class of depreciation and efficiency models.
10. The Declining Balance or Geometric Depreciation Model
The declining balance method of depreciation dates back to Matheson (1910; 55) at least
as we noted in the previous section.64 In terms of the algebra presented in section 4
above, the method is very simple: all of the cross sectional vintage depreciation rates δnt
defined by (12) are assumed to be equal to the same rate δ, where δ a positive number
less than one; i.e., we have for all time periods t:
(52) δnt = δ ;

n = 0,1,2,... .

Substitution of (52) into (14) leads to the following formula for the sequence of period t
vintage user costs:
(53) unt = (1 − δ)n−1 [(1+rt) − (1+it)(1 − δ)] P0t ;
;
= (1 − δ)n−1 u0t

n = 0,1,2,...
n = 1,2,... .

The second set of equations in (53) says that all of the vintage user costs are proportional
to the user cost for a new asset. This proportionality means that we do not have to use an
index number formula to aggregate over vintages to form a capital services aggregate.
To see this, using (53), the period t services aggregate St defined earlier by (38) can be
rewritten as follows:
(54) St ≡ u0t K0t + u1t K1t + u2t K2t + …
= u0t [K0t + (1 − δ) K1t + (1 − δ)2 K2t + … ]
= u0t KAt
where the period t capital aggregate KAt is defined as
(55) KAt ≡ K0t + (1 − δ) K1t + (1 − δ)2 K2t + …
If the depreciation rate δ and the vintage capital stocks are known, then KAt can readily
be calculated using (55). Then using the last line of (54), we see that the value of capital
services (over all vintages), St, decomposes into the price term u0t times the quantity term
KAt. Hence, it is not necessary to use an index number formula to aggregate over
vintages using this depreciation model.
A similar simplification occurs when calculating the wealth stock using this depreciation
model. Substitution of (52) into (13) leads to the following formula for the sequence of
period t vintage asset prices:
64

Matheson (1910; 91) used the term “diminishing value” to describe the method. Hotelling (1925; 350)
used the term “the reducing balance method” while Canning (1929; 276) used the term the “declining
balance formula”.

52

(56) Pnt = (1 − δ)n−1 P0t ;

n = 1,2,... .

Equations (56) say that all of the vintage asset prices are proportional to the price of a
new asset. This proportionality means that again, we do not have to use an index number
formula to aggregate over vintages to form a capital stock aggregate. To see this, using
(56), the period t wealth aggregate Wt defined earlier by (37) can be rewritten as follows:
(57) Wt ≡ P0t K0t + P1t K1t + P2t K2t + …
= P0t [K0t + (1 − δ) K1t + (1 − δ)2 K2t + … ]
= P0t KAt
where KAt was defined by (55). Thus KAt can serve as both a capital stock aggregate or a
flow of services aggregate, which is a major advantage of this model.65
There is a further simplification of the model which is useful in applications. If we
compare equation (55) for period t+1 and period t, we see that the following formula
results using equations (39):
(58) KAt+1 ≡ K0t+1 + (1 − δ) KAt .
Thus the period t+1 aggregate capital stock, KAt+1, is equal to the investment in new
assets that took place in period t, which is K0t+1, plus 1 − δ times the period t aggregate
capital stock, KAt. This means that given a starting value for the capital stock, we can
readily update it just using the depreciation rate δ and the new investment in the asset
during the prior period.
We now need to address the problem of determining the depreciation rate δ for a
particular asset class. Matheson was perhaps the first engineer to address this problem.
On the basis of his experience, he simply postulated some approximate rates that could be
applied:
“In most [brick or stone] factories an average of 3 per cent for buildings will generally be found
appropriate, if due attention is paid to repairs. Such a rate will bring down a value of £ 1000 to £ 400 in
thirty years.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 69).
“Buildings of wood or iron would require a higher rate, ranging from 5 to 10 per cent, according to the
design and solidity of the buildings, the climate, the care and the regularity of the painting, and according
also, to the usage they are subjected to.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 69).
“Contractors’ locomotives working on imperfect railroads soon wear out, and a rate of 20 per cent is
generally required, bringing down the value of an engine costing £ 1000 to £ 328 in five years.” Ewing
Matheson (1910; 86).

65

This advantage of the model has been pointed out by Jorgenson (1989) (1996b) and his coworkers. Its
early application dates back to Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) and Christensen and Jorgenson (1969)
(1973).

53
“In engineering factories, where the work is of a moderate kind which does not strain the machines
severely, and where the hours of working do not average more than fifty per week, 5 per cent written off
each year from the diminishing value will generally suffice for the wear-and-tear of machinery, cranes and
fixed plant of all kinds, if steam engines and boilers be excluded.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 82).
“The high speed of the new turbo generators introduced since 1900, and their very exact fitting, render
them liable to certain risks from variations in temperature and other causes. Several changes in regard to
speed and methods of blading have occurred since their first introduction and if these generators are taken
separately, only after some longer experience has been acquired can it be said that a depreciation rate of 10
per cent on the dimishing value will be too much for maintaining a book-figure appropriate to their
condition. Such a rate will reduce £ 1000 to £ 349 in ten years.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 91).

How did Matheson arrive at his estimated depreciation rates? He gave some general
guidance as follows:
“The main factors in arriving at a fair rate of depreciation are:
1. The Original value.
2. The probable working Life.
3. The Ultimate value when worn out or superceded.
Therefore, in deciding upon an appropriate rate of depreciation which will in a term of years provide for the
estimated loss, it is not the original value or cost which has to be so provided for, but that cost less the
ultimate or scrap value.” Ewing Matheson (1910; 76).

The algebra corresponding to Matheson’s method for determining δ was explicitly
described by the accountant Canning (1929; 276). Let the initial value of the asset be V0
and let its scrap value n years later be Vn. Then V0, Vn and the depreciation rate δ are
related by the following equation:
(59) Vn = (1 − δ)n V0.
Canning goes on to explain that 1 − δ may be determined by solving the following
equation:
(60) log (1 − δ) = [log Vn − log V0]/n.
It is clear that Matheson used this framework to determine depreciation rates even though
he did not lay out formally the above straightforward algebra.
However, Canning had a very valid criticism of the above method:
“This method can be summarily rejected for a reason quite independent or the deficiencies of formulas 1
and 2 above [(59) and (60) above]. Overwhelming weight is given to Vn in determining book values. ...
Thus the least important constant in reality is given the greatest effect in the formula.” John B. Canning
(1929; 276).

Thus Canning pointed out that the scrap value, Vn, which is not determined very
accurately from an a priori point of view, is the tail that is wagging the dog; i.e., this

54
poorly determined value plays a crucial role in the determination of the depreciation
rate.66
An effective response to Canning’s criticism of the declining balance method of
depreciation did not emerge until relatively recently when Hall (1971), Beidelman (1973)
(1976) and Hulten and Wykoff (1981a) (1981b) used an entire array of used asset prices
at point in time in order to determine the geometric depreciation rate which best matched
up with the data.67 Another theoretical possibility would be to use information on vintage
rental prices in order to deduce the depreciation rate.68 Hulten and Wykoff summarize
their experience in estimating depreciation rates from used asset prices by concluding that
the assumption of geometric or declining balance depreciation described their data
relatively well:
We have used the approach to study the depreciation patterns of a variety of fixed business assets in the
United States (e.g., machine tools, construction equipment, autos and trucks, office equipment, office
buildings, factories, warehouses, and other buildings). The straight line and concave patterns [i.e., one hoss
shay patterns] are strongly rejected ; geometric is also rejected, but the estimated patterns are extremely
lose to (though steeper than) the geometric form, even for structures. Although it is rejected statistically,
the geometric pattern is far closer than either of the other two candidates. This leads us to accept the
geometric pattern as a reasonable approximation for broad groups of assets, and to extend our results to
assets for which no resale markets exist by imputing depreciation rates based on an assumption relating the
rate of geometric decline to the useful lives of assets.” Charles C. Hulten and Frank C. Wykoff (1996; 16).

This brings us to our next problem: how should we convert our estimated asset lives of 39
years for structures and 14 years for machinery and equipment into comparable geometric
rates?
One possible method for converting an average asset life, L periods say, into a
comparable geometric depreciation rate is to argue as follows. Suppose that we believe
that the straight line model of depreciation is the correct one and the asset under
consideration has a useful life of L periods. Suppose further that investment in this type
of asset is constant over time at one unit per period and asset prices are constant over

66

“There may be cases in which the formula fits the facts, but ... the chance of its being a formula of close
fit is remote indeed. Its chief usefulness seems to be to furnish drill in the use of logarithms for students in
accounting.” John B. Canning (1929; 277).
67
Jorgenson (1996a) has a nice review of most of the empirical studies of depreciation. It should be noted
that Beidelman (1973) (1976) and Hulten and Wykoff (1981a) (1996; 22) showed that equation (59) must
be adjusted to correct for the early retirement of assets. The accountant Schmalenbach (1959; 91) (the first
German edition was published in 1919) also noticed this problem: “The mistake should not be made,
however, of drawing conclusions about useful life from those veteran machines which are to be seen in
most businesses. Those which one sees are but the rare survivors; the many dead have long lain buried.
This can be the source of serious errors.”
68
This possibility is mentioned by Hulten and Wykoff (1996; 15): “In other words, if there were active
rental markets for capital services as there are for labor services, the observed prices could be used to
estimate the marginal products. And the rest of the framework would follow from these estimates. But,
again, there is bad news: most capital is owner utilized, like much of the stock of single family houses.
This means that owners of capital , in effect, rent it to themselves, leaving no data track for the analyst to
observe.”

55
time. Under these conditions, the long run equilibrium capital stock for this asset would
be69:
(61) 1 + [(L−1)/L] + [(L−2)/L] + ... + [2/L] + [1/L] = L(L+1)/2L = (L+1)/2.
Under the same conditions, the long run equilibrium geometric depreciation capital stock
would be equal to the following sum:
(62) 1 + (1−δ) + (1−δ)2 + ... = 1/[1−(1−δ)] = 1/δ.
Now find the depreciation rate δ which will make the two capital stocks equal; i.e.,
equate (61) to (62) and solve for δ. The resulting δ is:
(63) δ = 2/(L+1).
Obviously, there are a number of problematical assumptions that were made in order to
derive the depreciation rate δ that corresponds to the length of life L70 but (63) gives us at
least a definite method of conversion from one model to the other.
Since we assumed that the average length of life for nonresidential construction was L
equal to 39 years, applying the conversion formula (63) implies that δNR equals .05; i.e.,
we assume that the declining balance or geometric depreciation rate for nonresidential
construction in Canada is 5%. Similarly, our assumed life of 14 years for machinery and
equipment translates into a δME equal to a 13 1/3% geometric depreciation rate for this
asset class.
There is one remaining problem to deal with and then we can proceed to table the results
for three geometric depreciation models for Canada. The problem is this: before 1926,
we do not have reliable investment data but the effects of investments made prior to 1926
live on forever in the infinite lived geometric depreciation model that we considered in
equations (54) to (58) above. In the case of machinery and equipment investments made
before 1926, by the time we get to 1965, what is left of the original investments is
negligible. However, in the case of a $1000 investment in nonresidential structures made
in 1925, $128.50 of it would still be available as a productive input in 1965, assuming a
69

Recall equations (48), which imply that the vintage asset prices are proportional. Hence Hicks’
Aggregation Theorem will imply that the capital aggregate will be the simple sum on the left hand side of
(61).
70
The two assumptions that are the least justified are: (1) the assumption that the straight line depreciation
model is the correct model to do the conversion and (2) the assumption that investment has been constant
back to minus infinity. Hulten and Wykoff (1996; 16) made the following suggestions for converting an L
into a δ: “Information is available on the average service life, L, from several sources. The rate of
depreciation for non-marketed assets can be estimated using a two step procedure based on the ‘declining
balance’ formula δ =X/L. Under the ‘double declining balance’ formula, X = 2. The value of X can be
estimated using the formula X = δL for those assets for which these estimates are available. In the HultenWykoff studies, the average value for of X for producer’s durable equipment was found to be 1.65 (later
revised to 1.86). For nonresidential structures, X was found to be 0.91. Once X is fixed, δ follows for
other assets whose average service life is available.”

56
5% geometric depreciation rate. Hence we need a method for estimating the geometric
capital stock that is available at the start of 1926 in order to not bias downward our
estimates of the geometric capital stock for nonresidential construction for the period
1965-1999. We decided to assume that nonresidential investment for the period prior to
1926 grew at the same rate that it grew during the years 1926-1999.71 Thus for the years
1927 to 1999, we took investment in nonresidential construction during the current year
divided by the corresponding investment in the prior year (both in constant dollars) as our
dependent variable and regressed this variable on a constant. The estimated constant
turned out to be 1.0509. Hence, for the prior to 1926 period, we assumed that
investments in nonresidential construction grew at the rate g ≡.05; i.e., a 5% growth rate.
Thus if INR1926 was the investment in 1926, we assumed that the investments in prior
years were:
(64) INR1926/(1+g), INR1926/(1+g)2, INR1926/(1+g)3, ... .
Using assumption (64), we can calculate an estimate of the starting capital stock for
nonresidential construction at the start of 1927 as
(65) KNR1927 ≡ INR1926 {1 + [(1−δ)/(1+g)] + [(1−δ)/(1+g)]2 + [(1−δ)/(1+g)]3 + ... }
= INR1926 {1/(1 − [(1−δ)/(1+g)]}
= INR1926 (1 + g)/(g + δ)
where g = .05 and δ = .05. Now we can use formula (58) above, starting at the year t =
1927, to build up the capital stock for each of our two asset classes. For nonresidential
construction, our starting 1927 capital stock was defined by (65) and for machinery and
equipment, it was simply the 1926 investment in machinery and equipment, IME1926 say.
At this point, we can proceed in much the same manner as in the previous section. We
have already explained how we can use equations (58) to form the aggregate capital
stocks for nonresidential construction and machinery and equipment. From (57), it can
be seen that the corresponding capital stock price is P0t, the price of a new vintage at the
beginning of year t. These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth
rates, can be found in Table 11 at 5 year intervals. In this seventh model, having
constructed the aggregate price and quantity of nonresidential capital, PNRt and KNRt
respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of machinery and equipment, PMEt and
KMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal formula and aggregate these two
series into a single aggregate price and quantity series for the wealth stock, which we
denote by P(7)t and K(7)t.
Table 11: Model 7 (Geometric Depreciation) Capital Stocks and Asset Prices
Year
1965
71

PNR
1.0000

PME
1.0000

P(7)
1.0000

KNR
32.8

KME
19.1

K(7)
51.9

This method for obtaining a starting value for the geometric capital stock is due to Kohli (1982); see also
Fox and Kohli (1998).

57
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

1.2476
1.9319
2.8122
3.8861
4.6936
4.9227
5.3871

1.0932
1.3898
1.9324
1.9516
1.8136
1.6696
1.5889

1.1896
1.7238
2.4701
3.0881
3.4404
3.4655
3.6243

42.6
53.3
68.0
85.0
98.0
107.1
115.9

26.3
35.9
51.1
75.0
115.4
149.3
199.7

68.9
88.7
117.4
154.4
194.5
224.1
259.7

1.0508

1.0137

1.0386

1.0378

1.0715

1.0485

The quantity units in Table 11 are in billions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen
that the aggregate (over vintages) stock price for nonresidential construction increased
approximately 5.4 fold from 1965 to 1999 while the aggregate machinery and equipment
stock price increased only approximately 59% over this period. Comparing these
columns in Table 11 with the corresponding columns in Table 7, it can be verified that
these numbers are exactly the same. This is because in both the straight line depreciation
model and the geometric model, the price of a new asset acts as the aggregate stock price
over all vintages. However, when we use the Fisher formula to aggregate the two types
of capital together to get either P(4) or P(7), we get slightly different numbers because the
aggregate quantities of the two types of asset differ in the two models. The Fisher ideal
aggregate price for these two capital stock components increased from 1 to 3.6243 over
this period. The average annual (geometric) growth rate factors are listed in the last row
of Table 11. It can be seen that the price of a unit of nonresidential construction capital
increased by 5.08% per year and the price of a unit of machinery and equipment capital
increased by only 1.37% per year on average. The average rate of price increase for the
capital aggregate was 3.86% per year. This should be compared to the average rate of
price increase for the one hoss shay capital aggregate which was much higher at 4.35%
per year; see Table 1 above. On the quantity side, the stock of nonresidential
construction capital increased from $32.8 billion to $115.9 billion (constant 1965)
Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 3.78% (3.85% for the
straight line model) while the stock of machinery and equipment capital increased from
$19.1 billion to $199.7 billion (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average
growth rate of 7.15% (7.19% for the straight line model). The capital aggregate grew at
an annual average growth rate of 4.85%. The corresponding aggregate growth rates for
the one hoss shay and straight line models were 4.95% and 4.88% per year respectively;
see Tables 1 and 7 above.
We turn now to the service flow part of our seventh model, where we assume that
producers exactly anticipate the asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, for nonresidential
construction and for machinery and equipment respectively; these ex post inflation rates
are listed in Table A2 in Appendix 1 below. The user cost for a new asset at the start of
period t, u0t, is defined in equations (53). Equation (54) shows that this user cost matches
up with the corresponding aggregated over vintages capital stock so the computations are
simplified in this model. Denote these user costs by uNRt and uMEt for our two assets and
denote the corresponding service aggregates by kNRt and kMEt respectively. We

58
renormalize these series so that both user costs are unity in 1965.72 These series, along
with their annual average (geometric) growth rates, can be found in Table 12 at 5 year
intervals. Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of nonresidential capital
services, uNRt and kNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of machinery
and equipment services, uMEt and kMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for capital services, which we denote by u(7)t and k(7)t.
Table 12: Model 7 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Perfect
Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.6479
3.0509
3.8265
6.8722
8.9110
8.4034
8.7449

uME
1.0000
1.1424
1.5827
3.8772
2.8839
2.6052
2.0818
2.5168

u(7)
1.0000
1.3337
2.0991
3.9280
4.2359
4.5646
3.9808
4.4776

1.0659

1.0275

1.0451

kNR
1916
2490
3113
3967
4963
5720
6255
6764

kME
3069
4231
5761
8214
12039
18541
23985
32069

k(7)
4985
6700
8868
11973
16249
21748
25747
31237

1.0378 1.0715

1.0555

The quantity units in Table 12 are in millions of 1965 Canadian dollars as usual. The
growth rates for the two types of capital services, kNR and kME, in Table 12 are exactly
equal to the corresponding growth rates for the two types of stock, KNR and KME, in Table
11; this follows from the fact that the corresponding quantity series are proportional to
each other after normalization. Comparison of the growth rates in Table 12 with the
corresponding growth rates in Table 8 (the corresponding straight line depreciation
model) shows that there are some substantial differences. For example, the average
annual geometric rate of growth for the user cost of machinery and equipment was 3.40%
per year for the straight line model versus 2.75% per year for the geometric model. The
geometric model rate of capital services price growth of 4.51% per year should be
compared to the straight line model rate of capital services price growth of 4.96% per
year which in turn can be compared to the average rate of price increase for the one hoss
shay capital services aggregate which was somewhat higher at 4.85% per year; see Tables
2 and 8 above. The use of ex post asset inflation rates again leads to user costs that are
extremely volatile; see Figure 11 below. On the quantity side, the flow of nonresidential
construction capital services increased from $1916 million to $6764 million (constant
1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 3.78% while
the flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased from $3069 million to
$32,069 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of
7.15%. The capital services aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of 5.55%
72

Before normalization, the service flow aggregates kNRt and kMEt are exactly equal to the corresponding
stock aggregates. Thus the rates of growth of the corresponding stock and flow variables will be the same.

59
compared to the 4.85% annual average growth rate for the aggregate capital stock. The
geometric model average rate of capital services growth rate of 5.55% per year can be
compared to the straight line growth rate of capital services of 5.30% per year and to the
average rate of growth for the one hoss shay capital services aggregate of 5.61% per year;
see Tables 2 and 8 above.
We turn now to our second geometric depreciation model, which will eliminate the
volatility problem mentioned in the last paragraph. In this Model 8, instead of assuming
that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation rates, it is assumed
that producers use the current CPI inflation rate as estimators of anticipated asset
inflation rates. In terms of computations, we simply replace the two ex post asset
inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by the CPI inflation rate ρt listed in Table A2 of the
Appendix and then repeat all of the computations made to implement Model 7 above.
It turns out that the Model 8 constant real interest rate capital stocks (and prices) are
exactly equal to their Model 7 counterparts in Table 7. This follows from equations (57),
which show that the aggregate (over vintages) stock price is equal to the price of a new
asset, which in turn does not depend on our assumptions about interest rates or expected
asset inflation rates. Hence there is no need to table the capital stocks and prices for
Model 8 (or Model 9 below). However, the Model 8 vintage user costs and capital
service flows are very different from their Model 2 counterparts and slightly different
from their Model 5 counterparts. Table 13 lists the Model 8 rental prices and flows of
capital services for the geometric depreciation (constant real interest rate) Canadian
capital stocks at 5 year intervals over the period 1965-1999.
Table 13: Model 8 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Constant Real
Interest Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.2645
2.1003
3.0339
3.9615
4.8220
4.9283
5.3718

uME
1.0000
1.1079
1.5109
2.0847
1.9895
1.8632
1.6715
1.5843

u(8)
1.0000
1.1804
1.7786
2.5109
2.8254
3.0471
2.9316
2.9879

kNR
3014
3917
4896
6241
7807
8997
9839
10640

kME
3379
4659
6344
9045
13257
20416
26411
35313

k(8)
6393
8568
11171
15050
20282
26723
31599
37855

1.0507

1.0136

1.0327

1.0378

1.0715

1.0537

When we compare the service prices and quantities in Table 13 (geometric depreciation
model with constant real interest rates) with the corresponding service prices and
quantities in Table 9 (straight line depreciation model with constant real rates), we see
that the rental price series for each type of asset, uNRt and uMEt, are identical. In both of
these models, the vintage user costs are all proportional to the user cost for a new asset

60
and hence the equality follows. However, the corresponding stocks that aggregate over
vintages are not identical: the average annual geometric growth rate for nonresidential
structures was 4.10% for the straight line model and 3.78% for the geometric model and
the average annual growth rate for machinery and equipment was 6.96% for the straight
line model and 7.15% for the geometric model. The overall annual rate of growth for
capital services for the straight line model was 5.41% per year compared to 5.37% per
year for the geometric model where both models assumed constant real interest rates.
This is not a large difference. In Figure 11 below, it will be seen that the user cost that
corresponds to the geometric model with constant real interest rates, u(8), is much less
volatile than the corresponding geometric model that assumes perfect foresight, u(7).
We turn now to our third geometric deprecation model, which we call Model 9. In this
model, instead of assuming that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset
inflation rates, we assume that they can anticipate the trends in asset inflation rates. In
terms of computations, we use exactly the same program that we used to implement
Model 7 except that we replace the rather volatile nominal interest rate rt that was listed
in Table A2 of the Appendix by the smoothed nominal interest rate that is listed in Table
A3 of the Appendix. We also replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt,
by their smoothed counterparts listed in Table A3 in the Appendix.
As mentioned earlier, the Model 9 constant real interest rate capital stocks (and prices)
are exactly equal to their Model 7 counterparts in Table 7. Hence there is no need to
table the capital stocks and prices for Model 9. However, the Model 9 vintage user costs
are somewhat different from their Model 7 and 8 counterparts. Table 14 lists the Model 9
rental prices and flows of capital services for the Canadian capital stock at 5 year
intervals over the period 1965-1999.
Table 14: Model 9 Capital Service Prices and Quantities using Smoothed Interest
Rates and Smoothed Asset Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.5910
2.4785
4.5384
6.8189
8.9179
6.4151
7.5181

uME
1.0000
1.1349
1.6061
2.7596
2.4039
2.4171
1.7680
1.9554

u(9)
1.0000
1.3037
1.9186
3.4025
3.8579
4.4108
3.2143
3.6505

kNR
2066
2685
3357
4278
5352
6168
6745
7294

kME
3477
4793
6527
9306
13639
21005
27172
36331

k(9)
5543
7449
9800
13254
17958
23981
28407
34482

1.0611

1.0199

1.0388

1.0378

1.0715

1.0552

When we compare the two capital services, kNRt and kMEt across the last three tables, it
can be seen that they are identical and hence so are their growth rates. Hence when we
aggregate across these two assets to form the Model 7,8 and 9 capital services aggregates,

61
we find that the average annual geometric growth rates are quite similar: 5.55%, 5.37%
and 5.52% respectively. When we compare the service prices and quantities in Table 14
(geometric depreciation model with smoothed asset inflation rates) with the
corresponding service prices and quantities in Table 10 (straight line depreciation model
with smoothed asset inflation rates), we see that the rental price series for each type of
asset, uNRt and uMEt, are no longer identical across the two models. Th geometric
aggregate rental price grew at an annual geometric rate of 3.88% per year while the
straight line aggregate rental price grew at a 4.31% per year rate. In Figure 11 below, it
will be seen that the user cost that corresponds to the geometric model with smoothed
asset inflation rates, u(9), is much less volatile than the corresponding geometric model
that assumes perfect foresight, u(7), but the trend in each series is similar.
We finish off this section by graphing the aggregate price and quantity series for the
Canadian capital stocks 1965-1999 (Figures 9 and 10 below) and for capital services
(Figures 11 and 12 below) for our three geometric depreciation models. Since the price
and quantity series for the capital stocks are all the same for our three geometric models
(i.e., P(7)t = P(8)t = P(9)t and K(7)t = K(8)t = K(9)t, in Figure 9, we graph P(7) with the
three one hoss shay capital stock prices, P(1)-P(3) along with the single straight line
depreciation capital stock price P(4) and in Figure 10, we graph K(7) with the three one
hoss shay aggregate capital stocks, K(1), K(2), and K(3), along with the single straight
line capital stock K(4).
Insert Figures 9,10,11,and 12.
Figure 9 provides a comparison of aggregate capital stock prices across all 9 models
considered so far, but note that the 3 straight line models all have the same aggregate
stock price P(4) and the 3 geometric models all have the same price P(7). It can be seen
that there is a huge amount of dispersion in the prices of the 3 one hoss shay models: the
P(1) series is the highest jagged curve (which uses ex post asset inflation rates), followed
by P(3) (which uses smoothed ex post asset inflation rates), followed by P(2) (which uses
a constant real interest rate). It can be seen that the P(3) curve is a smoothed version of
the very nonsmooth P(1) curve. The constant real interest rate one hoss shay aggregate
capital stock price series, P(2), is only slightly above the straight line depreciation price
series, P(4), and the geometric depreciation rate capital stock price series, P(5). The last
two series are virtually identical. Thus the aggregate capital stock prices for 7 of our 9
models are very close, with two of the one hoss shay models generating quite different
numbers.
Figure 10 compares the aggregate capital stocks across the 9 models considered thus far.
Again, we note that that the 3 straight line models all generate the same aggregate stocks
K(4) and the 3 geometric models all generate the same stocks K(7). The 3 one hoss shay
models generate the biggest aggregate capital stocks: the constant real interest rate series
K(2) is the highest curve, followed by the smoothed asset inflation rates series K(3) and
the ex post inflation rates series K(1) is just slightly below the corresponding smoothed
series K(3). The straight line depreciation model aggregate capital stocks K(4) are next

62
and finally, the geometric depreciation aggregate stocks K(7) are considerably below the
other stock series.
Figures 11 and 12 plot the user costs and aggregate capital services that correspond to the
3 geometric depreciation models considered in this section. Figure 11 shows the
tremendous volatility of the geometric user cost, u(7), that uses ex post asset inflation
rates. The user cost model that uses smoothed asset inflation rates, u(9), is much
smoother (but still quite volatile) and it captures the trends in the u(7) series. The
geometric depreciation model that uses the assumption of constant real interest rates,
u(8), lies considerably below the other two series. On the quantity side of things, the
constant real interest rate model gives the highest capital services series, k(8), followed
by the smoothed asset inflation rates series, k(9), and the perfectly anticipated asset
inflation model generates the lowest curve, k(7).
We turn now to our fourth class of depreciation and relative efficiency model.
11. The Linear Efficiency Decline Model
Recall that our first class of models (the one hoss shay models) assumed that the
efficiency (or cross section user cost) of the asset remained constant over the useful life
of the asset. In our second class of models (the straight line depreciation models), we
assumed that the cross section depreciation of the asset declined at a linear rate. In our
third class of models (the geometric depreciation models), we assumed that cross section
depreciation declined at a geometric rate. Comparing the third class with the second
class of models, it can be seen that geometric depreciation is more accelerated than
straight line depreciation; i.e., depreciation is relatively large for new vintages compared
to older ones.73 In this section, we will consider another class of models that gives rise to
an accelerated pattern of depreciation: the class of models that exhibit a linear decline in
efficiency.74
It is relatively easy to develop the mathematics of this model. Let f0t be the period t
rental price for an asset that is new at the beginning of period t. If the useful life of the
asset is L years and the efficiency decline is linear, then the sequence of period t cross
sectional user costs fnt is defined as follows:
(66) fnt ≡ f0t [L − n]/L ;
≡0
;

n = 0,1,2,...,L − 1 ;
n = L,L+1,L+2, ... .

Now substitute (66) into the first equation in (5) and get the following formula for the
rental price f0t in terms of the price of a new asset at the beginning of year t, P0t:
(67) f0t = LP0t/[L + (L−1)(γt) + (L−2)(γt)2 + ...+ 1(γt)L−1]
73

See Figure 2 in Chapter 6 of the Manual.
This class of models was also considered in Chapter 6 of the Manual. It was described as an asset whose
age efficiency falls by a constant amount each year.

74

63
where the period t discount factor γt is defined in terms of the period t nominal interest
rate rt and the period t expected asset inflation rate it in the usual way:
(68) γt ≡ (1 + it)/(1 + rt).
Now that f0t has been determined, substitute (67) into (66) and substitute the resulting
equations into equations (5) and determine the sequence of period t vintage asset prices,
Pnt:
(69) Pnt = P0t [(L−n) + (L−n−1)(γt) + ...+ 1(γt)L−1−n]/[L + (L−1)(γt) + ...+ 1(γt)L−1]
for n = 0,1,2,...,L−1
=0
for n = L, L+1,L+2,... .
Finally, use equations (8) to determine the end of period t rental prices, unt, in terms of
the corresponding beginning of period t rental prices, fnt:
(70) unt = (1 + rt)fnt ;

n = 0,1,2,...

Given the vintage asset prices defined by (69), we could use equations (12) above to
determine the corresponding vintage cross section depreciation rates δnt. We will not
table these depreciation rates since our focus is on constructing measures of the capital
stock and of the flow of services that the stocks yield. However, we will note that if we
recall definition (10) for the period t cross section depreciation of an asset of vintage n,
Dnt ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t, and assume that the nominal interest rate rt and the nominal asset
inflation rate it are both zero, then using (69), it can be shown that
(71) Dnt ≡ Pnt − Pn+1t = P0t [L − n]/[L(L+1)/2]

for n = 0,1,2,...,L;

i.e., when rt = it = 0, depreciation declines at a linear rate for the linear efficiency decline
model. When depreciation declines at a linear rate, the resulting formula for depreciation
is called the sum of the year digits formula.75 Thus just as the one hoss shay and straight
line depreciation models coincide when rt = it = 0, so too do the linear efficiency decline
and sum of the digits depreciation models coincide.
In our tenth Model, we assume that producers exactly anticipate the asset inflation rates,
iNRt and iMEt, for nonresidential construction and for machinery and equipment
respectively. We use the Fisher ideal index to aggregate over vintages using formula (69)
above for the vintage asset prices. Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity
of nonresidential capital, PNRt and KNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity
of machinery and equipment, PMEt and KMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher
ideal formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity
series for the wealth stock, which we denote by P(10)t and K(10)t; see Table 15 below.

75

See Chapter 6 of the Manual. Canning (1929; 277) describes the method in some detail so it was already
in common use by that time.

64
Table 15: Model 10 Capital Stocks and Prices Assuming Perfect Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

PNR
1.0000
1.2877
2.0296
2.8906
4.1906
5.1187
5.2982
5.7521

PME
1.0000
1.1030
1.4061
2.1564
2.0871
1.9271
1.7414
1.7291

P(10)
1.0000
1.2234
1.8021
2.6312
3.3621
3.7770
3.7552
3.9621

KNR
29.6
38.6
48.0
60.8
75.7
86.1
92.5
98.5

1.0528

1.0162

1.0413

1.0360

KME
15.0
21.4
29.8
43.0
63.5
98.2
124.8
166.6

K(10)
44.7
60.0
77.3
102.0
133.7
166.8
188.4
215.7

1.0733 1.0474

The quantity units in Table 10 are in billions of 1965 Canadian dollars. The average rate
of price increase for the linear efficiency decline capital aggregate was 4.13% per year,
which is lower than the corresponding rate of aggregate price increase for the one hoss
shay aggregate of 4.35% per year. On the quantity side, the stock of nonresidential
construction capital increased from $29.6 billion to $98.5 billion (constant 1965)
Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 3.60% while the stock
of machinery and equipment capital increased from $15.0 billion to $166.6 billion
(constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of 7.33%. Of course
the levels of the capital aggregate are only about 2/3 to 3/4 of the corresponding one hoss
shay levels due to the accelerated form of depreciation for the former model. The
linearly declining efficiency capital aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of
4.74%, which is lower than the corresponding rate of growth for the one hoss shay
aggregate of 4.95%.
Using equations (66), (67) and (70) along with the data tabled in Appendix 1 (see Tables
A1 and A2), we can construct the end of the period user costs for each of our 39 vintages
of nonresidential construction capital. As usual, use equation (38) to construct the
service flow aggregate for nonresidential construction for each year. Then we use (42)
(where L equals 39) to aggregate over the 39 vintages of nonresidential capital using the
Fisher (1922) ideal index number formula and form the aggregate rental price for
nonresidential construction, uNRt, and the corresponding services aggregate, kNRt, for the
years 1965-1999.76 These series, along with their annual average (geometric) growth
rates, can be found in Table 16 at 5 year intervals. Similarly, we use (42) above (where L
equals 14) and aggregate over the 14 vintages of machinery and equipment using the
Fisher ideal index number formula and form aggregate capital services price and quantity
series, uMEt and kMEt, for the years 1965-1999. These series, along with their annual
average (geometric) growth rates, can also be found in Table 16 at 5 year intervals.
Having constructed the aggregate price and quantity of nonresidential capital services,
uNRt and kNRt respectively, and the aggregate price and quantity of machinery and
76

Since all of the vintage rental prices are proportional to each other, again Hicks’ (1939; 312-313)
aggregation theorem implies that all of the usual indexes are equal to each other.

65
equipment services, uMEt and kMEt respectively, we may again use the Fisher ideal
formula and aggregate these two series into a single aggregate price and quantity series
for capital services, which we denote by u(10)t and k(10)t.
Table 16: Model 10 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming
Perfect Foresight
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.5517
2.8288
3.6236
6.2794
8.1234
7.6853
8.0210
1.0632

uME
1.0000
1.1333
1.5639
3.6046
2.7018
2.4488
1.9864
2.3442
1.0254

u(10)
1.0000
1.2978
2.0336
3.6849
3.9775
4.3007
3.7872
4.2092
1.0432

kNR
2066
2721
3444
4394
5498
6346
6945
7467

kME
3162
4305
5949
8582
12744
19468
25405
33554

k(10)
5227
7012
9366
12716
17337
23072
27418
32915

1.0385 1.0719

1.0556

The quantity units in Table 16 are in millions of 1965 Canadian dollars. It can be seen
that the price of a unit of nonresidential construction capital services increased by 6.32%
per year and the price of a unit of machinery and equipment capital services increased by
2.54% per year on average. The average rate of price increase for the linearly declining
efficiency capital services aggregate was 4.32% per year, which is much less than the
corresponding rate of price increase for the one hoss shay aggregate capital services
price, which was 4.85% per year. On the quantity side, the flow of nonresidential
construction capital services increased from $2066 million to $7467 million (constant
1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average (geometric) growth rate of 3.85% while
the flow of machinery and equipment capital services increased from $3162 million to
$33,554 million (constant 1965) Canadian dollars, for an annual average growth rate of
7.19%. The capital services aggregate grew at an annual average growth rate of 5.56%
compared to the 5.61% annual average growth rate for the corresponding one hoss shay
capital services. As usual, the linear efficiency decline user costs u(10) that are based on
the assumption of perfect foresight are very volatile; see Figure 15 below.
We turn now to our second linear efficiency decline model, which will eliminate the
volatility problem mentioned in the last paragraph. In this Model 11, instead of assuming
that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation rates, it is assumed
that producers use the current CPI inflation rate as estimators of anticipated asset
inflation rates. This model turns out to be equivalent to the constant real interest rate
model that was used throughout the main Manual. As usual, in terms of computations, we
simply replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by the CPI inflation rate
ρt listed in Table A2 of the Appendix and then repeat all of the computations made to
implement Model 10 above. The counterparts to Tables 15 and 16 are Tables 17 and 18
below; Table 17 lists the Model 11 prices and quantities for the Canadian capital stock at

66
5 year intervals over the period 1965-1999 while Table 18 lists the rental prices and flows
of capital services over this same period.
Table 17: Model 11 Capital Stocks and Prices Assuming Constant Real
Interest Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

PNR
1.0000
1.2476
1.9319
2.8122
3.8861
4.6936
4.9227
5.3871

PME
1.0000
1.0932
1.3898
1.9324
1.9516
1.8136
1.6696
1.5889

P(11)
1.0000
1.1953
1.7421
2.4990
3.1443
3.5189
3.5512
3.7215

KNR
31.4
41.0
51.0
64.6
80.3
91.4
98.1
104.5

KME
15.3
21.8
30.4
43.8
64.8
100.5
127.4
170.3

1.0508

1.0137

1.0394

1.0360

1.0734 1.0472

K(11)
46.7
62.7
80.8
106.6
139.5
173.7
195.9
224.0

The Model 11 capital stock quantities are very similar to the Model 10 quantities. The
overall average growth rate for the price of the aggregate stock is a bit higher for Model
10 (4.13% per year) than for Model 11 (3.93% per year).
Table 18: Model 11 Capital Service Prices and Quantities Assuming Constant
Real Interest Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

uNR
1.0000
1.2645
2.1003
3.0339
3.9615
4.8220
4.9283
5.3718

uME
1.0000
1.1079
1.5109
2.0847
1.9895
1.8632
1.6715
1.5843

u(11)
1.0000
1.1806
1.7797
2.5124
2.8262
3.0462
2.9299
2.9851

kNR
2988
3936
4982
6357
7954
9181
10047
10802

kME
3400
4630
6398
9229
13706
20937
27323
36086

k(11)
6388
8561
11311
15334
20798
27339
32487
38591

1.0507

1.0136

1.0327

1.0385 1.0719

1.0543

The one hoss shay capital services aggregate that assumes constant real interest rates,
k(2), is quite close to the linear efficiency decline capital services aggregate that assumes
constant real interest rates, k(11), and their average annual geometric growth rates are
also close: 5.49% for k(2) versus 5.43% for k(11). However, k(11) is 15 to 20% bigger
in levels than the first linear efficiency decline capital services aggregate k(10), which
assumed that anticipated asset inflation rates were equal to ex post rates. The average
annual geometric growth rate for k(10) was somewhat higher at 5.56% per year.

67

We turn now to our third linear efficiency decline model. In this model (Model 12),
instead of assuming that producers correctly anticipate each year’s ex post asset inflation
rates, we assume that they can anticipate the trends in asset inflation rates. In terms of
computations, we use exactly the same program that we used to implement Model 10
except that we replace the rather volatile nominal interest rate rt that was listed in Table
A2 of the Appendix by the smoothed nominal interest rate that is listed in Table A3 of the
Appendix. We also replace the two ex post asset inflation rates, iNRt and iMEt, by their
smoothed counterparts listed in Table A3 in the Appendix. The counterparts to Tables 15
and 16 are Tables 19 and 20 below; Table 19 lists the Model 12 prices and quantities for
the Canadian capital stock at 5 year intervals over the period 1965-1999 while Table 20
lists the rental prices and flows of capital services over this same period.
Table 19: Model 12 Capital Stocks and Prices using Smoothed Interest Rates and
Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

PNR
1.0000
1.2840
1.9774
2.9749
4.1990
5.1418
5.0738
5.6233

PME
1.0000
1.0987
1.4102
2.0299
2.0190
1.9017
1.6921
1.6546

P(12)
1.0000
1.2194
1.7719
2.6291
3.3350
3.7765
3.6153
3.8497

KNR
29.9
38.9
48.4
61.3
76.3
86.8
93.4
99.4

KME
15.4
21.9
30.4
43.9
64.9
100.4
127.7
170.3

K(12)
45.2
60.7
78.2
103.3
135.4
168.8
190.8
218.4

1.0521

1.0149

1.0404

1.0360

1.0733

1.0474

Comparing the numbers in Tables 15, 17 and 19, it can be seen that there are some small
differences between the capital stocks generated by our three variants of the linear
efficiency decline model but the average growth rates are virtually identical. There is
more variation across the three models in the movement of the stock prices with Model
10 giving the highest rate of price growth for the capital aggregate (4.13% per year),
followed by Model 12 (4.04% per year) and then Model 11 (3.94% per year). The Model
10, 11 and 12 aggregate prices of capital are graphed in Figure 13 below and the
corresponding aggregate quantities are graphed in Figure 14 below.
Table 20: Model 12 Capital Service Prices and Quantities using Smoothed Interest
Rates and Smoothed Asset Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1970
1975
1980

uNR
1.0000
1.5179
2.3823
4.2462

uME
1.0000
1.1288
1.5817
2.6535

u(12)
1.0000
1.2788
1.8813
3.2554

kNR
2186
2879
3643
4649

kME
3481
4740
6551
9450

k(12)
5667
7601
10122
13766

68
1985
1990
1995
1999
Annual
Growth
Rates

6.3349
8.2766
6.0823
7.0720

2.3309
2.3269
1.7447
1.8905

3.7107
4.2349
3.1581
3.5360

5817
6714
7348
7900

14033
21436
27974
36947

18747
24900
29607
35553

1.0592

1.0189

1.0378

1.0385

1.0719

1.0555

Comparing the numbers in Tables 16, 18 and 20, it can be seen that there are large
differences in the levels and small differences in the growth rates for capital services
generated by the 3 models: the average annual geometric growth rates for k(10), k(11)
and k(12) are 5.56%, 5.43% and 5.55% per year. 4.32%, 3.27% and 4.04% per year
respectively. However, there is much more variation across the three models in the
movement of the service prices with Model 10 giving the highest rate of price growth for
the capital services aggregate (4.32% per year), followed by Model 12 (3.78% per year)
and then Model 11 (3.27% per year). The Model 10, 11 and 12 aggregate prices of
capital services are graphed in Figure 15 below and the corresponding aggregate
quantities of services are graphed in Figure 16 below.
Insert Figures 13, 14 ,15 and 16
Viewing Figure 13, we see that the P(10) curve is the highest and the most wiggly; this is
the aggregate capital stock price series that assumes that anticipated asset inflation rates
are equal to the actual ex post rates. Smoothing these volatile asset inflation rates leads
to the P(12) curve, which is much smoother and captures the trend in P(10). The constant
real interest aggregate capital stock price series P(11) lies substantially below the other
two series.
Viewing Figure 14, we see that all three of the linear efficiency decline models generate
the same aggregate wealth capital stock to a high degree of approximation. For the
record, the K(11) series is the top curve, the K(12) series is in the middle and the K(10)
series is the lowest curve.
Viewing Figure 15, we see that the aggregate linear efficiency decline user cost series
u(10), which assumes that anticipated asset inflation rates are equal to the actual ex post
rates, is the highest very volatile curve. Smoothing these volatile asset inflation rates
leads to the u(12) curve, which is much smoother and captures the trend in u(10). The
constant real interest rate user cost series, u(11), lies far below the other two aggregate
user cost series for much of the sample period.
Figure 16 plots the three linear efficiency decline aggregate capital services series, k(10)k(12). Each of these series is reasonably smooth but note that they are spread out much
more than the corresponding aggregate capital stock series, K(10)-K(12), that were
plotted in Figure 14. Thus the different assumptions on anticipated asset price
movements generate substantially different measures of capital services for these linear
efficiency decline models. The constant real interest rate series, k(11), is the top curve,

69
followed by the smoothed asset inflation rates model, k(12), and the ex post asset
inflation rates model, k(10), is the lowest curve.
We turn now to a class of models that has not been formally considered in the literature
but which relates in a very interesting way to the models presented in this section.
12. The Linearly Increasing Maintenance Expenditures Model
Many years ago, the accountant Canning raised the following interesting problem that
bears on our topic:77
“By spending enough for parts replacements (repairs), it is possible to keep any machine running for an
indefinitely great length of time, but it does not pay to do so. Query: How does one know just when a
machine is worn out?” John B. Canning (1929; 251).

In other words, Canning notes that the choice of when to retire an asset is really an
endogenous decision rather than an exogenous one as we have assumed up to now. In
this section, we attempt to model the retirement decision in a preliminary way using the
concept of a maintenance profile.
For most new machines and new structures, engineers are able to devise a maintenance
schedule that will ensure that the asset delivers its services during the period under
consideration. Thus in the Queensland Competition Authority (2000; Chapter 13),78 a
schedule of costs per kilometer of rail track that is required to keep the rails in working
order as a function of the age of the track is laid out. These maintenance expenditures
will enable the track to deliver transportation services over its lifetime. This schedule has
a fixed cost aspect to it and then as the track ages, the maintenance expenditures increase
linearly up to a certain point and then flatten out. Similarly, a new truck will have a
schedule of recommended maintenance operations that the owner is urged to follow. In
addition to these maintenance expenditures, we could also include operating costs like
fuel and driver inputs since these inputs are necessary to deliver ton miles of output.
Finally, an office building will also have maintenance expenditures associated with it and
some operating expenditures such as heat since the renters of offices typically want
square meters of space maintained at a comfortable temperature. In any case, we assume
that at the beginning of period t, we know the period t maintenance and operating
expenditures necessary to operate an asset that is n periods old at the beginning of period
t, mnt, n = 0,1,2,... .We say that {mnt} is the period t (cross section) maintenance profile.
77

Matheson (1910; 76-77) raises the same sort of issues in a less focussed manner: “But this principle has
to be applied with considerable qualification where repairs really renew the life of a machine and prolong
greatly its period of useful work. For instance, a locomotive during its life may have its wheel tires
renewed four times, its boiler three times, and be painted seven times, so that before the framework, the
wheels and other more durable parts fail, and the engine is broken up, much more than its original cost will
have been expended on it. The value of any such serious renewals of this kind should be duly credited in a
proper system of depreciation. Another course, followed more often in the United States than in Great
Britain, is to prefer the substitution of new machines with all modern improvements rather than to renew or
repair old plant, which even rendered serviceable may not be so economical in working.”
78
Euan Morton of the Queensland Competition Authority brought this work to the author’s attention.

70
We now have to distinguish between the gross and net rental prices of an asset that is n
periods old at the beginning of period t, gnt and fnt, respectively. An office or an
apartment is typically rented on a gross basis; i.e., the tenant rents an office that is t
periods old at the beginning of period t and pays the gross rent gnt at the beginning of the
period and the landlord is responsible for the period t maintenance costs mnt.79 On the
other hand, a truck (on a long term lease) is usually rented on a net basis; i.e., the user of
the truck is responsible for operating costs and maintenance. In any case, the relationship
between the gross and net rental prices is:
(72) gnt = fnt + mnt ;

n = 0,1,2,... .

Thus our present notation is consistent with our previous notation where we valued an
asset by the discounted stream of its net rentals; i.e., previously, we used the cross section
profile of net rentals fnt (extrapolated to future periods) in order to value vintage assets.
Our new vintage asset valuation equation is the following equation, which gives the value
of a new asset at the beginning of period t, assuming that the asset will be retired after L
periods of use:
(73) P0t(L) ≡ g0t + (γt) g1t + (γt)2 g2t + ...+ (γt)L−1 gL−1t
− [m0t + (βt) m1t + (βt)2 m2t + ...+ (βt)L−1 mL−1t]
where the discount factors γt and βt are defined as follows:80
(74) γt ≡(1+it)/(1+rt) ; βt ≡(1+αt)/(1+rt).
As in the previous sections, it is the one period anticipated inflation rate for the services
of the asset at the beginning of period t, rt is the period t nominal interest rate and hence
γt is the same discount factor that has appeared in previous sections. A new parameter is
αt, which is the one period anticipated inflation rate for maintenance (and operating
cost) services and so βt is the counterpart to γt except that βt is the discount factor that
applies to future anticipated costs while γt is the discount factor that applies to future
anticipated gross revenues.
The interpretation of equation (73) is straightforward: a new asset that is to be used for L
periods is equal to the discounted stream of the gross rentals that it is expected to yield
minus the discounted stream of expected maintenance and operating costs.
We now evaluate equation (73) for L = 1,2,... , and pick the L which gives the highest
value of P0t(L). We call this optimal value L*. Once the optimal L* has been
79

We assume that these costs are converted to beginning of period t costs using present values if necessary.
We could have presented a more general equation than (73); i.e., we could have presented a counterpart
to the very general equation (2) in section 3 above, involving the anticipated asset inflation rates int, the one
period nominal interest rates rnt and another set of anticipated maintenance cost inflation rates αnt.
However, we would soon be forced to impose the simplifying assumptions (3) and (4) along with a new set
of simplifying assumptions, αnt = αt.

80

71
determined, then if used asset markets are in equilibrium, the sequence of period t vintage
asset prices Pnt , the sequence of period t vintage gross rental prices gnt and the sequence
of period t cross section maintenance costs mnt should satisfy the following system of
equations:
(75) P0t = g0t + (γt) g1t + (γt)2 g2t + ...+ (γt)L−1 gL*−1t
− [m0t + (βt) m1t + (βt)2 m2t + ...+ (βt)L−1 mL*−1t]
P1t = g1t + (γt) g2t + (γt)2 g3t + ...+ (γt)L−1 gL*−2t
− [m1t + (βt) m2t + (βt)2 m3t + ...+ (βt)L−1 mL*−2t]
...
PL*−2t = gL*−2t + (γt) gL*−1t − [mL*−2t + (βt) mL*−1t ]
PL*−1t = gL*−1t − mL*−1t.
Equations (75) are the counterparts to our earlier system of equations (5). Given the
cross section gross rental prices gnt and the cross section maintenance costs mnt (and the
discount factors γt and βt), we can determine the period t vintage asset prices Pnt using
equations (75). Given the vintage asset prices Pnt and the cross sectional maintenance
costs mnt, we can also use equations (75) to determine the vintage gross rental prices gnt:
start with the last equation in (75) and determine gL*−1t; then move up to the second last
equation and determine gL*−2t; etc. Of course, once the gnt have been determined, then we
may use equations (72) to determine the net rental prices (or vintage user costs) fnt and
then we can use these fnt as weights for the vintage capital stocks and construct a measure
of capital services as in the previous sections. Thus equations (75) are indeed the key
equations in this section.
Unfortunately, in general, we cannot derive counterparts to equations (6) using equations
(75). To see why this is so, look at the first equation in (75) and try to convert it into a
counterpart to the first equation in (6):
(76) P0t = g0t − m0t + γt [g1t + γtg2t + ...+ (γt)L−2gL*−1t] − βt[m1t + βtm2t + ...+ (βt)L−2mL*−1t]
≠ g0t − m0t + γt P1t.
It is also the case that we no longer have the simple relationship between anticipated time
series depreciation that we derived in equations (24) above. Put another way, suppose all
expectations held at the beginning of period t turned out to be true. Under this
assumption, we can derive the following relationship between the price of a one period
old asset at the beginning of period t, P1t, and the price of a one period old asset at the
beginning of period t+1, P1t+1, as follows:
(77) P1t+1 = (1+it)[g1t + γtg2t + ...+ (γt)L−2gL*−1t] − (1+αt)[m1t + βtm2t + ...+ (βt)L−2mL*−1t]
≠ (1+it)P1t.
However, if we assume that the period t anticipated rental price escalation factor 1+it is
equal to the period t anticipated maintenance cost escalation factor 1+αt so that γt is equal

72
to βt, then the two inequalities (76) and (77) become equalities. Hence, to make further
progress81, we make the following simplifying assumption:
(78) αt = it or γt = βt.
Using assumption (78), we can rewrite equations (75) as follows:
(79) P0t = g0t − m0t + γt P1t
P1t = g1t − m1t + γt P2t
...
PL*−2t = gL*−2t − mL*−2t + γt PL*−1t
PL*−1t = gL*−2t − mL*−2t + 0

= f0t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]P1t
= f1t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]P2t
...
= fL*−2t + [(1+it)/(1+rt)]PL*−1t
= fL*−1t + 0

where the second set of equations follows using equations (72). Note that equations (79)
are exact counterparts to equations (6) in section 3 above.
Obviously, equations (79) can be rewritten to give us explicit formulae for the gross
rental prices gnt in terms of the period t vintage asset prices Pnt and the period t vintage
maintenance costs mnt:
(80) gnt = mnt + Pnt − [(1+it)/(1+rt)]Pn+1t ;

n = 0,1,2,...,L*−1.

Equations (80) are exact counterparts to our earlier system of equations (7) for the period
t user costs, fnt.
In order to get a useful, explicit depreciation model, we make some further assumptions:
(81) γt ≡ (1+it)/(1+rt) = γ
(82) gnt = λt g
(83) mnt = λt [b+nc]

for all periods t;
for all periods t and n = 0,1,2,...;
for all periods t and n = 0,1,2,...

where g, b and c are positive parameters with g > b; i.e., the gross rental must be greater
than the fixed maintenance cost. We now explain the meaning of assumptions (81)-(83).
Assumption (81) means that the real interest rate is constant over all periods.
Assumption (82) is a one hoss shay type assumption except that it is applied to the gross
output of the asset; i.e., (82) means that the gross services yielded by a properly
maintained asset of any vintage in period t is the same across all vintages. Assumption
(83) says that the period t vintage maintenance costs have a fixed cost component that is
the same across all vintages, λtb, plus another component that increases linearly in the
age of the asset, λtnc for an asset that is n periods old at the start of period t. The
presence of the scalar factor λt in both (82) and (83) means that we are assuming that
period t rental prices gnt and maintenance costs mnt are essentially constant except for a
common period t inflation factor λt.
81

We do this in order to obtain a simpler set of relations between gnt, mnt and Pnt than the rather complex
system of relations defined by equations (75).

73

Now substitute assumptions (78) and (81)-(83) into (73) and obtain the following
expression for the function P0t(L), which gives the anticipated asset value of a new asset
as a function of the number of periods L that it is used:82
(84) P0t(L) ≡ g0t + (γt) g1t + (γt)2 g2t + ...+ (γt)L−1 gL−1t
− [m0t + (βt) m1t + (βt)2 m2t + ...+ (βt)L−1 mL−1t]
= λt [g − b][1 + γ + γ2 +...+ γL−1] − λt c[1 + 2γ + 3γ2 +...+ (L−1)γL−2].
Now reparameterize the positive parameter c as follows:
(85) c ≡ [g − b]d
where d is another positive parameter. Substitute (85) into (84) and (84) can be rewritten
as follows:
(86) P0t(L) = λt [g − b]h(L)
where the function h(L) is defined as
(87) h(L) ≡ [1 + γ + γ2 +...+ γL−1] − d [1 + 2γ + 3γ2 +...+ (L−1)γL−2].
Provided that d is small enough and the real interest rate escalation factor γ is close to
one, a positive integer L* that maximizes h(L) will exist. This exercise determines the
optimal age of retirement of a new asset.
However, we now reverse the argument: given an L*, we look for a positive parameter d
such that h(L) will be at a maximum when L = L*. This can be done numerically. For γ
= 1/(1.04) (this corresponds to a real interest rate of 4%, our standard assumption), we
found that the d that corresponded to L* = 39 was approximately equal to 0.002. This in
turn corresponds to the assumption that maintenance costs for nonresidential structures
were rising at the rate of 0.2 percentage points per year. The d that corresponded to L* =
14 was approximately equal to 0.012. This in turn corresponds to the assumption that
maintenance costs for machinery and equipment were rising at the rate of 1.2 percentage
points per year.
Once the d* that corresponds to the desired asset life L* has been found, then the
function h(L) defined by (87) is known. Now set the right hand side of equation (86)
(evaluated at L = L*) equal to the price of a new asset at the beginning of period t, P0t,
and solve the resulting equation for λt [g − b]. The solution is:

82

By examining (84), it can be seen that as b and c increase (so that either the fixed cost component or the
rate of increase in maintenance costs increases), then the optimal age of retirement L* will decrease.
Conversely, as g increases (so that the gross revenue yielded by the asset exogenously increases), then the
optimal age of retirement will increase.

74
(88) λt [g − b] = P0t/h(L*).
We now have enough information to evaluate the sequence of period t net rental prices,
fnt, as follows:83
(89) fnt = gnt − mnt
= λt g − λt [b+nc]
= λt [g − b] − λt n[g − b]d
= λt [g − b] [1− nd]
= P0t [1− nd]/h(L*)

n = 0,1,2,...,L−1 using (72)
using (82) and (83)
using (85)
rearranging terms
using (88).

If the price P0t of a new asset is known, then everything on the right hand side of (89) is
known and the sequence of net rental prices fnt can be calculated. Once the fnt are known,
then the second set of equations in (79) can be used in order to obtain the sequence of
vintage asset prices, Pnt: given P0t and f0t, use the first equation in (79) to determine P1t;
then use f1t and the second equation to determine P2t and so on.
We will not table the results of this linearly increasing maintenance expenditures model
because it turned out to be virtually equivalent to Model 11 in the previous section. The
explanation for this result is contained in equations (89): these equations show that the
(net) user costs decline linearly as older assets are used. This is precisely the assumption
made in Model 11 in the previous section, which also assumed constant real interest
rates.84
The importance of the model presented in this section is that it casts some light on the
conditions under which we might expect net rental prices to decline in a linear fashion
even though we know the asset is of the gross one hoss shay type; i.e., an older truck can
deliver the same ton miles in a period as a younger one provided that we spend enough
on maintenance. Thus the simplified model presented at the end of this section provides
a justification for assuming a quite accelerated form of depreciation, even though the
asset essentially delivers one hoss shay type services. Put another way, in the context of
assets that are capable of delivering the same services as they age, then if maintenance
costs rise as the asset ages, accelerated depreciation is inevitable.85 The more general
model presented at the beginning of this session could also be used in regulatory contexts
where maintenance schedules often exist and the determination of “economic”
depreciation is a matter of some importance.

83

We do not have enough information to obtain the sequence of gross rental prices, gnt, but, fortunately, it
is the net rental prices that we need in order to calculate a capital services aggregate.
84
It is not clear that the user costs defined by (89) decline down to zero as we reach age L*. Empirically,
this proved to be the case and so the results of this model were virtually the same as those of Model 11.
85
The results in this section also enable us to reinterpret the geometric depreciation model, which is often
interpreted as an asset evaporation model; i.e., each period, a fraction of the existing stock of assets simply
“evaporates”. However, now we see that the asset may in fact be delivering a constant amount of gross
services but a certain pattern of increasing maintenance costs is in fact causing used asset prices to have the
profile implied by geometric depreciation (up to some limiting age).

75
The simple model presented at the end of this section may also help to explain why there
is tremendous diversity in the ages at which identical assets are retired in different
countries. For example, if maintenance costs are higher or are expected to rise more
quickly in a particular country, then the model implies that identical assets in that country
will be retired at an earlier age. This observation can help to explain why well
maintained assets in developing countries are used much longer than in developed
countries. Conversely, assets employed in a country enjoying a boom so that gross rental
prices are relatively high will be retired at a later age than assets employed in a country
experiencing relatively low rental rates, other things being equal. If future asset rental
rates are expected to decline or increase less rapidly than future maintenance costs (i.e., it
increases less than αt), then the expected future gross revenues will decline or grow less
rapidly than expected future operating costs and the asset will be retired earlier. Thus the
models presented in this section can cast some light on why the same asset is retired at
different ages across countries and uses.86
In the following section, we make some graphical comparisons across our 12 models.
13. A Comparison of the Twelve Models
In this section, we will compare stock prices and user costs across our four types of
model that are based on alternative assumptions about the structure of depreciation or
asset efficiency, holding constant our assumptions about nominal interest rates and
anticipated asset price movements. We will also compare capital stocks and service
flows across depreciation and relative efficiency models, holding constant our
assumptions about nominal interest rates and anticipated asset price movements.
Figure 17 plots the aggregate capital stock prices generated by our four classes of
depreciation and efficiency models, assuming that ex post asset price movements are
perfectly anticipated. Note the volatility of these series. The one hoss shay stock prices
P(1) are the highest, followed by the linear efficiency decline prices P(10). The straight
line and geometric depreciation prices, P(4) and P(7), are the lowest and are very close to
each other.
Figure 18 plots the aggregate capital stock prices generated by our four classes of
depreciation and efficiency models, assuming that ex post asset price changes are equal to
changes in the consumer price index. This model assumes a constant real interest rate of
4 per cent. These stock prices are much smoother than those exhibited in Figure 17 and
they are also much closer to each other. The one hoss shay and linear efficiency decline
prices, P(2) and P(11), are virtually indistinguishable on the top, followed by the straight
line depreciation prices P(5) and then followed very closely by the geometric stock prices
P(8).

86

We have just scratched the surface in exploring the implications of this class of models. These models
should also be imbedded in a more formal intertemporal production model; see Hicks (1939; Chapter 15)
and Diewert (1980; 472-475).

76
Figure 19 plots the aggregate capital stock prices generated by our four classes of
depreciation and efficiency models, assuming that anticipated asset price changes are
equal to smoothed ex post asset price changes. These stock price series smooth out
considerably the much rougher series exhibited in Figure 17. The one hoss shay stock
prices P(3) are the highest, followed by the linear efficiency decline prices P(12). The
straight line and geometric depreciation prices, P(6) and P(9), are the lowest and are very
close to each other.
Figure 20 plots the aggregate capital stocks that correspond to the smoothed asset price
change model; i.e., Figure 20 is the quantity counterpart to Figure 19. The one hoss shay
capital stock curve K(3) is the highest, followed by the straight line depreciation curve
K(6), which in turn is followed by the geometric depreciation curve K(9). The linear
efficiency decline stock K(12) is the lowest curve. These results are intuitively plausible:
the one hoss shay model has the least accelerated form of depreciation, followed by the
straight line model, followed by the geometric depreciation model and the linear
efficiency decline model generates the most accelerated form of depreciation. In an
economy where investment is growing over time, the capital stocks corresponding to the
least accelerated form of depreciation will grow the quickest, followed by the more
accelerated forms and the capital stock corresponding to the most accelerated form of
depreciation will grow the slowest. Figures 25 and 26 plot the aggregate capital stocks
that correspond to the perfectly anticipated asset price change and the constant real
interest rate models: the results are much the same as those exhibited in Figure 20.
Insert Figures 17, 18, 19 and 20
Figure 21 plots the aggregate user costs generated by our four classes of depreciation and
efficiency models, assuming that ex post asset price movements are perfectly anticipated.
Note that the user cost series in Figure 21 are even more volatile that the capital stock
prices charted in Figure 17. The one hoss shay and straight line depreciation user costs,
u(1) and u(4), are the highest, followed by the geometric depreciation and linear
efficiency decline user costs, u(7) and u(10).
Figure 22 plots the aggregate user costs generated by our four classes of depreciation and
efficiency models, assuming that ex post asset price changes are equal to changes in the
consumer price index. This model assumes a constant real interest rate of 4 per cent.
These user costs are much smoother than those exhibited in Figure 21 and they are also
much closer to each other. The straight line depreciation user costs u(5) are on top,
followed by the one hoss shay, geometric and linear efficiency decline user costs, u(2),
u(8) and u(11), which are too close to each other to be distinguished visually.
Figure 23 plots the aggregate user costs generated by our four classes of depreciation and
efficiency models, assuming that anticipated asset price changes are equal to smoothed ex
post asset price changes. These user cost series smooth out considerably the much
rougher series exhibited in Figure 21. The straight line and one hoss shay user costs, u(6)
and u(3), are very close to each other on top but near the end of our sample period, the
one hoss shay user costs u(3) dip below the straight line depreciation user costs u(6). The

77
geometric depreciation and linear efficiency decline user costs, u(9) and u(12), are fairly
close to each other on the bottom. These two models represent the most accelerated
forms of depreciation.
Figure 24 plots the aggregate capital services that correspond to the smoothed asset price
change model; i.e., Figure 24 is the quantity counterpart to Figure 23. The linear
efficiency decline capital services curve k(12) is the highest, followed closely by the
geometric depreciation and one hoss shay curves, k(9) and k(3), which are very close to
each other. The straight line depreciation curve k(6) is the lowest curve.
Insert Figures 21, 22, 23 and 24
Figures 27 and 28 plot the aggregate capital services that correspond to the perfectly
anticipated asset price change and the constant real interest rate models. The aggregate
services using ex post asset price changes plotted in Figure 27 are more volatile and more
widely dispersed than the aggregate services plotted in Figures 24 and 28, as one might
expect. The linear efficiency decline services are the top curve k(10), followed by the
geometric depreciation services k(7), followed by the one hoss shay services k(1) and the
straight line depreciation capital services k(4) are the bottom curve. The aggregate
services using constant real interest rates plotted in Figure 28 are fairly similar to the
smoothed capital services exhibited in Figure 24. For the constant real interest rate
services in Figure 28, the one hoss shay and linear efficiency decline services, k(2) and
k(11), are at the top followed very closely by the geometric depreciation services k(8)
and the straight line depreciation capital services k(5) are the bottom curve. Thus overall,
three of our four depreciation and efficiency models give rise to much the same measures
of capital services, holding constant the assumptions about asset price changes and the
reference interest rate. However, the straight line depreciation capital services seem to be
consistently below the corresponding services generated by the other three classes of
models.
Insert Figures 25, 26, 27 and 28.
14. Conclusion
We have considered the problems involved in constructing price and quantity measures
for both the capital stock and the flow of services yielded by the stock in an inflationary
environment. In order to accomplish these tasks, the statistician will have to make
decisions in a number of dimensions:
•
•
•

What length of life L best describes the asset?
What form of depreciation or asset efficiency is appropriate?
What assumptions should be made about the reference interest rate and the treatment
of anticipated asset price change?

In this paper, we focused on the last two questions. We considered four classes of
depreciation or efficiency and three types of assumption on the nominal interest rate rt

78
and on the anticipated asset inflation rate it, giving 12 models in all. We evaluated these
12 models using aggregate Canadian data on two asset classes over the period 1926-1999.
We found that the assumptions on the form of depreciation or vintage asset efficiency
were less important than the assumptions made about the reference interest rate and the
treatment of anticipated asset price changes.87
We consider the third question above first. In order to answer this question, it is
necessary to ask about the purpose for which the capital data will be used. For some
purposes, it may be useful to use ex post asset price changes as anticipated price changes.
For example, this approach may be useful in constructing estimates of taxable business
income if capital gains are taxable. It may also be useful if we want to evaluate the ex
post efficiency of a firm, industry or economy. However, for most other uses, assuming
that anticipated price changes are equal to actual ex post price changes is very
unsatisfactory since it is unlikely that producers could anticipate all of the random noise
that seems to be inherent in series of actual ex post asset price changes. Moreover, this
approach generates tremendous volatility in user costs and statistical agencies would face
credibility questions if this approach were used.
Thus we restrict our attention to the choice between assuming a constant real interest rate
or using smoothed ex post asset price changes as estimates of anticipated asset price
changes. The assumption of constant real interest rates has a number of advantages:
•
•

The resulting price and quantity series tend to be very smooth.
The estimates are reproducible; i.e., any statistician given the same basic price and
quantity data along with an assumed real interest rate will be able to come up with
the same aggregate price and quantity measures.

However, the use of smoothed ex post asset price changes as measures of anticipated
asset price changes has some advantages as well:
•
•

Longer run trends in relative asset prices can be accommodated.
The anticipated obsolescence phenomenon can be captured.

Each individual statistical agency will have to weigh the costs and benefits of the two
approaches in order to decide which approach to use.
We now discuss which of our four sets of assumptions on the form of depreciation or
vintage asset efficiency decline is “best”.
The one hoss shay model of efficiency decline, while seemingly a priori attractive, does
not seem to work well empirically; i.e., vintage depreciation rates tend to be much more
accelerated than the rates implied by the one hoss shay model. We also saw in Section
11, that the simple one hoss shay model does not take into account the implications of
87

Harper, Berndt and Wood (1989) also found that differing assumptions on rt and it made a big difference
empirically using U.S. data. However, they considered only geometric depreciation. Our paper can be
viewed as an extension of their work to consider also variations in the form of depreciation.

79
rising maintenance and operating costs for an asset as it ages. Thus if maintenance costs
are linearly rising over time, a “gross” one hoss shay model gives rise to a linearly
declining efficiency model, which of course, is a model that exhibits very accelerated
depreciation.
The straight line depreciation model, while not as inconsistent with the data as the one
hoss shay model, also does not generate the pattern of accelerated depreciation that seems
to characterize many used asset markets. However, given the simplicity of this model (to
explain to the public), it could be used by statistical agencies.
The geometric depreciation model seems to be most consistent with the empirical studies
on used assets of the four simple classes of model that we considered.88 Of course,
geometric depreciation has the disadvantage that it will never exhaust the full value of the
asset.89
Finally, a good alternative to the geometric depreciation model is the linear efficiency
decline model. However, this model may have a pattern of “overaccelerated”
depreciation relative to the geometric model. What is required is more empirical work so
that the actual pattern of depreciation can be determined.
We conclude by noting some limitations of the analysis presented in this paper:
•
•
•
•
•
•

We have not dealt with the problems posed by unique assets.
We have not dealt with the problems posed by assets that depreciate by use rather
than by age.90
We have neglected property taxes, income taxes and insurance premiums as
additional components of user costs.
We have neglected the problems posed by indirect commodity taxes on investment
goods; this complication can lead to differences between investment prices and asset
stock prices.
We have neglected many forms of capital in our empirical work including
inventories, land, knowledge capital, resource stocks and infrastructure capital.
We have not discussed the many complexities involved in making quality
adjustments for new types of capital.

Appendix : Canadian Data for 1926-1999
We list our primary data on gross business investment in Canada for the years 1926 to
1999 for two assets: machinery and equipment and nonresidential construction. From
88

See Hulten and Wykoff (1981a) (1981b) and Jorgenson (1996a).
Some statistical agencies solve this problem by “scrapping” the depreciated value of the asset when it
reaches a certain age. This solves one problem but it introduces two additional problems: (i) the truncation
age has to be decided upon and (ii) the theoretical simplicity of the model is lost.
90
Our reason for neglecting use is simple: usually, the national statistician will not have data on the use of
machines available.
89

80
Leacy (1983), Series F23 and F24, we have nominal investments (in millions of Canadian
dollars) for these two asset classes for the years 1926 to 1976. The corresponding
constant 1971 dollar series are F43 and F44. We only use the data for the years 1926 to
1961 inclusive. For the more recent data, we use Table 1 in Statistics Canada (2000; 46), which lists business investment in nonresidential structures and in machinery and
equipment for the years 1961 to 1999 in current millions of dollars and in constant 1992
prices. These series are linked through the year 1961 and the prices are renormalized to
equal 1 in the year 1965. The resulting price series, PNR and PME, and quantity series, INR
and IME, are listed in Table A1 below.
Table A1: Price and Quantity Data for Two Types of Investment in Canada,
1926-1999; Quantities in Millions of 1965 Dollars
Year
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957

PNR
0.4058
0.4065
0.4154
0.4290
0.4120
0.3804
0.3640
0.3567
0.3592
0.3657
0.3751
0.4046
0.3968
0.3917
0.4047
0.4267
0.4604
0.4832
0.4896
0.4921
0.5216
0.5824
0.6505
0.6716
0.6908
0.7811
0.8265
0.8336
0.8222
0.8429
0.8855
0.8841

PME
0.3515
0.3400
0.3384
0.3455
0.3318
0.3216
0.3215
0.3134
0.3109
0.3151
0.3189
0.3425
0.3455
0.3423
0.3713
0.4006
0.4176
0.4425
0.4374
0.4281
0.4324
0.4825
0.5428
0.5776
0.6103
0.6890
0.7019
0.7146
0.7233
0.7353
0.7806
0.8219

INR
596.3
745.4
1001.5
1146.8
929.7
701.8
337.9
218.7
256.1
322.6
399.8
467.1
433.5
421.2
521.4
679.7
723.2
649.8
529.0
534.4
864.7
1047.4
1276.0
1389.1
1521.4
1668.2
1904.4
2093.2
2042.0
2210.2
2922.7
3505.3

IME
742.6
961.8
1105.0
1276.5
1060.8
618.8
335.9
261.7
373.1
457.0
561.4
820.4
793.0
739.1
1096.2
1372.9
1216.4
784.1
850.4
1051.1
1336.7
2033.3
2107.5
2173.0
2190.6
2390.4
2560.2
2734.3
2419.6
2483.3
3129.5
3156.0

81
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

0.8808
0.8856
0.8938
0.8905
0.8954
0.9210
0.9473
1.0000
1.0605
1.1063
1.1185
1.1819
1.2421
1.3174
1.3923
1.5433
1.8301
2.0449
2.1615
2.2770
2.4426
2.6641
2.9878
3.3250
3.5731
3.5487
3.6813
3.7921
3.8483
4.0287
4.2590
4.4463
4.5839
4.4856
4.4531
4.5097
4.6633
4.7260
4.8643
4.9931
5.1033
5.1754

0.8352
0.8539
0.8658
0.8714
0.8998
0.9250
0.9623
1.0000
1.0326
1.0256
1.0246
1.0520
1.1018
1.1315
1.1767
1.2087
1.3374
1.4981
1.5873
1.6831
1.7516
1.8595
1.7650
1.7869
1.9192
1.9009
1.8781
1.8300
1.8277
1.7861
1.7525
1.7453
1.7309
1.5730
1.5229
1.5568
1.6067
1.5984
1.5241
1.5412
1.5290
1.4180

3188.0
2933.4
2902.1
2939.8
2858.9
2956.6
3418.1
3728.0
4278.2
4055.9
4022.2
4026.7
4417.4
4556.6
4537.8
4896.0
5195.8
5876.0
5740.1
6087.1
6244.9
7048.6
7851.7
8449.3
7681.0
7045.9
6971.4
7322.6
6898.9
7165.6
7893.2
8135.8
8154.6
7890.8
6659.2
6694.9
7291.4
7335.9
7474.9
8718.3
8870.8
9047.3

2683.1
2820.1
2916.4
2460.4
2631.8
2856.3
3360.6
3947.0
4700.8
4803.2
4471.0
4894.5
4989.1
5138.1
5556.4
6800.7
7660.9
8096.9
8450.2
8429.8
9121.9
10614.4
12811.5
15488.6
13059.7
12815.4
13677.6
15753.9
17463.1
20155.9
23908.5
25750.4
24607.8
24740.5
25380.0
24202.1
26493.7
29083.4
31886.6
39385.3
42915.3
49613.0

Note that the price of machinery and equipment more or less declines from 1982 onward.
This reflects the effects of the Statistics Canada quality adjustments for information
technology equipment.

82

Recall that the ex post consumer price index for the economy at the beginning of year t
was defined as ct and the ex post general inflation rate for period t, ρt, was defined by
equation (17) above as ρt ≡ [ct+1/ct] − 1. We approximate ct by the Total Goods
Consumer Price Index for Canada for the previous year; see Table 12 in Statistics Canada
(2000; 50), which covers the years 1961 to 1999. We list the resulting general year t ex
post inflation rates ρt for the years 1965 to 1999 in Table A2 below. Given ρt, we can use
equation (18) above to calculate the ex post nominal interest rate that producers face in
year t as rt ≡ (1+r*t)(1+ρt) −1 where we set the real interest rate r*t equal to 4 %. The ex
post nominal interest rates rt are also listed in Table A2 below.
The beginning of year t price for a new asset P0t is approximated by the corresponding
investment price in the previous year; i.e., we assume P0t equals either PNRt−1 or PMEt−1.
Since inflation in Canada was not all that high over the period, this is probably an
acceptable approximation for illustrative purposes.91 Once the beginning of the period
new asset prices are determined, we can define the corresponding ex post nominal asset
inflation rates it by [P0t+1 / P0t] − 1. The two ex post nominal asset inflation rates iNRt and
iMEt are also listed in Table A2. Finally, we use equation (28) and the nominal inflation
rates iNRt, iMEt and ρt in order to define the two real ex post nominal asset inflation rates,
iNR*t and iME*t, as follows:
(A1) 1 + iNR*t ≡ (1 + iNRt)/(1 + ρt) ; 1 + iME*t ≡ (1 + iMEt)/(1 + ρt).
These two ex post real asset inflation rates are also listed in Table A2.
Table A2: Ex Post Nominal Interest Rates and Nominal and Real Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
91

ρt
0.0204
0.0400
0.0337
0.0419
0.0446
0.0342
0.0289
0.0482
0.0766
0.1068
0.1093
0.0754
0.0782
0.0900
0.0917

rt
0.0612
0.0816
0.0750
0.0835
0.0864
0.0756
0.0701
0.0901
0.1197
0.1510
0.1537
0.1184
0.1213
0.1336
0.1354

iNRt
0.0556
0.0605
0.0432
0.0111
0.0566
0.0510
0.0606
0.0568
0.1085
0.1859
0.1174
0.0570
0.0534
0.0728
0.0907

iMEt
0.0392
0.0326
-0.0068
-0.0009
0.0267
0.0474
0.0270
0.0399
0.0272
0.1065
0.1201
0.0595
0.0603
0.0407
0.0616

iNR*t
0.0345
0.0197
0.0092
-0.0296
0.0115
0.0162
0.0308
0.0083
0.0296
0.0715
0.0072
-0.0171
-0.0229
-0.0158
-0.0010

iME*t
0.0184
-0.0071
-0.0391
-0.0411
-0.0171
0.0127
-0.0019
-0.0079
-0.0459
-0.0002
0.0097
-0.0147
-0.0165
-0.0452
-0.0276

For countries with really high inflation, more care would need to be taken in constructing consistent
beginning, middle and end of period prices.

83
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Average

0.1008
0.1240
0.1087
0.0582
0.0434
0.0402
0.0413
0.0435
0.0405
0.0495
0.0483
0.0557
0.0152
0.0180
0.0020
0.0216
0.0163
0.0161
0.0093
0.0175
0.0511

0.1449
0.1690
0.1530
0.1005
0.0852
0.0818
0.0830
0.0853
0.0821
0.0915
0.0902
0.0980
0.0558
0.0587
0.0420
0.0624
0.0570
0.0567
0.0497
0.0582
0.0932

0.1215
0.1129
0.0746
-0.0068
0.0374
0.0301
0.0148
0.0469
0.0572
0.0440
0.0309
-0.0214
-0.0073
0.0127
0.0341
0.0134
0.0293
0.0265
0.0221
0.0141
0.0505

-0.0509
0.0124
0.0740
-0.0095
-0.0120
-0.0256
-0.0012
-0.0228
-0.0188
-0.0041
-0.0082
-0.0912
-0.0319
0.0222
0.0321
-0.0052
-0.0465
0.0112
-0.0079
-0.0726
0.0121

0.0188
-0.0099
-0.0307
-0.0614
-0.0058
-0.0097
-0.0255
0.0032
0.0160
-0.0053
-0.0166
-0.0731
-0.0222
-0.0052
0.0320
-0.0080
0.0127
0.0103
0.0127
-0.0033
-0.0005

-0.1378
-0.0993
-0.0313
-0.0640
-0.0531
-0.0633
-0.0409
-0.0635
-0.0570
-0.0511
-0.0539
-0.1392
-0.0464
0.0042
0.0300
-0.0262
-0.0618
-0.0048
-0.0170
-0.0885
-0.0368

The arithmetic average of the interest rates and inflation rates over the 35 years is listed
in the last row of Table A2. Thus the average Consumer Price inflation was 5.11 % per
year, which was close to the average inflation rate for the price of nonresidential
construction. The average inflation rate for machinery and equipment was much lower at
1.21 % per year on average. From the last column of Table A2, it can be seen that after
1980, the real inflation rate for machinery and equipment was predominantly negative
and the average real rate of price change was − 3.68 % per year. It can also be seen that
the general inflation rate ρt surged to rates in the 7 to 12 % range for the years 1972
through 1982 and remained in the 4 to 5 % range until 1992 when it collapsed to the 1 to
2 % range. Note also the volatility of all of the listed ex post inflation rates.
The volatility of ex post asset inflation rates makes it unlikely that producers could
perfectly anticipate these rates at the beginning of each year. Thus for our third class of
models, we used smoothed ex post inflation rates as our estimators of ex ante expected
price change. Since the ex post changes in the Consumer Price Index (the ρt) are also
quite volatile, we also smooth these rates so that our nominal interest rate series (the rt)
will also be less volatile. We used Cleveland’s (1979) and Cleveland and Devlin’s
(1988) locally weighted regression method as our smoothing method as implemented by
White’s (1997; 261-262) SHAZAM computer program.92 In order to implement the
smoothing method, one has to choose a smoothing parameter, f , which controls how
much smoothing is done. We considered only 3 values for this smoothing parameter: f =
.20, .25 or .30. We chose one of these 3 values for f by using the cross validation score
92

This is the METHOD=LOWESS option on the NONPAR command in SHAZAM.

84
as our model choice criterion.93 For smoothing the ex ante ρt series, we ended up
choosing f = .2 while for smoothing the iNRt and iMEt series, we ended up choosing f = .2
and f = .3 respectively. These smoothed counterparts to the interest rates and inflation
rates listed in Table A2 are reported in Table A3.
Table A3: Smoothed Interest Rates and Nominal and Real Inflation Rates
Year
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

93

ρt
0.0264
0.0313
0.0360
0.0395
0.0386
0.0377
0.0416
0.0550
0.0756
0.0907
0.0936
0.0894
0.0850
0.0870
0.0955
0.1042
0.1043
0.0924
0.0721
0.0527
0.0435
0.0417
0.0425
0.0445
0.0469
0.0464
0.0391
0.0283
0.0173
0.0139
0.0143
0.0155
0.0150
0.0148
0.0143

rt
0.0675
0.0725
0.0774
0.0811
0.0801
0.0792
0.0832
0.0972
0.1186
0.1343
0.1373
0.1330
0.1284
0.1305
0.1393
0.1483
0.1485
0.1360
0.1150
0.0948
0.0852
0.0834
0.0842
0.0862
0.0888
0.0883
0.0806
0.0694
0.0580
0.0544
0.0549
0.0561
0.0556
0.0553
0.0548

iNRt
0.0574
0.0504
0.0449
0.0399
0.0426
0.0515
0.0616
0.0834
0.1112
0.1226
0.1122
0.0860
0.0694
0.0757
0.0925
0.1018
0.0911
0.0645
0.0411
0.0256
0.0260
0.0334
0.0393
0.0443
0.0378
0.0197
0.0056
0.0022
0.0097
0.0187
0.0240
0.0243
0.0224
0.0204
0.0179

iMEt
0.0217
0.0215
0.0219
0.0225
0.0227
0.0272
0.0381
0.0512
0.0609
0.0664
0.0696
0.0688
0.0585
0.0435
0.0326
0.0251
0.0165
0.0082
0.0034
0.0001
-0.0065
-0.0126
-0.0152
-0.0197
-0.0242
-0.0241
-0.0194
-0.0158
-0.0142
-0.0097
-0.0052
-0.0126
-0.0218
-0.0313
-0.0413

iNR*t
0.0302
0.0185
0.0086
0.0004
0.0038
0.0133
0.0192
0.0269
0.0331
0.0293
0.0170
-0.0031
-0.0143
-0.0104
-0.0028
-0.0021
-0.0120
-0.0255
-0.0290
-0.0257
-0.0167
-0.0080
-0.0030
-0.0002
-0.0087
-0.0256
-0.0322
-0.0254
-0.0075
0.0048
0.0096
0.0087
0.0073
0.0055
0.0036

iME*t
-0.0046
-0.0095
-0.0135
-0.0164
-0.0153
-0.0101
-0.0033
-0.0036
-0.0137
-0.0223
-0.0219
-0.0189
-0.0244
-0.0401
-0.0574
-0.0716
-0.0795
-0.0771
-0.0641
-0.0500
-0.0478
-0.0521
-0.0553
-0.0615
-0.0680
-0.0674
-0.0563
-0.0429
-0.0310
-0.0232
-0.0192
-0.0277
-0.0363
-0.0454
-0.0548

Using this choice also led to the smallest amount of autocorrelation for each series.

85
Average 0.0510

0.0931

0.0506

0.0116

-0.0003

-0.0373

Comparing Table A3 with Table A2, it can be seen that the smoothing process has made
the underlying trends much more visible. Note that the arithmetic averages for each
series listed in the last row of Table A3 are very close to the corresponding arithmetic
averages listed in the last row of Table A2. This is as it should be: the smoothing process
should eliminate the random noise in our series without distorting the overall trends.
References
Babbage, C. (1835), On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, Fourth Edition,
London: Charles Knight.
Baxter, W.T. (1984), Inflation Accounting, Oxford: Philip Allen Publishers.
Beidelman, C. (1973), Valuation of Used Capital Assets, Sarasota Florida: American
Accounting Association.
Beidelman, C.R. (1976), “Economic Depreciation in a Capital Goods Industry”, National
Tax Journal 29, 379-390.
Böhm-Bawerk, E. V. (1891), The Positive Theory of Capital, W. Smart (translator of the
original German book published in 1888), New York: G.E. Stechert.
Christensen, L.R. and D.W. Jorgenson (1969), “The Measurement of U.S. Real Capital
Input, 1929-1967”, Review of Income and Wealth 15, 293-320.
Christensen, L.R. and D.W. Jorgenson (1973), “Measuring the Performance of the
Private Sector of the U.S. Economy, 1929-1969”, pp. 233-351 in Measuring Economic
and Social Performance, M. Moss (ed.), New York: Columbia University Press.
Church, A.H. (1901), “The Proper Distribution of Establishment Charges, Parts I, II, and
III”, The Engineering Magazine 21, 508-517; 725-734; 904-912.
Clark, D. (1940), The Conditions of Economic Progress, London: Macmillan.
Cleveland, W.S. (1979), “Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing
Scatterplots”, Journal of the American Statistical Association 74, 829-836.
Cleveland, W.S. and S.J. Devlin (1988), “Locally Weighted Regression: An Approach to
Regression Analysis by Local Fitting”, Journal of the American Statistical Association
83, 596-610.
Crandell, W.T. (1935), “Income and its Measurement”, The Accounting Review 10, 380400.

86
Daniels, M.B. (1933), “The Valuation of Fixed Assets”, The Accounting Review 8, 302316.
Davies, G.R. (1924), “The Problem of a Standard Index Number Formula”, Journal of
the American Statistical Association 27, 180-188.
Diewert, W.E. (1974), “Intertemporal Consumer Theory and the Demand for Durables”,
Econometrica 42, 497-516.
Diewert, W.E. (1976), “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers”, Journal of Econometrics
4, 115-145.
Diewert, W.E. (1978), “Superlative Index Numbers and Consistency in Aggregation”,
Econometrica 46, 883-900.
Diewert, W.E. (1980), “Aggregation Problems in the Measurement of Capital”, pp. 433528 in The Measurement of Capital, D. Usher (ed.), Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Diewert, W.E. (1992a), “The Measurement of Productivity”, Bulletin of Economic
Research 44, 165-198.
Diewert, W.E. (1992b), “Fisher Ideal Output, Input and Productivity Indexes Revisited”,
The Journal of Productivity Analysis 3, 211-248.
Diewert, W.E. (1996), “Seasonal Commodities, High Inflation and Index Number
Theory”. Discussion Paper No. 96-06, Department of Economics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, V6T 1Z1, January, available on the web at:
http://web.arts.ubc.ca/econ/diewert/Disc.htm
Diewert, W.E. (1998), “High Inflation, Seasonal Commodities and Annual Index
Numbers”, Macroeconomic Dynamics 2, 456-471.
Diewert, W.E. (1999), “Index Number Approaches to Seasonal Adjustment”,
Macroeconomic Dynamics 3, 48-68.
Diewert, W.E. and K.J. Fox (1999), “Can Measurement Error Explain the Productivity
Paradox?”, Canadian Journal of Economics 32, 251-280.
Diewert, W.E. and D.A. Lawrence (2000), “Progress in Measuring the Price and Quantity
of Capital”, pp. 273-326 in Econometrics and the Cost of Capital: Essays in Honor of
Dale W. Jorgenson, L.J. Lau (ed.), Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.
Edwards, E.O. and P.W. Bell (1961), The Theory and Measurement of Business Income,
Berkeley, California: University of California Press.

87
Epstein, L.G. (1977), Essays in the Economics of Uncertainty, unpublished Ph.D thesis,
Vancouver: The University of British Columbia.
Fisher, I. (1896), Appreciation and Interest, New York: Macmillan.
Fisher, I. (1897), “The Role of Capital in Economic Theory”, The Economic Journal 7,
341-367.
Fisher, I. (1908), “Are Savings Income?”, Publications of the American Economic
Association, Third Series 9, 21-47.
Fisher, I. (1922), The Making of Index Numbers, London: Macmillan and Company.
Fox, Kevin J. and Ulrich Kohli (1998) “GDP Growth, Terms-of-trade Effects, and Total
Factor Productivity”, Journal of International Trade and Economic Development 7, 87110.
Garcke, E. and J.M. Fells (1893), Factory Accounts: Their Principles and Practice,
Fourth Edition, (First Edition 1887), London: Crosby, Lockwood and Son.
Gilman, S. (1939), Accounting Concepts of Profit, New York: The Rolland Press Co.
Griliches, Z. (1963), “Capital Stock in Investment Functions: Some Problems of Concept
and Measurement”, pp. 115-137 in Measurement in Economics, C. Christ and others
(eds.), Stanford California: Stanford University Press; reprinted as pp. 123-143 in
Technology, Education and Productivity, Z. Griliches (ed.), (1988), Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Hadar, E. and S. Peleg (1998), “Efforts to Present Useful National Accounts under High
Inflation”, paper presented at the 25th General Conference of The International
Association for Research in Income and Wealth, Cambridge, UK, August 23-29.
Hall, R.E. (1971), “the Measurement of Quality Change from Vintage Price Data”, pp.
240-271 in Price Indexes and Quality Change, Z. Griliches (ed.), Cambridge
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Harper, M.J., E.R. Berndt and D.O. Wood (1989), “Rates of Return and Capital
Aggregation Using Alternative Rental Prices”, pp. 331-372 in Technology and Capital
Formation, D.W. Jorgenson and R. Landau (eds.), Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.
Hicks, J.R. (1939), Value and Capital, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
Hicks, J.R. (1942), “Maintaining Capital Intact: a Further Suggestion”, Economica 9,
174-179.
Hicks, J. (1973), Capital and Time, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.

88

Hill, P. (1996), Inflation Accounting: A Manual on National Accounting under
Conditions of High Inflation, Paris: OECD.
Hill, P. (1999); “Capital Stocks, Capital Services and Depreciation”; paper presented at
the third meeting of the Canberra Group on Capital Stock Statistics, Washington, D.C..
Hill, P. (2000); “Economic Depreciation and the SNA”; paper presented at the 26th
Conference of the International Association for Research on Income and Wealth;
Cracow, Poland.
Hotelling, H. (1925), “A General Mathematical Theory of Depreciation”, Journal of the
American Statistical Association 20, 340-353.
Hulten, C.R. (1990), “The Measurement of Capital”, pp. 119-152 in Fifty Years of
Economic Measurement, E.R. Berndt and J.E. Triplett (eds.), Studies in Income and
Wealth, Volume 54, The National Bureau of Economic Research, Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Hulten, C.R. (1996), “Capital and Wealth in the Revised SNA”, pp. 149-181 in The New
System of National Accounts, J.W. Kendrick (ed.), New York: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Hulten, C.R. and F.C. Wykoff (1981a), “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation using
Vintage Asset Prices”, Journal of Econometrics 15, 367-396.
Hulten, C.R. and F.C. Wykoff (1981b), “The Measurement of Economic Depreciation”,
pp. 81-125 in Depreciation, Inflation and the Taxation of Income from Capital, C.R.
Hulten (ed.), Washington D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.
Hulten, C.R. and F.C. Wykoff (1996), “Issues in the Measurement of Economic
Depreciation: Introductory Remarks”, Economic Inquiry 34, 10-23.
Jorgenson, D.W. (1989), “Capital as a Factor of Production”, pp. 1-35 in Technology and
Capital Formation, D.W. Jorgenson and R. Landau (eds.), Cambridge MA: The MIT
Press.
Jorgenson, D.W. (1996a), “Empirical Studies of Depreciation”, Economic Inquiry 34, 2442.
Jorgenson, D.W. (1996b), Investment: Volume 2; Tax Policy and the Cost of Capital,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.
Jorgenson, D.W. and Z. Griliches (1967), The Explanation of Productivity Change”, The
Review of Economic Studies 34, 249-283.

89
Jorgenson, D.W. and Z. Griliches (1972), “Issues in Growth Accounting: A Reply to
Edward F. Denison”, Survey of Current Business 52:4, Part II (May), 65-94.
Kohli, Ulrich (1982) “Production Theory, Technological Change, and the Demand for
Imports: Switzerland, 1948-1974”, European Economic Review 18, 369-386.
Lachman, L.M. (1941), “On the Measurement of Capital”, Economica 8, 361-377.
Leacy, F.H. (ed.) (1983), Historical Statistics of Canada, Second Edition, Ottawa:
Statistics Canada.
Littleton, A.C. (1933), “Socialized Accounts”, The Accounting Review 8, 267-271.
Maddison, A. (1993), “Standardized Estimates of Fixed Capital Stock: A Six Country
Comparison”, Innovazione e materie prime, April, 1-29.
Matheson, E. (1910), Depreciation of Factories, Mines and Industrial Undertakings and
their Valuations, Fourth Edition, (First Edition 1884), London: Spon.
Middleditch, L. (1918), “Should Accounts Reflect the Changing Value of the Dollar?”,
The Journal of Accountancy 25. 114-120.
OECD (1993), Methods Used by OECD Countries to Measure Stocks of Fixed Capital.
National Accounts: Sources and Methods No. 2, Paris: Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development.
Oulton, N. (1995), “Depreciation, Obsolescence and the Role of Capital in Growth
Accounting”, Bulletin of Economic Research 47, 21-33.
Pigou, A.C. (1924), The Economics of Welfare, Second Edition, London: Macmillan.
Pigou, A.C. (1935), “Net Income and Capital Depletion”, The Economic Journal 45, 235241.
Queensland Competition Authority (2000), Draft Decision on Queensland
Rail’s Draft Undertaking, http://www.qca.org.au, Brisbane: Queensland Competition
Authority.
Scott, M. (1995), “Depreciation, Obsolescence and the Role of Capital in Growth
Accounting: A Reply to Oulton”, Bulletin of Economic Research 47, 35-38.
Schmalenbach, E. (1959), Dynamic Accounting, translated from the German 12th edition
of 1955 (first edition 1919) by G.W. Murphy and K.S Most, London: Gee and Company.
Schreyer, P. (2001), OECD Productivity Manual: A Guide to the Measurement of
Industry-Level and Aggregate Productivity Growth, Paris: OECD.

90

Solomons, D. (1961), “Economic and Accounting Concepts of Income”, The Accounting
Review 36, 374-383.
Solomons, D. (1968), “The Historical Development of Costing”, pp. 3-49 in Studies in
Cost Analysis, D. Solomons (ed.), Homewood Illinois: Richard D. Irwin.
Statistics Canada (2000), Canadian Economic Observer: Historical Statistical
Supplement 1999/00, Catalogue No. 11-210-XPB, July, Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Triplett, J.E. (1996), “Depreciation in Production Analysis and in Income and Wealth
Accounts: Resolution of an Old Debate”, Economic Inquiry 34, 93-115.
Tweedie, D. and G. Whittington (1984), The Debate on Inflation Accounting, London:
Cambridge University Press.
Vanoli, A. (1998), “Interest and Inflation Accounting”, paper presented at the 25th
General Conference of The International Association for Research in Income and Wealth,
Cambridge, UK, August 23-29.
Walsh, C.M. (1901), The Measurement of General Exchange Value, New York:
Macmillan and Company.
Walsh, C.M. (1921), The Problem of Estimation, London: P.S. King and Son.
Walras, L. (1954), Elements of Pure Economics, a translation by W. Jaffé of the Edition
Définitive (1926) of the Eléments d’économie pure, first edition published in 1874,
Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin.
White, K.J. (1997), SHAZAM: The Econometrics Computer Program User’s Reference
Manual, Version 8.0, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Whittington, G. (1980), “Pioneers of Income Measurement and Price Level Accounting:
A Review Article”, Accounting and Business Research 10 (Spring), 232-240.
Whittington, G. (1992), “Inflation Accounting”, pp. 400-402 in The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Money and Finance, Volume 2, P. Newman, M. Milgate and J. Eatwell
(eds.), London: Macmillan.

1
Measuring Capital: Charts

Figure 1: Alternative One Hoss
Shay Stock Prices

Figure 2: Alternative One Hoss
Shay Capital Stocks

5

350

4.5

300

4

250

3.5
3

P(1)

2.5

P(2)
P(3)

2
1.5

K(1)

200

K(2)
150

K(3)

100

1

50

0.5
0

0
1

5

9

13 17 21 25 29 33

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 4: Alternative One Hoss Shay
Aggregate Capital Services

Figure 3: Alternative One Hoss Shay
Aggregate User Costs
10

45000

9

40000

8

35000

7

30000

6

u(1)

5

u(2)

4

u(3)

k(1)

25000

k(2)

20000

k(3)

15000

3

10000

2
1

5000

0

0

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

2
Figure 5: One Hoss Shay and
Straight Line Depreciation Capital
Stock Prices

Figure 6: One Hoss Shay and
Straight Line Depreciation Capital
Stocks

5

350

4.5
300

4

250

3.5
P(1)

3

P(2)

2.5

P(3)

2

K(1)

200

K(2)
K(3)

150

P(4)

K(4)
100

1.5
1

50

0.5
0

0

1

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 8: Alternative Straight Line
Depreciation Capital Services

Figure 7: Straight Line
Depreciation Aggregate User
Costs

40000
9

35000

8

30000

7

25000

6
u(4)

5

u(5)

4

u(6)

3

k(4)

20000

k(5)
k(6)

15000
10000

2
1

5000

0

0
1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

3

Figure 9: Aggregate Capital Stock
Prices for Five Models

Figure 10: Aggregate Capital Stocks
for Five Models

5

350

4.5

300

4
3.5

P(1)

3

P(2)

2.5

P(3)

2

P(4)

1.5

P(7)

1

250

K(1)
K(2)

200

K(3)
150

K(4)
K(7)

100
50

0.5
0

0

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 12: Alternative Geometric
Depreciation Capital Services

Figure 11: Alternative Geometric
Depreciation User Costs
7

40000

6

35000
30000

5
u(7)

4

u(8)
3

u(9)

2

25000

k(7)
k(8)

20000

k(9)

15000
10000

1

5000

0

0

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

4

Figure 13: Linear Efficiency Decline
Aggregate Capital Stock Prices
4.5

Figure 14: Alternative Linear
Efficiency Decline Capital Stocks
250

4

200

3.5
3
P(10)

2.5

150

K(11)
K(12)

P(11)

2

P(12)

K(13)

100

1.5
1

50

0.5

0

0
1

5

1

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 16: Alternative Linear
Efficiency Decline Capital Services

Figure 15: Alternative Linear
Efficiency Decline User Costs
7

45000

6

40000
35000

5

30000
u(10)

4

u(11)
3

u(12)

k(10)

25000

k(11)

20000

k(12)

15000

2

10000
1

5000
0

0
1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

5

Figure 18: Alternative Stock Prices
with Constant Real Interest Rates

Figure 17: Capital Stock Prices
using Ex Post Price Changes
4

5

3.5

4.5
4

3

3.5

P(1)

3

P(4)

2.5

P(7)

2

P(10)

1.5

2.5

P(2)
P(5)

2

P(8)
P(11)

1.5
1

1
0.5

0.5

0
1

5

0

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

Figure 19: Alternative Stock Prices
Using Smoothed Asset Price
Changes

Figure 20: Alternative Capital
Stocks Using Smoothed Asset Price
Changes

4.5

350

4

300

3.5

250

3

P(3)

K(3)

2.5

P(6)

200

2

P(9)

150

K(6)
K(9)

P(12)

1.5

K(12)
100

1

50

0.5

0

0
1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

6

Figure 21: Alternative User Costs
Using Ex Post Asset Price Changes
10

Figure 22:Alternative User Costs
Using Constant Real Interest Rates
4

9

3.5

8

3

7
u(1)

6

u(4)

5

u(7)

4

u(10)

3

u(2)

2.5

u(5)

2

u(8)

1.5

u(11)

1

2

0.5

1

0

0
1

5

1

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 24: Alternative Capital
Services Using Smoothed Asset
Price Changes

Figure 23: Alternative User Costs
Using Smoothed Asset Price
Changes

40000

6

35000

5

30000

4

u(3)
u(6)

3

u(9)
u(12)

2

k(3)

25000

k(6)

20000

k(9)

15000

k(12)

10000

1

5000

0

0

1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34

1

5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33

7

Figure 26: Alternative Capital
Stocks Using Constant Real Rates

Figure 25: Alternative Capital
Stocks Using Ex Post Price
Changes
350
350

300

300

250
250
K(1)
200

K(4)

150

K(7)
K(10)

K(8)
K(11)

100
50

50

0

0
5

K(5)

150
100

1

K(2)

200

1

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 27: Alternative Capital
Services Using Ex Post Price
Changes

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

Figure 28: Alternative Capital
Services Using Constant Real
Rates

35000

45000
40000

30000

35000

25000
k(1)
20000
15000
10000

30000

k(2)

k(4)

25000

k(5)

k(7)

20000

k(8)

k(10)

15000

k(11)

10000
5000

5000
0

0
1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

1

5

9 13 17 21 25 29 33

