                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  PRICE DISCOVERY IN THE
                                  U.S. TREASURY MARKET:
                              THE IMPACT OF ORDERFLOW AND
                               LIQUIDITY ON THE YIELD CURVE

                                          Michael W. Brandt
                                         Kenneth A. Kavajecz

                                         Working Paper 9529
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9529


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2003




We thank Alessandro Beber, Roger Edelen, Simon Gervais, Nick Souleles, Rob Stambaugh, Amir Yaron and
seminar participants at the University of Colorado, University of Maryland, University of Pennsylvania and
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter Investment Management for helpful comments. In addition, we thank Patricia
Kelt of GovPX for explaining their data. Financial support from the Rodney L. White Center for Financial
Research at the Wharton School is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Price Discovery in the U.S. Treasury Market:
The Impact of Orderflow and Liquidity on the Yield Curve
Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz
NBER Working Paper No. 9529
February 2003
JEL No. G0

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the role of price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market through the empirical
relationship between orderflow, liquidity, and the yield curve. We find that orderflow imbalances
(excess buying or selling pressure) can account for as much as 26 percent of the day-to-day variation
in yields on days without major macroeconomic announcements. The effect of orderflow on yields
is permanent and strongest when liquidity is low. All of the evidence points toward an important role
of price discovery on understanding the behavior of the yield curve.



Michael W. Brandt                                             Kenneth A Kavajecz
Finance Department                                            Finance Department
The Wharton School                                            The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                                    University of Pennsylvania
2300 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall                                  2300 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER                                                      kavajecz@wharton.upenn.edu
brandtm@wharton.upenn.edu
The use of riskless interest rates permeates almost every facet of economics and finance. A
critical issue within these disciplines is therefore to understand the behavior of the term structure
of riskless interest rates, or the yield curve, which gives the mapping between the maturity of a
riskless loan and its rate. Much of the term structure literature focuses on factor models in which
at each point in time the yields on all bonds with different maturities are determined by the
realizations of a few common factors (e.g., Vasicek, 1977; Cox, Ingersoll and Ross, 1985). The
general consensus is that more than one, but not many more than three common factors capture
the day-to-day variation in the yield curve. Although these factors are typically not uniquely
identified, it is common to think of the factors as the level, slope, and curvature of the yield
curve (e.g., Litterman and Scheinkman, 1991).

       Economists are ultimately interested in understanding why and how the yield curve
changes from one day to the next, which, in the context of factor models, amounts to
understanding why and how the factors change over time. From a theoretical standpoint, there
are two contrasting mechanisms describing changes in the yield curve. On one hand, yield curve
changes can be due to public information flow, such as periodic macroeconomic announcements.
The underlying assumption is that both the factor structure and the impact of public information
on the factors are common knowledge among market participants. Given everyone has the same
interpretation of public information, the factors and hence the yield curve immediately adjusts to
new information releases, and trading in this model is strictly due to portfolio rebalancing.
Empirically, there is evidence in support of this public information view in Fleming and
Remolona (1997, 1999), Balduzzi, Elton, and Green (2001), and Green (2002). Moreover,
acceptance of this mechanism appears to be growing, as announcement effects have recently
been incorporated into term structure models (e.g. Piazzesi, 2001).

       On the other hand, yield curve changes can be due to the aggregation of heterogeneous
private information via the price discovery process. The assumption underlying this mechanism
is that market participants either have heterogeneous information signals or different models
through which public information in processed. Market participants trade when their private
bond valuations differ from the market prices and through the orders they place their information
is incorporated into the factors and the yield curve. Empirically, this mechanism implies that
yield curve changes are not necessarily concentrated around the release of public information.



                                                  1
Figure 1 provides evidence consistent with this implication. The left plot displays changes in the
yield of the on-the-run five-year bond on the three days surrounding the ten most influential
macroeconomic announcements.1 Consistent with the results of Fleming and Remolona (1997),
there are large changes in the yield curve on days when material information is released. The
right plot shows the corresponding yield changes on all other days. It is clear that there is still
substantial variation in yields even in the absence of identifiable public information releases.
Ultimately, we conclude that both mechanisms are likely to play a role in determining why and
how the yield curve changes from one day to the next.

        The term structure literature is rather agnostic about the mechanism by which the yield
curve changes. Rather than analyze the underlying economic mechanisms, the majority of the
literature tends to model the factors as exogenously driven stochastic processes that could
represent either public information flow or price discovery. We know from many event studies
that the yield curve responds to macroeconomic announcements (e.g., Fleming and Remolona,
1997, 1999; Balduzzi, Elton, and Green, 2001; Green, 2002), but there is only tangential
evidence from other markets that asset prices move in response to aggregate orderflow, most
notably the recent work on exchange rates by Evans and Lyons (2002a).2 Our goal in this paper
is to explore empirically the role of price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market by investigating
how the yield curve changes in the absence of material public information flow. Our hypothesis
is that the impact of orderflow imbalances (i.e., excess buying or selling pressure) on the yield
curve as well as the interaction between orderflow and liquidity provides the conduit through
which price discovery takes place, and that price discovery accounts for a substantial portion of
the day-to-day fluctuations of the yield curve.3

        Our empirical results strongly support this hypothesis. We find that orderflow
imbalances account for up to 26 percent of the day-to-day variation of yields on days without
major macroeconomic announcements. A one standard deviation excess buying (selling)
pressure is associated with yields dropping (rising) by more than 2.5 basis points, which is
approximately half the standard deviation of daily yield changes. We show that these changes in


1
  The announcements pertain to civilian unemployment, consumer confidence, consumer prices, FOMC meetings,
housing starts, industrial production, NAPM report, non-farm payroll, producer prices, and retail sales.
2
  See also Lyons (2001a, 2001b) and Evans and Lyons (2002b).
3
  This hypothesis can be derived from a number of theoretical models that are reviewed in Lyons (2001a).



                                                     2
yields are permanent, at least over a two-week period following the orderflow imbalance, and are
not attributed to a liquidity/inventory premium. Furthermore, we find that the relationship
between yields and orderflow becomes even stronger when we condition on the liquidity in the
Treasury market being low. A one standard deviation orderflow imbalance in the presence of
low liquidity produces yield changes of more than 3.3 basis points and an adjusted R2 of up to 26
percent. This is consistent with market participants paying more attention to orderflow when the
true valuations are relatively uncertain (and liquidity is therefore low). Finally, we illustrate the
multi-dimensional aspect and practical relevance of our results in the context of common fixed
income trading strategies.

       Our results have a number of important implications for both theorists and practitioners.
From a modeling perspective, our findings suggest that the price discovery mechanism is a
critical aspect of the factor dynamics. It follows that existing term structure models can be
improved by better understanding the information structure and the way heterogeneous
information is aggregated in the Treasury market. On a more fundamental level, the results help
to bridge the gap between asset pricing and microstructure by demonstrating that microstructure
issues, such as liquidity, can have macro implications. Finally, practitioners can use our results
to determine the way their trading strategies will impact the yield curve and thereby find
strategies that minimize transaction costs.

       Section I describes the data and the structure we use for measuring the yield, liquidity and
orderflow variables. Section II discusses the impact of orderflow on the yield curve. Section III
then examines the interaction of orderflow and liquidity. Section IV analyzes the effect of
common fixed income trading strategies on the yield curve, and Section V concludes.

I.     Data and Preliminaries
A.     Raw Data

We use intra-day U.S. Treasury security quotes and transactions for all Treasury issues. The data
are obtained from GovPX, which consolidates quotes and transaction data from five of the six




                                                  3
major inter-dealer Treasury security brokers.4 Fleming (1997) estimates that these five brokers
account for approximately two-thirds of the inter-dealer broker market, which in turn represents
roughly 45 percent of the trading volume in the secondary market for Treasury securities. Our
sample period covers January 1992 through December 1999.

        The GovPX dataset contains security identifier information, including the CUSIP,
coupon, maturity date, as well as an indicator of whether the security is trading when-issued, on-
the-run, or off-the-run. The quote data contains the best bid and ask prices, associated yields,
and respective bid and ask depths, all time-stamped to the nearest second. The transaction data
include the time, initiator (i.e., signed trades), price and quantity. These data allow us to calculate
changes in yields, net orderflow, and liquidity measures at an intra-day frequency. Our data
includes 97.0 million records (89.9M quotes and 7.1M trades) on 949 CUSIPs, accounting for
69.5 trillion dollars in traded volume.

        We supplement the GovPX data with information on macroeconomic announcements
from Money Market Services (MMS). We have data on announcements of the latest consumer
price index (CPI), producer price index (PPI), housing starts, civilian unemployment, non-farm
payroll, retail sales, industrial production, consumer confidence, the NAPM reports, as well as on
all FOMC meetings. For each announcement, we have the date and time of the release, the
market’s expectation, and the announced statistic.

B.      Aggregation and Timing

To analyze the interaction among yields, orderflow, and liquidity, we must first impose a
structure on the analysis that is detailed enough to capture the diversity of the data yet
parsimonious enough to be manageable. Following the lead of past research we adopt a two-
dimensional partition of the data. The first dimension quite naturally is the remaining time-to-




4
 GovPX covers the following inter-dealers brokers: Liberty, Tullett & Tokyo, Garban, ICAP and Hilliard Farber.
Cantor Fitzgerald is the only major inter-dealer broker that is missing from the GovPX dataset. The omission of
Cantor Fitzgerald results in systematically sparse data for the 30-year bond, given the prominence of Cantor
Fitzgerald within the long end of the yield curve.



                                                        4
maturity of a security, which we split into six categories: one day to six months, six to 12
months, 12 months to two years, two to five years, five to ten years, and ten to 30 years.5

        The second dimension is the seasonedness of a security, which describes how recently a
security was auctioned. Similar to past research, we separate bonds into on-the-run and off-the-
run. However, given the heterogeneity that exists within the set of off-the-run bonds, we further
partition the off-the-run category into just off-the-run and off-the-run. Our decision to partition
seasonedness in this way stems from two facts. First, the periodic auctions of the Treasury
Department creates a possible link between the current on-the-run security and the incoming
(when-issued) on-the-run security that we want to account for explicitly. Second, our partition is
consistent with the repurchase agreement (repo) market, which is closely connected to Treasury
market; where rates are segmented into on-the-run, just off-the-run and general collateral (i.e. all
other securities).6 Technically, we make the distinction between the off-the-run bonds by
counting the auctions of similar maturities that occurred since the bond’s issue date. Securities
within one or two auctions are just off-the-run while securities outside of two auctions are off-
the-run. Thus, taking the two dimensions together, we separate the data into 18 categories (six
time-to-maturity categories by three seasonedness categories). Notice that the six on-the-run
categories correspond simply to the six on-the-run securities (i.e., each category only includes a
single CUSIP), while the just off-the-run and off-the-run categories contain a variety of securities
with different issue dates and coupons (and hence different duration, convexity, etc.).

        Another critical issue is the definition and proper measurement of the variables of
interest. We measure net orderflow by summing the signed trade volume (purchases have a
positive and sales have a negative sign) within each category over the relevant period. Because
we know the initiator of the trade explicitly, this is a clean calculation, in contrast to equity
market studies where the initiator of the trade often needs to be estimated (e.g., Lee and Ready,
1991). The liquidity variables, spread and depth, are measured using quote records. The quoted
spread variable is defined as the difference between the ask and bid prices divided by the bid-ask
spread midpoint price using only two-sided quotes for the calculation (i.e., the percent price



5
 Each category is made wide enough to include the when-issued trading of the issuing-maturity security.
6
 See Brandt, Kavajecz and Underwood (2003) for a description of the repo market and its link to the Treasury
market.



                                                        5
spread). The quoted depth variable is the average of the bid and ask depth, where both one and
two-sided quotes are used in the calculation. Both the percent quoted spread and quoted depth
variables are then averaged for all bonds within each category over the relevant period.

       Yield observations are obtained from transactions and bid-ask spread midpoints. The fact
that the yield is a level variable (in contrast to the orderflow and liquidity variables) makes it
more susceptible to contamination due to isolated transactions and stale quotes. To address this
issue, we impose a filter on the yield observations at the individual security level. In particular,
for each date t, we record yield observations at date t and t+1 (to later compute changes) for all
bonds that are traded or quoted on these two consecutive days. Computing aggregate yield
changes within each category with these filtered yield observations results in much less noisy
series than computing yield changes with the raw yield observations, especially for off-the-run
securities, because it avoids taking differences between two isolated transactions of two very
different bonds (with different seasonedness, coupons, or liquidity, for example).

        Finally, we employ an intra-day sampling scheme for the measurement of our variables
that is driven by both institutional and technical rationales. First, the Treasury market tends to be
most active in the morning, which suggests that the orderflow is likely to be concentrated in the
morning. Second, because orderflow, changes in liquidity, and changes in yields do not in
general occur simultaneously, there is a concern that the impact of orderflow on yields may be
masked or even reversed if we measure these variables concurrently. Thus, to account for the
concentration of trade in the morning as well as to minimize concerns over non-synchronous
measurement, we are careful to measure our variables over separate and disjoint intervals over
the course of the day. Specifically, for each category and each day in our sample, we aggregate
net orderflow and average liquidity variables from the beginning of the day until 2:30 PM. In
contrast, yields are averaged from 2:30 PM until the end of the trading day (See diagram below).
Aggregating the variables in this way measures orderflow and liquidity during the active trading
period and provides orderflow every opportunity to impact yields without the potential
confounding effects of non-synchronous movements in the variables.




                                                  6
                         Day t                                         Day t+1


                                 2:30PM – End         Start – 2:30PM         2:30PM – End


                                    Yield(t)           Orderflow(t)              Yield(t+1)

                                                        Liquidity(t)




C.       Summary Statistics and Factor Structures

Table I provides univariate summary statistics for the yields, net orderflow, bid-ask spreads, and
quoted depth in our sample. Yields display the usual upward sloping nature of the yield curve.
Net orderflow tends to be positive signifying net purchases; however, the standard deviations are
particularly large revealing substantial variations and potential for large negative net orderflow.
Lastly, the liquidity measures confirm the common notion that the more seasoned a security is,
the more illiquid the market, since spreads rise and depth falls as securities move from on-the-
run to just off-the-run to off-the-run.

         To get a sense for the multivariate structure of the data across time-to-maturity categories
in a given seasonedness category, which is how the term structure literature tends to look at the
data, we begin our analysis by performing standard factor decompositions. In particular, we use
principle components analysis to extract the orthogonal factors F(t) from the covariance matrix
of the vector X(t), such that X(t)=A+B×F(t), where and A and B are matrices of constants and
factor loadings, respectively. We let X(t) be the (6x1) vector of yields, net orderflow, bid-ask
spreads, or quoted depth within a given seasonedness category.7

         Table II presents the results for on-the-run securities (the results for just off-the-run and
off-the-run securities are very similar and are thus omitted). Consistent with the term structure
literature, three factors emerge to explain 73, 26 and one percent of the variation in yields,
respectively. The first factor, called the level factor, loads about equally on all maturities, with a

7
 It should be noted that our results are not sensitive to whether the factors are constructed from yields or changes in
yields as has been done in the previous literature.



                                                           7
slight emphasis on the one- to five-year range. The second factor loads positively on long and
negatively on short maturities and is called the slope factor. The third factor, called the curvature
factor, loads positively on long and short maturities and negatively on medium maturities.

       It is natural to conjecture that the same three factors explain the variation in the on-the-
run net orderflow and liquidity variables. However, the factor decomposition for net orderflow,
bid-ask spreads, and quoted depth suggest otherwise. For net orderflow, there appears to be only
one predominant common factor explaining approximately 32 percent of the variation. This
factor loads about equally on the net orderflow of all bonds, with a slight emphasis of the two- to
five-year maturities. The remaining five factors explain approximately equal amounts of the
variation of net orderflow, ranging from 16 to 11 percent. The importance of all six factors as
well as the fact that net orderflow is not highly correlated across maturities, with correlations
ranging from 0.1 to 0.2, suggest that the net orderflow for each maturity potentially contains
independent signals for the price discovery process. The factor structures of the liquidity
variables appear similar to each other and to the net orderflow factors. Like the net orderflow
factors, spreads and depth contain a predominant common factor explaining between 47 and 56
percent of the variation in spreads and depth while the remaining five factors explain between
three and 17 percent. Despite the similarities among some of the factors, formal pairwise
comparisons of the yield, net orderflow, spreads and depth factor spaces, using the test of Chen
and Robinson (1989), are rejected at the one-percent level.

       In summary, the heterogeneity of yields across maturities can be effectively described
using three orthogonal factors. In contrast, net orderflow, bid-ask spreads, and quoted depth all
have a single dominant factor and the remaining factors all play non-trivial roles in describing
the cross-sectional variation within those series. Moreover, all the factor spaces of our variables
are statistically distinct suggesting that the information contained in yields, net orderflow,
spreads and depth are different. We use these results to guide our modeling choices below.




                                                  8
II.      Orderflow and the Yield Curve

A.       Baseline Yield Dynamics

Motivated by the linear conditional expectations implied by the general class of affine term
structure models and by the extensive macroeconomic literature modeling yields using vector
autoregressions (VARs), we use as baseline model for the daily dynamics of yields a first-order
VAR. However, rather than regress yields Yt on a constant and lagged yields Yt-1, we regress
them on a constant and the lagged common factors (level, slope, and curvature) Ft-1=L×Yt-1,
where L denotes the factor loadings.8 Intuitively, since the three factors contain virtually all of
the information in the cross-section of yields, using the factors as regressors results in an
equivalent but more parsimonious description of the yield dynamics (it also overcomes the
multicolinearity problem of the full VAR). More formally, our model is a restricted version of
the full VAR in which the slope coefficients Br satisfy Br×L=Bu, where Bu denotes the slope
coefficients of the full VAR. We therefore refer to our baseline model as a restricted VAR.

         Table III presents the slope coefficients, residual standard deviations, and equation-by-
equation adjusted R2 of the restricted VAR for each seasonedness category. The signs and
magnitudes of the coefficients are consistent with highly persistent yields and the characteristics
of the factors from Table II. A test of the restriction Br×L=Bu is not rejected at any conventional
significance level, lending formal support to our modeling choice. The most striking feature of
the results is that when the regressions are expressed in yield levels the adjusted R2 are all in
excess of 98 percent but when the regressions are equivalently expressed in yield changes (by
subtracting Yt-1 on both sides) the adjusted R2 are virtually zero. This indicates that the yields are
close to following a random walk and that the lagged yields (or factors) explain virtually none of
the day-to-day changes in yields.




8
  Because the off-the-run categories have at times a small number of observations, there are a few instances when
there is insufficient data to form the yield factors for these categories. In order to have a full set of independent
variables, we interpolate the missing off-the-run yields from the corresponding on-the-run yields to form the factors.
Note that the interpolation is confined to the factors alone and no dependent variable data is interpolated.



                                                          9
       We conclude that our baseline model for the yield dynamics is successful at capturing the
yield levels but effectively leaves all of the day-to-day changes in yields unexplained. The
residual standard deviations indicate that the magnitude of these unexplained yield changes is
substantial from an economic perspective, with standard deviations ranging from 5.1 to 9.6 basis
points. Finally, Figure 1 and similar plots for the other maturities suggest that these unexplained
yield changes are not solely attributed to the arrival of new information via macroeconomic
announcements. Taken together, these empirical facts motivate our hypothesis that some
fraction of the day-to-day yield changes is attributed to price discovery.

C.     Response of Yields to Orderflow Imbalances

More specifically, our hypothesis is that orderflow, and its interaction with liquidity, are the
conduit through which price discovery takes place. We first investigate the link between
orderflow and yields by including orderflow imbalances, indicating excess buying or selling
pressure, as an explanatory variable in the restricted VAR model. More specifically, for each
seasonedness category, we regress the yields at time t+1 on a constant, the three yield factors at
time t, and the net orderflow (demeaned and standardized) for all six bonds in that seasonedness
category between time t and t+1 (recall the sampling scheme illustrated in the diagram above).

       The presence of price discovery predicts a negative correlation between net orderflow
and yields (excess demand pushes up prices and therefore lowers yields). One might think that
such negative correlation can also be consistent with the public information flow view of yield
curve movements, as long as the new information that instantaneously lowers yields
simultaneously causes market participants to rebalance their portfolios such that demand exceeds
supply. Strictly speaking, this argument is internally inconsistent. If the new information shifts
market prices from one set of equilibrium prices to another, then by the definition of an
equilibrium price as one that clears the market, portfolio rebalancing due to the new information
cannot be systematically associated with excess demand or supply. The market should
instantaneously clear at the new set of equilibrium prices. Nonetheless, we address this critique
technically by excluding from the regressions the three days surrounding the CPI, PPI, and
unemployment announcements as well as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting
dates, which are the four most influential events for bond markets according to Fleming and




                                                 10
Remolona (1997). Focusing on the remaining non-announcement days is more in line with our
goal of understanding how bond prices move in the absence of identifiable public information.

           Table IV presents the coefficients on net orderflow along with statistics describing the
regression fit (the intercept and coefficients on the lagged factors are almost identical to the ones
presented in Table III and are therefore omitted). The results show overwhelmingly that net
orderflow for virtually all maturities and in all three seasonedness categories is significantly
negatively related to yields. Excess buyside orderflow or bond purchases raise Treasury prices
and in turn lower Treasury yields and vice versa for excess sellside orderflow.9 Furthermore, the
magnitude of the coefficients is economically significant. For on-the-run bonds, for example, the
coefficients on net orderflow are as large as -0.0166, which indicates that a one-standard
deviation orderflow imbalance is associated with a 1.66 basis point drop in yields.

           To measure the contribution of orderflow imbalance to explaining the day-to-day changes
in yields, we compute for each regression an incremental adjusted R2 that has the interpretation
of the fraction of the variance of the residuals from the restricted VAR (i.e., the variation in yield
not explained by the factors) that is explained by net orderflow. In all cases, these incremental
R2 are substantial, ranging from five to 25 percent. Interestingly, the relationship between yields
and orderflow is strongest for on-the-run bonds, an issue we revisit below.

           Consistent with the fact that the yields for different maturities are related by a common
factor structure and that price discovery in the bond market is really concerned with the whole
yield curve and the underlying factors, all yields react to net orderflow for all maturities (with
only a few insignificant coefficients), as opposed to each bond reacting only to its own
orderflow. Closer inspection reveals an intriguing pattern in the result. Each maturity range has
a strong reaction to it own orderflow imbalance, relative to adjacent maturity ranges, but an even
stronger reaction to the orderflow imbalance at the two- to five-year maturity range. The
prominence of this maturity range may be institutional because the majority of fixed income
portfolios, such as CMOs, are likely to have a duration near five years (the middle of the yield
curve), which corresponds to the most recently issued five-year Treasury notes. Furthermore,
futures trading is concentrated in the five-year note, which is consistent with the five-year future
being used as a hedge instrument. The relative importance of the two- to five-year maturity
9
    Our results are consistent with Fleming (2001) who also investigates the impact of net orderflow on bond prices.



                                                           11
range may therefore be a product of it containing a bellwether security that is universally held
and easily hedged.

       Another interesting result is that the incremental R2 are highest for the two- to five-year
range and decrease monotonically for shorter and longer maturities. This pattern is exactly
opposite to the pattern in the R2 for the restricted VAR explaining yield changes in Table III.
Even after accounting for the fact that there is more residual variance to be explained, orderflow
imbalances are most important for explaining the yield changes for bonds that are relatively
difficult to forecast with the yields-only baseline model.

       It is worth reiterating that the results in Table IV are for non-announcement days only
and are therefore unlikely to be driven by portfolio rebalancing due to transparent public
information flow, which we interpret as evidence of price discovery in the private information or
heterogeneous interpretation (of public information) view of how the yield curve changes. To
provide further evidence in support of this view, we estimate the model with net orderflow using
data for all days rather than just non-announcement days. Consistent with the hypothesis that
transparent public information causes yields to shift instantaneously to a new equilibrium level
and that the resulting orderflow due to portfolio rebalancing is balanced and uninformative, the
relationship between yield changes and net orderflow is weaker in the all-days sample than in the
non-announcement days sample. Specifically, the incremental R2 for all days (also shown in
Table IV) are as much as 4.5 percent smaller than for the non-announcement days.

       Finally, recall from the factor analyses in Table II that net orderflow contains a common
factor that accounts for about 32 percent of its variation across maturities and that the remaining
variation is maturity-specific. It is therefore sensible to ask whether the relationship between
orderflow imbalances and yields is due to the common component of net orderflow, the maturity
specific components of net orderflow, or both. To examine this question, we replace in the
regressions above (for non-announcement days) the net orderflows for all six maturities with the
common factor in net orderflow. The results are shown in the last three columns of Table IV.
Comparing the incremental R2 across specifications, it is clear that most (upward of 80 percent)
of the effect of orderflow imbalances on yields is due to the common factor in orderflow.
Furthermore, the coefficients on the net orderflow factor are substantially larger than the
coefficients on the individual net orderflows. For example, a one-standard deviation shock to the


                                                 12
common factor (which is roughly speaking an average across maturities with a slight emphasis
on the two- to five-year range – see the factor loadings in Table II) is associated with one to ten
year yields changing by 2.5 basis points or more. The interpretation is that excess buying or
selling across the whole curve is much more informative about the level of yields than excess
buying or selling of a particular maturity range. This is perhaps not too surprising given that
parallel shifts dominate the day-to-day changes in the yield curve, an issue we return to shortly.

       In summary, the results in Table IV show that the negative relationship between net
orderflow and yields predicted by our hypothesis of price discovery is both statistically and
economically significant. Orderflow imbalances explain as much as 25 percent of the day-to-day
variation in yields and a one-standard deviation imbalance across all maturities, as captured by
the common factor in net orderflow, can move yields by as much as 2.8 basis points. We now
explore in more depth the relationship between orderflow and yields.

       As mentioned in the introduction, understanding how the yield curve changes, in the
context of a factor model, amounts to understanding how the underlying factors change. We
therefore examine next the relationship between orderflow imbalances and the three yield
factors. Table V reports the results of regressing each on-the-run yield factor on a constant, the
lagged yield factors, and on-the-run net orderflows (as in Table IV we only show a subset of the
coefficients). Orderflow imbalances are strongly negatively related to changes in the level
factor, with coefficients that are large in magnitude and highly significant and with an
incremental R2 of 28 percent. A one standard deviation orderflow imbalance across all
maturities, as captured by the common factor in net orderflow, leads to a 5.5 basis point drop in
the level factor, more than half of the standard deviation of its day-to-day changes.

        The relationship between net orderflow and the slope and curvature factors is weaker.
Although the coefficients have the expected signs (excess buying of short-term bonds steepens
the yield curve, excess buying of long-term bonds flattens the curve, and excess buying of
medium-term bonds reduces the concavity of the curve), many of the coefficients are statistically
insignificant. Furthermore, the incremental R2 of eight and five percent are not only low but
must also be interpreted with some care because there is a fairly strong mechanical correlation
between changes in the level and changes in the slope and curvature factors due to the loadings




                                                 13
of the slope and curvature factors not summing to zero.10 For example, if net orderflow explains
28 percent of the changes in the level factor and if there exists a mechanical correlation of 0.2
between changes in the level and slope factors, close to the empirical correlation, net orderflow
mechanically explains about six percent of the variation in the slope factor.

         We conclude from the results in Table V that the information contained in orderflow
imbalances relates primarily to the level of the yield curve, explaining nearly one-third of the
variation in the level factor. According to Jones (1991), approximately 87 percent of the returns
on Treasury portfolios are attributed to parallel shifts in the yield curve. Together, these two
facts suggest that about one-quarter of the returns are associated with price discovery.11

D.       Price Discovery or Liquidity Premium?

Price discovery is not the only hypothesis consistent with a negative correlation between
orderflow imbalances and yield changes. An ex-ante equally sensible alternative is that yields
react to orderflow imbalances to compensate market participants for providing liquidity to
uninformed traders, as formalized by Garman (1976) and Campbell, Grossman, and Wang
(1993). For risk averse liquidity providers to be willing to absorb excess selling pressure, for
example, the expected return on the offsetting long position must increase. Holding fixed the
future payoffs of the securities, the only way for the expected return to increase is through a
temporary drop in price and hence a rise in yield, thereby inducing the negative correlation we
observe in the data. In this section, we provide three pieces of evidence that help differentiate
our hypothesis of price discovery from the alternative of a liquidity/inventory premium.

         The first piece of evidence is the observation in Table IV that each yield responds to
orderflow imbalances across the entire yield curve as opposed to just an imbalance in its own
maturity category. While this result is consistent with our notion that the market aggregates
information about the underlying yield factors, it is more difficult to explain in the context of
liquidity/inventory premiums. For example, why should market participants receive a greater
expected return on the 12-month Treasury bill in exchange for providing liquidity in the five-

10
   Suppose the yield curve is flat at eight percent and all yields change by 25 basis points. Given the factor loadings
in Table II, the slope factor increases from 1.92 to 1.98 and the curvature factor increases from 2.33 to 2.41 although
the slope and curvature of the yield curve have not changed.
11
   This calculation also links the incremental R2 in Table V to the ones in Table IV.



                                                          14
year bond? One possibility is that they provide liquidity across all maturities, but even then it is
difficult to understand why this increase in the expected return is almost twice as large as the
corresponding increase for providing liquidity in the 12-month bill itself.

        More direct evidence comes from comparing the results for on-the-run bonds to those for
just off- and off-the-run bonds. Besides differences in liquidity and coupon rates, bonds with
different seasonedness but the same maturity are substitutes. Empirical studies on dually traded
stocks as well as on spot and futures markets (e.g., Garbade and Silber, 1979, 1983) suggest that
price discovery where substitutes are present tends to take place in the market that is most liquid.
Liquidity premiums, on the contrary, are by definition more prevalent in illiquid markets.
Comparing the results in Table IV across seasonedness categories, which are substitutes with
decreasing liquidity, the incremental R2 are substantially greater for on-the-run bonds than for the
just off- and off-the-run bonds, consistent with price discovery in the liquid on-the-run bonds.

        Taking this argument one step further, we include in the regressions for just off- and off-
the-run yields the net orderflow for the on-the-run bonds in addition to the just off- and off-the-
run net orderflow (i.e., the seasonedness category’s own net orderflow), respectively. Under the
hypothesis that price discovery takes place in the liquid on-the-run bonds, the on-the-run net
orderflow should be more informative. In contrast, under the liquidity premium hypothesis, the
change in yields should be more related to orderflow imbalances in the own seasonedness
category. The results presented in Table VI favor overwhelmingly the price discovery
hypothesis. Just off- and off-the-run yields respond much more strongly to the on-the-run net
orderflow than to the own net orderflow. In fact, the own net orderflows are almost all
insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that they contain no additional information.12

        For the third piece of evidence, we exploit the different intertemporal predictions of the
two hypotheses. While the impact of price discovery on yields is permanent, the liquidity
premium hypothesis requires that yield changes revert quickly for liquidity providers to realize
the abnormal returns over their holding period. Given the high turnover in the Treasury market,
especially for on-the-run bonds, we expect this reversal to occur over the next day, which
predicts a positive correlation of yield changes from dates t to t+1 with orderflow imbalances

12
 The off-the-run ten- to 30-year category is the only exception for which the own orderflow remains significant.
However, the data for this category is very sparse due to the exclusion of Cantor Fitzgerald from GovPX.



                                                        15
between dates t-1 and t that roughly offsets the observed negative correlation with orderflow
imbalances between dates t and t+1.13

         In Table VII we formally test this prediction of the liquidity premium hypothesis by
including in the regressions one-day lagged net orderflows in addition to contemporaneous net
orderflows as explanatory variables. There is virtually no evidence that the yield changes
associated with orderflow imbalances revert the subsequent day. The vast majority of the
coefficients on the lagged net orderflows are negative, and the few positive coefficients are
relatively small in magnitude. Less than ten percent of the coefficients are statistically different
from zero at the ten percent level (which is consistent with the null of zero coefficients at that
significance level). The adjusted incremental R2 increase only marginally (in some cases even
decrease) relative to the results in Table IV. Finally, to address the possibility of more gradual
reversals, we also included further lagged net orderflows. The results, which are omitted in the
tables but are available on request, show no sign of a systematic positive correlation between
lagged orderflow imbalances and yield changes at any lag ranging from one day to two weeks.
Thus, the yield changes associated with orderflow imbalances appear to be permanent.

         Considering the three pieces of evidence together, we are confident that the yield changes
associated with orderflow imbalances are not attributed to liquidity/inventory risk premiums.
The evidence is instead fully consistent with (and further supportive of) our hypothesis of price
discovery. However, this conclusion in no way suggests that liquidity drops out of the picture
because, as we show next, liquidity plays its own role in the price discovery process.

III.     Interaction of Orderflow and Liquidity

While orderflow imbalances are a critical component of the price discovery mechanism, we
argue so too is the state of liquidity in the market. Specifically, orderflow imbalances in the
presence of an illiquid market are likely to have a more pronounced and potentially different
impact on yields than orderflow imbalances in a liquid market. A useful analogy for our view of
the interplay between orderflow, liquidity, and yields is the relation between a beam of light, a

13
  Our one day reversal assumption stems from the high turnover rates in the Treasury market. As an example, the
daily average transaction volume in early 2003 was $417 billion. This transaction volume is approximately 12% of
the outstanding marketable debt held by the public and five times the on-the-run issues. For more on these statistics
see www.ustreas.gov and www.publicdebt.treas.gov.



                                                         16
prism, and the color spectrum. Just as the prism alters the way the beam of light is seen, so too
does the state of liquidity alter the impact of orderflow imbalances on the yield curve.

       We model this interaction between orderflow and liquidity in the price discovery process
by allowing in the regressions in Table IV different coefficients on net orderflow depending on
whether liquidity is high or low. We proxy high or low liquidity by the bid-ask spread being
below or above its median or by the quoted depth being above or below its median, respectively.
Furthermore, we consider two alternative ways of conditioning on liquidity. We let the net
orderflow coefficients depend either on the liquidity of the bonds for which the orderflow
imbalance occurs or on the overall liquidity as proxied for by the common factor in the bid-ask
spreads or quoted depths.

       Figure 2 presents graphically the results of conditioning on the bid-ask spread of the
bonds for which the orderflow imbalance occurs for the on-the-run category. (The results are not
tabulated because there are 36 regressions per seasonedness category.) Each plot shows three
sets of bars representing the yield changes across maturities resulting from a one standard
deviation net orderflow imbalance in one of the six maturity categories. The black bars represent
the unconditional reaction of the yield curve, corresponding to the results in Table IV. The gray
and white bars represent the reaction when the liquidity of the bonds in which the orderflow
imbalance occurs is high or low, respectively.

       The plots reveal a number of interesting features of the data. First, consistent with the
results in Table IV, positive orderflow imbalances in any of the six maturities are
unconditionally associated with substantial drops in yields across the whole yield curve (black
bars). Second, the reaction of the yield curve to orderflow imbalances is much stronger during
periods of low liquidity than unconditionally and during periods of high liquidity, supporting our
view of the interaction between orderflow and liquidity in the price discovery process. When
liquidity is low (white bars), yields change by as much as 2.25 basis points in response to one
standard deviation net orderflow, as opposed to 1.75 basis points unconditionally and 1.25 basis
points when liquidity is high (gray bar). In relative terms, the yield changes during low liquidity
are between 11 and 130 percent greater than unconditionally and between 39 and 241 percent
greater than during high liquidity. Third, despite the differences in magnitude, the general shape
of the reaction along the yield curve is similar across the results for different liquidity states. In


                                                  17
particular, for each orderflow imbalance the largest reaction is for the maturity in which the
imbalance occurs and the reaction diminishes the further the maturity is away from the origin of
the buying pressure, thereby taking on a v-shape. Interestingly, the reaction appears to be
skewed in the sense that the reaction for maturities shorter than the origin of the imbalance is
muted relative to the reaction for longer maturities. Lastly, orderflow imbalances for different
maturities are associated with different changes in the shape of the yield curve. Positive net
orderflow at the short end of the yield curve (Treasury bills of one year or less to maturity) tends
to steepen the curve. Excess buying in the middle of the yield curve (two- and five-year notes)
tends to invert the curve and leads to the most pronounced reaction in magnitude. Positive net
orderflow at the long end of the curve (ten-year note and 30-year bond) tends to flatten the curve
and has the smallest effect in magnitude, especially for the ten-year note.

         To get a sense for the statistical significance of the interaction between orderflow and
liquidity, we present in Table VIII the results from conditioning on the overall liquidity as
proxied for by the common factor in bid-ask spreads (panel A) or quoted depths (panel B).14
The table shows the coefficients on net orderflow for high liquidity and the incremental
coefficient for low liquidity (i.e., the low-liquidity coefficient is the sum of the two coefficients
and the t-statistic on the incremental coefficient measures the statistical significance of the
difference between the high- and low-liquidity coefficients). It also shows the adjusted
incremental R2 of the regression and the change in the adjusted incremental R2 relative to the
unconditional results in Table IV. Finally, to reduce the number of regressors and ease the
interpretation of the result, we focus on the regressions with the first net orderflow factor instead
of the entire set of net orderflows, corresponding to the last three columns in Table IV. The
other results are qualitatively the same and are available on request.

          The incremental coefficients for low liquidity are all negative, confirming that the drop
in yields in response to excess buying is greater when liquidity is low, and most of the
incremental coefficients are statistically significant at the five percent level (in 16 of 24 cases),
suggesting that the difference between the high- and low-liquidity coefficients is indeed non-



14 Panel B only shows results for on-the-run bonds because the quoted depth for just off and off-the-run bonds is at
the median most of the time, resulting in insufficient variation in the conditioning variable.




                                                         18
zero. In relative terms, the low-liquidity coefficients are between 29 and 98 percent larger in
magnitude than the high-liquidity coefficients. This difference is somewhat less pronounced
than when the coefficients depend on the bond-specific liquidity (in Figure 2), which is
consistent with our view of the interaction between orderflow and liquidity and suggests that the
statistical inferences are conservative. The adjusted incremental R2 of the regressions increase
substantially, relative to the unconditional results in Table IV, especially for the on-the-run
bonds in panel A (two to five percent). Finally, the results in panel B are qualitatively the same
as the corresponding results in panel A, but they are quantitatively weaker because there is less
variation in quoted depth than in bid-ask spreads.

       In summary, the results in Figure 2 and Table VIII demonstrate that liquidity plays an
important role in the price discovery process. When there is uncertainty about the true
valuations, market participants provide less liquidity and update substantially their private
valuations given the information revealed by the orderflow, hence yields respond about twice as
strongly to an orderflow imbalance. When there is little uncertainty about the true valuations, in
contrast, liquidity is high and market participants pay relatively little attention to orderflow.

IV. Common Trading Strategies

The marginal effect of an orderflow imbalance for one maturity on yields across all maturities, as
illustrated in Figure 2, for example, abstracts from the fact that orderflow tends to be spread
across maturities through the use of fixed income trading strategies designed to place focused
bets on changes in the level and shape of the yield curve. An intuitive and practically more
relevant way to get a sense for the multi-dimensional relationship between yields, orderflow, and
liquidity is therefore to examine the way yields change in response to these trading strategies.

       We consult the fixed income literature for the choice of common trading strategies to
consider. Jones (1991) and Fabozzi (2000) describe directional interest rate trades (ladders,
bullets, and barbells) as well as relative rate trades (term spreads), and Grieves (1999) examines
different ways of constructing convexity trades (butterfly spreads). Guided by these discussions,
we consider the following five trading strategies: (i) a ladder – an equal investment in each
issuing maturity along the yield curve; (ii) a bullet – an investment at one maturity on the yield
curve (note that the marginal results in Figure 2 can be interpreted in the context of bullets); (iii)



                                                  19
a barbell – an investment in two non-adjacent maturities with the same duration as an
intermediate maturity; (iv) a duration-neutral term spread – an opposite investment in the long
and short-end of the yield curve with canceling duration; and (v) a duration-neutral and duration-
balanced butterfly spread – an opposite investment in extreme (long and short) maturities and in
an intermediate maturity with canceling duration and such that it can be split into two duration-
neutral term spreads. Given the relative prominence of the five-year bond, we center all trades at
the five-year maturity. We consider a five-year bullet, a barbell with the duration of a five-year
bullet involving the two- and ten-year maturities, a term spread with the two- and ten-year
maturities, and a butterfly spread with the two-, five-, and ten-year maturities. Finally, we set the
absolute (long and short) orderflow to be $100M, which represents a fraction of the hourly
volume in on-the-run securities and is not uncommon for large market participants.15

         For each of these five common fixed income trading strategies, we examine the change in
yields implied by the regression results, both unconditionally and under high- or low-liquidity
conditions as captured by the common factor in bid-ask spreads. Figure 3 presents the results in
the same format as Figure 2 (i.e., the black, white, and gray bars are the unconditional, low-, and
high-liquidity responses, respectively). Consider first the ladder, five-year bullet, and five-year
barbell strategies, which all involve positive orderflows and are therefore associated with a drop
in yields across all maturities. Of these three strategies, the bullet has the strongest effect on
yields (as much as 1/3 basis point), especially for medium maturities and when liquidity is low.
However, not only is the magnitude of the response for the ladder and barbell smaller, but the
way the shape of the yield curve changes is also very different. The bullet has a v-shaped
response, centered at the five-year maturity, and therefore leads to a downward shift and
straightening (i.e., decrease in concavity) of the yield curve. The ladder and barbell, in contrast,
have relatively small effects on very short maturities (one year and less) and roughly equal
effects on all other maturities, resulting in a parallel shift of the yield curve with a flattening (i.e.,
decrease in slope) at the very short end. Finally, the response to the bullet is somewhat more
sensitive to liquidity than the responses to the ladder and barbell.


15
   More specifically, the five trading strategies involve the following positions: (i) ladder – long $16.67M in each of
the six-month and one-year bills, two-, five-, and ten-year notes, and 30-year bond; (ii) bullet – long $100M in the
five-year note; (iii) barbell – long $54.9M in the two-year note and $45.1M in the ten-year note; (iv) term spread –
short $80.4M in the two-year note and long $19.6M in the ten-year note; and (v) butterfly spread – long $48.1M and
$11.7M in the two- and ten-year notes, respectively, and short $40.2M in the five-year note.



                                                          20
       The differences between the results for the bullet and barbell strategies are particularly
intriguing because the barbell has by design the same duration and hence the same first-order
exposure to short-term interest rate movements as the bullet. The fact that the response to the
bullet is between 33 and 119 percent greater (46 and 135 percent when liquidity is low) and that
the shape of the responses is quite different suggests that excess buying or selling of the five-year
bond carries information beyond a directional bet on short-term interest rates. From a practical
perspective, it also implies that the barbell is a considerably cheaper way of buying five-year
duration because it involves a smaller price impact and therefore lower transaction costs.

       The term spread, which involves buying the ten-year bond and selling the two-year note
such that the durations of the two positions cancel, leads to an upward shift and bowing (i.e.,
increase in concavity) of the yield curve. Mechanically, the upward shift is consistent with the
fact that the term spread involves more negative than positive orderflow because the duration of
the ten-year bond is roughly four times that of the two-year note. At a more conceptual level,
however, the fact that a duration-neutral trading strategy is associated with a shift in the yield
curve is somewhat surprising and suggests again that the information contained in orderflow is
more complex than a directional bet on short-term interest rates. The bowing of the yield curve
is more intuitive. Since the term spread represents a bet that the two-year yield will rise (its price
will drop) relative to the ten-year yield, the yield increase in response to the orderflow is 71
percent greater at the two-year maturity than at the ten-year maturity. The results for the
butterfly spread are equally intuitive. The butterfly spread involves selling the five-year note and
buying the two-year note and ten-year bond such that the durations cancel and the position can
be split into two duration-neutral term spreads. It represents a bet that the yield on the middle
maturity will rise relative to the yields on the extreme maturities, resulting in a more concave
yield curve. Consistent with this bet, the orderflow leads to an increase in the medium maturity
yields and leaves the short- and long-maturity yields unchanged.

       Comparing rows in Figure 3, the role of liquidity is very different for the directional
strategies in the first row than for the spread strategies in the second row. For the directional
strategies, the yield response is much more pronounced when liquidity is low than when it is
high, consistent with the results in the previous section and our view that market participants pay
more attention to orderflow when the true valuation is uncertain and liquidity is low. For the



                                                 21
spread strategies, in contrast, the yield response is far less sensitive to liquidity. The relative
difference between the low- and high-liquidity responses for the term spread, for instance, ranges
from six to 64 percent, compared to 78 to 150 percent for the bullet strategy. The reason for this
difference is that for the spread strategies each leg of the position has a more pronounced effect
on yields when liquidity is low but in aggregate the low-liquidity increments partially cancel.

        In summary, the results for the common fixed income trading strategies show how
different combinations of orderflow can lead to substantially different changes in the level and
shape of the yield curve. Even two strategies with the same duration elicit distinct yield
responses. Furthermore, a sequence of realistic trades can account in magnitude for the typical
day-to-day changes in the yield curve. For example, a sequence of ladder trades totaling $2B,
which accounts for a small fraction of the daily volume in on-the-run Treasuries, shifts the yield
curve by four basis points unconditionally and by six basis points when liquidity is low, which is
approximately the daily standard deviation of yield changes. Finally, the role of liquidity
depends on the context of the orderflow and is very different for directional strategies with
strictly positive or negative orderflow than for spread strategies with mixed orderflow.

V.      Conclusion

We examined the role of price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market through the empirical
relationship between orderflow, liquidity, and the yield curve. Our hypothesis is that, in the
absence of material public information flow, orderflow imbalances account for a substantial
portion of the day-to-day fluctuations of the yield curve and that the role of orderflow depends
on the liquidity in the Treasury market.

        Our empirical results strongly support this hypothesis. Unconditionally, orderflow
imbalances account for up to 21 percent of the day-to-day variation of yields on days without
major macroeconomic announcements. A one standard deviation excess buying (selling)
pressure is associated with yields dropping (rising) by more than 2.5 basis points, which is
approximately half the standard deviation of daily yield changes. The changes in yields appear
permanent and are not attributed to a liquidity/inventory premium. The evidence is even
stronger when we condition on the liquidity in the Treasury market being low. Net orderflow
then accounts for up to 26 percent of the day-to-day variation of yields, and a one-standard



                                                  22
deviation imbalance is associated with yields changing by more than 3.3 basis points. We
argued that this finding is consistent with market participants paying more attention to orderflow
when the true valuations are uncertain. Finally, we illustrated the multi-dimensional aspect and
practical relevance of our results in the context of common fixed income trading strategies.




                                                23
References

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, Edwin J. Elton, and T. Clifton Green, 2001, Economic news and bond prices:
      Evidence from the U.S. Treasury market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
      36, 523-543.

Brandt, Michael W., Kenneth A. Kavajecz and Shane Underwood, 2003, An analysis of the
       repurchase agreement market, Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Campbell, John Y., Sanford J. Grossman and Jiang Wang, 1993, Trading volume and serial
     correlation in stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 905-939.

Chen, K.H., and John Robinson, 1989, Comparison of factor spaces of two related populations,
       Journal of Multivariate Analysis 28, 190-203.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term
       structure of interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385-408.

Evans, Martin D.D., and Richard K. Lyons, 2002a, Orderflow and exchange rate dynamics,
       Journal of Political Economy 110, 170-180.

Evans, Martin D.D., and Richard K. Lyons, 2002b, How is macro news transmitted to exchange
       rates?, Working Paper, Georgetown University.

Fabozzi, Frank J., 2000, Bond Markets, Analysis and Strategies, Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle
      River, NJ.

Fleming, Michael J., 1997, The round-the-clock market of U.S. Treasury securities, Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 9-32.

Fleming, Michael J., 2001, Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity, Working Paper, Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York.

Fleming, Michael J., and Eli M. Remolona, 1997, What moves the bond market?, Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 31-51.

Fleming, Michael J., and Eli M. Remolona, 1999, Price formation and liquidity in the U.S.
      treasuries market: The response to public information, Journal of Finance 54, 1901-
      1915.

Garbade, Kenneth D., and William L. Silber, 1979, Dominant and satellite markets: A study of
      dually traded securities, Review of Economics and Statistics 61, 455-460.

Garbade, Kenneth D., and William L. Silber, 1983, Price movements and price discovery in
      futures and cash markets, Review of Economics and Statistics 65, 289-297.

Garman, Mark B., 1976, Market microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 257-275.



                                               24
Green Clifton T., 2002, Economic News and the Impact of Trading on Bond Prices. Working
      paper, Emory University.

Grieves, Robin, 1999, Butterfly trades, Journal of Portfolio Management 26, 87-95.

Jones, Frank J., 1991, Yield curve strategies, Journal of Fixed Income 1, 43-51.

Lee, Charles and Mark Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of
       Finance 46, 733-746.

Litterman, Robert, and Jose Scheinkman, 1991, Common factors affecting bond returns, Journal
       of Fixed Income 1, 54-61.

Lyons, Richard K., 2001a, The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, MIT Press: Boston,
       MA.

Lyons, Richard K., 2001b, New perspective on FX markets: Order-flow analysis, International
       Finance 4, 303-320.

Vasicek, Oldrich, 1977, An equilibrium characterization of the term structure, Journal of
       Financial Economics 5, 177-188.

Piazzesi, Monika, 2001, An econometric model of the yield curve with macroeconomic jump
       effects, Working Paper, UCLA.




                                               25
                                         Table I: Summary Statistics
This table presents means and standard deviations [in brackets] of yields, net orderflow (purchases less sales),
percentage price bid-ask spreads, and quoted depth over the period January 1992 through December 1999 for the
GovPX dataset. Securities are grouped by the remaining time-to-maturity and seasonedness, where seasonedness is
separated into on-the-run (when-issued trading plus the most recently auctioned security), just off-the-run
(securities having either one or two new issues of similar maturity auctioned since being issued), and off-the-run
(securities having three or more new issues of similar maturity auctioned since being issued).

                                                          Remaining Time to Maturity
       Seasonedness          0-6 months     6-12 months     1-2 years    2-5 years   5-10 years      10-30 years

                                                                 Yields (%)
                                4.787          4.984         5.432         5.826          6.313         6.751
       On-the-Run
                               [0.928]        [0.948]       [0.874]       [0.797]        [0.801]       [0.806]

                                4.841          4.964         5.419          5.815         6.515         6.970
     Just Off-the-Run
                               [0.912]        [0.937]       [0.889]        [0.803]       [0.739]       [0.623]

                                4.764          4.985         5.290          5.806         6.412         6.977
       Off-the-Run
                               [0.926]        [0.948]       [0.912]        [0.789]       [0.800]       [0.748]

                                                            Net Orderflow ($Mil.)
                               22.443         -52.082       246.909      307.857         144.651       22.884
       On-the-Run
                              [322.111]      [372.891]     [594.361]    [604.659]       [343.624]     [121.397]

                               12.250          -6.662       29.838         21.797        7.555          4.494
     Just Off-the-Run
                              [145.323]      [110.529]     [115.934]      [89.382]      [46.129]       [39.263]

                               29.945         67.652        86.873        52.243          5.371          0.958
       Off-the-Run
                             [3871.440]      [228.883]     [250.132]     [138.983]      [54.497]       [20.840]

                                                   Bid-Ask Spreads (% of Midpoint Price)
                                0.033          0.056        0.075         0.129        0.235            0.553
       On-the-Run
                               [0.017]        [0.029]      [0.030]       [0.043]      [0.066]          [0.153]

                                0.067          0.138         0.209          0.350         0.605         0.646
     Just Off-the-Run
                               [0.052]        [0.079]       [0.097]        [0.119]       [0.149]       [0.211]

                                0.123          0.210         0.329          0.508         0.736         0.740
       Off-the-Run
                               [0.049]        [0.077]       [0.105]        [0.148]       [0.203]       [0.214]

                                                            Quoted Depth ($Mil.)
                               15.207         15.276        18.034        8.188           6.488         2.171
       On-the-Run
                               [6.718]        [4.492]       [7.577]      [2.115]         [2.212]       [0.762]

                                8.773          6.861         4.779          2.789         1.426         1.721
     Just Off-the-Run
                               [4.252]        [2.485]       [2.675]        [0.828]       [1.130]       [1.808]

                                5.434          3.923         1.892          1.122         1.223         1.419
       Off-the-Run
                               [2.374]        [1.749]       [0.538]        [0.350]       [0.769]       [1.075]
                                         Table II: Factor Structures
This table presents the loadings of orthogonal factors extracted from the covariance matrix of on-the-run yields, net
orderflow (purchases less sales), percentage bid-ask spreads, and quoted depth for six maturity categories. The
factors are ordered by the percent of the total variation explained by each factor (% Explained).

                                                                     Factors
        Maturity                1st             2nd            3rd             4th            5th            6th

                                                                    Yields
       0-6 months                 0.3956         -0.4358         0.6403          0.2925         0.3899         0.0785
      6-12 months                 0.4231         -0.3686         0.0820         -0.2713        -0.7074        -0.3230
        1-2 years                 0.4644         -0.1793        -0.4273         -0.3366         0.1501         0.6586
        2-5 years                 0.4715          0.1178        -0.4348          0.1023         0.4164        -0.6252
       5-10 years                 0.3887          0.4602        -0.0272          0.6549        -0.3778         0.2543
      10-30 years                 0.2745          0.6453         0.4593         -0.5368         0.0943        -0.0158

      % Explained                 0.7274          0.2648         0.0058          0.0013         0.0006         0.0001

                                                                 Net Orderflow
       0-6 months                 0.3201         -0.5345         0.7325        -0.1456         -0.2320         0.0172
      6-12 months                 0.4001         -0.1994        -0.1395         0.8740          0.0316         0.1257
        1-2 years                 0.4351         -0.3094        -0.4034        -0.4197          0.3407         0.5099
        2-5 years                 0.5172         -0.0019        -0.2044        -0.1575          0.1116        -0.8084
       5-10 years                 0.4085          0.4244        -0.1371        -0.1152         -0.7588         0.2127
      10-30 years                 0.3374          0.6314         0.4699         0.0240          0.4908         0.1587

      % Explained                 0.3237          0.1602         0.1451          0.1360         0.1294         0.1057

                                                               Bid-Ask Spreads
       0-6 months                 0.3679         -0.2156        0.6911        0.5778            0.0798        -0.0181
      6-12 months                 0.4067         -0.0029        0.4510       -0.7785           -0.1332         0.0859
        1-2 years                 0.4354          0.4406       -0.1974        0.0486            0.6346         0.4150
        2-5 years                 0.4916          0.1146       -0.2593        0.0087            0.0397        -0.8224
       5-10 years                 0.4697          0.0431       -0.3265        0.2160           -0.7043         0.3580
      10-30 years                 0.2178         -0.8628       -0.3258       -0.1050            0.2747         0.1247

      % Explained                 0.5610          0.1651         0.1166          0.0810         0.0452         0.0311

                                                                 Quoted Depth
       0-6 months                 0.2681          0.1801        -0.8110       -0.4820           0.0700        -0.0265
      6-12 months                 0.3717          0.2151        -0.3124        0.8339           0.1494         0.0118
        1-2 years                 0.5267         -0.0076         0.1927       -0.0660          -0.4747        -0.6750
        2-5 years                 0.5281         -0.1374         0.1408       -0.0897          -0.3785         0.7288
       5-10 years                 0.4810         -0.1996         0.2965       -0.1898           0.7751        -0.0643
      10-30 years                -0.0478         -0.9287        -0.3158        0.1543          -0.0585        -0.0909

      % Explained                 0.4711          0.1706         0.1537          0.1113         0.0553         0.0380
                             Table III: Response of Yields to Lagged Factors

This table presents the results of regressing yields of six maturity categories at date t on the first three yield factors
(level, slope, and curvature) at date t-1. The regressions include intercepts that are not tabulated. The subpanels are
for three different seasonedness categories – on-the-run, just off-the-run, and off-the-run bonds. The table also
shows adjusted R2 for regressions in both levels and changes. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5%,
and 1%, respectively.

                                                Factors                                              Adjusted R2
        Maturity                Level            Slope         Curvature          Res Std       Levels        Changes

                                                                    On-the-Run
       0-6 months              0.3806***       -0.4313***         0.6210***       0.0505        99.70%         1.09%
      6-12 months              0.4400***       -0.3826***         0.0669***       0.0672        99.50%         0.61%
        1-2 years              0.4719***       -0.1747***        -0.4390***       0.0577        99.57%         0.46%
        2-5 years              0.4519***        0.1193***        -0.4268***       0.0595        99.44%         0.41%
       5-10 years              0.3864***        0.4531***        -0.0625***       0.0675        99.28%         0.55%
      10-30 years              0.2808***        0.6464***         0.4608***       0.0509        99.60%         0.64%

                                                                 Just Off-the-Run
       0-6 months              0.3911***       -0.4253***         0.5935***     0.0584          99.59%         0.53%
      6-12 months              0.4243***       -0.3893***         0.1336***     0.0642          99.53%         0.51%
        1-2 years              0.4534***       -0.2109***        -0.3827***     0.0825          99.14%         0.34%
        2-5 years              0.4366***        0.0779***        -0.6339***     0.0738          99.15%         0.18%
       5-10 years              0.4003***        0.4682***         0.0689***     0.0838          98.72%         0.29%
      10-30 years              0.3208***        0.6327***         0.3563***     0.0639          98.95%         0.42%

                                                                    Off-the-Run
       0-6 months             0.4018***        -0.5504***         0.5573***       0.0538        99.66%         0.73%
      6-12 months             0.4118***        -0.4187***        -0.0386***       0.0530        99.69%         0.59%
        1-2 years             0.4172***        -0.1937***        -0.5463***       0.0720        99.37%         0.52%
        2-5 years             0.4092***         0.2418***        -0.5171***       0.0720        99.16%         0.44%
       5-10 years             0.4125***         0.4344***         0.0519***       0.0958        98.55%         0.58%
      10-30 years             0.3852***         0.4847***         0.6091***       0.0801        98.86%         0.69%
                                                      Table IV: Response of Yields to Orderflow
This table presents the results of regressing yields of six maturity categories at date t on net orderflow (purchases less sales) between dates t-1 and t. The
regressions are for non-announcement days and include intercepts and coefficients on the first three yield factors at date t-1 that are not tabulated. The subpanels
are for three different seasonedness categories – on-the-run, just off-the-run, and off-the-run bonds. The adjusted R2 measures the incremental contribution of
net orderflow relative to regressions that include only the lagged yield factors. For comparison, the table also shows the adjusted R2 for all days and the results
of regressing yields on the first net orderflow factor. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                                            Net Orderflow by Maturity                                                                 1st Net Orderflow Factor
                                                                                                                       All Days
   Maturity       0-6 mths     6-12 mths       1-2 yrs      2-5 yrs       5-10 yrs     10-30 yrs   Res Std Adj R2       Adj R2       Factor     Res Std   Adj R2

                                                                                  On-the-Run
 0-6 months      -0.0072***    -0.0030**     -0.0060***   -0.0090***    -0.0010    -0.0013         0.0438     10.61%     9.57%    -0.0147***    0.0540      10.21%
 6-12 months     -0.0050***    -0.0091***    -0.0070***   -0.0114***    -0.0028    -0.0031***      0.0596     15.37%    13.51%    -0.0229***    0.0599      13.80%
   1-2 years     -0.0061***    -0.0062***    -0.0096***   -0.0133***    -0.0030*   -0.0042***      0.0476     21.15%    18.83%    -0.0248***    0.0478      19.79%
   2-5 years     -0.0068***    -0.0057***    -0.0092***   -0.0166***    -0.0032** -0.0049***       0.0496     24.67%    20.19%    -0.0263***    0.0498      21.37%
  5-10 years     -0.0038***    -0.0043***    -0.0070***   -0.0149***    -0.0050** -0.0054***       0.0590     19.15%    17.61%    -0.0278***    0.0593      17.81%
 10-30 years     -0.0022       -0.0028**     -0.0064***   -0.0097***    -0.0047*** -0.0064***      0.0461     15.58%    12.31%    -0.0165***    0.0463      13.42%
                                                                                Just Off-the-Run
 0-6 months      -0.0056***    -0.0047***    -0.0055***   -0.0083**     -0.0028       0.0004       0.0540      4.68%     3.51%    -0.0091***    0.0544       3.62%
 6-12 months     -0.0041***    -0.0088***    -0.0069***   -0.0116***    -0.0035*     -0.0056***    0.0571     15.10%    14.93%    -0.0236***    0.0573      14.78%
   1-2 years     -0.0043**     -0.0086***    -0.0095***   -0.0140***    -0.0045*     -0.0061***    0.0731     16.00%    13.65%    -0.0304***    0.0733      14.85%
   2-5 years     -0.0059***    -0.0081***    -0.0104***   -0.0184***    -0.0052** -0.0046**        0.0619     17.37%    15.94%    -0.0273***    0.0620      16.34%
  5-10 years     -0.0091***    -0.0077***    -0.0098***   -0.0131***    -0.0075*** -0.0039**       0.0739     15.69%    14.30%    -0.0234***    0.0742      14.46%
 10-30 years      0.0000       -0.0057**     -0.0057*     -0.0094***    -0.0053** -0.0033*         0.0548     16.07%    15.70%    -0.0231***    0.0554      15.25%
                                                                                  Off-the-Run
  0-6 months     -0.0051***    -0.0043***    -0.0029*     -0.0036**     -0.0002     -0.0016        0.0482      5.09%     4.40%    -0.0099***    0.0484       4.72%
 6-12 months     -0.0044***    -0.0072***    -0.0068***   -0.0074***    -0.0027*    -0.0063        0.0430     16.45%    16.19%    -0.0193***    0.0434      15.42%
   1-2 years     -0.0054***    -0.0065***    -0.0096***   -0.0137***    -0.0035** -0.0037*         0.0612     16.33%    14.27%    -0.0283***    0.0614      15.91%
   2-5 years     -0.0050***    -0.0056***    -0.0082***   -0.0168***    -0.0038** -0.0064*         0.0614     14.53%    13.81%    -0.0252***    0.0616      13.88%
  5-10 years     -0.0064**     -0.0042***    -0.0100***   -0.0120**     -0.0043*** -0.0079**       0.0856     13.41%    12.97%    -0.0240***    0.0862      11.78%
 10-30 years      0.0084       -0.0035       -0.0200***   -0.0050       -0.0024** -0.0081**        0.0713     12.60%    11.39%    -0.0270***    0.0752       9.79%
                                                   Table V: Response of Yield Factors to Orderflow
This table presents the results of regressing the first three on-the-run yield factors (level, slope, and curvature) at date t on net orderflow (purchases less sales)
between dates t-1 and t. The regressions are for non-announcement days and include intercepts and coefficients on the yield factors at date t-1 that are not
tabulated. The adjusted R2 measure the incremental contribution of net orderflow relative to regressions that include only the lagged yield factors. For
comparison, the table also shows the results of regressing the yield factors on the first net orderflow factor. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5%
and 1%, respectively.

                                              Net Orderflow by Maturity                                                                  1st Net Orderflow Factor
    Factors        0-6 mths      6-12 mths       1-2 yrs      2-5 yrs          5-10 yrs      10-30 yrs     Res Std       Adj R2          Factor     Res Std Adj R2

   Level          -0.0121 *** -0.0157 *** -0.0184 *** -0.0286 *** -0.0070 ** -0.0100 ***                    0.0863         28.14%     -0.0550 *** 0.0868       27.68%
   Slope           0.0018     -0.0010     -0.0022 *   -0.0051 *** -0.0033 *** -0.0010                       0.0346          8.27%     -0.0071 *** 0.0348        7.67%
  Curvature        0.0003      0.0016 **   0.0014 **   0.0029 *** -0.0006      0.0007                       0.0204          4.95%      0.0042 *** 0.0204        3.77%
                              Table VI: Response of Off-the-Run Yields to Own versus On-the-Run Orderflow
This table presents the results of regressing off-the-run yields of six maturity categories at date t on off-the-run and on-the-run net orderflow (purchases less sales)
between dates t-1 and t. The regressions are for non-announcement days and include intercepts and coefficients on the first three yield factors at date t-1 that are
not tabulated. The subpanels are for two different seasonedness categories – just off-the-run and off-the-run bonds. The adjusted R2 measure the incremental
contribution of net orderflow relative to regressions that include only the lagged yield factors. ∆Adj R2 denotes the change in the adjusted R2 relative to the results
in Table IV. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                            Own Net Orderflow by Maturity                                      On-the-Run Net Orderflow by Maturity
  Maturity   0-6 mths 6-12 mths 1-2 yrs      2-5 yrs 5-10 yrs 10-30 yrs         0-6 mths   6-12 mths   1-2 yrs      2-5 yrs   5-10 yrs        10-30 yrs    Adj R2   ∆Adj R2
                                                                                  Just Off-the-Run
  0-6 mths   -0.0013 -0.0004      -0.0006    -0.0003    -0.0002     0.0046*   -0.0021*** -0.0037***    -0.0069**     0.0043**    -0.0028      -0.0030       5.03% 0.35%
 6-12 mths   -0.0080* 0.0015      -0.0016     0.0008    -0.0004     0.0015    -0.0015** -0.0056***     -0.0047***   -0.0108***   -0.0054      -0.0034      15.28% 0.18%
   1-2 yrs   -0.0042  0.0000      -0.0031    -0.0004    -0.0046*   -0.0064*   -0.0061** -0.0052**      -0.0099***   -0.0177***   -0.0098**    -0.0045*     15.98% -0.02%
   2-5 yrs   -0.0070 -0.0001      -0.0059     0.0033     0.0011    -0.0002    -0.0042** -0.0040**      -0.0082**    -0.0132**    -0.0125***   -0.0072**    17.32% -0.05%
  5-10 yrs    0.0025 -0.0010      -0.0059    -0.0035    -0.0033    -0.0040    -0.0093** -0.0032        -0.0057      -0.0100***   -0.0146***   -0.0108**    15.69% 0.00%
 10-30 yrs   -0.0024  0.0037*     -0.0055     0.0021     0.0002    -0.0003    -0.0002       -0.0055*   -0.0033      -0.0139**    -0.0109***   -0.0113***   16.33% 0.26%
                                                                                    Off-the-Run
  0-6 mths -0.0142     -0.0101    -0.0011    -0.0001    -0.0052     0.0065    -0.0025*** -0.0059**     -0.0016      -0.0079      -0.0032      -0.0029**     5.44% 0.35%
 6-12 mths 0.0015      -0.0156    -0.0067     0.0004    -0.0076*    0.0068*   -0.0053** -0.0031***     -0.0061**    -0.0081**    -0.0017      -0.0069*     16.64% 0.19%
   1-2 yrs  0.0151*    -0.0060    -0.0064*    0.0011    -0.0053    -0.0017    -0.0017** -0.0038***     -0.0079***   -0.0134**    -0.0083      -0.0081*     16.37% 0.04%
   2-5 yrs -0.0276*    -0.0162*   -0.0031    -0.0092*   -0.0054     0.0096*   -0.0072*     -0.0024*    -0.0013**    -0.0136***   -0.0106*     -0.0096**    14.52% -0.01%
  5-10 yrs  0.0188*    -0.0289*   -0.0040     0.0007    -0.0084*    0.0032    -0.0014      -0.0090     -0.0076      -0.0114**    -0.0146**    -0.0104***   13.48% 0.07%
 10-30 yrs -0.0068      0.0030    -0.0005    -0.0026    -0.0031    -0.0127*   -0.0117      -0.0040     -0.0065      -0.0107**    -0.0183**    -0.0125**    12.71% 0.11%
                                 Table VII: Response of Yields to Contemporaneous and Lagged Net Orderflow
This table presents the results of regressing yields of six maturity categories at date t on contemporaneous net orderflow (purchases less sales) between dates t-1
and t and on lagged net orderflow between dates t-2 and t-1. The regressions are for non-announcement days and include intercepts and coefficients on the first
three yield factors at date t-1 that are not tabulated. The subpanels are for three different seasonedness categories – on-the-run, just off-the-run, and off-the-run
bonds. The adjusted R2 measure the incremental contribution of net orderflow relative to regressions that include only the lagged yield factors. ∆Adj R2 denotes
the change in the adjusted R2 relative to the results in Table IV. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively.

                            Contemporaneous Net Orderflow by Maturity                                       Lagged Net Orderflow by Maturity
 Maturities    0-6 mths    6-12 mths   1-2 yrs    2-5 yrs    5-10 yrs          10-30 yrs     0-6 mths 6-12 mths   1-2 yrs      2-5 yrs  5-10 yrs   10-30 yrs   Adj R2   ∆Adj R2
                                                                                              On-the-Run
 0-6 mths     -0.0065***   -0.0041**    -0.0054***   -0.0061***   -0.0007      -0.0013        0.0008 -0.0011       -0.0003    -0.0009     0.0009   -0.0019     10.06%    -0.55%
 6-12 mths    -0.0055***   -0.0102***   -0.0066***   -0.0097***   -0.0022      -0.0065***     0.0022 -0.0038*      -0.0030    -0.0015    -0.0008   -0.0029     15.68%     0.31%
   1-2 yrs    -0.0062***   -0.0072***   -0.0095***   -0.0110***   -0.0022**    -0.0047***     0.0027 -0.0009       -0.0029*   -0.0007    -0.0012   -0.0052 *   21.38%     0.23%
   2-5 yrs    -0.0068***   -0.0079***   -0.0102***   -0.0122***   -0.0029**    -0.0038**      0.0015 -0.0017       -0.0021    -0.0019     0.0003   -0.0045 *   25.18%     0.51%
  5-10 yrs    -0.0044**    -0.0097***   -0.0067***   -0.0154***   -0.0022***   -0.0043**      0.0011 -0.0057*      -0.0016    -0.0055*   -0.0017   -0.0020     19.85%     0.70%
 10-30 yrs    -0.0019      -0.0045**    -0.0064***   -0.0066***   -0.0043***   -0.0038**      0.0030* -0.0004      -0.0028    -0.0003    -0.0005   -0.0025 *   15.96%     0.38%
                                                                                            Just Off-the-Run
 0-6 mths     -0.0051***   -0.0058***   -0.0059***   -0.0018*      0.0025       0.0008        -0.0022 -0.0007       0.0018     0.0054     0.0017    0.0010*     5.36%     0.68%
 6-12 mths    -0.0044***   -0.0102***   -0.0068***   -0.0102***   -0.0029***   -0.0063***      0.0019 -0.0035      -0.0025    -0.0013    -0.0021   -0.0030*    15.78%     0.68%
  1-2 yrs     -0.0059***   -0.0080***   -0.0087***   -0.0175***   -0.0048***   -0.0066**       0.0076 -0.0036      -0.0024*   -0.0073     0.0007   -0.0046     17.16%     1.16%
  2-5 yrs     -0.0057***   -0.0086***   -0.0119***   -0.0116***   -0.0028**    -0.0037**      -0.0007 -0.0002*     -0.0041     0.0034    -0.0028   -0.0022     17.14%    -0.23%
  5-10 yrs    -0.0098***   -0.0090***   -0.0077***   -0.0095***   -0.0045**    -0.0032**       0.0028 -0.0094      -0.0014    -0.0022     0.0068   -0.0023     15.46%    -0.23%
 10-30 yrs     0.0011      -0.0051**    -0.0063*     -0.0071**    -0.0098*     -0.0039**       0.0000     0.0029   -0.0047    -0.0046    -0.0023   -0.0032     14.12%    -1.95%
                                                                                             Off-the-Run
 0-6 mths     -0.0051***   -0.0034**    -0.0034*     -0.0032*     -0.0009      -0.0010        0.0002 -0.0031       -0.0017     0.0036     0.0003   -0.0017      4.78%   -0.31%
 6-12 mths    -0.0044***   -0.0079***   -0.0070***   -0.0068***   -0.0030**    -0.0059       -0.0003 -0.0016       -0.0008     0.0005    -0.0010   -0.0027     16.94%     0.49%
   1-2 yrs    -0.0047***   -0.0081***   -0.0089***   -0.0151***   -0.0026**    -0.0034        0.0017 -0.0016       -0.0032    -0.0046    -0.0024   -0.0023     16.07%    -0.26%
   2-5 yrs    -0.0054***   -0.0066***   -0.0100***   -0.0129***   -0.0034***   -0.0053**      0.0030 -0.0009       -0.0005    -0.0010     0.0000   -0.0058     15.28%     0.75%
  5-10 yrs    -0.0072**    -0.0055***   -0.0101***   -0.0051**    -0.0045***   -0.0060**      0.0021 -0.0115       -0.0019     0.0042     0.0021   -0.0009     12.55%    -0.86%
 10-30 yrs     0.0100      -0.0035**    -0.0251***   -0.0028      -0.0021***   -0.0088**      0.0040     0.0046     0.0032    -0.0032    -0.0136   -0.0047     11.57%    -1.03%
             Table VIII: Response of Yields to Orderflow Conditional on Liquidity

This table presents the results of regressing yields of six maturity categories at date t on the first net orderflow
factor and on the product of the first net orderflow factor with a dummy variable for low liquidity between dates t-1
and t. The dummy variable equals one when liquidity is low and zero otherwise, where low liquidity is proxied by
the first factor in bid-ask spreads being above its median (in panel A) or the first factor in quoted depth being below
its median (in panel B). The regressions are for non-announcement days and include intercepts and coefficients on
the first three yield factors at date t-1 that are not tabulated. The subpanels are for three different seasonedness
categories – on-the-run, just off-the-run, and off-the-run bonds. The adjusted R2 measure the incremental
contribution of net orderflow relative to regressions that include only the lagged yield factors. ∆Adj R2 denotes the
change in the adjusted R2 relative to the results in Table IV. * (**) [***] represent significance levels of 10%, 5%
and 1%, respectively.

                                            1st Net Orderflow Factor
        Maturities              High Liquidity           Low Liquidity Increment            Adj R2         ∆Adj R2
                                                  Panel A: Liquidity Proxied by Bid-Ask Spreads
                                                                   On-the-Run
        0-6 months                  -0.0102 ***                   -0.0077 **               12.47%           2.26%
       6-12 months                  -0.0177 ***                   -0.0093 ***              16.93%           3.13%
         1-2 years                  -0.0189 ***                   -0.0107 ***              24.84%           5.05%
         2-5 years                  -0.0208 ***                   -0.0117 ***              26.34%           4.97%
        5-10 years                  -0.0209 ***                   -0.0130 ***              21.40%           3.59%
       10-30 years                  -0.0150 ***                   -0.0042 *                16.15%           2.73%
                                                                Just Off-the-Run
        0-6 months                  -0.0074 ***                  -0.0041 *                  4.65%           1.03%
       6-12 months                  -0.0186 ***                  -0.0118 ***               16.96%           2.18%
         1-2 years                  -0.0251 ***                  -0.0122 ***               17.34%           2.49%
         2-5 years                  -0.0217 ***                  -0.0131 ***               19.15%           2.81%
        5-10 years                  -0.0204 ***                  -0.0096 **                16.51%           2.05%
       10-30 years                  -0.0206 ***                  -0.0070 *                 16.37%           1.12%
                                                                   Off-the-Run
        0-6 months                  -0.0062 ***                   -0.0061 *                 4.79%           0.07%
       6-12 months                  -0.0149 ***                   -0.0087 **               16.96%           1.54%
         1-2 years                  -0.0226 ***                   -0.0117 ***              17.83%           1.92%
         2-5 years                  -0.0206 ***                   -0.0092 **               15.56%           1.68%
        5-10 years                  -0.0206 ***                   -0.0060 *                12.73%           0.95%
       10-30 years                  -0.0107 ***                   -0.0047                  10.12%           0.33%
                                                   Panel B: Liquidity Proxied by Quoted Depth
                                                                   On-the-Run
        0-6 months                  -0.0107 ***                   -0.0065                  10.24%           0.03%
       6-12 months                  -0.0218 ***                   -0.0071 **               14.75%           0.95%
         1-2 years                  -0.0223 ***                   -0.0080 **               20.93%           1.14%
         2-5 years                  -0.0224 ***                   -0.0083 **               22.54%           1.17%
        5-10 years                  -0.0155 ***                   -0.0072 **               18.84%           1.03%
       10-30 years                  -0.0181 ***                   -0.0029                  13.89%           0.47%
                                         Figure 1: Change in the Yield of the 5-year Treasury Note
The left plot shows yield changes for the 5-year Treasury note on the three days surrounding the ten most influential
macroeconomic announcements (civilian unemployment, consumer confidence, consumer prices, FOMC meetings,
housing starts, industrial production, NAPM report, non-farm payroll, producer prices, and retail sales). The right
plot shows the corresponding yield changes on all other days.

                           ∆ 5yr Yield Surrounding Announcement Days                                             ∆ 5yr Yield on All Other Days
                   0.4                                                                            0.4

                   0.3                                                                            0.3

                   0.2                                                                            0.2

                   0.1                                                                            0.1
   Basis Points




                                                                                  Basis Points
                    0                                                                              0

                  −0.1                                                                           −0.1

                  −0.2                                                                           −0.2

                  −0.3                                                                           −0.3

                  −0.4                                                                           −0.4
                    1992   1993   1994    1995   1996 1997   1998   1999   2000                    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996 1997   1998   1999   2000
                                                 Year                                                                          Year
                                         Figure 2: The Impact of Orderflow on the Yield Curve
The plots display the reaction of the yield curve to a one standard deviation net orderflow (purchases less sales) in
each of the six issuing maturities. The black bars represent the unconditional reaction. The gray and white bars are
for periods of high or low liquidity, respectively, where low liquidity is characterized as the bid-ask spread of the
maturity in which the orderflow imbalance occurs being above its median.
                                                        1/2yr Orderflow                                                          1yr Orderflow
                                        0.0                                                           0.0

                                     −0.5                                                      −0.5
                         Basis Points




                                                                                    Basis Points
                                     −1.0                                                      −1.0

                                     −1.5                                                      −1.5

                                     −2.0                                                      −2.0

                                     −2.5                                                      −2.5
                                              1/2   1      2       5      10   30                                 1/2    1         2       5      10    30
                                                           Maturity                                                                Maturity

                                                        2yr Orderflow                                                             5yr Orderflow
                                        0.0                                                                 0.0

                               −0.5                                                                     −0.5
                    Basis Points




                                                                                             Basis Points


                               −1.0                                                                     −1.0

                               −1.5                                                                     −1.5

                               −2.0                                                                     −2.0

                               −2.5                                                                     −2.5
                                              1/2   1     2       5       10   30                                  1/2       1       2       5     10    30
                                                          Maturity                                                                   Maturity

                                                        10yr Orderflow                                                           30yr Orderflow
                                        0.0                                                             0.0

                                   −0.5                                                            −0.5
                      Basis Points




                                                                                      Basis Points




                                   −1.0                                                            −1.0

                                   −1.5                                                            −1.5

                                   −2.0                                                            −2.0

                                   −2.5                                                            −2.5
                                              1/2   1      2       5      10   30                                 1/2    1          2       5     10    30
                                                           Maturity                                                                 Maturity
               Figure 3: The Impact of Common Fixed Income Trading Strategies on the Yield Curve
The plots display the reaction of the yield curve to a five commond fixed income strategies (ladder, five-year bullet,
five-year barbell, duration-neutral term spread, and duration-neutral and duration-weighted butterfly spread). Each
strategy involved an absolute (buy and sell) orderflow of $100M. The black bars represent the unconditional
reaction. The gray and white bars are for periods of high or low liquidity, respectively, where low liquidity is
characterized as the bid-ask spread of the maturity in which the orderflow imbalance occurs being above its median.
                               Ladder                                                                                  5yr Bullet                                                                      5yr Barbell
               0.2                                                                           0.2                                                                             0.2

               0.1                                                                           0.1                                                                             0.1

               0.0                                                                           0.0                                                                             0.0
Basis Points




                                                                              Basis Points




                                                                                                                                                              Basis Points
           −0.1                                                                          −0.1                                                                            −0.1

           −0.2                                                                          −0.2                                                                            −0.2

           −0.3                                                                          −0.3                                                                            −0.3

           −0.4                                                                          −0.4                                                                            −0.4
                     1/2   1   2       5                    10       30                            1/2        1        2       5                 10   30                           1/2        1         2       5    10   30
                               Maturity                                                                                Maturity                                                                         Maturity

                                                                          Term Spread                                                                     Butterly Spread
                                                0.2                                                                                      0.2

                                                0.1                                                                                      0.1

                                                0.0                                                                                      0.0
                                 Basis Points




                                                                                                                          Basis Points




                                            −0.1                                                                                     −0.1

                                            −0.2                                                                                     −0.2

                                            −0.3                                                                                     −0.3

                                            −0.4                                                                                     −0.4
                                                      1/2        1          2       5                    10       30                           1/2    1      2       5                   10       30
                                                                            Maturity                                                                         Maturity
