NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NEW SUMMARY MEASURE OF
THE EFFECTIVE TAX RATE ON INVESTMENT
Roger Gordon
Laura Kalambokidis
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 9535
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9534
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2003

Presented at the CES-ifo Conference on Measuring the Effective Taxation of Capital, Venice, July 15-16,
2002. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2003 by Roger Gordon, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

A New Summary Measure of the Effective Tax Rate on Investment
Roger Gordon, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 9535
February 2003
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
The empirical literature that seeks to measure the effective tax rate on new investment offers
a striking paradox. On the one hand, summary measures of the effective tax rate on new investment
are normally quite high. On the other hand, the amount of revenue actually collected from taxing
capital income is apparently very low.
In this paper we derive explicitly how revenue figures (under the existing system and under
a hypothetical R-base tax) can be used to construct an estimate of the true effective tax rate on
capital income, and how this measure and existing measures are affected by several factors,
including resale of assets (churning), risk, pure profits, debt finance and arbitrage, and choice of
organizational form.We conclude that our new methodology provides a very useful, but not fail-safe,
approach for measuring the effective tax rate on new investment. It is much more robust than the
standard measures, such as King-Fullerton marginal effective tax rates, to many commonly omitted
complications in the tax law.
In trying to reconcile the high conventional measures of the effective tax rate with the low
revenue collected, we conclude that the effective tax rate does seem to be much lower than existing
measures suggest.
Roger Gordon
Department of Economics 0508
9500 Gilman Drive
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508

Joel Slemrod
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220

Laura Kalambokidis
Department of Applied Economics
Room 231 Classroom Office Building
1994 Buford Avenue
University of Minnesota
St. Paul, MN 55108-1995

A New Summary Measure of the Effective Tax Rate on Investment

Objectives
Taxes on investment income have become high-profile candidates for
reduction or repeal, given their presumed negative effects on investment and
growth. Given this policy focus, economists have put significant effort toward
learning how tax systems in fact affect the incentive to invest, typically by
measuring the effective tax rate on new investment.
The empirical literature that seeks to measure the effective tax rate on new
investment offers a striking paradox. On the one hand, summary measures of the
effective tax rate on new investment are normally quite high.1 On the other hand,
the amount of revenue actually collected is apparently very low. For example,
Gordon and Slemrod (1988) (hereafter GS) estimated that in 1983 the U.S. tax
system collected no revenue from taxing capital income, while Gordon,
Kalambokidis, and Slemrod (2001) (hereafter GKS) estimated that in 1995, the
U.S. tax system collected approximately $18 billion in revenue from corporate
capital income, or just 4% of total corporate profits (equal to $441.5 billion in
1995 according to the Economic Report of the President (1999)).2 If the taxation
of capital income in fact generates little or no revenue while imposing large
distortions to investment incentives, then this tax structure is hard to defend.

On the other hand, the low revenue figures for existing taxes on capital
income could be consistent with a view that the U.S. tax system does not
discourage investment as severely as has been thought. The low revenue could
reflect an effective tax rate on new capital investment that is much lower than has
conventionally been reported in the past. This would be the case if the low
revenue figures provide more revealing information about the effective tax rate
because they reflect complications in the tax law ignored in standard estimates of
this effective tax rate. However, revenue figures are also affected by things that
do not matter for investment incentives, such as the income generated by
inframarginal decisions, so it is not clear a priori how informative revenue
collections are for this purpose.
While GS (1988) and GKS (2001) estimated the revenue collected from U.S.
capital income taxes, they did not convert those estimates into an effective tax rate
measure. Our first objective in this paper is to derive explicitly how these
revenue figures can be used to estimate the effective tax rate on new investment.
We start with the simplest possible setting in section 1, with just a corporate
tax and only equity finance. In this setting, we define an effective tax rate on new
investment using the Hall and Jorgenson (1967) approach, as later refined by
King and Fullerton (1984) (hereafter KF). In this simple setting, the resulting
effective tax rate also equals one derived using the Feldstein and Summers (1979)
(hereafter FS) approach that calculates an effective tax rate equal to the ratio of

2

corporate tax payments (plus any personal taxes on corporate dividend and
interest payments) to corporate income. Next, we show how the estimates of the
revenue collected from taxing capital income, using the procedures in GKS, can
be used to measure this same effective tax rate.
In section 2, we then assess all three measures when we move beyond this
initial model of investment incentives. Among the complications we consider
are: resale of assets (churning), risk, pure profits, debt finance, and choice of
organizational form. Except in the case of choice of organizational form, where
it would overestimate the effective tax rate, the GKS measure is the only one that
consistently equals the desired value. That it automatically captures the effects of
such complications is an important strength of this approach to measuring the
effective tax rate. In the presence of these complications, the FS and KF
measures as used in practice consistently overestimate the desired value for the
effective tax rate, providing some help in reconciling the past evidence.
In section 3, we explore some further complications that are not dealt with
appropriately by the GKS measure. The first is debt arbitrage, whereby investors
in high tax brackets borrow from those in low tax brackets to buy more lightly
taxed equity. The data in GS (1988) suggested that such debt arbitrage is a
dominant reason why the revenue from existing taxes on capital income in the
United States has been so low. With this complication introduced, we find that

3

the GKS measure now underestimates the effective tax rate, while the KF and the
FS measures (as used in practice) both overestimate it.
We conclude in section 4 that the GKS approach provides a very useful but
not fail-safe approach for measuring the effective tax rate on new investment.
This measure proves to be much more robust than the KF or the FS measures to
many commonly omitted complications in the tax law. Like all backward looking
measures of effective tax rates, it has one blind spot. Because it relies on ex post
data on tax payments, it cannot be used to assess the effects of proposed changes
in the existing law, and will not accurately reflect a recently changed law.
Overall, our exploration of alternative measures of the effective tax rate on new
investment leads us to conclude that, in trying to reconcile the high conventional
measures of effective tax rates with the low revenue collected, that the actual
effective tax rate on new investment does seem to be much lower than existing
measures suggest, due to various omitted complications.

1. Effective Tax Rate Measures: Base Case
In this section we explore alternative means of measuring the effective tax rate
on new investment in the simplest possible setting: that used in the seminal work
by Hall and Jorgenson (1967). This model, based on the neoclassical theory of
optimal asset accumulation, assumes perfect information, perfect competition,
zero excess profits on the marginal investment, an unchanging tax law, and no

4

risk. It also ignores any personal taxes on corporate-source income, abstracts
from the use of debt finance, and assumes that the firm has sufficient profits to
use all of the allowed credits and deductions in the earliest possible year.
Hall and Jorgenson argue that a profit-maximizing firm will purchase a new
capital asset as long as the present discounted value of the stream of returns
generated by the asset exceeds the cost of acquiring the asset. Such a firm will
invest until the present discounted value of the returns on a marginal project just
equals the acquisition cost. Normalizing the pre-tax price of the capital good to
be one, we can write the single-period-equivalent maximization problem as
Max f(K) –(r+d)K.
Here r is the discount rate and d is the rate of depreciation of the capital goods,
assumed to be exponential at rate d. The solution to this problem is characterized
by the following condition for the marginal investment:

(1)

f’(K)-d = r.

Here f’-d is the annual net return to one unit of capital. In equilibrium, it exactly
equals the marginal rate of return to savings for the firm’s shareholders, r.
Now introduce a corporation tax. The revenue generated by the investment is
taxed at the corporate tax rate, denoted u. In addition, purchasing a capital asset
entitles the owner to a stream of depreciation deductions (we ignore any

5

investment tax credits). It is useful to think of the present discounted value of the
tax savings generated by the depreciation deductions as a reduction in the
acquisition cost of the asset. Let z be the present value of depreciation deductions
per dollar of acquisition cost, so that uz is the present value of the tax savings
resulting from the deductions allowed on one dollar of new investment. As a
result, only (1-uz) dollars need to be raised from investors to finance a dollar of
new investment. Similarly, only d(1-uz) dollars need to be raised in each future
period to cover replacement expenditures. With these adjustments, equation (1)
becomes
(1’)

f ′( K ) =

( r + d )(1 − uz ) ,
(1 − u )

which can be rewritten as
(2)

f '− d = r +

u (r + d )(1 − z )
.
1− u

Here, the second term captures the extent of any tax distortion, measuring the
difference between the net return to capital and the investors’ marginal rate of
return to savings. It will be convenient for future purposes to denote the
numerator of this term by ∆≡u(r+d)(1-z). One can think of ∆ as measuring the
extra taxes due as a result of using depreciation rather than expensing, measured
as a constant figure in each year. To pay these extra taxes while still yielding a

6

return of r to investors, the firm needs to earn an extra ∆ /(1 − u ) before corporate
taxes.

We define the “effective tax rate,” m, as that tax rate on net corporate
income, f’-d, that leads to the same equilibrium value of f’, given r, as arises
under the actual tax law. By definition, then, m satisfies the following equation:
( f '− d )(1 − m) = r ,

(3)

where the equilibrium f’ is characterized by equation (2). We then find, using
equations (2) and (3), that
(3’)

m=

∆
.
(1 − u )r + ∆

Two special cases are important. The first is expensing, under which all
investment expenditures are deductible from taxable income when incurred. In
this case z equals one, so that m equals zero regardless of the value of u or d. The
other case of interest is the pure income tax, where depreciation allowances
exactly mirror the decline in value of the asset—its “economic” depreciation.
Then z equals d/(r+d). If d/(r+d) is substituted for z in expression (2), then m =
u.

1.1 King-Fullerton

Throughout the rest of the paper, we focus on the updated version of the Hall
and Jorgenson (1967) model developed by King and Fullerton (1984). Given our

7

initial assumptions, their approach is equivalent to that of Hall and Jorgenson,
yielding the appropriate measure of the effective tax rate on new investment in
this context.
In general, King and Fullerton extended Hall and Jorgenson’s cost of capital
approach by taking into account personal taxes on corporate income and the range
of forms of corporate finance. To do so, they estimate a marginal effective tax
rate on new investment with respect to one kind of capital asset, and one kind of
financing, at a time. This effective tax rate depends on the source of financing
and, consequently, on the tax characteristics of the recipient of the returns. Their
focus was on the resulting variation in the effective tax rate by type of investment,
though in addition they take a weighted average of these effective tax rates to
provide a measure of the overall effective tax rate on investment.
To obtain this weighted average effective tax rate, King-Fullerton assumed
that new investment is distributed among different asset types, industries, sources
of finance, and ownership characteristics in the same proportions as the current
capital stock. Further assumptions arise from the inability to trace specific assets
through to their ultimate owners. Specifically, the King-Fullerton study assumes
that “all assets in a particular industry are financed in the same way, that all
owners hold debt from the different industries in the same proportions, and that all
owners hold equity from the different industries in the same proportions.”3 These
aspects become relevant as we add complications below to the analysis.

8

1.2 Average tax rate

A number of studies have used observed average tax rates as an
approximation of the effective marginal tax rate. As an example of this approach,
Feldstein and Summers (1979) calculate an average effective tax rate equal to
corporate taxes paid, plus personal taxes due on corporate dividend and interest
payments, as a proportion of capital income, measured using accounting data.
While the average tax rates are relatively easy to calculate, there are numerous
reasons why the average rates would be poor proxies for marginal effective rates
on new investment. (Fullerton (1984) lists eleven of these reasons.4) For
example, the average effective tax rate is backward-looking: it depends on
investments made by the firm over many previous periods. If the tax law has
changed over time, prospective investments will face a different regime than past
investments. In this case, the backward-looking measure will incorrectly
characterize the impact of taxes on future investments. As another example, a
firm may have little tax liability in a year when it earns high income, because
earlier tax losses may have been carried forward. The result will be an average
tax rate that may understate the impact of taxes on the incentive to undertake a
new investment.
In the simple setting used in this section, however, the average tax rate exactly
equals m under specific conditions. In particular, the taxes paid in some year t
equal

9

Tt = u[ f t ( K t ) − ∫

∞

s =0

d s ,t − s I t − s ds ] ,

where ds,t-s equals the depreciation deductions allowed for s year old capital
originally purchased in year t-s, based on the tax law in force in year t-s. Capital
purchased in year t-s is denoted by It-s. The estimate for the effective average tax
rate is then
mFS =

Tt
,
( ft ( K t ) − dK t )

or tax liability divided by corporate income net of true depreciation.
This expression does equal the marginal tax rate, m, if: 1) the tax law remains
fixed over time, 2) real investment has been growing at rate r, and 3) there are no
business cycle effects, so that ft does not in fact vary with t. All of these pertain
to the history of the tax system and investment. A fourth assumption is that there
is constant returns to scale, so that f(K)=Kf’. From now on, for the most part we
will assume that these assumptions do hold, and explore other advantages and
disadvantages of using the average tax rate and other measures as an
approximation of m . We return to the impact of relaxing some of these
assumptions later.

1.3 GKS Tax Rate

In two earlier papers (GS (1988) and GKS (2001)), we estimated the impact
on U.S. tax revenue from shifting from the current law to an R-base for both the

10

corporate and the personal income tax, a tax base that excludes financial income,
disallows interest deductions, and replaces depreciation, amortization, and
depletion deductions with expensing for new investment.5 The difference
between how much is raised under the actual tax system and the amount of
revenue a hypothetical R-base tax (with the same tax rates) would raise provides
an estimate of the net tax revenue collected from capital income under the current
regime.
GS found that under a simulated R-base tax in 1983, the tax liability of nonfinancial corporations would increase by $22.6 billion, and individual tax liability
would fall by $15.2 billion. On net, therefore, GS estimated that the existing
income taxes collected $7.4 billion less in tax revenue that an R-base would have,
even though an R-base tax imposes no distortion to savings or investment
decisions. Since this figure is a small fraction of total tax revenue, the implication
of this result is that, in 1983, the U.S. tax system imposed little or no burden on
the return to capital. The question we focus on is why these revenue figures can
be so low, in spite of the high standard estimates of the effective tax rate on new
investment.
GKS repeated this experiment using data from 1995 and found a somewhat
different result. In 1995, switching to an R-base tax would have reduced
corporate tax liability by $18.0 billion and individual tax liability by $90.1 billion,
for a net revenue loss of $108.1 billion.6 Two important reasons for the difference

11

in results were the drop in nominal interest rates from 1983 to 1995, reducing the
tax savings from arbitrage through the use of debt, and the much higher
investment rate in 1995 compared with 1983. If 1995 had been at a more typical
point in the business cycle, GKS estimated that the revenue loss from shifting to
an R-base tax would have been $94.9 billion.
In neither paper were the revenue results converted into an effective tax rate
summary measure. How would we do so, at least in this simple setting?
Let TC be the tax collected under the existing tax rules. Let TR be the tax that
would be collected under an R-based tax, holding both the return to capital and
the capital stock at the existing levels, rather than at the values they would have in
the equilibrium with an R-base tax. GKS focused on measuring the taxes
collected under the existing law relative to an R-base tax that does not distort
capital investments: TC-TR. This difference equals the net taxes collected on
income/deductions from financial assets (dividends, interest, and capital gains)
plus the effects on tax revenue from use of depreciation and amortization rather
than expensing for new investment.
In general, and as calculated in GS (1988) and GKS (2001), this measure
depends on the relative tax treatments of all capital, corporate and non-corporate,
real and financial, under existing law compared with under an R-based tax.
However, for purposes of this discussion, consider the calculation of this measure

12

in an economy consisting of just a corporate sector with no personal taxes. This
expression in any given year then equals:
TCt − TRt = u ( I t − ∫

∞

s =0

d s ,t − s I t − s ds )

Assume as before 1) an unchanging tax law and 2) real investment growing at
rate r.7 Then this expression simplifies to u(r+d)(1- z)K = ∆K, where ∆ is defined
as earlier.
To measure m, we propose the following definition:
mGKS ≡

(4)

(TCt − TRt ) / K
.
(1 − u )r + (TCt − TRt ) / K

In practice, as in GS(1988) and GKS(2001), (TCt − TRt ) / K can be calculated
using actual U.S. tax return data, and the estimated counterfactual amount of
revenue that would be collected under an R-base tax.
Note a few things about mGKS . First, if the current tax system were equivalent
to an R-base tax, so that z is equal to one, TC would equal TR, so that mGKS=0
regardless of the value of u or r. Second, if TC was a pure income tax, so that
z=d/(r+d), m = mGKS = u .
Therefore, under the above assumptions, all three tax rates correctly measure
the disincentive to invest due to taxes. All but the King-Fullerton measure require
that the tax law has been unchanging in the past and that investment had been
growing at a rate equal to r. For example, GKS recalculated TR as if investment

13

had been at an average, rather than a high-growth, level. That paper did not
attempt to correct for changes in the tax law in the past.8 The FS measure in
addition requires no business-cycle effects: Feldstein and Summers (1979) did
attempt to control for business cycle effects in making use of their measure of the
average tax rate.

2. Omitted complications

How do these three proposed measures of the effective tax rate compare with
the m in more complicated settings? We examine several possible complications.

2.1 Churning

In principle, the approach taken by Hall and Jorgenson, or later by King and
Fullerton, can deal appropriately with any additional complications as long as a
careful effort is made to incorporate these additional complications into the
theoretical model. Since the tax law is very complicated and since the range of
possible responses is also complicated, however, it is easy for tax economists to
overlook issues that in practice turn out to be important – any given study cannot
feasibly take account of all the detailed provisions in the law, and all the ways
that firms and individuals may respond to the tax law.
The FS and GKS measures, however, can potentially take these complications
into account automatically, since these complications and any behavioral

14

responses to them will affect the amount of revenue collected by existing taxes.
Whether the revenue effects in fact measure well the implications of any given
complication in the law for marginal investment incentives, however, depends in
general on the nature of the specific complication at issue.
One example of particular importance in the U.S. during the early 1980’s was
“churning.” Churning refers to the sale of existing real capital by one firm to
another firm. This sale generates taxable capital gains, which by itself
discourages such a sale. However, the firm acquiring the capital can set the tax
basis for the capital back up to its current market value, generating higher
depreciation deductions in the future than the firm selling the asset would have
been eligible for. Churning would be profitable, at least based on tax
considerations, if the value of the extra depreciation deductions more than offsets
the extra capital gains taxes.
This was often the case in the U.S. prior to the 1986 tax reform. Yet this type
of behavioral response was ignored when many economists first tried to assess the
effects of the 1981-3 tax reforms. At the time, many studies9 argued that
structures faced a particularly high effective tax rate. Yet in fact, due to churning,
structures were heavily subsidized under the tax law.10 What would the value of
m be, with churning? How are the three alternative measures affected, assuming
that churning exists but that economists are not yet aware of its importance?

15

Start with m. Consider the simple case in which all capital is churned every c
years. Each time capital is churned there are transactions costs equal to κ percent
of the current market value of the capital; c is assumed to be the optimal rate of
churning given κ . The present value of depreciation deductions on the initial
∞

investment then equals zc= ∑ e − dcj ∫ d s e − r ( s + cj ) ds , while the present value of
j =0

c

0

capital gains tax liabilities, denoted by g, equals g =
∞

τg ∑e
j =0

 − dc − ∫0 d s ds  − dc ( j −1)
, where τg denotes the capital gains tax rate. Let
e −e
e


c

− rcj

∞

uz * = uzc − g. In addition, let κ * ≡ (r + d )∑ κ e − dcj measure the constant rate of
j =1

expenditure equivalent to the implied transactions costs. The first-order condition

u (r + d )(1 − z * )
. Here, as before,
for new investment now equals f '− κ − d = r +
1− u
*

the last term measures the difference between the net real return to new
investment and the marginal rate of return to savings.
In practice, the King-Fullerton measure ignored churning, assuming, as did
Hall and Jorgenson, that firms invest permanently, so it mistakenly used z to
calculate mKF. To the extent to which z*>z, because of accelerated depreciation
allowances, the measure will be in error.
What about the average tax rate measure? Under the above assumptions, if
calculated correctly this measure would equal

16

mFS =

u[ f − (r + d ) z * K ]
.
f − (d + κ * ) K

Under the same assumptions as before, it is easy to show that this measure equals

m. Note, however, that the extra capital-gains taxes being incurred through
churning would need to be taken into account when calculating the correct
average tax rate. Instead, the standard approach has been to use an effective tax
rate equal to u+e(1-u). Here, e represents the effective personal tax rate on
dividends and capital gains, e.g. e=vτd+τg(1-v), where v is the dividend payout
rate, τd is the effective personal tax rate on dividends, and τg is the effective
capital gains tax rate, e.g., τg=.25τd. When churning becomes profitable, reported
depreciation deductions will jump, but the extra capital gains taxes would easily
be overlooked.11 The average tax rate measure will then underestimate m.
What about the GKS measure? Under the behavior described above, the
observed ∆ would equal u ( I − (r + d ) z * K ) = u (r + d )(1 − z * ) K . We then find that

mGKS=m. Therefore the GKS measure does automatically capture the effects of
churning on investment incentives, even if economists are not aware of its
importance. This is an illustration of an advantage of a measure based on actual
tax collections.

17

2.2 Risk

The above derivations have ignored the presence of risk. Yet corporate
investments are certainly risky, and the risk premia can be very large relative to
the required return on a risk-free investment. To what degree is the value of m,
and each of the three methods for measuring m, affected by the presence of risk?
We address this question by considering how the previous results change if
the marginal return to new investments, f% ' , is now random.12 Under the tax

structure described above, we would now find in equilibrium that
(1 − u ) f% ' = (r + d )(1 − uz ) + (1 − u )( ρ + ε% ) ,
where the first term on the right-hand side equals the required return, net of
corporate taxes, from a risk-free investment, ρ represents the risk premium that
shareholders would require to hold the lottery f% ' ,13 while ε% is the random return.
By definition, then, the certainty-equivalent value of the lottery f% ' equals
'
f '− ρ ≡ f CE
, implying that

'
fCE
−d = r+

∆
.
1− u

To measure the effective tax rate in this setting, we want to compare the social
return on this investment with the social opportunity cost, r. If risk has been
allocated efficiently in the economy, then the risk premium on any random taxes
equals the risk premium required by shareholders. The certainty-equivalent value

18

'
derived based on
of f% ' , now from a social perspective, equals the same value fCE

shareholder preferences. The effective tax rate, defined implicitly by the equation
'
( f CE
− d )(1 − m) = r is then the same as we found without risk.

The King-Fullerton measure for this tax rate is also unaffected, as is the GKS
measure. However, the average tax rate now equals

(5)

mFS

∞
u  fCE − ∫ d s ,t − s I t − s ds + ρ K 

s =0
 .
= 
f CE − dK + ρ K

The average tax rate no longer equals m, but instead is biased towards the
statutory tax rate, u. Intuitively, this measure misinterprets the tax revenue
collected on the risk premium as a disincentive to invest rather than as a fair
premium for the reduction in risk caused by the tax levy. The larger is the risk
premium, the larger is the bias.

2.3 Pure Profits

To this point, we have assumed that each firm has constant returns to scale.
What if instead firms have a concave production function, thus earning profits on
inframarginal investments in equilibrium? Would this affect the marginal
effective tax rate, m? Here, the answer is an easy “no:” marginal incentives are
unaffected by the rate of return earned on inframarginal projects. For the same
reason, mKF is unaffected by having a concave production function. Nothing in

19

the expression for mGKS is affected either. Because the revenue collected on pure
profits under the existing system would also be collected by an R-base tax with
the same rate structure, the presence of pure profits has no effect on the
calculation of TCt-TRt above. The mGKS measure is based on the revenues
collected over and above the R-base tax. This is an essential and critical
advantage of the GKS measure of m: by construction, it depends only on those
revenues that arise from marginal investments, and ignores those revenues that
arise from inframarginal investments.
In contrast, the average tax rate is affected by the presence of pure profits. In
particular, recall that our earlier derivation made use of the assumption that f=f’K,
an assumption that is valid only if the production function has constant returns to
scale. Assume instead that f = f ' K + π , where π represents the profits earned
on inframarginal investments. Then the expression for the average tax rate equals

(6)

mFS

∞
u  f ′K + π − ∫ d s ,t − s I t − s ds 

s =0

= 
f ′K + π − dK

As with risk, we find that the average tax rate is biased towards the statutory
rate, u, and the bias increases with the extent of the profits on inframarginal
investment. As it does in the presence of risk, the mFS measure misinterprets the
revenue collected from profits on inframarginal investment as evidence of a
disincentive to marginal investments.

20

At this point it is worth commenting briefly on another tax rate measure
recently proposed by Devereux and Griffith (1998). They expand the effective
tax rate concept by introducing the corporate effective average tax rate, which
explicitly allows for the presence of economic rents. This tax rate is defined as
the difference between the pre- and post-tax economic rent scaled by the net
present value of the pre-tax income stream. This measure of the tax rate equals
mFS under the same assumptions needed above to reconcile mFS and m in a setting

without pure profits.
While this expression does not provide an appropriate measure of the effective
tax rate on marginal investments, being biased towards the statutory tax rate u,
Devereux and Griffith argue that their tax rate measure may be of value in judging
the effects of the tax law on a firm’s choice between mutually exclusive
investment projects that are expected to generate positive economic rents before
tax. If true, the mFS measure would be useful in the same context.

2.4 Debt Finance

So far, we have assumed that corporate investments are entirely financed with
equity. King and Fullerton (1984) devote considerable attention to the
implications of debt finance for the incentive to invest. In their calculation of the
marginal effective tax rate, they assume that: 1) there are no real costs resulting
from using debt versus equity finance, but that firms can finance at most a

21

fraction b* of their investments with debt, and 2) interest payments are tax
deductible under the corporate tax, but interest income is taxable at some tax rate

τ b under the personal income tax.
To investigate the effects of debt finance on alternative measures of the
effective tax rate, we follow these assumptions used by King and Fullerton.
Furthermore, we assume for simplicity that the law allows tax depreciation
allowances that are equal to economic depreciation, at rate d, and we ignore
personal taxes on equity income as well as risk.
When a firm undertakes an additional dollar of investment, assume that it
raises b dollars from debt and (1 − b) dollars from equity. The opportunity cost
equity investors face equals the return they could earn on bonds instead, so equals
r(1-τb) where τb equals their personal tax rate on interest income from corporate

bonds. Wealth owners are then indifferent between holding equity and debt if:
(1 − u )[ f '− rb − d ] = (1 − b)r (1 − τ b ) ,

(7)

implying in equilibrium that
(8)

f '− d =

r (1 − τ b )(1 − b) + rb(1 − u )
∆
= r (1 − τ b ) + b ,
1− u
1− u

where ∆ b = ur (1 − τ b ) − br (u − τ b ) .14 As long as u>τb, the cost of funds is
minimized if b is as large as possible, implying that firms use as much debt
finance as possible, so that b=b*.15 In other words, the use of debt rather than
equity finance generates an effective tax rate of τb rather than u, or a tax arbitrage

22

gain of u-τb. In this case the tax arbitrage arises because of the differential tax
treatment of two otherwise identical ways to raise funds. This arbitrage gain is
limited to b* times the amount of capital, so it amounts to an effective marginal
subsidy to investment.
In order to summarize these complicated tax incentives in an “effective” tax
rate m, we continue to use the following modified identity:
(1 − m)( f '− d ) = r (1 − τ b ),

(9)

where r(1-τb) represents the marginal rate of return to saving. From equations (8)
and (9), we find that
(10)

m=

∆b
∆b
=
.
(1 − u )( f '− d ) (1 − u )r (1 − τ b ) + ∆ b

Tax distortions now arise from both personal and corporate taxes. For
example, if b*=1, then no corporate taxes are paid. However, we still find, after a
simple derivation, that m = τb, due to the taxes still paid under the personal tax on
the interest received by investors.
Under the above assumptions, the King-Fullerton approach calculates the
correct effective tax rate, m. How does the average tax rate compare? To answer
this question, note that total (corporate plus individual) taxes paid on the return to
corporate investment equal u(f-dK-brK)+ τ b brK. If we divide by the pretax return
to corporate capital, f-dK, and simplify, we find that

23

mFS =

∆b
,
(1 − u )( f '− d )

so mFS = m. The average tax rate calculation generates the correct effective tax
rate.
Under the GKS approach, we now find that TCt − TRt = u(I-dK-rbK)+τbrbK.
Given this expression, the value for mGKS in equation (4) equals m if and only if
I=(r(1-τb)+d)K, that is, when the growth rate in real investment equals the

investors’ discount rate, r(1-τb).16
How do the results change if instead of a constraint limiting the debt/capital
ratio, the firm faces some real agency costs from having more debt that limit the
size of the optimal debt/capital ratio? Assume, for example, that these agency
costs as a function of the debt-capital ratio equal a(b).17 Now optimal investment
is characterized by
(7a)

(1 − u )[ f ′ − rb − a(b) − d ] = (1 − b)r (1 − τ b ) ,

so that
(8a)

f '− a(b) − d = r (1 − τ b ) +

∆
.
1− u

The only substantive change from the situation without real costs of debt
when measuring the effective tax rate on new investment is that there is an
internal optimum for b. None of the three measures for the effective tax rate are
affected by this modification.

24

Note, however, that there are additional efficiency costs, a(b), arising from the
tax distortion favoring use of debt that are not reflected in any of these effective
tax rate measures that focus strictly on investment incentives. A tax structure that
generates the same effective tax disincentive, ∆ , without distorting the use of
debt finance, instead allowing for more generous depreciation allowances, could
in principle avoid this extra efficiency cost, a(b).

2.5 Choice of Organizational Form

Another complication that is normally ignored when calculating effective tax
rates is the choice of organizational form. Under U.S. tax rules, when firms have
losses, they generally would prefer to face high tax rates in order to generate
larger tax savings, while they would prefer low tax rates when they have profits.
If some individuals face personal tax rates above the corporate tax rate,18 then a
firm can structure any capital currently generating losses so that it is part of a
subchapter S corporation,19 owned by investors in high tax brackets. When the
capital generates profits, the firm can shift to C-corporation status, and then be
taxed at the corporate tax rate.
How does this choice affect m, and how does it affect each of the three
measures of this tax rate? Consider the following simple case. Assume that
depreciation deductions are front loaded, so that projects generate tax losses
during their first s years, and taxable profits thereafter. The firm then chooses to

25

be a pass-through entity (i.e., non-corporate or an S corporation) owned by
individuals facing a tax rate above the corporate rate while it has losses, and to be
a traditional C corporation thereafter. The project is just profitable if
(11)

∫

∞

0

∞

f 'e − ( r + d )t dt − ∫ u (t )( f ' e − dt − dt )e − rt dt = 1 ,
0

where u (t ) represents the statutory marginal tax rate the firm faces in year t of the
project. For simplicity we assume that u(t) equals the relevant non-corporate tax
rate, τ, during the first s years of the project and the corporate rate, u, thereafter.
∞

Let u * = (r + d ) ∫ u (t )e − ( r + d )t dt represent the weighted average tax rate faced by
0

∞

the firm, and let z * = ∫ dt u (t )e − rt dt / u* . Then, equation (11) implies that
0

(12)

f '− d = r +

u* (r + d )(1 − z * )
1 − u*

The expression for m thus remains unchanged, except that u * and z* replace u and
z.

Applications of the King-Fullerton measure of the effective tax rate have not
to date taken into account a firm’s ability to choose a tax-efficient organizational
form. This measure will therefore be in error to the extent that u * and z* differ
from u and z. Because these shifts in organizational form are done because they
save on taxes, mKF will be biased upwards.
Similarly, in past work average tax rate measures have always focused on
corporate tax payments and, perhaps, personal taxes due on this income when it is

26

paid out as dividends or realized in the form of capital gains. Personal taxes
saved at an earlier non-corporate stage of the business and shifting of income
between the personal and corporate bases at a point in time have been ignored.
Since the measure thus ignores the firm’s tax savings during its years not subject
to the corporation income tax, it also overestimates the effective tax rate.
What about the GKS tax measure? First note that, at a point in time, the firms
aged s or less are non-corporate (technically, they are pass-through entities), and
those aged s or more are corporate. Under an R-base, investment by noncorporate firms would be expensed at rate τ, investment by corporate firms (of
capital purchased from non-corporate firms) would be expensed at rate u, while
the revenue generated from capital sold by a non-corporate firm would be taxed at
rate τ. Under the above assumptions, along with those used earlier, TCt − TRt
equals
(13)

∞

τ I + (u − τ ) Ie− ( r + d ) s − ∫ u (t )dt Ie− rt dt
0

Here, the first term reflects the cost of expensing for current investment by
non-corporate firms. The second term reflects the tax implications under an Rbase tax of a sale of capital by the original non-corporate firm and its purchase by
a corporate firm, while the third term measures the tax cost of depreciation
deductions under current law, assuming that investment has been growing at rate r

27

over time. This expression then equals u * (r + d )(1 − z * ) K , following the same
derivation as before.
The resulting measure for the tax rate then equals

(TCt − TRt )

(TC − TR + r (1 − u ) K )
*

t

t

=

∆*
,
∆ * + r (1 − u *)

where ∆ * = u*(r+d)(1-z*). In principle, therefore, the GKS approach provides
the correct measure of the effective tax rate in this setting.
If the researcher were not aware of these changes in organizational form, as
we’ve presumed in describing the other measures, however, then the second term
in expression (13) would likely be ignored.20 In addition, u rather than u * would
presumably be used in the denominator, resulting in an overestimate of m.21

3. Other Complications, Part 2

So far, we have compared the three approaches for measuring the effective tax
rate with a baseline measure in a variety of settings. In principle, the KingFullerton approach can deal appropriately with any complication, assuming that
the model is extended to address it. However, in practice, it is infeasible to
address more than a small number of issues. In particular, applications to date
have ignored churning and the choice of organizational form, in each case
resulting in an overestimate of the effective tax rate.

28

One advantage of the other two measures is that they have the potential to
capture the effects of any and all complications without the researcher having
specific knowledge of these complications, since the data on tax payments will
automatically reflect these complications. This was to some degree true for the
Feldstein-Summers measure with respect to churning. However, the FS measure
does not deal appropriately with risk, pure profits, or the choice of organizational
form, in each case resulting in a substantial overestimate of the investment
disincentive due to taxes.
The GKS measure does, however, handle all of these complications well.
Even without explicit knowledge of the researcher, it would handle appropriately
all but the choice of organizational form, where it would overestimate the
investment disincentive.
The results so far (summarized in Table 1) thus suggest that the low tax
revenue observed in GS (1988) and in GKS (2001) indeed implies that the actual
effective tax rate is low, and therefore there is little or no resulting distortion to
investment incentives. In fact, due to the implications of the choice of
organizational form, the revenue collected and the resulting distortion may have
both been overestimated. The apparent inconsistency between the high effective
tax rates reported in the past literature and the low revenue yield is then explained
simply by errors in the calculations of the effective tax rate in the previous
literature.

29

However, this conclusion is not robust. In this section, we consider other
complications that are not dealt with appropriately under the GKS measure, thus
leading us to a more ambiguous set of conclusions. To begin with, we consider
the effects of portfolio arbitrage by individual investors, in particular the tendency
of investors in high tax brackets to borrow from those in low tax brackets, saving
substantially on the deduction of the interest payments and then investing the
funds in more lightly-taxed assets. GS (1988) found that this form of debt
arbitrage was responsible for a substantial loss of tax revenue, and was an
important reason why in 1983 existing U.S. taxes on capital income collected
little or no revenue.

3.1 Debt Arbitrage

In section 2.4, we considered the implications of corporate borrowing, but in a
setting in which all investors faced the same personal tax rate, τ. Consider what
happens in a more general setting in which investor i faces a personal tax rate of

τi,, with rates varying by investor. Each individual can now invest in either bonds
or equity. If we continue with the simplifying assumption used by King and
Fullerton that there is no risk, for each individual one or the other asset will offer
a higher after-tax rate of return. In the absence of any restrictions on short
holdings and negative tax liabilities, each individual would want to have an
unlimited short position in the lower-yielding asset and an unlimited long position

30

in the higher-yielding asset. Thus, some further consideration must be added to
the analysis to explain the existence of equilibrium portfolios. In what follows,
we assume that individuals can buy positive amounts of either asset without
restriction, but can borrow22 only up to some proportion β of their personal
savings; that is, if individual i has savings of Si, then she can borrow at most
Bi = β Si .23 Let e represent the rate of return on equity, net of any corporate
taxes. Then individual i will borrow to buy equity only if e > r (1 − τ i ) -- if she
borrows, she will borrow up to the allowed limit of β Si . If e < r (1 − τ i ) , the
individual will instead put all her wealth in bonds. Only the marginal investor for
whom e = r (1 − τ i ) will be indifferent between debt and equity. Let the tax rate of
this marginal investor be denoted by τ*.
The marginal after-tax rate of return to savings differs by investor, and
clienteles for debt and equity form. For those with e ≤ r (1 − τ i ) , extra savings are
simply invested in bonds, so that the marginal return equals r(1-τi). In contrast,
for investors facing e > r (1 − τ i ) , each extra dollar of savings enables the
individual to borrow an additional β dollars as well. The net return to savings
for those that borrow, deduct interest payments on their debt, and invest in equity
is then e + β (e − r (1 − τ i )) = r (1 − τ * ) + β r (τ i − τ * ) .

31

Figure 1 graphs this rate of return to an additional dollar of savings, as a
function of the individual’s tax rate, τi. Here, we see that savings incentives are a
V-shaped function of the tax rate, with a minimum rate of return to savings for the
marginal investor for whom e = r (1 − τ * ) . Denote the after-tax, or net, return to
savings of individual i by ri n .
What happens to the equilibrium value of f’ ? By definition, the net rate of
return to equity is denoted by e. Therefore ( f '− d − br )(1 − u ) = (1 − b)e . Since
e = r (1 − τ * ) , equation (8) continues to hold, now with ∆ b = ur (1 − τ * ) − br (u − τ * ) .

This focus on the “marginal” investor is the typical strategy used for handling
heterogeneous investors under the King-Fullerton approach. Equation (8), with

τ = τ * , then describes mKF in this setting.
In contrast to the setting with a uniform personal tax rate at rate τ*, however,
now virtually all investors earn an after-tax rate of return to savings that is higher
than the opportunity cost of funds, r(1-τ*), used in deriving the equilibrium value
of f’. Therefore, for virtually all investors the mKF measure overestimates the tax
distortion between the marginal product of capital and the investor’s after-tax
marginal rate of return to savings.
More formally, given the equilibrium value of f’, we can calculate the
effective tax rate faced by any given investor using the equation
(9a)

( f '− d )(1 − mi ) = ri n ,

32

implying that
(10a)

∆b
ri n − r (1 − τ * )
.
−
mi =
(1 − u )( f '− d )
f '− d

Since ri n ≥ r (1 − τ * ) , we see that mi ≤ mKF , implying that the King-Fullerton
approach overestimates the effective tax rates faced by all investors except those
subject to a personal tax rate of τ * .
Given that effective tax rates vary by investor, what is the right measure of the
overall effective tax rate? Or, in other words, what measure best summarizes the
distortion caused by the tax system? As tax rates become more heterogeneous,
holding the mean tax rate fixed, the excess burden grows, since the excess burden
grows approximately with the square of the tax rate. In particular, the excess
burden generated by the distorted incentives faced by any individual i equals
approximately .5mi dSi . If the behavioral response has constant elasticity, then

dSi / Si ≈ α mi for some α , implying an excess burden of .5α mi2 Si for individual
i and an overall excess burden of

∑ .5α m S
2
i

i

.

i

The measure of the effective tax rate that best summarizes the total excess burden
should be such that this overall excess burden,

∑ .5α m S
2
i

i

We then infer that

33

i

, equals .5α m 2 ∑ Si .
i

 ∑ mi2 Si 
 ,
m =  i

 ∑ Si 
 i

.5

so that m equals the weighted root-mean squared average of the mi .
Easier to calculate, but without a clear conceptual underpinning, is the
savings-weighted-mean tax distortion, m = ∑ mi Si / ∑ Si . As applied to the
i

i

current U.S. economy, the savings–weighted-mean rate is probably quite low,
because a large fraction of wealth is held either directly by those in the highest tax
brackets or by pension funds and other financial intermediaries that are effectively
in a zero tax bracket, giving high weight to the lowest values of mi . However,

m < m : relative to m , m gives much more weight to individuals facing high tax
rates. It is still the case, however, that m < mKF .
In order to understand better the values of the other two tax measures,
consider how they compare with m . Simple algebra reveals that
(10b)

∆b
r n − r (1 − τ * )
,
m=
−
(1 − u )( f '− d )
f '− d

where rn is the weighted average return to savings across tax brackets. This
becomes our reference point.
Consider in comparison an average tax rate measure. Corporate tax payments
still equal u ( f '− rb − d ) K . In addition, personal taxes are owed on the resulting
interest income. Now calculate the average tax rate measure that results if one

34

takes these personal taxes into account but ignores the tax deductions that arise
because of borrowing, which is our reading of past practice. The weighted
average personal tax rate on interest income, denoted by τa, equals
τ*

τ*

0

0

τ a = ∫ τ i Siϕ (τ i )dτ i / ∫ Siϕ (τ i )dτ i , where φ measures the number of investors in
each tax bracket.24 Then taxes on interest income per unit of total capital equal
rbτa. The average effective tax rate generated using this approach, after some
simplifying algebra, equals
(10c)

mFS =

∆b
r (1 − τ a ) − r (1 − τ * )
.
−b
(1 − u )( f '− d )
f '− d

Comparing equations (10) and (10c), we find that mKF>mFS, since necessarily

τa<τ*. In equilibrium only those with low marginal tax rates hold debt, so
averaging those tax rates will certainly be lower than the tax rate that makes
investors indifferent between holding debt and equity.
How does mFS compare to the measure shown in equation (10b)? Answering
this question requires a comparison of rn and r(1-τa). Here, rn is a weighted
average of all of the net returns to savings seen in Figure 1, while r(1-τa) is a
weighted average across only those tax rates to the left of the bottom of the V. As
the figure is drawn, the two could be quite close. For purposes of discussion, if
r (1 − τ a ) ≈ r n , then mFS > m . How it compares to m is harder to judge.

35

What about the GKS approach? If, as we do in GS and GKS, one includes in
the measure of TRs the revenue effects of eliminating interest deductions as well
as interest income, the resulting estimate for the effective tax rate equals

mGKS =

τ*

1

0

τ

u ( I − dK − rbK ) + ∫ rτ i Siϕ dτ i − ∫ * β rτ i Siϕ dτ i
(1 − u )( f '− d ) K

.

To see this, recall that in a closed economy all equity and corporate debt is
owned by domestic investors. In addition, ignore other financial assets, such as
non-corporate businesses or government debt. Given these assumptions, net
holdings of debt by domestic individuals must equal net corporate borrowing. It
follows that
(10d)

mGKS =

∆b
r n − r (1 − τ * )
−
.
(1 − u )( f '− d ) (1 − u )( f '− d )

Comparing equations (10b) and (10d), we find that m > mGKS . Since m > m ,
we can conclude that mGKS < m < mKF . At least in this context, we thus find that
the GKS approach underestimates the impact of taxes on the incentive to invest,
while the KF approach overestimates it. Which provides a better approximation
would require a close examination of the data.

36

3.2 Personal Taxes on Equity Income

So far, we have for the most part ignored any personal taxes on dividends or
capital gains income from equity holdings. In doing so, we ignored a variety of
issues that have been raised in the past literature.
Consider first the size of the distortion generated by the current tax treatment
of equity. To make sense of this, the literature has first been forced to come up
with a reason why dividends are paid, since dividends are at a clear tax
disadvantage relative to share repurchases. One approach, followed for example
by Auerbach (1979) and Bradford (1981), assumes that shares cannot be
repurchased. In their model, a tax on dividends lowers the value of existing
equity, but does not affect investment incentives, at least for investments financed
with retained earnings. An alternative explanation for dividends was developed
by Bernheim (1991), who argues that dividends and share repurchases are used
jointly by firms to signal their profitability. There is some optimal cost for such a
signal, inducing firms to use some weighted average of dividends and share
repurchase that generate this optimal cost. Any taxes on dividends change the
mixture of dividends and share repurchase used, while having no real effect on the
firm’s investment incentives.25 While both theories say that taxes on dividends
should be ignored, all three methods examined in this paper view these tax
payments as equivalent to other taxes on income from investment, and to that
extent overestimate the effective tax rate. In each case, an explicit modification in

37

the derivation of the measure would be needed to be consistent with these
theories.
Assessing the effects of taxes on realized capital gains raises a different set of
complications. As discussed in Stiglitz (1983), under U.S. tax law individuals
have an incentive to realize capital losses immediately, and to postpone realizing
capital gains at least until they qualify for the lower rate imposed on “long term”
gains, and perhaps holding these capital gains until death when they become tax
free. In addition, any taxes on capital gains result in risk-sharing with the
government, so that the certainty-equivalent tax payment can be much below the
expected tax payment. Taking into account both of these effects, Constantinides
(1983) found that the existing tax treatment of capital gains likely makes equity
investments more attractive than in their absence, implying a negative effective
tax rate. None of these complications have been taken into account seriously in
the public finance literature, and in particular none of the three measures studied
makes any attempt to deal with them, presuming in each case that the expected
tax rate is appropriate.26 As a result, each of them will overestimate the effective
tax rate on capital gains.

4. Conclusions

The past literature investigating taxes on capital income provides a striking
contrast between papers that report very high reported effective tax rates on new

38

investment—with the accompanying distortions--and others that report very low
additional tax revenue compared with a tax that does not at all distort savings and
investment decisions. If taken at face value, these facts together make a
compelling case that the current tax treatment of capital income needs reform.
Alternatively, the low reported revenue from existing taxes may imply that
past measures of effective tax rates may be biased upwards. The most widely
used past measure, developed initially by Hall and Jorgenson (1967) and refined
by King and Fullerton (1984), uses a theoretical model to derive an effective tax
rate, taking into account what are presumed to be the most important aspects of
the tax law and the most important types of behavioral responses. To be feasible,
however, in practice many aspects of the law and of behavior have to be ignored.
A user must hope that the effects of these omitted issues are of second-order
importance. One interpretation of low reported tax revenue is that these omitted
issues together are not in fact of second-order importance, and instead together
imply that the actual effective tax rate on new investment is very low.
The other approach, used for example by Feldstein and Summers (1979), is to
calculate the average tax rate, equal to corporate tax payments plus personal taxes
due on corporate income, relative to pretax corporate income. Any aspect of the
tax law and any aspect of behavior will automatically affect observed tax
payments. The hope is that the resulting average tax rate provides an appropriate
summary of the implications of these many different complications for the

39

incentive to invest, including those omitted in practice from the King-Fullerton
type measure of the effective tax rate.
In this paper, we first follow the King-Fullerton framework to define an
effective tax rate that correctly measures the impact of taxes on the incentive to
invest in any given setting. We then adopt this tax rate as a standard to which we
compare the King-Fullerton and Feldstein-Summers measures, as they have been
used in practice, as well as a third measure developed in this paper.
The new effective tax rate measure is based on the approach developed
initially in GS (1988) for estimating the net revenue collected by taxing capital
income. Net tax revenue is estimated by calculating how much tax revenue would
change if new investment could be expensed, rather than depreciated, and if all
financial income were free of tax. As shown in the Meade Committee Report
(1978), such an “R-Base” tax leaves savings and investment decisions
undistorted. In section 1, we proposed a new effective tax rate measure based on
this methodology for calculating the net revenue collected from capital income.
Ideally, this measure automatically captures the effects of any and all
complications in the tax law and any and all types of behavioral responses, but is
not biased by the tax revenue that arises from inframarginal investments or risk
premia imbedded in the average return to capital.
We find in the simplest setting all three measures are identical and provide a
correct estimate of the effective tax rate on new investment. The average tax rate,

40

however, will be strongly biased towards the statutory tax rate once risk and pure
profits are taken into account, making it an unreliable approach to measuring the
effective tax rate. In several situations, explored in section 2, the GKS approach
does in fact automatically capture the effects of complications that in practice
have been omitted from the reported effective tax rates derived using the KingFullerton approach. In each of these cases, the King-Fullerton measures
overestimate the effective tax rate. Table 1 presents a summary comparing the
effective tax rate with those derived using each of the three approaches.
Viewed naively, these results from section 2 suggest that the difference
between the high effective tax rates reported in the past and the low revenue yield
may well be due primarily to biases in past measures of the effective tax rate, and
that the GKS measure is the best approach of the three for measuring the impact
of taxes on investment incentives. However, a notable qualification is that the
GKS tax measure relies on ex post data on tax payments under the law, so it
cannot be used to assess the effects of proposed changes in the existing law and
will not accurately reflect a recently changed law. Even with an unchanging tax
law, the GKS approach does not deal appropriately with a set of other
complications. In particular, it underestimates the disincentive due to the effects
of debt arbitrage, while it overestimates the disincentive due to the current tax
treatment of dividends and capital gains.

41

Because of its superiority on a number of important dimensions, we propose
that the GKS measure of the effective tax rate on new investment be added to the
pantheon of existing measures. We recognize, though, that any measure of the
effective tax rate—including the GKS measure—is imperfect and must therefore
be used with caution. At a minimum, any differences in the estimates of the
effective tax rates across measures should be investigated further, as these
differences may indicate complications ignored by the investigator.

42

References
Auerbach, Alan J. 1979. “Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, pp. 433-46.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1991. “Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle,” Rand

Journal of Economics 22, pp. 455-76.

Bradford, David F. 1981. “The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on

Corporate Distribution,” Journal of Public Economics 15, pp. 1-22.

Bulow, Jeremy and Lawrence H. Summers. 1984. “The Taxation of Risky

Assets,” Journal of Political Economy 92, pp. 20-39.

Constantinides, George M. 1983. “Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal

Tax.” Econometrica 51, pp. 611-36.

Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith. 1998. “The Taxation of Discrete

Investment Choices.” Mimeo. Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

43

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers. 1979. “Inflation and the Taxation

of Capital Income in the Corporate Sector.” National Tax Journal. 32(4),
pp.445-471.

Fullerton, Don. 1984. “Which Effective Tax Rate?” National Tax Journal.

37(1), pp. 23-41.

Fullerton, Don and Yolanda Henderson. 1984. “Incentive Effects of Taxes on

Income from Capital: Alternative Policies in the 1980’s.” In The Legacy of
Reagonomics: Prospects for Long Term Growth, eds. Charles R. Hulten and
Isabel V. Sawhill. Washington: Urban Institute Press.

Gordon, Roger and James R. Hines, Jr. 2002. “International Taxation,”

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8854.

Gordon, Roger and Young Lee. 2001. “Do Taxes Affect Corporate Debt

Policy? Evidence from U.S. Corporate Tax Return Data.” Journal of Public
Economics 82, pp. 195-224.

Gordon, Roger, James R. Hines, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1987. “Notes

on the Tax Treatment of Structures.” In The Effects of Taxation on Capital

44

Accumulation, ed. Martin Feldstein. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
223-54.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. 1983. “A General Equilibrium Study of

Subsidies to Municipal Expenditures.” Journal of Finance, 38(2), pp. 585-594.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod. 1988. “Do We Collect Any Revenue from

Taxing Capital Income?” In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 2, ed. Lawrence
Summers. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 89-130.
Gordon, Roger, Laura Kalambokidis, and Joel Slemrod. 2001. “Do We Now

Collect Any Revenue from Taxing Capital Income?” Conference paper presented
at the International Seminar in Public Economics conference, Berkeley, CA,
December 7-8, 2001.

Gordon, Roger H. and John D. Wilson. 1989. “Measuring the Efficiency Cost

of Taxing Risky Capital Income,” American Economic Review 79, pp. 427-39.

45

Grubert, Harry and Joel Slemrod. 1998. “The Effect of Taxes on Investment

and Income Shifting to Puerto Rico.” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(3),
pp. 365-373.

Hall, Robert, and Dale Jorgenson. 1967. “Tax Policy and Investment

Behavior.” The American Economic Review. 57(3), pp. 391-414.

King, Mervyn and Don Fullerton, eds. 1984. The Taxation of Income from

Capital: A Comparative Study of the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden,
and West Germany. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Meade Committee. 1978. The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation.

Boston: Allen & Unwin.

Miller, Merton H. and Franco Modigliani. 1961. “Dividend Policy, Growth,

and the Valuation of Shares.” Journal of Business 34, pp. 411-33.

Slemrod, Joel. 2001. “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to

Taxation.” International Tax and Public Finance, 8(2), pp. 119-128.

46

Stiglitz, Joseph. 1983. “Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains,”

Journal of Public Economics 21, pp. 257-94.

Stiglitz, Joseph. 1985. “The General Theory of Tax Avoidance.” National Tax

Journal. 38(3), pp. pp. 325-338.

United States Council of Economic Advisers. 1999. Economic Report of the

President, 1999. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

United States Department of the Treasury. 1984. Tax Reform for Fairness,

Simplicity, and Economic Growth: The Treasury Department Report to the
President. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury.

47

FIGURE 1

r
After-tax
return to

r(1-τ*)

savings
Marginal personal tax rate

48

Table 1

King-Fullerton

Feldstein-Summers
mFS =

mKF =
Algebraic
formula
(general)
Tax law
allows
expensing
Tax law
allows
economic
deprec.
Churning

GordonKalambokidisSlemrod
mGKS =
TCt − TRt
Kr (1 − u ) + TCt − TRt

u ( r + d )(1 − z )
(1 − u )( f ′ − d )

∞
u  ft ( K t ) − ∫ d s ,t − s I t − s ds 
s =0


ft ( K t ) − dK t

m KF = 0

m FS = 0

mGKS = 0

m KF = u

m FS = u

mGKS = u

mKF > m

mFS < m

mGKS = m

unchanged

Risk
unchanged

Pure profits

mFS =
∞
u  fCE − ∫ d s ,t − s I t − s ds + ρ K 


s =0
fCE − dK + ρ K

mFS

∞
u  f ′K + π − ∫ d s ,t − s I t − s ds 


s =0
= 
f ′K + π − dK

unchanged

unchanged

With economic deprec.:

Debt
finance
Choice of
organiz.
form

Key to
notation

mKF = 1 −
=m

r (1 − τ b )
( f ′−d)

mKF > m

m=effective tax rate
r=discount rate,
d=depreciation rate
u=corporate tax rate
z=present value of
depreciation deductions
τb=personal income tax rate
on interest income

mFS = m

mGKS = m

mFS > m

mGKS > m

fs(Ks)=return to capital in year s
Ks=stock of capital in place in year s
ds,t-s=depreciation deductions allowed for
investments made at time t-s
It-s=investment at time t-s
ρ = risk premium
fCE = certainty equivalent value of the return to
capital
π=profits from inframarginal investments

49

TCs=tax revenue collected
under current law in year s
TRs=tax revenue collected
under R-base tax in year s

Figure 1 caption:
After-tax Rate of Return to Saving as a Function of the Marginal Personal Tax
Rate
Table 1 caption:
Summary measures under different complications

50

1

Feldstein and Summers (1979) found the effective total tax rate on corporate

capital income to be about 66 percent in 1977. King and Fullerton (1984) found
overall effective total tax rates on capital income to be about 37 percent in 1980.
2

These revenue estimates equal the difference between revenue collected under

the current law and revenue collected if income and deductions from financial
investments were instead tax exempt and if depreciation deductions on real
investments were replaced by expensing.
3

King and Fullerton (1984), p. 235.

4

Among the items on Fullerton’s list that are dealt with in this paper are the

existence of pure profits, the presence of risk, and the use of debt finance.
Fullerton (1984), pp. 28-29.
5

An R-base tax imposes a zero marginal tax rate on new investment and saving,

and is described in detail in Meade Committee (1978).
6

This revenue loss figure reflects changes in the tax treatment of all forms of

savings and investment, not just investment in corporate capital.
7

In contrast to the FS measure, business cycle effects and possible

economies/diseconomies to scale do not affect the estimated revenue figures here.

51

8

To do so would require recalculating what taxes would have been paid in the

current year if the current law had in fact been in effect for the indefinite past.
The key correction needed is for depreciation deductions, since investment
purchased in the past continues to be depreciated based on the rules existing at the
date of the investment rather than under current provisions. It would in principle
be feasible to estimate by how much depreciation deductions would have differed
if all capital were being depreciated under the current law, though such a
calculation has not been attempted to date.
9

See, for example, Fullerton and Henderson (1984) and United States Treasury

(1984).
10

For further discussion, see Gordon, Hines, and Summers (1987). Note that the

firm making use of the structure need not change when ownership changes hands.
The initial owner may simply become a renter.
11

In fact, since reported corporate profits fall, presumed capital gains tax

payments fall as well.
12

Bulow and Summers (1984) argued that results could differ with random

depreciation rather than random return. Gordon and Wilson (1989) explored this
issue more carefully, and found that the key issue is the timing of new investment
in the future. If new investment tends to be large when the economy is doing
well, then individuals pay the resulting taxes on this investment when they can

52

best afford it, so that risk in fact reduces the effective tax rate. The model
discussed in the text has nonstochastic investment rates, so this complication does
not arise.
13

For example, in a two-period setting, this risk premium would equal -

cov(f’,U’)/EU’.
14

This expression equals the foregone income each year from not having been

allowed to expense the original investment, ur (1 − τ b ) , minus the tax savings
arising from the use of debt finance.
15

The difference in the riskiness of equity returns depending on the debt-equity

ratio is immaterial according to the logic of Miller and Modigliani (1961).
16

Based on the data in the Economic Report of the President, the average annual

real growth rate in nonresidential fixed investment between 1959 and 1997 was
4.6%, which seems quite close to commonly presumed discount rates.
17

The assumption that a is a function only of b is not an innocuous one.

Alternatively, consider the implications if we were to write a(b,K). Then the firstorder condition for K would have an additional term that is the partial derivative
of a with respect to K. In the extreme case in which the non-tax cost of debt was
unrelated to K—implying that a(b,K)=a’(b)/K—the tax benefits of using debt are
entirely inframarginal and do not reduce the effective tax rate on new investment.
We do not pursue this case because its empirical implication of sharply declining

53

debt-capital ratios with the size of the firm—is not observed. Nevertheless, as
elaborated on in Slemrod (2001), the nature of the non-tax costs of a tax
preference, and in particular whether they are inframarginal or not, is crucial to
understanding the relationship between the foregone revenue and the impact on
the marginal incentives.
18

This is more likely if the firm has tax losses, since the effective corporate tax

rate on losses is close to zero, due to limits on corporate tax loss carry-forwards,
but there is immediate deductibility of losses under the personal tax.
19

A Subchapter S firm is legally a corporation, but is taxed as a pass-through

entity.
20

21

GS (1988) and GKS (2001) in fact did ignore this term.
In particular, relative to m, the resulting measure would add ( τ -u)(r+d) to the

numerator, and (τ − u )(r + d ) + r (u * − u ) to the denominator. The result is an
upward bias as long as the m is below
(m − u )(r + d ) /[(m − u )(r + d ) + r (u * − u )] > .5 .
22

Borrowing implies negative holdings of debt. We do not allow negative

holdings (short sales) of equity.
23

A special case, of course, has no borrowing, in which case β = 0 .

24

Both Feldstein and Summers (1979) and King and Fullerton (1984) used a

weighted average of the marginal tax rates on gross interest income calculated

54

with the TAXSIM model of the National Bureau of Economic Research. With
this method, the weights are the shares of interest income received by taxpayers
facing different tax rates. (See Feldstein and Summers (1979), p. 454, and King
and Fullerton (1984), p. 201.)
25

If the tax becomes either too high or too low, however, then the firm’s signal

will be at a corner solution – either all dividends or all share repurchase--so it will
involve costs different from the firm’s optimal costs for a signal. With higher
costs of a signal, the firm’s expenses are higher, and investment could fall.
26

The KF and FS measures also in practice ignore capital losses, and focus solely

on the effective tax rate on capital gains.

55

