NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION RISK AND CROSS-SECTIONAL RETURNS
Jonathan A. Parker
Christian Julliard
Working Paper 9538
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9538
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Yacine Ait-Sahalia, Albina Danilova, Pierre-Oliver
Gourinchas, Sydney Ludvigson, Monika Piazzesi, Christopher Sims and seminar participants at Princeton
University. For financial suport, Parker thanks the National Science Foundation grant SES-0096076, and the
Sloan Foundation. Contact information and revised versions available at:www.princeton.edu/~jparker/.The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Jonathan A. Parker and Christian Julliard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

Consumption Risk and Cross-Sectional Returns
Jonathan A. Parker and Christian Julliard
NBER Working Paper No. 9538
March 2003
JEL No. G12, G11, E21
ABSTRACT
This paper evaluates the central insight of the Consumption Capital Asset Pricing Model (CCAPM) that an asset's expected return is determined by its equilibrium risk to consumption. Rather
that measure the risk of a portfolio by the contemporaneous covariance of its return and consumption
growth -- as done in the previous literature on the C-CAPM and the pattern of cross-sectional returns
-- we measure the risk of a portfolio by its ultimate consumption risk defined as the covariance of
its return and consumption growth over the quarter of the return and many following quarters. While
contemporaneous consumption risk has little predictive power for explaining the pattern of average
returns across the Fama and French (25) portfolios, ultimate consumption risk is highly statistically
significant in explaining average returns and explains a large fraction of the variation in average
returns. Aditionally, estimates of the average risk-free real rate of interest and the coefficient of
relative risk aversion of the representative household based on ultimate consumption risk are more
reasonable than those obtained using contemporaneous consumption risk.

Jonathan A. Parker

Christian Julliard

Department of Economics

Department of Economics

Princeton University

Princeton University

Princeton, NJ 08544

Princeton, NJ 08544

and NBER

julliard@princeton.edu

jparker@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The natural economic explanation for the large predictable diﬀerences in returns observed across assets in the U.S. stock market is diﬀerences in risk. According to canonical economic theory, an asset’s risk is its covariance with consumption growth. But
observed diﬀerences in the covariance of returns and consumption growth across portfolios do not explain the observed diﬀerences in expected returns across portfolios.1
The asset pricing literature has largely concluded that the textbook consumptionbased capital asset pricing model (C-CAPM) does not explain observed diﬀerences in
returns across portfolios of stocks, and instead diﬀerences in return arise from timevariation in eﬀective risk aversion or quite diﬀerent models of economic behavior.
In this paper, we study the Fama and French size and book-to-market portfolios
and re-evaluate the central insight of the Consumption Capital Asset Pricing model
(C-CAPM) that an asset’s expected return is determined by its equilibrium risk to
consumption. Rather that measure the risk of a portfolio by the contemporaneous
covariance of its return and consumption growth — as done in the previous literature
on the C-CAPM and the pattern of cross-sectional returns — we follow Parker (2001)
and measure the risk of a portfolio by its ultimate risk to consumption, defined as the
covariance of its return and consumption growth over the quarter of the return and
many following quarters.
Measuring the risk of equity as the ultimate impact of a return on consumption
has several appealing features. First, this approach maintains the assumption that
the primary determinant of utility is the level of flow consumption. This assumption
is intuitive and has proved useful and successful in many other subfields of economics.
Second, this approach is consistent with the textbook model of portfolio choice in
that, if the textbook model were true, the ultimate risk would correctly measure the
risk of diﬀerent portfolios. Finally and most importantly, the ultimate risk is a better measure of the true risk of the stock market under a wide class of extant models
used in the study of household consumption and saving. If consumption responds
with a lag to changes in wealth, then the contemporaneous covariance of consumption and wealth understates the risk of equity, and the ultimate risk provides the
correct measure. This slow adjustment is a well-documented feature of consumption
data: consumption displays excess smoothness in response to wealth shocks.2 Existing theoretical explanations for slow adjustment of consumption include direct costs of
adjusting consumption, nonseparability of the marginal utility of consumption from
factors such as labor supply or housing stock, which themselves are constrained to
adjust slowly, constraints on borrowing or changes in risk that hinder consumption
smoothing, and constraints on information flow or calculation so that household be1

See Mankiw and Shapiro (1986), Breeden, Gibbons, and Litzenberger (1989), Campbell (1996),
Cochrane (1996) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b).
2
The slow adjustment of consumption has a long history starting with Flavin (1981) and Hall and
Mishkin (1982). Even the seminal paper, Hall (1978), which first notes that consumption should not
be slow to adjust rejects the random walk of consumption using data on market returns.

1

havior is “near-rational.” The common feature of these models is that consumption
responds slowly to a market innovation, so that only after some time is the impact of
a change in wealth completely observed in the movement of consumption.
Thus, the ultimate risk provides a robust measure of the risk of a stock in that
it remains to some extent agnostic about the particular optimization problem faced
by households. This robustness allows us to evaluate the economic insight that consumption risk should determine returns even though the true or complete model of
household saving and portfolio choice has to date escaped discovery.
We find three main pieces of evidence that consumption risk largely explains the
cross-sectional pattern of returns.
First, while, the covariance of each portfolio and contemporaneous consumption
growth has almost no predictive power for explaining the pattern of average returns
across portfolios, the ultimate risk to consumption explains half or more of the variation in returns across portfolios of stocks. The explanatory power of this single factor
— ultimate consumption risk —is similar to that of the three factors models of Fama
and French (1993) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). Second, and related, the ultimate risk to consumption is statistically significant while the contemporaneous risk is
not. We also show that firm characteristics do not drive out the statistical significance
of consumption risk. These findings are consistent with the slow adjustment of consumption to a change in wealth and inconsistent with the textbook model in which
consumption adjusts instantaneously to a return.
Third, the baseline model implies a risk-free real interest rate around five percent,
a point estimate that is not statistically diﬀerent from the average real rate on 3-month
Treasury bills in the sample. While some alternative specifications yield estimates of
the risk-free rate that are lower and closer to the sample average, even this estimate is
a significant improvement both over estimates based on contemporaneous consumption risk and over estimates based on the macroeconomic factor model of Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001b). Finally, we use the model to calculate the risk aversion of the
representative agent from the estimated relationship between risk and return. Point
estimates of risk aversion lie around 12, again much lower than average estimates
implied by the models of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b), Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) or contemporaneous consumption risk, which imply levels of risk aversion of
40 and larger. Using the ultimate risk to consumption, a relatively-small 95 percent
confidence interval contains reasonable estimates of risk aversion.
Our main results are most closely related to Brainard, Nelson, and Shapiro (1991)
who show that the longer the horizon of the investor, the better the C-CAPM performs
relative to the CAPM and to Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2001) who show that
the cointegrating relationship between consumption and dividends explains a large
share of the variation in average returns. We work directly with returns rather than
long-run movements in dividends and map estimates back to underlying structural
parameters which gives us confirmation of the importance of consumption risk. We
are also closely related to the literature on the stochastic properties of aggregate
consumption following aggregate market returns (Daniel and Marshall (1997), Kandel
2

and Stambaugh (1990), Parker (1999b), Ludvigson and Steindel (1999), Parker (2001),
Dynan and Maki (2001), Gabaix and Laibson (2001), and Piazzesi (2001)).
The balance of the paper is organized as follows. The next section sets the stage
by deriving the textbook C-CAPM from the portfolio choice of a representative agent.
Section 3 presents the ultimate risk to consumption and discusses the range of models
that would imply it. The fourth section describes our data and the fifth our econometric methodology. The sixth section contains our main results on fit, significance,
risk-free rate, and implied risk aversion for the ultimate risk to consumption. The seventh section of the paper compares our one-factor model to the fit and the performance
of the models of Fama and French (1993) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b). The
eighth section presents results using the ultimate risk to consumption in an economy
with time variation in the risk-free rate of interest. A final section concludes.

2. The average cross-sectional pattern of returns and the CCAPM
Following the literature, we use the equilibrium condition governing optimal portfolio
choice to derive a beta representation of average returns across assets as a function of
their consumption risk. This derivation of the beta representation of the C-CAPM lays
the groundwork for the derivation of our beta representation based on the ultimate
risk to consumption.
The C-CAPM first developed by Rubinstein (1976) and Breeden (1979) assumes
that the representative household maximizes the expected present discounted value
of utility flows from consumption by allocating wealth to consumption and diﬀerent
investment opportunities. At the optimal allocation, a small extra investment in a
portfolio of stocks yields an expected marginal increase in utility at t + 1 that exactly
oﬀsets the expected marginal decrease in utility from the small amount less invested
in the risk-free asset:
f
Et [u0 (Ct+1 ) Ri,t+1 ] − Et [u0 (Ct+1 )] Rt,t+1
= 0.

(2.1)

f
where u (·) is the period utility function, C is consumption, Rt,t+1
is the gross risk-free
real interest rate in the economy between t and t + 1, and Ri,t+1 is the gross return on
portfolio i of stocks, unknown at t, known at t + 1.
Equation (2.1) can be written as a model of average cross-sectional returns by manipulating it to a beta representation or factor model. First, we assume that the riskfree rate in the economy is constant. This assumption allows us to relate our results
to previous work and keep the algebra simple, but more importantly is a reasonable
approximation since, relative to the portfolios of stocks that we consider, the risk-free
rate moves little. Section 8 confirms that relaxing this assumption in the textbook
model does not aﬀect the substance of our results. Second, to make the model empirically tractable, divide u0 (Ct+1 ) by u0 (Ct ) to move from the nonstationary u0 (Ct+1 ) to

3

the stationary u0 (Ct+1 ) /u0 (Ct ). Third, take the unconditional expectation, re-write
the expectation of the product in terms of covariances, and re-organize to yield
£ i ¤
E Rt+1
(2.2)
= α0 + β i,0 λ0
where

α0 = Rf , β i,0 =

Cov

h

u0 (Ct+1 )
, Ri,t+1
u0 (Ct )

V ar

h

u0 (Ct+1 )
u0 (Ct )

i

i

, λ0 = −

h

u0 (Ct+1 )
u0 (Ct )

V ar
h 0
i
t+1 )
E uu(C
0 (C )
t

i

This equation summarizes the implications of the canonical C-CAPM for cross-sectional
returns. The expected return on a portfolio is the risk-free rate of return plus the scaled
consumption risk of the portfolio, β i,0 λ0 . Since λ0 < 0, portfolios that pay oﬀ poorly
when marginal utility is high (so consumption is scarce) have a high expected return.
To proceed to estimation and testing of this model of cross-sectional returns, we
log-linearize the ratio of marginal utilities assuming constant relative risk aversion, γ,
as
u0 (Ct+1 )
≈ 1 − γ∆ ln Ct+1
u0 (Ct )
and treat consumption growth as the stochastic discount factor that prices returns.3
Including the preference parameter, γ, in the coeﬃcient λ, the model for returns is
still in the form of equation (2.2) but with coeﬃcients
£ ¤
Cov [∆ ln Ct+1 , Ri,t+1 ]
γV ar [∆ ln Ct+1 ]
α0 = E Rf , β i,0 =
, λ0 =
V ar [∆ ln Ct+1 ]
E [1 − γ∆ ln Ct+1 ]

(2.3)

Linearization is not necessary, but it allows us to use the Fama and MacBeth (1973)
two-step procedure to evaluate the model and estimate γ, which in turn has the
advantage of making our results easy to understand and easy to relate to previous
results.
We estimate and test equation (2.2). Further, equation (2.3) provides an external
test of the structure embodied in the model. The estimated α should equal the riskfree rate of return and the estimated λ0 and moments of consumption growth should
imply a reasonable level of the risk aversion for the representative investor, according
to
λ0
γ=
.
(2.4)
E [∆ ln Ct+1 ] λ0 + V ar [∆ ln Ct+1 ]
3

This stochastic discount factor only prices returns relative to one another and not goods over time
because we derive it from portfolio choice rather than the intertemporal allocation of consumption.
That is, our ratio of marginal utilities omits the household’s degree of impatience (the household’s
discount factor).

4

3. The ultimate risk to consumption
Equations (2.1), (2.3), and (2.4) evaluate the risk of a portfolio based solely on its covariance with contemporaneous consumption growth. They maintain the assumption
that the intertemporal allocation of consumption is optimal from the perspective of
the textbook model of consumption smoothing, so that any change in marginal utility
is reflected instantly and completely in consumption. This is at odds with the literature on the intertemporal allocation of consumption, which is in wide agreement that
the simple, textbook model of a representative consumer is false.4 In particular, the
empirical literature studying consumption and saving behavior suggests that the following assumptions are at least questionable and at worst quite misleading: 1) utility
is additively separable from factors that adjust slowly and covary with returns, such
as leisure; 2) uninsurable idiosyncractic risk and borrowing constraints are not important; 3) consumption can be instantaneously adjusted or if there are adjustment costs
on some items, such as housing, then these categories are additively separable from
the utility of consumption; 4) aggregate consumption data accurately measure movements in flow consumption; 5) households perfectly optimize without informational or
calculation constraints.5
To allow for the slow response of consumption to market returns, this paper evaluates the risk/return trade-oﬀ among portfolios of stocks by focussing on the ultimate
risk to consumption. Rather that measure the risk to consumption from the contemporaneous comovement of consumption and returns, the risk to consumption is
measured by the response of consumption to a return over a longer horizon, as given
by
· µ
¶
¸
Ct+1+S
Cov ln
, Ri,t+1
(3.1)
Ct
or in beta representation

where
αS = Rf , β i,S

£ ¤
E Ri = αS + β i,S λS

´
i
´i
h ³
h ³
Ct+1+S
,
R
Cov ln Ct+1+S
γV
ar
ln
i,t+1
Ct
Ct
h ³
³
´i
´´i
=
, λS = h³
Ct+1+S
V ar ln Ct+1+S
E
1
−
γ
ln
Ct
Ct

(3.2)

(3.3)

Thus the stochastic discount factor we consider is one minus the long-horizon consumption growth times the risk aversion of the representative agent. Consumption
4
This literature is not in agreement about the explanation for this failure, but this literature has
the problem of too many models fitting time series data on consumption and risk-free returns rather
than no model fitting this behavior.
5
See Attanasio and Weber (1995), Basu and Kimball (2000), Zeldes (1989), Caballero (1990),
Carroll (1997), Gourinchas and Parker (2002), Grossman and Laroque (1990), Ogaki and Reinhart
(1998), Attanasio and Weber (1995), Baxter and Jermann (1999), Attanasio and Weber (1993),
Wilcox (1992), Parker (1999a), Souleles (forthcoming).

5

risk is measured by the covariance of the return at t + 1 and the change in consumption from t to t + 1 + S, where S is the horizon over which the consumption response
is studied. The implied relative risk aversion of the representative agent is
γS =

λS
´i
´i
h ³
h ³
Ct+1+S
λ
E ln Ct+1+S
+
V
ar
ln
S
Ct
Ct

(3.4)

Why evaluate risk using ultimate risk, as in equations (3.3) and (3.4)? If households
choose their portfolio at time t, and the impact of this choice and the realized return on
stocks takes time to appear in observed consumption data, then this measure provides
a better measure of the risks of stocks than does the contemporaneous measure. To be
more concrete, the remainder of this subsection argues that the ultimate consumption
risk measures consumption risk a) if the textbook model is true b) if the marginal
utility of consumption is shifted by a stationary variable that covaries with returns, c)
if constraints on information flow slow consumption movements, and d) if consumption
data is mismeasured due to the use of lagged data.
First consider a textbook model of consumption smoothing. Households seek to
smooth consumption over time, which is captured by the consumption Euler equation
between any two periods
· f 0
¸
δR u (Cτ +1 )
Eτ
=1
u0 (Cτ )

where δ is the factor by which households discount the future. These relationships
imply
t+1+S
X ¡
¡ f ¢S 0
¢τ −t−1
0
u (Ct+1+S ) −
ετ
δRf
u (Ct+1 ) = δR
τ =t+2

0

0

where ετ = u (Cτ ) − Eτ −1 [u (Cτ )], the expectation error in τ . Substituting into
equation (2.1) and noting that the expectation errors are mean zero and uncorrelated
with information known at time t + 1 yields
Et [u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ri,t+1 ] − Et [u0 (Ct+1+S )] Rf = 0

(3.5)

Following the same derivation as in section (2) yields the structural beta representation
given by equations (3.2) to (3.4). Thus, if the textbook model were true, our analysis
would be as valid as the analysis using contemporaneous risk.
Second, consider the class of models in which marginal utility adjusts at the time
of the return, but in which a stationary confounding variable implies that the contemporaneous change in consumption understates this change. For this class of models,
the ultimate risk to consumption explains the pattern of expected returns, but our
estimates of risk aversion are biased. More concretely, suppose that the marginal
utility of the representative agent is shifted by a stationary variable, µt£ > 0, so¤ that
marginal utility is given by µt u0 (Ct ), and normalize so that limS→∞ Et+1 µt+1+S = 1.
6

Assume that the η ut ,µt is a jointly covariance stationary process, where η ut = u0 (Ct ) −
Et−1 [u0 (Ct )].6 µt can capture the factors that shift the marginal utility of consumption
in many extant models. For example, µ can represent a) the share of hours devoted to
market work, b) the relative productivity of home production, c) the stock of durable
goods relative to flow consumption.7
In such a model, arbitrage across assets implies
¤
£
¤
£
Et µt+1 u0 (Ct+1 ) Ri,t+1 = Et µt+1 u0 (Ct+1 ) Rf
and consumption smoothing implies

t+1+S
X ¡
¡ f ¢S
¢τ −t−1
0
µt+1 u (Ct+1 ) = δR
µt+1+S u (Ct+1+S ) −
ετ .
δRf
0

τ =t+2

Combining gives
¤
£
£
¤
Et µt+1+S u0 (Ct+1+S ) Rf = Et µt+1+S u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ri,t+1
¤
£
£
¤
= Et Et+1 µt+1+S u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ri,t+1 .
hP
i
S
u
Now, defining ψ = limS→∞ Covt+1
τ =S/2+1 η t+1+τ , µt+1+S , we have

¤
¤
£
£
£
¤
Et+1 µt+1+S u0 (Ct+1+S ) = Covt+1 µt+1+S , u0 (Ct+1+S ) + Et+1 µt+1+S Et+1 [u0 (Ct+1+S )]
−→ ψ + Et+1 [u0 (Ct+1+S )]
S→∞

since




S/2
S
X
X
¤
£
η ut+1+τ , µt+1+S  + Covt+1 
η ut+1+τ , µt+1+S 
Covt+1 µt+1+S , u0 (Ct+1+S ) = Covt+1 
τ =1

τ =S/2+1

−→ 0 + ψ.

S→∞

It follows that, for large S, optimal portfolio choice implies
Et [ψ + Et+1 [u0 (Ct+1+S )]] Rf = Et [(ψ + Et+1 [u0 (Ct+1+S )]) Ri,t+1 ]
E [ψ + u0 (Ct+1+S )] Rf = E [(ψ + u0 (Ct+1+S )) Ri,t+1 ]
= Cov [u0 (Ct+1+S ) , Ri,t+1 ] + E [ψ + u0 (Ct+1+S )] E [Ri,t+1 ]
6
The usual assumption is that the µt u0 (Ct ) − Et−1 [µt u0 (Ct )] is a covariance stationary process.
Since we assume µt is stationary, joint stationarity is not particularly restrictive.
7
See for example Aschauer (1985) Eichenbaum, Hansen, and Singleton (1988), Startz (1989),
Flavin (2001), and Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2003). It is uncertain but possible that ultimate
consumption risk might also capture consumption risk in models with transitory movements in individual consumption risk or the cross-sectional distribution of marginal utilities such as the model of
Lustig (2001).

7

so that we can apply a derivation parallel to that of the previous section to yield
h ³
h ³
´
i
´i
Ct+1+S
Cov (ln Ct+1+S
γV
ar
ln
,
R
i,t+1
Ct
Ct
´i
´i
h ³
h
³
E [Ri,t+1 ] = Rf +
Ct+1+S
Ct+1+S
+ψ
V ar ln
E 1 − γ ln
Ct
Ct
= Rf + β i,S λ̃S

where

´i
h ³
γV ar ln Ct+1+S
Ct
´i
³
λ̃S = h
Ct+1+S
+ψ
E 1 − γ ln
Ct

(3.6)

Thus, for this class of models, we have the same structural beta representation, so
that ultimate consumption risk should explain the cross-sectional pattern of returns.
However, since λ̃S includes an additional term, ψ, in the denominator, our estimates of
risk aversion are biased. A plausible assumption is that the stochastic discount factor
based only on consumption understates the volatility of the true stochastic discount
factor, and therefore that Cov [µt , u0 (Ct )] = ψ > 0. If this were true, our estimates
of risk aversion that ignore the term ψ would be downward-biased. While there is
no hard evidence on the magnitude of ψ, we suspect that, relative to the size of the
denominator in equation (3.6), this bias is small.8
Related to this class of models, the appendix uses a diﬀerent argument to show
that there are a set of models with multiplicative external habits that do not have
this bias in estimates of risk aversion. For this class of models, which includes that of
Abel (1990), our measure of ultimate consumption risk prices average returns and our
measure of risk aversion is unbiased, for S large enough.
Third, the ultimate risk also measures the risk of stocks in some models in which
households face constraints on information, calculation, or adjustment of consumption
so that consumption and marginal utility move only slowly to the new optimal level
following a shock. As a concrete example, Gabaix and Laibson (2001) add to the
canonical model of Merton (1969) the assumption that households face costs of monitoring their portfolio balances and so check and learn their wealth only infrequently,
once every D periods.9 When a household learns its wealth, it adjusts its consumption
in response to all the market returns during the interval since it last learned its account
balance. Assuming that a constant measure of households learn their balances and
adjust their consumption at every instant, aggregate consumption adjusts smoothly
and slowly over D periods to reflect a given return. In this case, the risk of a given
portfolio under this model of economic behavior is measured by the ultimate risk to
consumption.
8

For example, Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2003), consider µt to be the budget share of consumption spend on housing services (relative to its mean). Since both this and consumption fluctuate
only by a few percent from their expected paths, ψ << 1.
9
See also Caballero (1995), Lynch (1996), Marshall and Parekh (1999), Alvarez, Atkeson, and
Kehoe (2000), and Sims (2001).

8

A final reason to evaluate the risk of equity with the ultimate risk is that aggregate
consumption data may measure consumption responses with delay, even if the true
consumption response were instantaneous. As demonstrated by Wilcox (1992), serially
correlated measurement error is induced in aggregate consumption data by sampling
error, imputation procedures, and definitional diﬃculties involved in constructing measures of aggregate consumption from monthly survey data on retail sales. For example,
sales at a given retailer are allocated across types of consumption using shares that
remain fixed for years. Given divergent price indexes, this induces serially correlated
measurement error, only corrected once the correct shares are employed.

4. Data
For our portfolios and returns, we use quarterly returns on the Fama and French
portfolios (25), which are the intersections of 5 portfolios formed on size (market
equity, ME) and 5 portfolios formed on the ratio of book equity to market equity
(B/M). B/M used during a fiscal year is based on the book equity for the previous
fiscal year divided by ME for December of the previous year. The B/M breakpoints
are the NYSE quintiles. The portfolios include all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ
stocks for which there is market equity data for December and June of the previous
fiscal year, and (positive) book equity data for the previous fiscal year. We denote a
portfolio by the rank of its ME and then the rank of its B/M so that the portfolio
15 is the smallest quintiles of stocks by ME and the largest quintile of stocks by
B/M. The series are available monthly from July 1926 to December 2001.10 To
match consumption data, we use a quarterly frequency, and set our timing convention
so that Ri,t+1 represents the return on portfolio i during the quarter t + 1.
We measure consumption as personal consumption expenditures on nondurable
goods from the National Income and Product Accounts, divided by the civilian noninstitutional population of the United States. The data are made real using a chainweighted price deflator, spliced across periods, produced by the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. Except where noted, we make the “end of period” timing assumption that
consumption during quarter t takes place at the end of the quarter. Our measure of
the risk-free rate is the return on a three-month treasury bill. All returns are deflated
by the same deflator as consumption.
These series determine our sample and frequency. We use a sample of returns
for quarterly data from the second quarter of 1947 to the first quarter of 1998. We
stop the sample of returns so that we can allow up to 4 years of consumption growth
matched to a return (S = 15) without altering the sample of returns that we study as
we vary S. That is, the sample for per capita consumption runs from the first quarter
of 1947 to the last quarter of 1998 plus S quarters, which is the last quarter of 2001
when S = 15.
10

We thank Kenneth French for making the Fama and French portfolio data available on his web
page: http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

9

5. Estimation and inference
Following the methodology of Fama and MacBeth (1973) and Fama and French (1992),
we estimate equations (3.2) and (3.3) in two steps. First, each β i,S is estimated directly
from the empirical counterparts to the theoretical moments in equation (3.3). This is
simple to implement since β̂ i,S is the slope coeﬃcient from a time series regression of
.
return i onto a constant and ln Ct+1+S
Ct
Second, λS and its standard error are estimated from a series of cross-sectional
regressions of returns on the β̂ i,S , the slope coeﬃcients estimated in the time series
0
regressions. Let the parameters be denoted
³ by θ´S = (αS , λS ) , let the data be denoted
by Rt+1 = (R1,t+1 , ...R25,t+1 )0 and X̂S = ι, B̂S where ι is a column vector of ones
´0
³
and B̂S = β̂ 1,S , ..., β̂ 25,S . Let b
θS,t be the average of the estimates of θS from crosssectional regression using only returns during period t
³
´−1
1 Xb
0
b
b
X̂S0 Rt .
θS,t , θS,t = X̂S X̂S
θS =
T t=1
T

(5.1)

We calculate Fama and MacBeth standard errors from the observed variation in
parameter estimates across subsamples,
Vd
ar

T ³
³√ ³
´´ X
b
=
θS,t −
T θ̂S − θS
t=1

1
T

PT b ´ ³b
θS,t −
t=1 θ S,t

1
T

PT b ´0
.
t=1 θ S,t

(5.2)

If the innovations to returns conditional on the factor are independently distributed
over time then
´´
³√ ³
−1
−1
T θ̂S − θS
= V = (XS0 XS ) XS0 ΦXS (XS0 XS )
plim Vd
ar

£
¤
where Φ = E (Rt+1 − E [Rt+1 ]) (Rt+1 − E [Rt+1 ])0 . However, these estimates of statistical uncertainty do not account for the fact that the betas are estimated regressors.
Shanken (1992) shows that, if asset returns are homoskedastic
´ and have a jointly nor√ ³
b
mal distribution conditionally on the factor, then T θ − θ converges to a normal
distribution with mean zero and variance W = V + Q where Q is given by
´i−1
h ³
−1
−1
(XS0 XS ) XS0 ΣXS (XS0 XS )
(5.3)
Q = λ2S V ar ln Ct+1+S
Ct

where Σ is the constant covariance matrix of the residuals of the time series regressions. Since Q is positive definite, in this case, the Fama and MacBeth standard errors
overstate the precision of the estimates. If the returns are indeed conditionally homoskedastic the Shanken standard errors are to be preferred. However, Jagannathan
and Wang (1998) shows this ordering may not hold when the returns are conditionally
10

heteroskedastic, leading us to report both standard errors. The Shanken standard
error is estimated from the empirical counterparts to the elements of equation (5.3).
Turning from the statistical importance of consumption risk to the economic importance of consumption risk, we report a cross-sectional R2 statistic from our secondstage regressions. Following Jagannathan and Wang (1998), the cross-sectional R2
measures the fraction of cross-sectional variation explained by the data given the average θ from the cross-sectional regressions,
µ T
¶
µ T
¶
i
1 P
1 P
Ri,t+1 − α̂S − λ̂S β̂ S /V arc
Ri,t+1 ,
1 − V arc
T t=1
T t=1
where V arc (.) denotes a cross-sectional variance. Since the β̂ i,S are estimated, it is
also the case that the fit of the second stage regression is biased downwards in finite
samples. To gauge the importance of this bias, we estimate the noise and signal in
the β̂ i,S for diﬀerent S. This also allows us to evaluate the relative importance of the
added signal (additional movement in expected consumption growth) and added noise
(innovations to consumption after time t + 1) in the β̂ i,S as we increase S.
We report inference concerning the implied risk-free rate and risk aversion based
only on the statistical uncertainty of the coeﬃcients in the cross-sectional regression.
That is, the standard error of the risk-free rate is the standard error of α, and the
test
£ of¤its equality to the observed average risk-free rate takes the empirical moment,
Ê Rf , as given. Similarly, we make inference regarding the risk
of the
´i
h aversion
³
and
representative investor taking as given the observed values of V ar ln Ct+1+S
Ct
´i
h ³
. This approach isolates the uncertainty about risk aversion due to
E ln Ct+1+S
Ct
the relationship between consumption risk and average returns, but understates our
true degree of ignorance about risk aversion and the risk-free rate.

6. Main findings
This section asks whether consumption risk explains the cross-sectional variation in
expected returns on diﬀerent portfolios of stocks. First, do the β̂ i,S explain a large
share of the variance of average returns — is consumption risk economically significant?
Second, is λ̂S significant — is consumption risk statistically significant? These two
questions address the major issue of whether consumption risk is or is not a major
determinant of the cross-sectional pattern of returns.
We pursue two additional checks of the model and, implicitly, of the importance
of consumption risk. First, α̂S is an estimate of the implied risk-free rate. Thus,
an additional test of the model is whether this estimate is similar to the sample
average of the risk-free rate. Second, we recover an estimate of the risk aversion of
the representative investor. Since this is a structural parameter that governs other
household behaviors, a test of the model is whether the estimated risk aversion is
plausible given what it would imply for economic behavior and risk taking in general.
11

6.1. Baseline results
We begin by reporting the economic and statistical significance of contemporaneous
consumption risk for the returns of these portfolios. The first two rows of Table 1 show
that for S = 0, consumption betas explain only 12 or 19 percent of the cross-sectional
variance in average returns. The first row reports results using the traditional “start
of period” timing convention for consumption growth that aligns ∆ ln Ct+2 with Ri,t+1 ,
while the second row reports results using the end of period timing convention that
aligns aligns ∆ ln Ct+1 with Ri,t+1 .11 For S > 0, we report results using the end of
period timing convention since only for this convention is the initial period entirely
prior to the period covered by the return.
In addition to having a low fit, contemporaneous risk is not statistically significant
in explaining average returns. Both the Fama-MacBeth and Shanken standard errors
are of similar magnitude to the estimated slope coeﬃcient λ̂. The insignificant slope
coeﬃcient is accompanied by a large estimate of the intercept, which implies a large
estimate of the risk-free rate. The fifth and sixth entries in the first two rows of of
Table 1 show that the annual real interest rate is estimated to be 15.0 or 8.6 percent,
far in excess of and statistically significantly diﬀerent from the actual average risk-free
rate over the sample of 1.7 percent. Finally, the low slope coeﬃcient and high intercept
imply implausibly large levels of household risk aversion. The point estimate of the
risk aversion required of the representative agent to rationalize the spread in average
returns given the diﬀerences in the contemporaneous consumption risk of the returns
is 41 or 55. A 95 percent confidence interval contains reasonable levels of risk aversion
only because statistical uncertainty is large.
The remainder of Table 1 shows that, contrary to the result for contemporaneous
risk, consumption risk measured after consumption has had time to adjusts to returns
explains a significant share of the variance in average returns. As we increase S, the
inferred economic importance of consumption risk rises: consumption betas measured
using the ultimate risk explain as much as half the variance in average returns across
portfolios. This rise is not monotonic, and the decline for S = 12 and higher is
discussed subsequently.
The magnitude of the slope coeﬃcient, λ̂, rises monotonically with S, and is statistically significant for horizons 9 and higher. The slope coeﬃcient measures the extent
to which one portfolio is expected to have a higher return than another, based on the
diﬀerence in their risk, as measured by the diﬀerence between the covariance of the
returns on each portfolio and the following change in consumption over 1 + S periods.
While this evidence seems strong, if the model is misspecified, it is possible for the
t-statistic to not converge to zero (Kan and Zhang (1999)). We provide a test of misspecification later in this section of the paper. For now, for large S, we observe that
11

Campbell (1999) uses the start of period convention because, consistent with the finding here
with respect to the cross-section of returns, the start of period convention produces a larger contemporaneous covariance between consumption and aggregate market returns than the end of period
timing convention.

12

consumption risk explains average returns.
The greater economic and statistical importance of consumption risk for large S
is accompanied by an increased plausibility of the implied interest rate on the riskfree asset and the implied risk aversion of the representative agent. For S > 6 the
average risk-free real interest rate and the intercept of the cross-sectional regression
are statistically indistinguishable, although the gap between the estimate and the
actual average remains 2 − 5 percent. The implied risk aversion of the representative
agent declines nearly monotonically in S to level oﬀ at a point estimate of around
12. The statistical uncertainty declines substantially with S, so that for large S, a 95
percent confidence interval contains roughly any positive number below 15. The 95
percent confidence interval includes reasonable estimates of the representative agent’s
risk aversion not simply because of large statistical uncertainty.
But how should we choose the correct horizon of consumption adjustment, S?
What are our best estimates for fit and parameter estimates given that they vary by
horizon? On the one hand, if consumption is slow to adjust for the reasons outlined
above, then larger S are preferred since they allow a longer horizon for consumption
adjustment. The fact that the estimates of risk aversion and the risk-free rate change
with S are evidence against the textbook C-CAPM and in favor of the C-CAPM
with slow consumption adjustment. This suggests that we would like to choose S
as large as possible. On the other hand, as one increases S, one also increases the
i
noise in the estimates
´of β S from the time series regressions. Measurement error in a
³
, is irrelevant asymptotically: the eﬀect on the denominator of
factor, here ln Ct+1+S
Ct
each β iS is oﬀset by a corresponding change in the numerator of λ. But measurement
error decreases the accuracy of estimation of β iS in any finite sample. For larger S,
measurement error is greater because we do not observe the expectation at time t + 1
of consumption growth over the subsequent S periods, but instead must construct or
proxy it.12 Closely related, for larger S, there is more correlation over time in residuals
in the time series regressions that estimate each β iS and thus less precisely estimated
β iS .13 These arguments imply that we do not want to choose S too large.
One solution would be to use the value of S which gives the best estimates of the
structural parameters. But such an approach would undermine inference. Instead we
consider two diﬀerent approaches to choosing a “best” value for S.
First, we choose S based on the statistical uncertainty in the β iS ’s from the time
i
series regressions relative to the total cross-sectional variance of the β̂ S used in the
12

We use actual consumption growth in place of consumption growth expected
h ³ given´iinformation
at t + 1. An alternative would be to use a constructed measure of Et+1 ln Ct+1+S
. But this
Ct
measure would still contain noise, and potentially more importantly would omit signal — true slow
adjustment of consumption — from our factor.
13
There is also a reason to keep the maximum S small and not include larger values of S in our
reported results. A larger maximum S studied implies a shorter time series of available returns on
which to estimate all β S , so that imprecision in all β̂ S increases.

13

second stage. We calculate for diﬀerent values of S the ratio
P25 d ³ i ´
1
i=1 V ar β̂ S
25
³
P25
P25 i ´2
i
1
1
β̂
−
S
i=1
i=1 β̂ S
25
25
i

where the numerator is the variance of β̂ S in each time-series regression averaged across
i
portfolios and the denominator is the cross-sectional variance in β̂ S . The numerator
i
is a measure of the average noise in β̂ S and the denominator is a measures of the
total observed signal plus noise across β iS . The calculation of the numerator is based
upon standard errors calculated accounting for time-series correlations using Neweyi
West standard errors in each time-series regression. Because any correlation among β̂ S
aﬀects both numerator and denominator, the measure is not perfect and the numerator
can be greater than the denominator, and indeed is. Figure 1 shows that statistical
uncertainty in the estimated β iS remains a roughly constant share of the total variance
from S = 0 to 11 and rises significantly after this. On these grounds, we choose
S = 11, since greater values of S lead to much larger ratios of statistical uncertainty
to observed variation in consumption beta’s. Consistent both with this evidence and
the hypotheses that consumption risk is important and that consumption adjusts
slowly, Table 1 shows that S = 11 is also the horizon for which the consumption betas
explain the largest fraction of average returns and our estimates of risk aversion are
most precise. On the other hand, still larger values of S lead to greater precision
in estimates of λ and more realistic estimates of the risk-free interest rate and the
coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion.
Second, consider the choice of S as a model selection problem in which S indexes
a set of models none of which are true and in which the sample of data is given.14
As discussed by Leamer (1983), the best model minimizes the diﬀerence between the
true and approximating density for the data in the information sense. Thus, choosing
among the models amounts to choosing the model which produces the best fit, since
there is no diﬀerence in the number of parameters across models. Thus, again we are
lead to choose S = 11.
In our tables, we continue to report all horizons, and to report in bold the model
selected by our first criterion, the variance ratio. We focus on the first criterion since
it does not necessarily select the model with the best fit. In all specifications and
samples that we have analyzed, the exact choice of S does not drive our inference on
structural parameters, in that estimates are similar for models (S) near the selected
model.
Returning to our main results, Figure 2 plots the consumption betas, average
realized returns, and the second-stage regression lines for S = 0 and for S = 11. One
14

If the sample were to grow, we could reasonably think we were estimating the true model by
choosing S large enough (or letting S grow with the sample) and our estimates would be consistent,
although potentially uininformative in our sample. Since instead we are fixing the sample and treating
mismeasurement of β as a fixed problem for inference, we are naturally lead to Bayesin methods.

14

i

can see that for S = 11, the β̂ explain more of the variance in returns. If the model
i
is correct, as the estimated expected returns and β̂ converge to their true values, the
fit of the second stage regression should become perfect. One can also observe that
the lower estimate of the risk-free rate is due to the increased slope of the regression
line, although this is not a precise statement since the scale of the β’s is diﬀerent due
to the diﬀerent variance of the stochastic discount factor.
Figure 3 recasts Figure 2 in terms of the more economically interesting concept
of pricing errors. The horizontal axis displays average returns and the vertical axis
predicted returns based on consumption betas measured for S = 0 and for S = 11.
Each portfolio is denoted by the relative size (1 to 5) and relative book to market
ratio (1 to 5). The error in pricing a return using consumption risk is the vertical
diﬀerence between the fitted return and average return and given by the distance of
a point from the 45-degree line. For all but five of the twenty five portfolios (ME 1,
B/M 3; ME 3, B/M 2; ME 4, B/M 1; ME 5, B/M 3; and ME 5, B/M 5), the
pricing error is smaller for S = 11 than for S = 0. Table 2 presents the information
slightly diﬀerently, showing the square root of the average squared pricing error for
each way of splitting into five quintiles. The pricing errors are aggregated to five size
and then five book to market quintiles. Comparing horizon S = 11 to horizon S = 0,
the pricing errors are lower in four out of five of size quintiles and four out of five book
equity to market equity quintiles. In each of the two exceptions (the middle book
to market portfolio and the largest size portfolio), the pricing error associated with
contemporaneous consumption risk, S = 0, is the smallest of the portfolios. Further,
the increases in the pricing error across horizons for these two portfolios are smaller
than the decreases in pricing error for every one of the remaining portfolios.
Before turning to comparisons with factor models of returns, we conclude this
section of the paper by reporting the results of estimating our model in several diﬀerent
ways and the results of testing for misspecification using portfolio characteristics.
6.2. Alternative specifications
We consider three alternative ways of estimating of our model. First, previous work
has focussed on a shorter time period than we analyze in our baseline results (e.g.
Fama and French (1992 and 1993)). Table 3 presents results for a sample set to
match that of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b). This sample uses returns from the
third quarter of 1963 to the third quarter of 1998, which implies that we can only
study a maximum horizon of three and a half years (S= 13). In this sub-period, our
slow consumption adjustment model does even better at explaining average returns.
The data still suggest that S = 11 is the best horizon to study, and at this horizon
consumption risk explains 73 percent of the variation in average returns. The implied
risk-free rate is below the average return on a three-month treasury bill. On the other
hand, estimated risk aversion rises slightly to 14.
Second, Ait-Sahalia, Parker, and Yogo (2001) argue that the consumption risk of
equity is understated by NIPA nondurable goods because it contains many necessities
15

and few luxury goods. Parker (2001) shows that this concern can be partly addressed
when using long-term measures of consumption risk by conducting the analysis with
total consumption instead of nondurable consumption. The usual concern with using
total consumption is that it contains expenditures on durable goods instead of the
theoretically desired stock of durable goods. But expenditures and stocks are cointegrated. The long-term movement in expenditures following an innovation to equity
returns also measures the long-term movement in consumption flows.
Table 4 presents our main results for total consumption per capita. Compared to
the results for nondurable goods, the initial fit for S = 1 is better and the increase
in fit for larger S is not monotone, but declines over the first year. As with the
main results, the noise ratio suggests that S = 11 provides the best estimates as the
noise to cross-sectional variance ratio rises significantly at S = 12 and each larger S.
At S = 11, the fit is higher than for nondurable consumption, 56 percent, and the
estimated coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion is lower, below 10. On the other hand,
the implied risk-free rate, while still statistically indistinguishable from the average
treasury bill rate, is economically farther from it, only slightly below 6 percent.
Third, we consider a slightly diﬀerent set of returns, the equal-weighted Fama and
French (25) portfolios. Table 5 shows that ultimate consumption risk does an even
better job of explaining the cross-sectional pattern of returns of these (albeit similar)
portfolios. The estimated risk-free return is 3.0 percent as opposed to 5.3 percent for
value-weighted portfolios. On the other hand, the estimated level of risk aversion is
slightly higher using this set of portfolios.
6.3. Testing the model for misspecification
While the evidence presented so far is consistent with an important role for consumption risk, if our model were misspecified, the cross-sectional estimation could
be asymptotically biased. Kan and Zhang (1999), with a simulation exercise, show
that “useless” factors can appear statistically significant when the Fama and MacBeth
methodology is applied to a misspecified model. When the factors are misspecified,
the t statistic for a beta may converge in probability to infinity even when the true coeﬃcient is zero. Therefore, it is possible that the statistical significance of the ultimate
risk to consumption might be spurious.
To test the hypothesis of misspecification, we follow Jagannathan and Wang (1996)
and expand our model to include other asset characteristics such as book-to-market
ratio and relative market size. Adding these to equation (3.2), we obtain
E [Ri,t+1 ] = aS + a0z zi + β i,S λS

(6.1)

where zi is the time average of the vector of observable asset characteristics. Using
formulae analogous to those in Section 5, we construct t-statistics for the coeﬃcient on
the asset characteristics using both the Fama and MacBeth standard errors and the
standard errors with the Shanken correction. If the model in equation (3.2) is correctly
specified, then az should be a vector of zeros. If instead the model is misspecified, the
16

t-statistics for firm characteristics converge to infinity in probability (Jagannathan and
Wang (1998)). Thus we include asset characteristic in our cross-sectional regressions
to detect model misspecification, since large t-statistics for firm characteristics would
reject the beta pricing model under analysis.
Table 6 shows the fit of the regressions of returns onto the ultimate consumption
risk betas and asset characteristics for two diﬀerent asset characteristics — size and
book to market value — and two diﬀerent measures of each of these characteristics —
the mean of the log of the characteristic over time for each portfolio or the log of the
mean of the characteristics over time for each portfolio. First note that in all four
cases, although only trivially for the log of the mean book to market value, the fit of
the model still is larger for the horizon S = 11 than for the horizon S = 0. Second, in
all four cases the statistical significance of the coeﬃcient on consumption beta is larger
for S = 11 than for S = 0. Thus, slow adjustment of consumption adds explanatory
power to consumption risk even in the presence of firm characteristics. For all panels
except the upper left panel, the statistical significance of firm characteristics is lower
for S = 11 than for S = 0. Finally, and most relevant for the test at hand, only for
one panel is the firm characteristic significant at a horizon of 11, while only for one
panel is consumption risk not significant at a horizon of 11.
Having shown that the ultimate risk to consumption is a significant explanator
of average returns across portfolios of stocks, we now compare the performance of
consumption risk as a “factor” to two important extant factor models that have been
used to study the average returns in the Fama and French portfolios. A final section of
results follows in which we derive and analyze the ultimate risk to consumption from
the textbook C-CAPM in an economy with a time-varying risk-free rate of interest.

7. Relation to Fama-French and Lettau-Ludvigson factor models
Fama and French (1992) and Fama and French (1993) show that three factors explain
a large fraction of the cross-sectional variation in returns in the Fama and French
portfolio: the overall market return (denoted Rm ), the diﬀerence between the size of
firms in the smallest and largest size quintiles (“small minus big” denoted SMB), and
the diﬀerence between the book to market equity ratios in the largest and smallest book
to market equity quintiles (“high minus low” denoted HML). Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001a) argues that the budget constraint of the representative household implies
that consumption, income and wealth should be cointegrated and then shows that
the deviation of these variables from their long-run relationship (the error-correction
term in the three variable vector autoregression) is a good predictor of market returns.
Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b) shows that this variable, denoted by cayt , consumption
growth (∆ ln Ct+1 ), and their interaction provide a three factor model that does as
well in explaining the average cross-section of returns as the Fama and French three

17

factor model. In this section, we compare the fit of our one factor model to these
alternative factor models.
Both three factor models assume that there exists a stochastic discount factor that
prices returns, Mt+1 , which is a linear function of the factors, which we denote ft+1 .
In the Lettau and Ludvigson model for example, we have
Mt+1 = b0 + b1 cayt + b2 ∆ ln Ct+1 + b3 cayt ∆ ln Ct+1 .
This model has the beta representation
£ i ¤
= α + β 0i λ
E Rt+1

(7.1)

where

α = Rf , β i = V ar [ft+1 ]−1 Cov [ft+1 , Ri,t+1 ] , λ = −Rf V ar [ft+1 ] b

and ft+1 = (cayt , ∆ ln Ct+1 , cayt ∆ ln Ct+1 )0 , the vector of factors, and b= (b1 , b2 , b3 )0
the vector of coeﬃcients on the factors¡in the stochastic discount
¢0 factor. In the Fama
m
and French three factor model, ft+1 = Rt+1
, SMBt+1 , HMLt+1 . We estimate these
models using the Fama-MacBeth methodology, first by estimating the vector β i from
a series of multivariate time-series regressions of the factors on the returns and then
by estimating equation (7.1) on the cross-section of β̂ i ’s. We report both standard
errors from the Fama-MacBeth procedure and those with the Shanken adjustment.
We initially focus on the subsample analyzed by Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b)
and the focus of Fama and French (1993). The first row of results in the first panel
of Table 7 reports the fit, implied risk-free rate, and coeﬃcients on the Fama and
French factors and their standard errors, the Fama-MacBeth standard error above the
Shanken-adjusted standard error. The penultimate column reports the t-tests of the
hypothesis that the risk-free rate implied by the model equals the average Treasury
bill return in the sample. The second row of results reports the same set of statistics
for the Lettau and Ludvigson three-factor model (using our timing convention for
consumption). One interpretation of this model is that the coeﬃcient of relative risk
aversion is time-varying, so that the stochastic discount factor is 1 − γ t ∆ ln Ct+1 .15
Since risk aversion appears only multiplied by consumption growth, we also report in
the third row results which omit cayt on its own. We view this as consistent with
this more structural view of the role of cayt , that it captures time variation in risk
aversion.16 The final column of results shows the point estimate and a 95-percent
confidence interval for the average level of risk aversion implied by the estimated
−γ

15

We assume that marginal utility at t + 1 is given by Ct+1t and make the arbitrage relation
−γ
stationary by dividing by Ct t .
16
There are two possible interpretations of the role of cay. Time-varying risk aversion is one; the
other, less structural, is that cay is a better version of a dividend-price ratio, where dividend is
measured by c and y and price by a. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) state “some stocks tend to be
more highly correlated with consumption growth in bad times, when risk or risk aversion is high,
than they are in good times, when risk or risk aversion is low [emphasis added].”

18

coeﬃcients in this model.
Ã

1X
cayt
γ = − b2 + b3
T t=1
T

!

The fourth row presents the results for our single-factor model, the ultimate risk
to consumption, and the results correspond to those in Table 3 with a horizon of 11
quarters. The final row reports the results for the textbook C-CAPM and corresponds
to Table 3 row 2.17
The first main point of Table 7 is that the fit of the Fama and French, Lettau
and Ludvigson, and ultimate risk to consumption models are all good: 78 percent,
66 percent and 73 percent of the variation in returns are explained by each model’s
betas respectively. The horizon S = 11 consumption beta is a single factor model,
and yet it explains returns as well as these three-factor models. Second, while the
factors are jointly significant, the individual factors in both three-factor models are
all statistically insignificant except HML. The ultimate risk to consumption is highly
statistically significant. Third, the betas on the Fama and French factors and the beta
on the ultimate risk to consumption both imply reasonable levels of the risk-free rate of
interest, while the Lettau and Ludvigson model performs less well on this dimension.
Fourth, a fair amount of explanatory power in the Lettau and Ludvigson model is lost
when the factor cay alone is removed. Consumption growth interacted with cay to
capture time-variation in risk aversion still explains more of the variation in returns
than the C-CAPM, but also now noticeably less than the Fama and French model
and ultimate consumption risk. Related to this point, the magnitude of the estimates
of risk aversion from the Lettau and Ludvigson model are much higher than for the
ultimate risk to consumption and suggest that cay does not measure time variation in
risk aversion. Finally, and most well-known, the textbook C-CAPM performs poorly.
Figure 4 graphs the pricing errors for each portfolio as the diﬀerence on the vertical
axis between a portfolio and the 45 degree line, for the four main models. All models
besides the textbook C-CAPM do quite well at fitting returns, although in this sample
and with this timing assumption, the performance of the textbook C-CAPM is not
terrible.
The second panel of Table 7 reports the same set of information as the first panel
but expands the sample to the longest possible sample and thus the closest to the
baseline sample used initially in this paper.18 The same conclusions stand as for the
shorter sample. Figure 5 plots fitted and average returns in this sample, but plots
the Lettau and Ludvigson two factor model that omits the variable cay not interacted
with consumption growth.
17

The textbook C-CAPM performs significantly worse than reported here under the start-of-period
timing convention.
18
The starting date is determined by the first available observation on cayt .

19

8. Consumption risk when the risk-free rate varies over time
So far we have assumed that the risk-free rate in the economy is constant. In this
section we demonstrate that our main results do not depend on this approximation.
We consider the textbook model only. When the risk-free rate varies, the extent to
which the model based only on the ultimate risk as in Section 3 diﬀers from the
truth is related to the extent to which an innovation to returns leads to a change in
future risk-free rates. Intuitively, according to the textbook model, if an innovation
to returns were to lead to a significant revision in planned intertemporal substitution
in consumption over the next S periods, then looking S periods out could be quite
misleading. If the only reason for consumption to move from planned consumption
between periods t + 1 and t + 1 + S were future innovations, then this measure would
exactly measure consumption risk. Thus, we demonstrate that our findings remain
when we include as an additional factor consumption growth interacted with changes
in the risk-free rate.
8.1. The ultimate risk to consumption
In an economy with a time-varying real interest rate, the textbook household optimization problem implies that consumption obeys an intertemporal Euler equation
between t + 1 and t + 1 + S for the risk-free rate
" S f
#
δ Rt+1,t+1+S u0 (Ct+1+S )
Et+1
= 1.
u0 (Ct+1 )
This Euler equation implies that marginal utility in t + 1 + S is equal to (discounted)
marginal utility in t + 1 plus an innovation to marginal utility due to information that
arises between t + 1 and t + 1 + S, denoted εt+1,t+1+S ,
f
u0 (Ct+1 ) = δS Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct+1+S ) − εt+1,t+1+S .

Substituting this relationship into the arbitrage equation (2.1), gives
h
i
h
i
f
f
f
Et Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ri,t+1 − Et Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct+1+S ) Rt,t+1
= 0.

Following the same derivation as before leads to a beta representation with
h
i
u0 (Ct+1+S )
f
f
i Cov Rt+1,t+1+S
h
,
R
0
t,t+1
u (Ct )
f
h
i
αS = E Rt,t+1
+
,
0
u (Ct+1+S )
f
E Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct )
h
i
0
u (Ct+1+S )
f
Cov Rt+1,t+1+S
, Ri,t+1
u0 (Ct )
h
i ,
β i,S =
u0 (Ct+1+S )
f
V ar Rt+1,t+1+S u0 (Ct )
h
i
u0 (Ct+1+S )
f
V ar Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct )
h
i .
λS = −
0
u (Ct+1+S )
f
E Rt+1,t+1+S
u0 (Ct )
20

³

u0 (Ct+1+S )
u0 (Ct )

Log-linearizing consumption growth,
u 1 − γ ln
factor beta representation
£ i ¤
f
f
C
= αS + β C
E Rt,t+1
i,S λS + β i,S λS

Ct+1+S
Ct

´
, we obtain a two
(8.1)

where:

h
³
³
´´
i
Ct+1+S
f
f
i Cov Rt+1,t+1+S 1 − γ ln
h
, Rt,t+1
Ct
f
³
³
´´i
h
+
;
αS = E Rt,t+1
f
1 − γ ln Ct+1+S
E Rt+1,t+1+S
Ct

βC
i,S

h
h
i
i
f
f
i
Cov Rt+1,t+1+S , Rt,t+1
V ar Rt+1,t+1+S
i ; λfS = − h
³
³
´´i ;
h
β fi,S =
f
f
1 − γ ln Ct+1+S
V ar Rt+1,t+1+S
E Rt+1,t+1+S
Ct
´
i
´i
³
³
h
h
Ct+1+S
f
f
,
R
ln Ct+1+S
ln
Cov Rt+1,t+1+S
γV
ar
R
i,t+1
t+1,t+1+S
Ct
Ct
´i
³
³
´´i .
h
³
; λC
=
= h
S
Ct+1+S
f
f
1
−
γ
ln
V ar Rt+1,t+1+S
ln Ct+1+S
E
R
t+1,t+1+S
Ct
Ct

The two factors are consumption growth interacted with the future risk-free rate
f
(Rt+1,t+1+S
) and the future risk free rate alone. Thus we have a “scaled” linear factor
f
f
is the scaling factor. Note that if we assume that Rt+1,t+1+S
model in which Rt+1,t+1+S
i
and Rt,t+1
are orthogonal, then we have that β fi,S λfS = 0 and our model collapses to a
one-factor model with β C
i,S only.
bC and λ
bf .
We also recover a measure of the implied risk aversion from both λ
S
S
These measures are, respectively,
h
i
C
bf
λ̂S E R
t+1,t+1+S
´i
´i ,
h
³
h
³
γ̂ C
(8.2)
S =
C
Ct+1+S
Ct+1+S
f
bf
b
+
λ̂
V ar R
ln
E
R
ln
S
t+1,t+1+S
t+1,t+1+S
Ct
Ct
h
i
h
i
f
f
bf E R
b
b
R
+
V
ar
λ
S
t+1,t+1+S
t+1,t+1+S
´i
h
³
γ̂ fS =
.
bf
E R
ln Ct+1+S
t+1,t+1+S

(8.3)

Ct

Using the estimated relative risk aversion we can recover a measure of the implied
mean risk free rate
h
³
´´
i
³
Ct+1+S
f
bf
i
h
Cov R
1
−
γ
b
,
R
ln
S
t,t+1
t+1,t+1+S
Ct
f
b Rt,t+1
h
³
³
´´i
=α
bS −
E
.
(8.4)
bf
E R
bS ln Ct+1+S
t+1,t+1+S 1 − γ
Ct

21

8.2. Estimation
f
Since Rt+1,t+1+S
is not observable for S > 1, the appropriate risk free rate need to
be constructed. We approximate the risk-free rate between t + 1and t + 1 + S by the
expected value of the product of the one-period risk-free rates
"S−1
#
Y
f
f
Rt+1,t+1+S
.
≈ Et+1
Rt+1+j,t+2+j
j=0

To model conditional expectations, we estimate the forecasting model
S−1
Y

f
Rt+1+j,t+2+j
= Φ0 + Φ1 Zt + Φ2 Zt−1 + ... + Φp+1 Zt−p + εt

(8.5)

j=0

i0
h
f
where Φ are parameter vectors and Zt = Rt,t+1
, π t , ∆ ln Ct . Our series for longhorizon risk-free rates is
"S−1
#
Y f
f
Rt+1,t+1+S = Êt+1
Rt+1+j,t+2+j
j=0

= Φ̂0 + Φ̂1 Zt + Φ̂2 Zt−1 + ... + Φ̂p+1 Zt−p

The fit in the forecasting regression exceeds 90 percent, suggesting that the assumed
approximation is reasonable.
Estimation of the two factor model uses the Fama-MacBeth procedure. β C
i,S and
f
β i,S are estimated by the time-series regressions
bf
Ri,t+1 = αfS + β fi,S R
t+1,t+1+S +
Ri,t+1 =

αC
S

+

βC
i,S

·
bf
R

µ

f
S,t,t+1 ,

Ct+1+S
t+1,t+1+S ln
Ct

¶¸

+

(8.6)

C
S,t,t+1 ,

(8.7)

f
f
f
bt+1,t+1
bt+1,t+2
= Rt+1,t+2
and R
= 1. In the
where we introduced the convention R
f
second stage, a series of cross-sectional regressions of equation (8.1) estimate λC
S , λS ,
and their statistical uncertainty.

8.3. Results
We estimate the model in equation (8.1) using the Fama-MacBeth procedure. The
second column of Table 8 reports the cross-sectional R2 of the two factor model given
by equation (8.1) while the remaining columns report statistics and estimated³parame´
Ct+1+S
f
ters for the one factor model in which we include only the factor Rt+1,t+1+S ln
Ct
22

f
and not Rt+1,t+1+S
(the one factor model is the same as in equation (8.1) with the ref
f
striction β i,S λS = 0). A comparison between the second and the third columns shows
bf
by
that adding R
t+1,t+1+S as additional factor increases the average fit of the model
´
³
C
f
t+1+S
b
ln
only 3 percent. Therefore, it is reasonable to concentrate on R
t+1,t+1+S

Ct

as the only factor. The first two rows of Table 8 reports the same results as the first
f
bt+1,t+1
= 1 and β fi,S λfS = 0. As S
two rows of Table 1 since, for S = 0, we have that R
increases, the economic importance of the factor increases and for S = 11 it explains
as much as 54 percent of the cross-sectional variance in average returns. As in Table 1,
this rise is not monotone and it declines for S ≥ 12. This corresponds to the starting
C
point of a sharp rise in the ratio of statistical uncertainty to observed variation in β̂ i,S .
The cross-sectional R2 of the one factor model is on average 1% higher than the one
bf
reported in Table 1, which shows that adding R
t+1,t+1+S as a scaling variable does not
decrease the high explanatory power of the ultimate risk to consumption, but actually
increases it slightly.
bC , rises monotonically with S and is staThe magnitude of the slope coeﬃcient, λ
tistically significant for horizons³8 and ´
higher. Thus, for large enough S, consumption
C
f
t+1+S
b
risk measured by R
explains the cross-section of returns. Moret+1,t+1+S ln
Ct

bC is never statistically diﬀerent from the point estimates of λ
b reported in Table
over, λ
1 and exhibits an almost identical pattern. We find similar conclusions for the implied
risk-free rate and risk aversion. α̂ decreases almost monotonically in S and becomes
statistically indistinguishable from the time series average of the three-month Treasury
bill for S > 6. The implied risk aversion declines in S and levels oﬀ at a point estimate
around 11. Furthermore, for larger S, the statistical uncertainty is much lower and a
95 percent confidence interval contains roughly all positive numbers below 14.
The analysis presented in this section is coherent, both qualitatively and quantitatively, with the results obtained under constant risk free rate assumption, and shows
that the assumption of a constant risk-free rate or return is not important for our
previous conclusions.

9. Conclusion
This paper analyzes the Fama and French portfolios and measures their riskiness by
their ultimate risk to aggregate consumption. When investors are allocating their
portfolios eﬃciently, diﬀerences in expected returns on assets should be explained by
diﬀerences in the risk of each marginal investment to the utility of investors. We
show that while the covariance of each portfolio and contemporaneous consumption
growth has almost no predictive power for explaining the pattern of average returns
across portfolios, the ultimate risk to consumption is highly statistically significant
in explaining average returns and explains a large fraction of the variation in average
returns. The average risk-free real rate of interest and the coeﬃcient of relative risk

23

aversion of the representative household calculated from the fitted model are more
reasonable and more precise than those obtained in the previous literature; confidence
intervals include completely reasonable estimates of these structural parameters. The
fit of our one factor model rivals that of the three factor models of Fama and French
and Lettau and Ludvigson. These conclusions are robust to several variations in
assumptions.
In sum, the insights of the C-CAPM are alive and well: consumption risk is an
important determinant of relative returns.
These results raise several questions. First, what is the true stochastic discount
factor that prices returns, over time and across assets? Second, and more realistically, while the ultimate risk to aggregate consumption helps to explain the premium
of equity over and above bonds, estimated risk aversion remains implausibly large.
However, Parker (2001) narrows the focus to households that actually hold stock, and
shows that the ultimate consumption risk of stockholders comes close to rationalizing
the observed premium on equity. Is the consumption of stockholders alone an even
better explanator of the cross-section of returns and does it imply more reasonable risk
aversion in this cross-sectional context? A final open question is whether the ultimate
risk to consumption explains diﬀerences in bond returns or diﬀerences in aggregate
returns over time.

24

References
Abel, A. B. (1990): “Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up with
the Joneses,” American Economic Review, 80, 38—42.
Ait-Sahalia, Y., J. A. Parker, and M. Yogo (2001): “Luxury Goods and the
Equity Premium,” NBER Working Paper 8417.
Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe (2000): “Money, Interest Rates, and
Exchange Rates with Endogenously Segmented Asset Markets,” NBER Working
Paper 7871.
Aschauer, D. (1985): “Fiscal Policy and Aggregate Demand,” American Economic
Review, 75, 117—27.
Attanasio, O., and G. Weber (1993): “Consumption Growth, the Interest Rate
and Aggregation,” Review of Economic Studies, 60, 631—49.
(1995): “Is Consumption Growth Consistent with Intertemporal
Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey,” Journal of
Political Economy, 103(6), 1121—57.
Bansal, R., R. F. Dittmar, and C. T. Lundblad (2001): “Consumption,
Dividends, and the Cross-Section of Equity Returns,” Manuscript, Fuqua School
of Business, Duke University.
Basu, S., and M. S. Kimball (2000): “Long-Run Labor Supply and the Elasticity
of Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption,” University of Michigan
Manuscript.
Baxter, M., and U. J. Jermann (1999): “Household Production and the Excess
Sensitivity of Consumption to Current Income,” American Economic Review, 89,
902—20.
Brainard, W. C., W. R. Nelson, and M. D. Shapiro (1991): “The
Consumption Beta Explains Expected Returns at Long Horizons,” Yale University
Manuscript.
Breeden, D. T. (1979): “An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7,
265—96.
Breeden, D. T., M. R. Gibbons, and R. H. Litzenberger (1989): “Empirical
Test of the Consumption-Oriented CAPM,” The Journal of Finance, 44(2),
231—262.
Caballero, R. J. (1990): “Expenditure on Durable Goods: A Case for Slow
Adjustment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 727—43.
(1995): “Near Rationality, Heterogeneity, and Aggregate Consumption,”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(1), 29—48.
Campbell, J. Y. (1996): “Understanding Risk and Return,” Journal of Political
Economy, 104(2), 298—345.
(1999): “Asset Prices, Consumption, and The Business Cycle,” in
Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1C,
chap. 19, pp. 1231—1303. Elsevier Press.
25

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A
Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of
Political Economy, 107(2), 205—51.
Carroll, C. D. (1997): “Buﬀer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent
Income Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1), 1—55.
Cochrane, J. H. (1996): “A Cross-Sectional Test of an Investment-Based Asset
Pricing Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 104(3), 572—621.
Daniel, K. D., and D. Marshall (1997): “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the
Risk-Free Rate Puzzle at Long Horizons,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1(2), 452—84.
Dynan, K. E., and D. M. Maki (2001): “Does the Stock Market Matter for
Consumption?,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2001-23, Federal
Reserve Board.
Eichenbaum, M., L. P. Hansen, and K. Singleton (1988): “A Times Series
Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 103, 51—78.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 47, 427—465.
(1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” The
Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3—56.
Fama, E. F., and J. MacBeth (1973): “Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical
Tests,” Journal of Political Economy, 81, 607—636.
Flavin, M. (1981): “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
about Future Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 974—1009.
(2001): “Owner-Occupied Housing and the Presence of Adjustment Costs:
Implications for Asset Pricing and Nondurable Consumption,” UCSD working
paper.
Gabaix, X., and D. Laibson (2001): “The 6D bias and the equity premium
puzzle,” in N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. by B. Bernanke, and
K. Rogoﬀ, pp. 257—311. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gourinchas, P.-O., and J. A. Parker (2002): “Consumption Over the
Lifecycle,” Econometrica, 70(1), 47—89.
Grossman, S., and G. Laroque (1990): “Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio
Choice in the Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods,” Econometrica,
58(1), 25—51.
Hall, R. E. (1978): “The Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle Permanent
Income Hypothesis,” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6), 971—87.
Hall, R. E., and F. S. Mishkin (1982): “The Sensitivity of Consumption to
Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,” Econometrica, 50,
461—481.
Jagannathan, R., and Z. Wang (1996): “The Conditional CAPM and the
Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” The Journal of Finance, 51, 3—53.
(1998): “An Asymptotic Theory for Estimating Beta-Pricing Models Using
Cross-Sectional Regression,” The Journal of Finance, 53, 1285—1309.
26

Kan, R. M., and C. Zhang (1999): “Two-pass Tests of Asset Pricing Models with
Useless Factors,” Journal of Finance, 54, 204—35.
Kandel, S., and R. F. Stambaugh (1990): “Expectations and Volatility of
Consumption and Asset Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 3(2), 207—232.
Leamer, E. E. (1983): “Model Choice and Specification,” in Handbook of
Econometrics, ed. by Z. Grilliches, and M. D. Intriligator, vol. 1. North-Holland.
Lettau, M., and S. Ludvigson (2001a): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth, and
Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815—49.
(2001b): “Resurrectiong the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test When Risk
Premia Are Time-Varying,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 1238—1286.
Ludvigson, S., and C. Steindel (1999): “How Important is the Stock Market
Eﬀect on Consumption?,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review, 5(2), 29—51.
Lustig, H. (2001): “The Market Pice of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth
Distribution,” Stanford University mimeo.
Lynch, A. W. (1996): “Decision Frequency and Synchronization Across Agents:
Implications for Aggregate Consumption and Equity Return,” Journal of Finance,
51(4), 1479—97.
Mankiw, N. G., and M. D. Shapiro (1986): “Risk and Return: Consumption
Beta Versus Market Beta,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 68, 452—59.
Marshall, D. A., and N. G. Parekh (1999): “Can Costs of Consumption
Adjustment Explain Asset Pricing Puzzles?,” Journal of Finance, 54(2).
Merton, R. (1969): “Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The
continuous time case,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 247—57.
Ogaki, M., and C. M. Reinhart (1998): “Measuring Intertemporal Substitution:
The Role of Durable Goods,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 1078—98.
Parker, J. A. (1999a): “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable
Changes in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 89(4), 959—973.
(1999b): “Spendthrift in America? On two decades of decline in the U.S.
saving rate,” in N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by B. Bernanke, and
J. Rotemberg, pp. 317—370. Cambridge: MIT Press.
(2001): “The Consumption Risk of the Stock Market,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 2, 279—348.
Piazzesi, M. (2001): “Comment on Gabaix and Laibson, ‘The 6D bias and the
equity premium puzzle’,” in N.B.E.R. Macroeconomics Annual 2001, ed. by
B. Bernanke, and K. Rogoﬀ. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Piazzesi, M., M. Schneider, and S. Tuzel (2003): “Housing, Consumption, and
Asset Pricing,” UCLA manuscript.
Rubinstein, M. (1976): “The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the
Pricing of Options,” Bell Journal of Economics, 7, 407—25.
Shanken, J. (1992): “On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models,” The Review of
Financial Studies, 5, 1—33.
Sims, C. A. (2001): “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Princeton University
Manuscript.
27

Souleles, N. (forthcoming): “Consumer Sentiment: Its Rationality and Usefulness
in Forecasting Expenditure — Evidence from Michigan Micro Data,” Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking.
Startz, R. (1989): “The Stochastic Behavior of Durable and Nondurable
Consumption,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 71, 356—63.
Wilcox, D. W. (1992): “The Construction of U.S. Consumption Data: Some Facts
and Their Implications For Empirical Work,” American Economic Review, 82,
922—941.
Zeldes, S. P. (1989): “Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 97, 305—346.

28

Appendixes
A. Multiplicative External Habits
In this section we show that, in the presence of external habit formation that acts
as a shifter of the utility function, the ultimate risk to consumption measure is the
appropriate stochastic discount factor to price the cross-section of asset returns.
Suppose that the instantaneous marginal utility function, u0 (Ct ) , is shifted by an
external habit component so that marginal utility at time t takes the form V (Ct , Ψt ) =
u0 (Ct ) Ψt (C0 , ..., Ct ) where Ψt is a function of the past history of aggregate consumption. Several properties of the habit component Ψt are desirable from an economic
point of view: i) Ψt is increasing in Cs so that more “habit” consumption increases
the marginal utility of agent consumption; ii) the eﬀect of Ct−s on Ψt decreases with
s so that more recent “habit” consumption matters more; iii) the marginal eﬀect of
“habit” consumption is decreasing so that Ct has diminishing marginal eﬀects on Ψt .
We formalize our general class of habit models as follows.
Assumption (The class of habit models)
a) Ψt (C0 , ..., Ct−τ ) = f (ln Ct−τ , Ψt−τ −1 ) for τ ≥ 0
b) fC (ln C, Ψ) ≥ 0, fCC (ln C, Ψ) < 0
c) |fC | > |fC fΨ | ⇒ |fΨ | < 1
where fC and fΨ are the derivatives with respect to the first and the second arguments of the function.19 For example, this class of models includes the model of Abel
(1990)
µ ¶1−γ
1
−γ
0
u (Ct ) Ψt (C0 , ..., Ct ) = Ct
Xt

κ
where Xt = Ct−1
and 1 > κ (γ − 1) > 0.
The first order conditions of the agent utility maximization problem imply an
arbitrage relation analogous to equations (2.1) and (3.5)
£
¤
i
(A.1)
− Et [u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ψt+1+S ] Rf = 0.
Et u0 (Ct+1+S ) Ψt+1+S Rt,t+1

Dividing both sides by u0 (Ct ), taking unconditional expectation and rewriting the
expectation of the product in term of covariances and reorganizing yield
£
¤
i
£ i ¤
Cov mt+1+S Ψt+1+S , Rt,t+1
E Rt,t+1 = αS −
,
(A.2)
E [mt+1+S Ψt+1+S ]
19

This recursive formulation does not represent a substantial loss of generality and greatly reduces
the dimensionality of the problem at hand making it easily tractable. The use of the natural logarith
is without loss of generality.

29

0

t+1+S )
where αS = Rf and mt+1+S = u (C
. Following the same derivation without habit
u0 (Ct )
component, yields
£
¤
i
£ i ¤
Cov mt+1+S , Rt,t+1
E Rt,t+1 = αS −
.
(A.3)
E [mt+1+S ]

Notice that log linearizing the ratio of marginal utilities mt+1+S in equation (A.3) we
obtain the beta representation of equation (3.3). This means that, if we are able to
show that the right hand side of equation (A.2) converges to the right hand side of
equation (A.3), the ultimate risk to consumption is the appropriate stochastic discount
factor to price the cross-section of asset returns in the presence of external habits that
act as a shifter of the instantaneous utility function.
Proposition 1. Under the following regularity conditions on consumption growth
and the functions
i) E [Ψt ] < d0 , E [Ψ2t ] < d1 ∀t
¸
·
ii) lim Ψt ln Ψt =⇒ lim E [Ψt ] = E lim Ψt
t−→+∞

t−→+∞

t−→+∞

iii) |∆ ln Ct+1 | < d2 ∀t almost surely
iv) |fC (Ct , Ψt−1 )| < d3 ∀t almost surely
v) fC (C, Ψ) is o (t−2 )
vi) V art (∆ ln Ct+1 ) is bounded from above for each t
for d0 , ..., d3 arbitrary constants, ∃ S such that ∀S > S
°
¤
¤°
£
°
° Cov £m
i
i
Cov mt+1+S , Rt,t+1
t+1+S Ψt+1+S , Rt,t+1
°
°
−
°60
°
°
°
E [mt+1+S Ψt+1+S ]
E [mt+1+S ]

(A.4)

almost surely and uniformly.

Proof: We prove the proposition for τ = 0. The case for τ > 0 is a simplification.
Notice that proving equation (A.4) is equivalent to prove that
£
£
¤
¤
i
i
E mt+1+S Ψt+1+S , Rt,t+1
a.s. E mt+1+S , Rt,t+1
−→
.
(A.5)
E [mt+1+S Ψt+1+S ]
E [mt+1+S ]
and the convergence is uniform. We first show that Ψt+1+S converges almost surely
and uniformly as S → +∞. By Taylor expansion of |Ψt+1+S − Ψt+S | around Ψt+S−1
and Ct+S we obtain that
|Ψt+1+S − Ψt+S | = |f (ln Ct+1+S , Ψt+S ) − Ψt+S |
∼
= |fC (ln Ct+S , Ψt+S−1 ) (∆ ln Ct+S+1 ) + fΨ (ln Ct+S , Ψt+S−1 ) (Ψt+S − Ψt+S−1 )|
≤ |fC (ln Ct+S , Ψt+S−1 )| |∆ ln Ct+S+1 | + |fΨ (ln Ct+S , Ψt+S−1 )| |(Ψt+S − Ψt+S−1 )|
t+S
P
≤
|fC (ln Cτ , Ψτ −1 )| |fΨ (ln Cτ +1 , Ψτ )|t+S−τ |∆ ln Ct+S+1 |
(A.6)
τ =0

+ |fΨ (ln C1 , Ψ0 )|t+S |(Ψ1 − Ψ0 )|
30

Notice that the last term in equation (A.6), since |fΨ | < 1, goes uniformly almost
surely to zero as S → +∞. For any δ 1 , δ 2 , k, pick T1 and T2 such that
|fΨ |t+S < δ 1

k (t + S)

|fC (Ct+S , Ψτ +S−1 )| < δ 2

∀S ≥ T1

k (t + S)2

∀S ≥ T2

Then define Te = max [T1 , T2 ] and pick T = 2Te. It follows that for each
t+S
P

τ =0

|fC (ln Cτ , Ψτ −1 )| |fΨ (ln Cτ +1 , Ψτ )|t+S−τ |∆ ln Ct+S+1 | <

(A.7)

almost surely for each S > T since
t+S
P

τ =0

≤ d2

|fC (ln Cτ , Ψτ −1 )| |fΨ (ln Cτ +1 , Ψτ )|t+S−τ |∆ ln Ct+S+1 |

t+S+
P Te
τ =t+Te

|fC (ln Cτ , Ψτ −1 )| |fΨ (ln Cτ +1 , Ψτ )|t+S−τ |∆ ln Ct+S+1 |

t+
PTe

|fC (ln Cτ , Ψτ −1 )| |fΨ (ln Cτ +1 , Ψτ )|t+S−τ |∆ ln Ct+S+1 |
τ =0
´ 1
³
< d2 δ1 + δ2
k
k (t + S)
+

and this completes the proof of almost sure convergence of Ψt+1+S Then, taking a log
linear approximation of the habit shifter around Ct+S and Ψτ +S−1
Ψt+S+1 ≈ f (ln Ct+S , Ψτ +S−1 ) + fC (ln Ct+S , Ψτ +S−1 ) ∆ ln Ct+S+1
+fΨ (ln Ct+S , Ψτ +S−1 ) (Ψτ +S − Ψτ +S−1 )
it is easy to see that, since the conditional on time t + S variance of ∆ ln Ct+S+1 is
bounded from above and |fC (Ct+S , Ψτ +S−1 )| decreases over time due to the increase
in consumption,
lim V art+S (Ψt+S+1 ) = 0
S−→∞

almost surely. Therefore, considering a normal approximation of the distribution of
and applying the law of
Ψt+S+1 , using the approximation mt+1+S ≈ 1 − γ ln Ct+S+1
Ct
iterated expectation in equation (A.5) completes the proof.

31

Table 1: Expected Returns and Consumption Risk at Different Horizons
Horizon
(quarters)

R2

λˆ

Fama-MacBeth
standard error

Shanken
standard error

Implied risk
free rate
(annualized)

t-test for the
implied risk
free rate**

Implied
relative risk
aversion

95 % confidence
interval for implied
risk aversion***

0*
0.12
0.0030
(0.0023)
(0.0025)
15.0%
6.08
40.8
[ 87.2
0
0.19
0.0043
(0.0026)
(0.0030)
8.6%
2.93
55.5
[ 103.8
1
0.08
0.0037
(0.0039)
(0.0041)
8.7%
2.29
23.1
[ 53.9
2
0.17
0.0081
(0.0055)
(0.0062)
6.3%
1.41
25.9
[ 45.9
3
0.20
0.0093
(0.0058)
(0.0065)
6.7%
1.74
20.0
[ 34.0
4
0.11
0.0073
(0.0064)
(0.0067)
8.0%
2.05
12.9
[ 25.6
5
0.12
0.0085
(0.0072)
(0.0077)
8.0%
2.11
11.9
[ 22.6
6
0.11
0.0091
(0.0078)
(0.0083)
8.1%
2.12
10.7
[ 20.0
7
0.16
0.0116
(0.0082)
(0.0089)
7.2%
1.86
11.0
[ 18.6
8
0.28
0.0165
(0.0084)
(0.0097)
6.4%
1.74
12.4
[ 18.2
9
0.41
0.0213
(0.0084)
(0.0103)
6.2%
1.68
13.0
[ 17.5
10
0.44
0.0234
(0.0087)
(0.0110)
5.8%
1.51
12.6
[ 16.4
11
0.52
0.0276
(0.0090)
(0.0118)
5.3%
1.27
12.5
[ 15.7
12
0.42
0.0299
(0.0108)
(0.0146)
4.8%
1.06
12.0
[ 15.1
13
0.45
0.0392
(0.0128)
(0.0195)
3.6%
0.62
12.4
[ 15.0
14
0.38
0.0409
(0.0140)
(0.0215)
4.4%
0.89
11.7
[ 14.3
15
0.37
0.0479
(0.0157)
(0.0261)
4.1%
0.74
11.6
[ 13.9
* Uses the start of period timing convention: consumption growth between t+1 and t+2 is aligned with returns during t+1.
** Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the return on 3 month Treasury bills.
*** The confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error.

-35.7
-29.6
-42.0
-23.8
-12.9
-19.2
-18.3
-17.9
-12.0
-4.1
0.8
1.5
3.5
0.7
0.3
-1.9
-4.4

]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]

Table 2. Pricing Errors of Average Size and Book to Market Portfolios
By size quintiles
(Quarterly rates in percentage terms)
Horizon (quarters)
0
11

By book-to-market quintiles
(Quarterly rates in percentage terms)
Change

Horizon (quarters)
0
11

Change

S1
0.87
0.72
-0.15
B1
0.87
0.70
-0.17
S2
0.60
0.40
-0.21
B2
0.40
0.25
-0.14
S3
0.42
0.23
-0.18
B3
0.27
0.35
0.08
S4
0.35
0.29
-0.05
B4
0.35
0.23
-0.12
S5
0.18
0.20
0.02
B5
0.58
0.36
-0.22
Note: Average pricing errors are calculated as the square root of the average squared errors. Units are quarterly rates
reported in percentage terms, so that an improvement of 0.15 is roughly 0.6 percent per year

Table 3: Expected Returns and Consumption Risk Estimated 1963Q3 to 1998Q3
Horizon
(quarters)

R2

λˆ

Fama-MacBeth
standard error

Shanken
standard error

Implied risk
free rate
(annualized)

t-test for the
implied risk
free rate**

Implied
relative risk
aversion

95 % confidence
interval for implied
risk aversion***

0*
0.03
0.0008
(0.0021)
(0.0021)
12.3%
3.87
12.3
[ 61.4
0
0.34
0.0048
(0.0025)
(0.0029)
6.3%
1.37
60.7
[ 106.5
1
0.14
0.0054
(0.0048)
(0.0052)
5.2%
0.78
30.9
[ 63.7
2
0.29
0.0125
(0.0074)
(0.0095)
2.2%
0.00
34.9
[ 55.9
3
0.26
0.0133
(0.0085)
(0.0104)
4.1%
0.55
25.4
[ 41.3
4
0.14
0.0095
(0.0087)
(0.0095)
6.1%
1.13
15.7
[ 30.0
5
0.15
0.0110
(0.0097)
(0.0107)
6.0%
1.12
14.3
[ 26.1
6
0.23
0.0160
(0.0110)
(0.0130)
4.6%
0.70
15.6
[ 24.7
7
0.26
0.0178
(0.0114)
(0.0136)
3.8%
0.45
14.4
[ 22.0
8
0.45
0.0272
(0.0121)
(0.0166)
2.5%
0.07
16.1
[ 21.6
9
0.64
0.0352
(0.0115)
(0.0177)
2.1%
0.04
16.4
[ 20.4
10
0.65
0.0376
(0.0122)
(0.0190)
0.9%
0.35
15.4
[ 18.9
11
0.73
0.0426
(0.0119)
(0.0196)
0.9%
0.34
14.8
[ 17.7
12
0.70
0.0477
(0.0137)
(0.0239)
-1.1%
0.78
14.2
[ 16.8
13
0.70
0.0563
(0.0148)
(0.0284)
-1.6%
0.83
13.9
[ 16.1
* Uses the start of period timing convention: consumption growth between t+1 and t+2 is aligned with returns during t+1.
** Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the return on 3 month Treasury bills.
*** The confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error.

-65.6
-18.2
-51.3
-41.1
-33.7
-37.2
-34.8
-27.7
-21.7
-10.6
-0.3
-0.5
3.0
0.0
-0.5

]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]

Table 4: Expected Returns and the Risk to Total Consumption
Horizon
(quarters)

R2

λˆ

Fama-MacBeth
standard error

Shanken
standard error

Implied risk
free rate
(annualized)

t-test for the
implied risk
free rate**

Implied
relative risk
aversion

95 % confidence
interval for implied
risk aversion***

0*
0.27
0.0053
(0.0026)
(0.0031)
14.6%
5.67
49.5
[ 80.7
0
0.32
0.0053
(0.0024)
(0.0027)
9.1%
3.37
49.8
[ 78.4
1
0.23
0.0064
(0.0037)
(0.0041)
7.0%
2.26
27.7
[ 45.1
2
0.18
0.0083
(0.0054)
(0.0060)
6.3%
1.69
19.6
[ 32.3
3
0.17
0.0103
(0.0069)
(0.0077)
6.6%
1.87
15.9
[ 25.7
4
0.11
0.0085
(0.0073)
(0.0078)
7.7%
2.17
10.9
[ 19.7
5
0.16
0.0133
(0.0090)
(0.0101)
6.9%
1.98
11.9
[ 18.5
6
0.17
0.0140
(0.0092)
(0.0103)
7.1%
2.16
10.6
[ 16.1
7
0.20
0.0177
(0.0103)
(0.0120)
7.0%
2.23
10.5
[ 15.0
8
0.33
0.0236
(0.0104)
(0.0129)
6.6%
2.16
10.9
[ 14.1
9
0.41
0.0271
(0.0103)
(0.0132)
6.3%
2.01
10.4
[ 13.0
10
0.46
0.0306
(0.0108)
(0.0143)
6.3%
1.98
9.9
[ 12.1
11
0.55
0.0370
(0.0111)
(0.0157)
6.2%
1.82
9.7
[ 11.4
12
0.50
0.0411
(0.0126)
(0.0185)
6.1%
1.77
9.3
[ 10.8
13
0.44
0.0520
(0.0158)
(0.0264)
5.4%
1.47
9.2
[ 10.6
14
0.38
0.0531
(0.0169)
(0.0280)
6.3%
1.82
8.7
[ 10.0
15
0.37
0.0588
(0.0182)
(0.0317)
7.0%
2.00
8.4
[ 9.5
* Uses the start of period timing convention: consumption growth between t+1 and t+2 is aligned with returns during t+1.
** Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the return on 3 month Treasury bills.
*** The confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error.

-12.0
-2.2
-12.7
-16.5
-16.6
-20.9
-16.2
-13.0
-10.7
-2.7
0.6
1.6
3.4
2.4
-0.5
-2.1
-3.8

]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]

Table 5: Expected Returns and Consumption Risk Using Equal Weighted Returns
Horizon
(quarters)

R2

λˆ

Fama-MacBeth
standard error

Shanken
standard error

Implied risk
free rate
(annualized)

t-test for the
implied risk
free rate**

Implied
relative risk
aversion

95 % confidence
interval for implied
risk aversion***

0*
0.10
0.0031
(0.0023)
(0.0025)
15.9%
6.12
42.6
[ 88.5
0
0.39
0.0064
(0.0028)
(0.0036)
7.0%
2.04
74.7
[ 122.2
1
0.23
0.0069
(0.0041)
(0.0047)
5.7%
1.18
37.2
[ 64.8
2
0.38
0.0131
(0.0058)
(0.0076)
2.7%
0.27
35.7
[ 53.4
3
0.39
0.0141
(0.0063)
(0.0078)
3.9%
0.68
26.3
[ 39.0
4
0.30
0.0130
(0.0068)
(0.0080)
4.6%
0.83
19.5
[ 30.2
5
0.31
0.0153
(0.0078)
(0.0093)
4.6%
0.82
17.7
[ 26.6
6
0.31
0.0166
(0.0086)
(0.0102)
4.5%
0.79
15.9
[ 23.5
7
0.36
0.0200
(0.0092)
(0.0114)
3.5%
0.52
15.4
[ 21.6
8
0.50
0.0242
(0.0092)
(0.0121)
3.6%
0.62
15.3
[ 20.2
9
0.62
0.0288
(0.0091)
(0.0127)
4.0%
0.78
15.0
[ 19.0
10
0.67
0.0326
(0.0097)
(0.0141)
3.2%
0.49
14.6
[ 17.9
11
0.74
0.0362
(0.0097)
(0.0147)
3.0%
0.43
14.0
[ 16.8
12
0.67
0.0414
(0.0120)
(0.0192)
1.8%
0.05
13.5
[ 16.2
13
0.71
0.0545
(0.0144)
(0.0271)
0.2%
-0.41
13.8
[ 16.0
14
0.67
0.0589
(0.0159)
(0.0310)
0.9%
-0.22
13.1
[ 15.2
15
0.68
0.0689
(0.0176)
(0.0380)
0.5%
-0.33
12.8
[ 14.7
* Uses the start of period timing convention: consumption growth between t+1 and t+2 is aligned with returns during t+1.
** Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the return on 3 month Treasury bills.
*** The confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error.

-32.9
-14.2
-22.1
-10.7
-5.0
-7.8
-7.4
-7.5
-4.6
0.1
3.5
4.1
5.3
2.5
0.2
-3.0
-8.7

]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]

Table 6: The Significance of Consumption Risk vs. Firm Characteristics

Horizon
(quarters)

R2

λˆ

0

0.22

0.0068
(0.0025)
(0.0033)

11

0.58

0.0355
(0.0106)
(0.0158)

0

0.23

0.0071
(0.0026)
(0.0034)

11

0.59

0.0357
(0.0106)
(0.0158)

Coefficient
on Size
Factor

R2

λˆ

Factor calculated as mean of the log
0.0012
0.56
0.0028
(0.0013)
(0.0029)
(0.0018)
(0.0030)
0.0012
(0.0014)
(0.0021)

0.0048
(0.0019)
(0.0020)

0.0186
(0.0115)
(0.0133)

0.0033
(0.0022)
(0.0025)

Factor calculated as log of the mean
0.0012
0.78
0.0013
(0.0013)
(0.0030)
(0.0017)
(0.0030)

0.0079
(0.0025)
(0.0026)

0.0012
(0.0013)
(0.0020)

0.65

Coefficient on
Book to Market
Factor

0.78

0.0075
(0.0140)
(0.0144)

0.0071
(0.0034)
(0.0035)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis, the first based on the Fama-McBeth standard error while the
second uses the Shanken correction.

Table 7: Statistics on Predicting Average Returns for Betas from Different Factor Models
Sample period of asset returns: 1963:3-1998:3
Factors

∆lnCt+1 cayt ∆ ln C t +1 ln(Ct+1+s

t-test for the
implied risk Implied relative
Ct ) free rate* risk aversion**

Row

R2

1

0.78 3.9% 0.0118 0.4425 1.4666
(6.3) (0.0165) (0.5099) (0.4477)
(6.7) (0.0173) (0.5108) (0.4477)
0.66 13.6%
-0.0032 0.0035 0.0022
(3.8)
(0.0035) (0.0020) (0.0012)
(5.1)
(0.0046) (0.0027) (0.0016)
0.43 8.27%
0.0019 0.0012
(2.8)
(0.0025) (0.0015)
(3.6)
(0.0032) (0.0020)
0.73 0.9%
0.0426
(4.1)
(0.0119)
(6.9)
(0.0196)
0.34 6.3%
0.0048
(3.0)
(0.0025)
(3.5)
(0.0029)

2

3

4

5

Rf

Rtm+1 SMB t+ 1 HML t+ 1

cay t

0.2627
0.2485
3.1239
2.3087

84.6
[5258.8 -5258.8]

2.1780
1.6890

49.7
[5365.5 -5266.3]

0.3354
0.1998

14.8
[3.0
17.7]

1.3691
1.1742

Sample period of asset returns: 1952:4-1998:3
Factors
∆

ln

C

t

+

1

∆lnCt+1 cayt ∆ ln C t +1 ln(Ct+1+s

t-test for the
implied risk Implied relative
Ct ) free rate* risk aversion**

Row

R2

1

0.71 16.0% -0.0116 0.3266 1.2820
(5.4) (0.0130) (0.4070) (0.3751)
(5.5) (0.0134) (0.4075) (0.3748)
0.61 15.7%
-0.0065 0.0049 0.0030
(4.3)
(0.0037) (0.0019) (0.0011)
(6.0)
(0.0051) (0.0026) (0.0016)
0.47 9.4%
0.0018 0.0012
(2.6)
(0.0027) (0.0016)
(3.3)
(0.0035) (0.0021)
0.61 5.1%
0.0306
(3.3)
(0.0091)
(4.6)
(0.0125)
0.33 7.5%
0.0044
(2.7)
(0.0020)
(3.1)
(0.0023)

2

3

4

5

Rf

Rtm+1 SMB t+ 1 HML t+ 1

cay t

2.7258
2.6375
3.3491
2.3878

65.1
[5894.7 -5764.5]

2.9520
2.2821

28.0
[7347.5 -7291.6]

0.9415
0.6757

13.1
[4.8
16.1]

2.0432
1.7955

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis, the first based on the Fama-McBeth standard error while the second uses the Shanken
correction.
* Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the 3 months T-bill. The
top statistic uses Fama-MacBeth standard errors, the bottom statistic uses the Shanken correction.
** 95% confidence interval in square brackets (confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error).

Table 8: Explaining Expected Returns with Consumption Growth and the Risk-Free Interest Rate
Horizon
(quarters)

R 2 -- two
factors
model

2
R -- one
factor
model

λ̂C

Fama-MacBeth
standard error

Shanken
standard error

Implied risk
free rate
(annualized)

t-test for the
implied risk
free rate**

Implied
relative risk
aversion

95 % confidence
interval for implied
risk aversion***

0*
0.12
0.12
0.0030
(0.0023)
(0.0025)
15.0%
6.08
40.8
[ 87.2
0
0.19
0.19
0.0043
(0.0026)
(0.0030)
8.6%
2.93
55.5
[ 103.8
1
0.15
0.08
0.0038
(0.0039)
(0.0041)
8.6%
2.27
23.4
[ 53.8
2
0.24
0.18
0.0083
(0.0055)
(0.0062)
6.1%
1.36
26.1
[ 45.7
3
0.27
0.21
0.0096
(0.0058)
(0.0065)
6.5%
1.68
20.1
[ 33.7
4
0.18
0.12
0.0076
(0.0064)
(0.0068)
7.8%
1.99
13.0
[ 25.3
5
0.19
0.13
0.0090
(0.0074)
(0.0079)
7.8%
2.04
12.0
[ 22.3
6
0.18
0.12
0.0098
(0.0080)
(0.0085)
7.8%
2.03
10.8
[ 19.7
7
0.22
0.17
0.0125
(0.0084)
(0.0092)
7.0%
1.78
11.0
[ 18.2
8
0.32
0.30
0.0177
(0.0087)
(0.0101)
6.3%
1.68
12.2
[ 17.6
9
0.44
0.43
0.0229
(0.0087)
(0.0108)
6.1%
1.64
12.6
[ 16.8
10
0.47
0.45
0.0253
(0.0092)
(0.0116)
5.7%
1.47
12.1
[ 15.7
11
0.55
0.54
0.0299
(0.0095)
(0.0126)
5.3%
1.27
11.9
[ 14.8
12
0.46
0.44
0.0328
(0.0115)
(0.0156)
4.7%
1.04
11.3
[ 14.2
13
0.50
0.47
0.0427
(0.0134)
(0.0206)
3.7%
0.66
11.6
[ 14.0
14
0.43
0.41
0.0457
(0.0150)
(0.0233)
4.4%
0.87
11.0
[ 13.3
15
0.42
0.41
0.0536
(0.0168)
(0.0283)
4.0%
0.72
10.8
[ 12.8
* Uses the start of period timing convention: consumption growth between t+1 and t+2 is aligned with returns during t+1.
** Tests for the null hypothesis that the implied risk free rate is equal to the time series average of the return on 3 month Treasury bills.
***The confidence interval for risk aversion uses the Shanken standard error.

-35.7
-29.6
-41.0
-22.3
-11.6
-18.1
-16.8
-16.0
-10.5
-3.2
1.3
1.9
3.6
1.2
1.1
-0.6
-2.3

]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]
]

Figure 1: Ratio of Statistical Variance to Cross-sectional Variance of Beta's
6

5

Ratio

4

3

2

1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Horizon (S)

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Average Real Returns (quarterly rates)

Figure 2: Average Returns and Betas
Horizon (S) = 0

0.045

Horizon (S) = 11

0.045

0.040

0.040

0.035

0.035

0.030

0.030

0.025

0.025

0.020

0.020

0.015

0.015

0.010

0.010

0.005

0.005

0.000

0.000
0

1

2

3

4

0.00

Consumption Betas

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

Figure 3: Fitted Returns and Average Returns
Quarterly rates
Horizon (S) = 0

0.045

Horizon (S) = 11

0.045

0.040

0.040

15

Fitted returns

12
0.035

11
0.030

21

31
42
51
41
52

0.025

13
55
22 33
32
4443
54
53

14
45
24
233435

0.035

15
25

0.030

42

25

21
51
52
31
41

0.025

0.020

53

0.020

0.015
0.015

11

14
35
13
24
45
12 44
23
3233
34
55
43
54
22

0.015
0.020

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.045

0.015

0.020

Average realized returns

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.045

Figure 4: Fitted Returns and Average Returns for Different Models
Quarterly rates, 1963:3 - 1998:3
Standard C-CAPM

0.0420
0.0385

0.0385

12

0.0350
0.0315

21
42
31

0.0245

53
41
5251

0.0210

Fitted returns

14

13

11

0.0280

55
22 33
32
43
54

15

0.0315

4524
23 35
34

0.0280
0.0245

44

0.0175

0.018

0.024

0.030

0.036

0.0385

25
0.0350

12
13
33
44

0.0280

52
53

11

42
21

22
43
54
32

15

34

15

24
14

23

53
52
21
31
41
51
0.018

0.024

0.030

45
24
35

13
3312
44

0.0280
0.0245

51

0.0210
0.0175

0.042

15

0.0385

0.0315

34
23

0.036

Slow consumption adjustment

0.0350

31
41
0.018

0.012

0.0420

14

55

0.0315

0.012

0.042

Lettau and Ludvigson (three factor model)

0.0420

0.0140

42

44
55
13
3312
5443
22 32

25

0.0140

0.012

0.0175

11

0.0210

0.0140

0.0210

35
45

0.0350

25

0.0175

0.0245

Fama and French

0.0420

42
11

51
52
21 53
31
41

55
43
32
54
22

1425
24
35
2345
34

0.0140
0.024

0.030

0.036

0.042

0.012

0.018

Average realized returns

0.024

0.030

0.036

0.042

Figure 5: Fitted Returns and Average Returns in the Baseline Sample
Quarterly rates, 1952:4 - 1998:3
Standard C-CAPM

0.045

0.040

0.040

12
0.035

11

55 13
22 33
21
31
32 44
42 54
43
53
41
52
51

0.030

Fitted returns

0.025

45
24
35
23
34

1425

15

15
0.035

55 13
44
12
54
33
43
53 22 32

0.030

11
0.025

21

0.020

0.020

0.015

25
35
45
14
3424
23

42
52
31
5141

0.015

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.045

Lettau and Ludvigson (two factor model)

0.045

0.015

0.020

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.040

45
55
1213
22 3344

0.035

11
0.030

21

52
51
4231
41

0.025

54
53

3243

24 14

25

15

15
0.035

35
34
0.030

23

11
42
51
21 52

0.025

0.020

13
44
12
55
33
3243
54
22

453524 1425
2334

53

41
31

0.020

0.015

0.045

Slow consumption adjustment

0.045

0.040

0.015

Fama and French

0.045

0.015
0.020

0.025

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.045

0.015

0.020

0.025

Average realized returns

0.030

0.035

0.040

0.045

