                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE LIFE CYCLES OF MODERN ARTISTS:
                      THEORY, MEASUREMENT, AND IMPLICATIONS

                                          David W. Galenson

                                         Working Paper 9539
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9539


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
The Life Cycles of Modern Artists: Theory, Measurement, and Implications
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 9539
March 2003
JEL No. J4

                                           ABSTRACT




There have been two very different life cycles for important modern artists: some, including Picasso,

have made their greatest contributions early in their careers, whereas others, like Cézanne, have

produced their best work late in their lives. Art’s young geniuses have worked deductively to make

conceptual innovations, while its old masters have worked inductively, to innovate experimentally.

These two life cycles emerge from quantitative analysis of a wide range of evidence, and

recognizing the differences between them allows a new understanding of a number of issues in art

history. The two life cycles are furthermore not limited to painting, for the association between

deduction and early achievement, and that between induction and late creativity, also clearly appear

in quantitative studies of the careers of important economists and poets. Understanding the careers

of modern artists therefore leads to a deeper understanding of the life cycles of human creativity in

general.




David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sogrodow@midway@uchicago.edu
                                                 3



Introduction

       In May of 1902, already suffering acutely from the illness that would cause his death the

following year, Paul Gauguin wrote from the Marquesas Islands to Georges-Daniel de Monfried,

his most loyal friend, that “For two months I have been filled with one mortal fear: that I am not

the Gauguin I used to be.” Gauguin’s fear was less for his life than for his art. Shortly before his

death, he recorded in his notebook his faith that at any age “an artist is always an artist.” Yet he

was forced to continue by posing a question: “Isn’t he better at some times, some moments, than

at others? Never impeccable, since he is a living, human being?”1

       Great artists whose lives are dominated by the desire to make the most important

contributions they possibly can are inevitably drawn to thinking about the relationship between

their stage of life and the quality of their work. Sometimes, as with Gauguin, the results are

painful to read. In other cases they are amusing. So for example Gertrude Stein poked fun at the

ambitious young Robert Delaunay. In The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, Stein wrote of

Delaunay’s frequent visits to her apartment, and his inspection of her remarkable art collection.

She recalled that “He was always asking how old Picasso had been when he had painted a certain

picture. When he was told he always said, oh I am not as old as that yet. I will do as much when

I am that age.”2

       Whether poignant or comical, most artists have considered the relationship between age

and the quality of work not in general, but within the specific context of their own careers, in

looking back on the improvement over time in their skills, or in worrying about the deterioration

of their abilities. Although their awareness of the relationship underscores its importance, their

assessments of it obviously cannot be taken to have any degree of generality. Leaving artists’
                                                 4


judgments aside, we can pose very simply the question that I wish to consider: how, and why,

does the quality of artists’ work vary with age? The purpose of this paper is to present my theory

of creative artists’ life cycles, demonstrate how this theory can be implemented empirically, and

examine some of the consequences of this analysis.3

Experimental and Conceptual Innovators

               Does creation reside in the idea or in the action?
                                              Alan Bowness, 19724

       My analysis begins with the proposition that there have been two very different types of

artist in the modern era. These two types are distinguished not by their importance, for both are

prominently represented among the greatest artists of the era. They are distinguished instead by

the methods by which they arrive at their major contributions. In each case their method results

from a specific conception of artistic goals, and each method is associated with specific practices

in creating art. I call one of these methods aesthetically motivated experimentation, and the

other conceptual execution.

       Artists who have produced experimental innovations have been motivated by aesthetic

criteria: they have aimed at presenting visual perceptions. Their goals are imprecise, so their

procedure is tentative and incremental. The imprecision of their goals means that these artists

rarely feel they have succeeded, and their careers are consequently often dominated by the

pursuit of a single objective. These artists repeat themselves, usually painting the same subject

many times, gradually changing its treatment in an experimental process of trial and error. Each

work leads to the next, and none is generally privileged over others, so experimental painters

rarely make specific preparatory sketches or plans for a painting. They consider the production

of a painting as a process of searching, in which they aim to discover the image in the course of
                                                  5


making it; they often believe that learning is a more important goal than making finished

paintings. Experimental artists build their skills gradually over the course of their careers,

improving their work slowly over long periods. These artists are perfectionists, and are typically

plagued by frustration at their inability to achieve their goals.

       In contrast, artists who have made conceptual innovations have been motivated by the

desire to communicate specific ideas or emotions. Their goals for a particular work can usually

be stated precisely, before its production, either as a desired image or as a desired process for the

work’s execution. Conceptual artists consequently often make detailed preparatory sketches or

plans for their paintings. Their execution of their paintings is often systematic, since they may

think of it as primarily making a preconceived image, and often simply a process of transferring

an image they have already created from one surface to another. Conceptual innovations

typically appear suddenly, as a new idea immediately produces a result quite different not only

from other artists’ work but also from the artist’s own previous work. Because it is the idea that

is the contribution, conceptual innovations can usually be implemented immediately, and

therefore are often embodied in individual breakthrough works.

       The precision of their goals typically allows conceptual artists to be satisfied that they

have produced one or more works that achieve a particular purpose. Unlike experimental artists,

whose inability to achieve their vague goals can tie them to a single problem for a whole career,

the conceptual artist’s ability to consider a problem solved can free him to pursue new goals.

The careers of some important conceptual artists have consequently been marked by a series of

innovations, each very different from the others. Thus whereas over time an experimental artist

typically produces many paintings that are closely related to each other, the career of the
                                                  6


conceptual innovator is often distinguished by discontinuity.

Archetypes

               I seek in painting.
                                              Paul Cézanne5

               I don’t seek; I find.
                                              Pablo Picasso6

       Two of the greatest modern artists epitomize the two types of innovator.

       In September, 1906, just a month before his death, 67-year-old Paul Cézanne wrote to a

younger friend, the painter Emile Bernard:

                       Now it seems to me that I see better and that I think more
               correctly about the direction of my studies. Will I ever attain the
               end for which I have striven so much and so long? I hope so, but
               as long as it is not attained a vague state of uneasiness persists
               which will not disappear until I have reached port, that is until I
               have realized something which develops better than in the past ...
               So I continue to study.
                       But I have just re-read your letter and I see that I always
               answer off the mark. Be good enough to forgive me; it is, as I told
               you, this constant preoccupation with the aim I want to reach,
               which is the cause of it.
                       I am always studying after nature, and it seems to me that I
               make slow progress. I should have liked you near me, for solitude
               always weighs me down a bit. But I am old, ill, and I have sworn
               to myself to die painting.7

       This brief passage expresses nearly all the characteristics of the experimental innovator:

the visual criteria, the view of his enterprise as research, the need for accumulation of

knowledge, the incremental nature and slow pace of his progress, the total absorption in the

pursuit of an ambitious, vague, and elusive goal, the frustration with his perceived lack of

success in achieving that goal of “realization,” and the fear that he would not live long enough to

attain it. The irony of Cézanne’s frustrations and fears at the end of his life stems from the fact
                                                 7


that it was his most recent work, the paintings of his last few years, that would soon come to be

considered his greatest contribution, and would directly influence every important artistic

development of the next generation.

       The critic Roger Fry eloquently discussed the incremental nature of Cézanne’s approach:

               For him as I understand his work, the ultimate synthesis of a
               design was never revealed in a flash; rather he approached it with
               infinite precautions, stalking it, as it were, now from one point of
               view, now from another... For him the synthesis was an asymptote
               toward which he was for ever approaching without ever quite
               reaching it; it was a reality, incapable of complete realization.8

The historian Alan Bowness stressed Cézanne’s inductive method and avoidance of

preconception: “His procedure is always empirical, not dogmatic - Cézanne is not following a set

of rules, but trying, with every new picture, to record his sensations before nature.”9 Emile

Bernard spent a month in Aix in 1904, and recalled that Cézanne spent the whole month working

on a single still life: “The colors and shapes in this painting changed almost every day, and each

day when I arrived at his studio, it could have been taken from the easel and considered a

finished work of art.” Bernard reported that Cézanne “never placed one stroke of paint without

thinking about it carefully,” and concluded that his method of working was “a meditation with a

brush in his hand.”10 Art scholars have often been puzzled by Cézanne’s casual disregard for his

own paintings, but his lack of concern appears understandable as a consequence of his

experimental method. Thus the critic Clive Bell explained that Cézanne’s real goal was not

making paintings, but learning:

               The whole of his later life was a climbing towards an ideal. For
               him every picture was a means, a step, a stick, a hold, a stepping-
               stone - something he was ready to discard as soon as it had served
               his purpose. He had no use for his own pictures. To him they
                                                                8


               were experiments. He tossed them into bushes, or left them in the
               open fields...11

       In 1923 Pablo Picasso gave a rare interview to a friend, the artist and critic Marius de

Zayas, in which he presented the view that art should communicate discoveries rather than

serving as a record of the artist’s development:

                      I can hardly understand the importance given to the word
               research in connection with modern painting. In my opinion to
               search means nothing in painting. To find, is the thing...
                      When I paint my object is to show what I have found, not
               what I am looking for...
                      The several manners I have used in my art must not be
               considered as an evolution or as steps toward an unknown ideal of
               painting...
                      I have never made trials or experiments. Whenever I had
               something to say, I have said it in the manner in which I have felt it
               ought to be said. Different motives inevitably require different
               methods of expression.12

       Picasso’s rejection of the description of his art as an evolution was not merely posturing,

but has been confirmed by generations of observers. As early as 1920, with Picasso not yet 40

years old, Clive Bell described his career as “a series of discoveries, each of which he has rapidly

developed,” and commented on the abruptness and frequency of his stylistic changes, a theme

that would later be echoed by dozens of biographers.13 Thus decades later the critic John Berger

wrote of Picasso’s “sudden inexplicable transformations,” and observed that “in the life work of

no other artist is each group of works so independent of those which have just gone before, or so

irrelevant to those which are to follow.”14 Historian Pierre Cabanne made this point by

comparing Picasso with Cézanne: “There was not one Picasso, but ten, twenty, always different,

unpredictably changing, and in this he was the opposite of a Cézanne, whose work ... followed

that logical, reasonable course to fruition.”15
                                                  9


       Picasso often planned his paintings carefully in advance. During the winter of 1906-07,

he filled one sketchbook after another with preparatory studies for Les Demoiselles d’Avignon,

the large painting that was to become his most famous single work.16 Historian William Rubin

estimated that Picasso made more than 400 studies for the Demoiselles, “a quantity of

preparatory work ... without parallel, for a single picture, in the entire history of art.”17 The

painting was a brutal departure from the lyrical works of the Rose period that immediately

preceded it, and its arrival rocked Paris’ advanced art world. Henri Matisse denounced the

painting as an attempt to ridicule the modern movement, and even Georges Braque, who would

later realize that he and Picasso “were both headed in the same general direction,” initially

reacted to the painting by comparing Picasso to a fairground fire-eater who drank kerosene to

spit flames.18 The importance of the Demoiselles stems from its announcement of the beginning

of the Cubist revolution, which Picasso and Braque would develop in the next few years. As

historian John Golding has observed, Cubism was a radical conceptual innovation, based not on

vision but thought:

               Even in the initial stages of the movement, when the painters still
               relied to a large extent on visual models, their paintings are not so
               much records of the sensory appearance of their subjects, as
               expressions in pictorial terms of their idea or knowledge of them.
               “I paint objects as I think them, not as I see them,” Picasso said.19

Planning, Working, and Stopping

               For any given artist, what does his work signify? A passion? A
               pleasure? A means, or an end? For some, it dominates life; for
               others, it is a part of it. According to their natures, some will pass
               easily from one work to another, tear up or sell, and go on to
               something quite different; others, on the contrary, become
               obsessed, involved in endless revision, cannot give up the game,
               turn their backs on their gains and losses: like gamblers, they keep
                                                                 10


               doubling the stakes of patience and determination.
                                             Paul Valéry, 193620

       The distinction between experimental and conceptual artists can be sharpened by

considering their procedures in making paintings. For this purpose, we can divide the process

into three stages: planning - all the artist does before beginning a particular painting; working -

all the artist does while in the process of putting paint on the canvas; and stopping - the decision

to cease working.21

       For experimental artists, planning a painting is unimportant. The subject selected might

be simply a convenient object of study, and frequently the artist returns to work on a motif he has

used in the past. Experimental painters rarely make elaborate preparatory sketches. Their most

important decisions are made during the working stage. The artist typically alternates between

applying paint and examining the emerging image; at each point, how he develops the image

depends on his reaction to what he sees. Lacking a clear goal for the work, the artist is looking

for things he finds interesting or attractive. If he finds them, he may continue working; if he

doesn’t, he may scrape off the image, or paint over it. The decision to stop is also based on

inspection and judgment of the work: the painter stops when he cannot see how to continue the

work. Sometimes this is because he likes the painting and considers it finished, but often he

remains dissatisfied, but can’t see how to improve the work. In either case, experimental

painters are prone to considering the decision to stop as provisional, and often return to work on

paintings they earlier abandoned or considered finished, even after long intervals.

       For the conceptual artist, planning is the most important stage. Before he begins

working, the conceptual artist wants to have a clear vision either of the completed work or of the
                                                11


process that will produce it. Conceptual artists consequently often make detailed preparatory

sketches or other plans for a painting. With the difficult decisions already made in the planning

stage, working and stopping are straightforward. The artist executes the plan, and stops when he

has completed it.

       The history of modern art contains a series of important artists who considered the

essence of art to be in the planning stage, rendering the execution of the work perfunctory.

Prominent examples come readily to mind. When visitors to his studio praised his great painting

of the island of the Grande Jatte, Georges Seurat remarked to a friend, “They see poetry in what I

have done. No, I apply my method and that is all there is to it.”22 In 1885 Paul Gauguin advised

Emil Schuffenecker, “Above all, don’t sweat over a painting; a great sentiment can be rendered

immediately.”23 In 1888 Vincent van Gogh wrote to his brother that “I am in the midst of a

complicated calculation which results in a quick succession of canvases quickly executed but

calculated long beforehand.”24 Marcel Duchamp explained that his artistic goal was “to get away

from the physical aspect of painting.”25 Charles Sheeler recalled that in 1929 he began “a period

that followed for a good many years of planning a picture very completely before starting to

work on the final canvas, having a blueprint of it and knowing just exactly what it was going to

be.”26 Ad Reinhardt wrote in 1953 that a technical rule for painting should be that “Everything,

where to begin and where to end, should be worked out in the mind beforehand.”27 Andy

Warhol declared in 1963 that “the reason I’m painting this way is that I want to be a machine.”28

A few years later Sol LeWitt stated that in his art “all of the planning and decisions are made

beforehand and the execution is a perfunctory affair.”29 Chuck Close explained that creating his

images of faces from photographs is done methodically: “I have a system for how the head is
                                                   12


going to fit into the rectangle. The head is going to be so big, it is going to come so close to the

top edge, and it is going to be centered left to right.”30 Robert Smithson told an interviewer in

1969 that “An object to me is the product of a thought.”31 Robert Mangold wrote in 1988 that “I

want to approach the final painting with a clear idea of what must happen.”32 Gerhard Richter

wrote that when he painted “I simply copied the photographs in paint and aimed for the greatest

possible likeness to photography;” a consequence of this procedure was that “conscious thinking

is eliminated.”33 Audrey Flack recalled the moment when she arrived at her practice of painting

over projections of color slides: “It was late at night and I suddenly had the idea of projecting an

image onto the canvas ... I owned no projector but was so excited by the idea that I called a

friend who immediately responded to the urgency of my request... This was the beginning. It

opened up a new way of seeing and working.”34 Ed Ruscha was equally pleased to find his

method: “It was an enormous freedom to be premeditated about my art... I was more interested in

the end result than I was in the means to an end.”35 Bridget Riley recently explained that “My

goal was to make the image perfect, not mechanical ... but perfect in the sense of being exactly as

I intended it.”36

        Just as readily, we can find important modern artists who believed that the source of their

achievement lay in the process of painting. Frustrated by the changing weather that slowed his

progress on his paintings of Rouen Cathedral in 1893, Claude Monet wrote to his wife that “the

essential thing is to avoid the urge to do it all too quickly, try, try again, and get it right.”37

Auguste Renoir explained that his paintings took time to develop: “At the start I see my subject

in a sort of haze. I know perfectly well that what I shall see in it later is there all the time, but it

only becomes apparent after a while.”38 Wasily Kandinsky wrote that “Every form I ever used
                                                  13


constituted itself ‘of its own accord,’” with a form frequently “constituting itself actually in the

course of work, often to my own surprise.”39 In 1909 Paul Klee wrote in his diary that “in order

to be successful, it is necessary never to work toward a conception of the picture completely

thought out in advance. Instead, one must give oneself completely to the developing portion of

the area to be painted.”40 When a young artist visited the New York studio of the aging Piet

Mondrian and asked him whether he wasn’t losing good pictures by continually revising the

same canvases, Mondrian replied “I don’t want pictures, I just want to find things out.”41 Joan

Miró told an interviewer in 1948 that “Forms take reality for me as I work. In other words,

rather than setting out to paint something, I begin painting and as I paint the picture begins to

assert itself, or suggest itself under my brush.”42 Alberto Giacometti told a critic “I don’t know

if I work in order to do something or in order to know why I can’t do what I want to do.”43 Mark

Rothko declared that “I think of my paintings as dramas ... Neither the action nor the actors can

be anticipated.”44 Jackson Pollock explained in 1947 that “I have no fears about making

changes, destroying the image, etc., because the painting has a life of its own. I try to let it come

through.”45 Hans Hofmann told an interviewer that “At the time of making a picture, I want not

to know what I’m doing; a picture should be made with feelings, not with knowing.”46 William

Baziotes wrote that “What happens on the canvas is unpredictable and surprising to me.”47

Robert Motherwell recorded his realization “that each brush stroke is a decision.”48 Howard

Hodgkin told a critic that “My pictures really finish themselves.”49 Balthus wrote that “A

painting’s different stages betray the painter’s endless trial and error as he tries to arrive at what

he feels is the definitive, final, completed state.”50 Pierre Alechinsky explained that “I apply

myself to seeking out images that I do not know ... Indeed, it would be sad to know in advance
                                                   14


that which is to come, for the simple reason that it deprives one of the sense of discovery.”51

Francis Bacon told an interviewer that “in my own work the best things just happen - images that

I hadn’t anticipated.”52 Pierre Soulages described the process of making a painting as “a kind of

dialogue between what I think is being born on the canvas, and what I feel, and step by step, I

advance and it transforms itself and develops.”53 Richard Diebenkorn confessed that “I find that

I can never conceive a painting idea, put it on canvas, and accept it, not that I haven’t often

tried.”54 Helen Frankenthaler recalled how she learned to compose her paintings: “When one

made a move toward the canvas surface, there was a dialectic and the surface gave an answer

back, and you gave it an answer back.”55 Joan Mitchell facetiously placed her style within the

context of 1960s art: “Pop art, op art, flop art, and slop art. I fall into the last two categories.”56

Susan Rothenberg said of her paintings that “The results are a way of discovering what I know

and what I don’t.”57

        The contrast between the two types of artist is just as sharp if we consider differences in

practice just in the final stage of making a painting. Considering the two archetypal cases

discussed above, Cézanne almost never considered his paintings finished. His friend and dealer

Ambroise Vollard observed that “When Cézanne laid a canvas aside, it was almost always with

the intention of taking it up again, in the hope of bringing it to perfection.”58 One consequence

of this was that Cézanne rarely signed his works: less than 10% of the paintings in John

Rewald’s recent catalogue raisonné are signed.59 In contrast, Picasso always signed his works,

and often dated them not only with the customary year but also the month and day - and

occasionally even the time of day - of their execution.60 He told his companion Francoise Gilot

that “I paint the way some people write their autobiography. The paintings, finished or not, are
                                                 15


the pages of my journal, and as such they are valid. The future will choose the pages it prefers.

It’s not up to me to make the choice.” Although Picasso explained that he did not always take

the time to complete his works, he did not share Cézanne’s doubt over whether it was possible to

complete them, as he told Gilot that “In some of my paintings I can say with certainty that the

effort has been brought to its full weight and conclusion.”61

Innovation and Age: Old Masters and Young Geniuses

               When a situation requires a new way of looking at things, the
               acquisition of new techniques, or even new vocabularies, the old
               seem stereotyped and rigid... But when a situation requires a store
               of past knowledge then the old find their advantage over the
               young.
                                             Harvey Lehman, 195362

               Picasso was a rare prodigy. Cézanne was not a prodigy, his art
               was a hard-earned skill that took a lot of time.
                                              David Hockney, 199763

       Recognizing the differences between the experimental and conceptual approaches

provides the basis for systematic predictions concerning the relationship between age and artistic

innovation. The long periods of trial and error often required for important experimental

innovations should mean that they will tend to occur late in an artist’s career. Because

conceptual innovations are made more quickly, it might be thought that they should be equally

likely to occur at any age. Yet the achievement of radical conceptual innovations depends on the

ability to perceive and appreciate the value of extreme deviations from existing conventions and

traditional methods, and this ability will tend to decline with experience, as habits of thought

become more firmly established. The most important conceptual innovations should therefore

tend to occur early in an artist’s career. As noted above, some conceptual artists will make a
                                                 16


series of unrelated contributions over the course of their careers, but this analysis predicts that

the most important of these will generally be the earliest.

       The predictions presented here have a parallel in the research of psychologists on when

successful practitioners of a variety of academic disciplines and fine arts have produced their

major contributions. Psychologists have found that chemists, mathematicians, physicists, and

poets typically do their best work at younger ages than do astronomers, geologists, medical

scientists, novelists, and philosophers.64 A suggested explanation for these differences proposes

that they are a function of the rates at which creative ideations can be produced and elaborated:

new ideas might be conceived and developed more rapidly in disciplines that are more abstract.65

       The inductive methods of experimental innovators in painting makes their enterprise

resemble the more empirical disciplines considered by the psychologists, while the deductive

approach of the conceptual innovators makes theirs resemble the more abstract disciplines.

Cézanne did not even formulate the central problem of his career, of making Impressionism a

more timeless and solid art, until he was in his mid-thirties. He then worked steadily at

developing his solution to that problem - “searching for a technique” - for more than three

decades, and arrived at his most important contribution at the end of his life.66 In contrast,

Picasso conceived his most important idea while in his mid-twenties, when he painted the

Demoiselles, and he and Braque developed that idea into the several forms of Cubism, his most

important contribution, within less than a decade. By 1914 Picasso had thus concluded “the

most complete and radical artistic revolution since the Renaissance.”67 He was then just 33, the

same age at which Cézanne had traveled to Pontoise to learn from Pissarro the techniques of

Impressionism, which became the starting point for the quest that would culminate in his greatest
                                                17


achievement more than 30 years later. Cézanne’s slow production and elaboration of his creative

ideas led to a very late peak in the quality of his work, whereas Picasso’s rapid production and

development of his new ideas led to a very early peak.

Artists, Scholars, and Art Scholars

               Today it is again apparent that the artist is an artisan, that he
               belongs to a distinct human grouping as homo faber, whose calling
               is to evoke a perpetual renewal of form in matter, and that
               scientists and artists are more like one another as artisans than they
               are like anyone else.
                                               George Kubler, 196268

               Why do people think artists are special? It’s just another job.
                                             Andy Warhol, 197569

               The more I’ve read of mathematicians and physicists, the more
               engrossed I’ve become. They really seem like artists to me.
                                           David Hockney, 198870

       The next important step in this presentation is to consider how the theoretical predictions

I’ve just made can be tested empirically. Before doing this, however, it is useful briefly to

indicate how my analysis relates to some earlier treatments in art history.

       Perhaps the most generally acclaimed recent examination of the context within which

artists make paintings is Michael Baxandall’s Patterns of Intention. In order to understand how

objects come to be made, Baxandall begins the book with a description of the construction of a

bridge in Scotland in the 19th century. A company formed by four railroads decided where they

wished to have a bridge, then hired an engineer to design and build it. Baxandall then uses this

framework to consider the production of paintings, with the artist in the role of the engineer.

       Curiously, Baxandall’s first application of this framework is not, as might be expected, to

a case in which a Renaissance prince or cardinal hired a painter to execute a commission, but
                                                 18


rather to Picasso in 1910.71 Since Picasso was not hired by Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler to paint

his portrait, much less given a set of criteria for the work, Baxandall must begin by making a

series of adjustments to his framework in order to apply it to this situation. My object here is not

to argue with Baxandall’s conclusions, nor is it to understand his motivation in proceeding in

such a roundabout way. My point is simply that in approaching the issue of modern artists’

motivations it would appear more pragmatic to begin with a model that is closer to the situation

of the modern artist. And we do not have far to look for such a model, for there are strong

parallels between the situation of the modern artist and that of the research scholar.

       Like the research scholar, the modern artist’s goal is to innovate - to produce new

methods and results that change the work of other practitioners. Most often, this involves not

only solving problems, but also formulating them. Most great modern art, like most great

scholarship, is unlike the case of the bridge, in which someone hires an agent to solve a

recognized problem. In most cases important scholarly and artistic innovations come from

perceiving a previously unrecognized problem, or formulating a previously recognized problem

in a novel way, before creating a solution to it. And since in both scholarship and art questions

are usually more durable than answers, the principal contribution often lies more in the

recognition and formulation of the problem than in the specific solution offered.

       This parallel between artists and scholars is not novel, for it has been drawn by several art

scholars. In a lecture first given in 1948 the historian Meyer Schapiro compared modern artists

to scientists in their commitment to “endless invention and growth” in their respective

disciplines.72 And in his 1962 book, The Shape of Time, the historian George Kubler regretted

our “inherited habit of separating art from science,” for he observed that “the value of any
                                                 19


rapprochement between the history of art and the history of science is to display the common

traits of invention, change, and obsolescence that the material works of artists and scientists both

share in time.”73 Yet these analyses of Schapiro and Kubler have been largely ignored by art

historians, perhaps because they conflict with the romanticized view of the artist’s enterprise that

serves as the implicit foundation for much of art history.74

       It is unfortunate that the parallel between artists and scholars has not been more widely

recognized, for it might have served as a corrective to some of the less compelling analyses of

artists’ motivations, by social scientists as well as humanists. We understand, for example, that

in the first instance virtually all important scholarship is produced for an audience of other

scholars. Scholars may do this out of love for their discipline, but even if their goals are more

self-serving, they recognize that influence within their discipline will often help them achieve

fame and fortune. Great artists appear to be no different. They may work from a variety of

motives, but their first goal is generally to influence their fellow artists. They understand that if

they are successful in this, public acclaim and lucrative sales will generally follow.75

       The careers of successful scholars and artists also have a common structure. At the

graduate level, most important scholars have worked with a teacher who is himself an important

contributor to the discipline. The same is true for artists. Few important modern painters have

been self-taught, for at a formative stage of their careers most have studied, formally or

informally, with successful older artists, who not only provided them with technical instruction

and advice, but inspired and encouraged them. Similarly, just as at an early stage of their careers

most successful scholars have studied and worked closely with other promising scholars of their

own generation, virtually all successful modern artists have initially developed their art in the
                                                 20


company of other talented young artists. In some cases these relationships involved

collaborating to solve a problem of common interest, but even when the artists’ goals differed

considerably, these alliances provided moral support as well as challenges to the young artists

involved. Thus for example Robert Rauschenberg recalled that at a time when he and Jasper

Johns were developing their art with little understanding or encouragement from the art world at

large, the support they gave each other gave them “permission to do what we wanted.”76 The

complexity of these early collaborations is suggested by Gerhard Richter’s comments on his

relationship with two fellow art students, Sigmar Polke and Konrad Lueg, in the early 1960s. At

the time, in 1964, he wrote:

               Contact with like-minded painters - a group means a great deal to
               me: nothing comes in isolation. We have worked out our ideas
               largely by talking them through. Shutting myself away in the
               country, for instance, would do nothing for me. One depends on
               one’s surroundings. And so the exchange with other artists - and
               especially the collaboration with Lueg and Polke - matters a lot to
               me: it is part of the input that I need.

Nearly 30 years later, when an interviewer asked him about his earlier collaboration with Polke

and Lueg, Richter stressed a different aspect of it:

               There were rare and exceptional moments when we were doing a
               thing together and forming a kind of impromptu community; the
               rest of the time we were competing with each other.77

All of these early collaborations probably contain elements of both cooperation and competition,

and both are probably critical to the early development of ambitious artists. The importance of

these collaborations is sometimes overlooked, for they usually dissolve as artists age and their

interests diverge, but it is important to notice how often the contributions even of apparently

isolated artists are in fact the product of working out solutions to problems that were formulated
                                                 21


earlier in groups.

       The distinction I have drawn between the two types of artistic innovator is equally not a

new one, for the difference in artists’ approaches has been noted by several art scholars. In his

survey of the history of modern art Alan Bowness observed that the difference between what he

called realist and symbolist artists “may depend on certain basic temperamental differences

among artists - on, for example, the degree to which the painter or sculptor can envisage the

finished work of art before he starts to make it.”78 The critic David Sylvester made a similar

observation in comparing two generations of American painters, as he noted that “Some artists

like to think that they are working in the dark, others that they are firmly in control;” whereas the

Abstract Expressionists “subscribed to the idea that making art meant feeling one’s way through

unknown territory,” the work of the leading artists of the ‘60s was “carefully planned, tightly

organized, precise in execution.”79

       Although both Bowness and Sylvester clearly recognized the distinction I have described

here, neither pursued it, and most importantly neither appears to have perceived its most startling

implication - the difference in the creative life cycles of the two groups of innovators. I have

found only one art scholar who does appear to have identified essentially this difference in life

cycles. Roger Fry devoted his inaugural lecture as professor of fine art at Cambridge University

in 1933 to outlining a more systematic approach to the study of art. In the course of this attempt,

Fry observed that an artist’s experiences must inform his work, and that “the mere length of time

that an artist has lived has then inevitably an influence on the work of art.” Fry then continued:

               When we look at the late works of Titian or Rembrandt we cannot
               help feeling the pressure of a massive and rich experience which
               leaks out, as it were, through the ostensible image presented to us,
                                                                 22


                whatever it may be. There are artists, and perhaps Titian and
                Rembrandt are good examples, who seem to require a very long
                period of activity before this unconscious element finds its way
                completely through into the work of art. In other cases,
                particularly in artists whose gift lies in a lyrical direction, the
                exaltation and passion of youth transmits itself directly into
                everything they touch, and then sometimes, when this flame dies
                down, their work becomes relatively cold and uninspired.

After making this statement, Fry immediately acknowledged the casual nature of his comments,

conceding apologetically that “I fear a great deal of this must appear to you to be rather wildly

speculative and hazardous.” Although it is not known whether Fry intended to pursue this

particular observation, his death the following year prevented any effort on his part to document

the hypothesis, and although many decades have passed since Fry spoke, no art historian has

taken up the challenge to do this. Yet today, seventy years later, I believe that my research

provides a firm evidentiary basis for Fry’s remarkable generalization, using the kind of

“systematic study in which scientific methods will be followed wherever possible” that he called

for in that lecture in 1933.80

Quantifying Artistic Success

                The modern professional humanist is an academic person who
                pretends to despise measurement because of its “scientific” nature.
                He regards his mandate as the explanation of human expressions in
                the language of normal discourse. Yet to explain something and to
                measure it are similar operations. Both are translations.
                                               George Kubler, 196281

        There is no single direct and obvious way to measure the quality of an artist’s work over

the course of his career. Instead, there is a variety of indirect ways. Each is based on a different

kind of evidence, and each of these types of evidence was produced by a different group of

judges. None of these groups of people were engaged in the activity that is my concern, of
                                                 23


measuring individual artists’ creative life cycles. Yet as will be seen, each of the groups’ actual

goals has the effect of generating evidence that can be used for just this purpose. The

independence of the processes that generated the bodies of evidence means that comparison of

the various results can serve to test the robustness of any conclusions. If the results obtained

from the different measures agree, the degree of confidence in the collective results will

obviously be greater than that associated with the results obtained from any single measure.

Prices

                Each stylistic portion of an artist’s total time span constitutes a
                separate sum of artifacts, and this is recognized by the art market
                in the values it places upon certain “periods” of an artist’s work in
                contrast to others.
                                                Harold Rosenberg, 197482

         Each year, the outcomes of auctions of fine art held throughout the world are collected by

a publisher in Lausanne, Switzerland, and issued in bulky volumes titled Le Guide Mayer. These

volumes provide the evidence for my econometric analysis of the prices of paintings. My

analysis is based on the proposition that variation in the sale prices of a particular painter’s work,

in all auctions held during the years 1970-97, can be systematically accounted for in part by the

values of a set of associated variables for which evidence is given in Le Guide Mayer:

specifically, these are the artist’s age when a given work was executed, the work’s support, its

size, and the date of its sale at auction.

         The estimates obtained for the multiple regression equation for a given artist allow us to

isolate the effect of an artist’s age at the time a painting was produced on the sale price of the

painting, separating this effect from the impact on that price of the work’s support, size, and sale

date. The estimates can therefore be used to trace out the relationship between age and price for
                                                  24


an artist as illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, which show the estimated age-price profiles for

Cézanne and Picasso, respectively. Each of these figures represents the hypothetical auction

values of a series of paintings of identical size, support, and sale date, done throughout the

artist’s career.

        The auction market clearly values Cézanne’s late work most highly. Figure 1 shows that

the estimated peak of his age-price profile is at age 67; a painting done in that year is worth

approximately 15 times that of a work the same size he painted at age 26. In contrast, Picasso’s

age-price profile reaches a peak at age 26 - in 1907, the year he painted Les Demoiselles

d’Avignon. A painting he did in that year would be worth more than four times as much as one

the same size he produced when he was 67.

        Before proceeding to consider other measures and other artists, it is useful to consider the

impact of a potential bias involved in using auction data to estimate the relative value of an

artist’s work over the life cycle. The issue in question involves famous artists, like Cézanne and

Picasso, whose work is eagerly sought by museums. Although museums sometimes sell

paintings, in general they are believed to be less likely to sell than are private collectors. How

does the absence from the auction market of museum holdings of great artists’ work bias

estimates like those of Figures 1 and 2?

        This question has never been systematically examined, but evidence for Cézanne can be

drawn from John Rewald’s catalogue raisonné of his work, which includes information on the

ownership of each painting at the time the book was published in 1996.83 Considering the oil

paintings, the probability that a painting was owned by a museum was considerably greater for

late than for early paintings.84 This in itself does not bias the age-price profile of Figure 1, but
                                                 25


would merely tend to reduce the amount of auction evidence on the value of late paintings from

which to estimate that relationship. Yet what can bias the profile of Figure 1 is that museums

don’t tend to take paintings randomly from a given period of an artist’s career, but rather pursue

most avidly the best works. We do not have direct measures of quality for Cézanne’s paintings,

but the catalogue raisonné does contain evidence on their sizes. This serves as a proxy for

quality, for larger paintings are typically considered more important than smaller ones.85

Analysis of the evidence of the catalogue raisonné strongly confirms that the works by Cézanne

owned by museums are on average considerably larger than those in private collections.86

       The catalogue raisonné therefore shows that it is not just late works by Cézanne that are

disproportionately removed from the auction market, but that it is the best of the late works that

are most disproportionately absent. If none of Cézanne’s works were owned by museums, the

average quality of his late paintings coming to auction would likely rise relative to the average

quality of the early works sold, and the profile of Figure 1 would consequently rise even more

steeply with the artist’s age than it does. Thus for Cézanne the impact of museum purchases is

actually to reduce the estimated value of the works the auction market considers his best - the

late works - relative to the rest of his paintings. This reinforces the conclusion from Figure 1 that

his latest works are the most valuable.87

Textbook Illustrations

               Quality in art can be neither ascertained nor proved by logic or
               discourse. Experience alone rules in this area... Yet, quality in art
               is not just a matter of private experience. There is a consensus of
               taste. The best taste is that of the people who, in each generation,
               spend the most time and trouble on art, and this best taste has
               always turned out to be unanimous, within certain limits.
                                                Clement Greenberg, 196188
                                                                26



       Few art historians or critics have been important art collectors, so although the judgments

of art historians may play an indirect role in determining the prices of paintings, through their

influence on collectors, the art market does not directly measure the opinions of art scholars.

This is not true, however, of textbooks, in which art scholars systematically set down their views.

       Published surveys of art history nearly always contain photographs that reproduce the

work of leading artists. These reproductions are chosen to illustrate each artist’s most important

contribution or contributions. No single book can be considered definitive, because no single

scholar’s judgments can be assumed to be superior to those of his peers, but pooling the evidence

of the many available books can effectively provide a survey of art scholars’ opinions on what

constitutes a given artist’s best period. The scores of authors and editors of textbooks of art

history published in recent decades include many distinguished academics, among them George

Heard Hamilton of Yale and Martin Kemp of Oxford, and such prominent critics as Robert

Hughes of Time and John Canaday of the New York Times. But although the eminence of the

authors varies, all the authors are likely to be among those who, in Clement Greenberg’s words,

“spend the most time and trouble on art,” for they have made the considerable effort to

communicate their views on the history of art in a systematic way. And for the modern period,

the number of textbooks available is sufficiently large that no important result will be

significantly influenced by the opinions of any single author or any one book.

       Tabulating illustrations in textbooks is obviously analogous to a citation study, in which

the relative importance of scholarly publications is judged by the number of citations they

receive. Yet using illustrations as the unit of analysis has considerable advantages over citation
                                                   27


counts, for illustrations are substantially more costly than written references. In addition to the

greater space taken up by the illustration and the greater cost of printing, authors must obtain and

pay for copyright permission to reproduce each painting, and must buy or rent a suitable

photograph. This substantial cost in time and money implies that authors will be more selective

in their use of illustrations, and that these may consequently give a more accurate indication than

written references of what an author considers genuinely important.

        Table 1 demonstrates the use of this evidence for Cézanne and Picasso. It presents the

distribution of all the illustrations of their work, tabulated by the artist’s age at the date of the

work’s execution, contained in 33 textbooks published in English since 1968. The contrast in the

two distributions is striking. Whereas Cézanne’s illustrations rise steadily with age, with more

than a third of his total representing works done in just the last eight years of his life, nearly two-

fifths of Picasso’s illustrations are of works he painted in his twenties, with a sharp drop

thereafter. And for both artists the single year represented by the largest number of illustrations

is precisely the same as the year estimated to be that of the artist’s peak in value - age 67 for

Cézanne, and 26 for Picasso.

        Table 2 presents the comparable evidence for the same artists obtained from a survey of

31 textbooks published in French since 1963. The results are almost identical to those of Table

1. French scholars clearly agree that Cézanne’s final decade was his greatest, and that Picasso

was at his peak during his 20s. They equally consider Cézanne’s best single year to have been at

age 67, and Picasso’s 26.

Examples: Ten Important Modern Painters

                I have never had either a first or a second or a third or a fourth
                                                                 28


               manner; I have always done what I wanted to do, standing loftily
               apart from the gossip and legends created about me by envious and
               interested people... If you think of all my exhibitions from 1918
               until today you will see continual progress, a regular and persistent
               march towards those summits of mastery which were achieved by
               a few consummate artists of the past.
                                               Giorgio de Chirico, 196289

       The use of the two measures of artist life cycles just described can be illustrated more

generally with some additional examples. Evidence for the two measures for 10 important

modern painters is given in Table 3.

       The evidence of both prices and illustrations places Camille Pissarro’s best period in his

mid-40s. Pissarro was one of the core group of landscape painters - with Monet, Renoir, and

Sisley - who pioneered the development of Impressionism. The greatest achievements of this

group are widely recognized as having come in the 1870s, when Pissarro was in his mid-40s.

During that decade the impact of the group’s discoveries was so great that nearly all of Paris’

advanced artists, including painters as disparate as Manet, Cézanne, Gauguin, and van Gogh,

were lured into experiments with their methods. Impressionism was quintessentially a visual

innovation, aimed at capturing “fugitive impressions of nature,” and both Pissarro’s goals and his

methods identify him as experimental.90 His art was visual, and he needed attractive views.

Looking for a new home in 1883, he complained of the ugliness of one town: “Can a painter live

here? I should have constantly to go off on trips. Imagine! No! I require a spot that has

beauty!”91 Pissarro struggled with finishing his paintings, as for example in 1895 he wrote to

his son that he had nearly completed a series of large paintings, but confessed that “I am letting

them lie around the studio until I find, at some moment, the final sensation that will give life to

the whole. Alas! while I have not found this last moment I can’t do anything further with
                                                 29


them.”92       Both types of evidence in Table 3 similarly place Edgar Degas’ best period in his

mid-40s. Degas often expressed his belief in repetition, saying “One must redo ten times, a

hundred times the same subject,” because of his perennial dissatisfaction with his

achievements.93 His dealer Ambroise Vollard observed that “the public accused him of repeating

himself. But his passion for perfection was responsible for his continual research.”94 A friend,

the poet Paul Valéry, wrote that “I am convinced that [Degas] felt a work could never be called

finished, and that he could not conceive how an artist could look at one of his pictures after a

time and not feel the need to retouch it.”95 Degas’ studies of ballet dancers are an example of a

large body of work in which his experimental innovations in the representation of space emerged

gradually, so although the series is famous as a whole it lacks any one or two particularly famous

landmark works. As Degas’ friend, the critic George Moore, observed, “He has done so many

dancers and so often repeated himself that it is difficult to specify any particular one.”96

       The quantitative measures of Table 3 place Wasily Kandinsky’s best work around the age

of 50, during the late 1910s, when he was pioneering an abstract art. In spite of Kandinsky’s

writings on metaphysics, the inspiration for his art was visual, and his development of it

experimental. He himself described the visual origins of his recognition of the potentialities of

non-representational painting, recalling an evening in 1910 when he returned to his studio around

dusk and was startled to see “an indescribably beautiful picture, pervaded by an inner glow.” On

approaching the mysterious painting he discovered that it was one he had done earlier, standing

on its side. This experience prompted him to set out on a search for forms that could be

expressive even though unrelated to real objects. As he emphasized, however, he did not achieve

this goal quickly, for “Only after many years of patient toil and strenuous thought, numerous
                                                 30


painstaking attempts, and my constantly developing ability to conceive of pictorial forms in

purely abstract terms, engrossing myself more and more in these measureless depths, did I arrive

at the pictorial forms I use today, on which I am working today and which, as I hope and desire,

will themselves develop much further.”97 In considering the three great pioneers of abstract art,

John Golding contrasted the progression of the experimental artists Kandinsky and Mondrian

with that of the conceptual Malevich: “It might be fair to say that Malevich’s abstraction sprang,

Athena-like, ready formed from the brow of its creator; this distinguishes Malevich’s approach

very sharply from that of both Mondrian and Kandinsky, who had sensed and inched their way

into abstraction over a period of many years.”98

       The difference of nine years between the two measures of Georgia O’Keeffe’s best work

in Table 3, while not extreme, is indicative of the absence of specific breakthrough years that

resulted from her experimental approach. From the beginning of her career O’Keeffe often

painted particular subjects in series. She explained that “I work on an idea for a long time. It’s

like getting acquainted with a person, and I don’t get acquainted easily.”99 The series generally

involved a progression: “Sometimes I start in very realistic fashion, and as I go from one

painting to another of the same thing, it becomes simplified till it can be nothing but abstract.”100

But her persistence was nonetheless a product of dissatisfaction. Over a period of 15 years, she

painted a door of her house in New Mexico more than 20 times. She explained that “I never

quite get it. It’s a curse - the way I feel I must continually go on with that door.”101 Her

experimental attitude toward art led her to distrust the idea of the individual masterpiece:

“Success doesn’t come with painting one picture. It results from taking a certain definite line of

action and staying with it.” Not surprisingly, this led her to believe that artists must mature
                                                 31


slowly: “Great artists don’t just happen... They have to be trained, and in the hard school of

experience.”102

       The quantitative measures of Table 3 for Jean Dubuffet agree only that he did his best

work after the age of 45. Dubuffet’s art was visual, as his goal was to draw on a variety of types

of art by the self-taught or untrained to break with traditional concepts of artistic beauty and

create an art that represented the viewpoint of the common man. He devoted considerable effort

to devising new technical procedures to achieve this, including the use of accidental effects.

During the 1950s, for example, he produced works he called assemblages by cutting up and

reassembling painted surfaces. He explained that this technique, “so rich in unexpected effects,

and with the possibilities it offers ... of making numerous experiments, seemed to me an

incomparable laboratory and an efficacious means of invention.”103 Describing him in the late

1950s a critic observed that “the level of [Dubuffet’s] work to date was uncommonly even,” and

this assessment can clearly be extended much further.104 There are no individual celebrated

master works or pronounced peaks in Dubuffet’s remarkably long career, but instead an

outpouring of a large body of work that evolved over time but that was nonetheless unified by a

distinctive philosophy and approach.

       Turning to the conceptual artists in Table 3 shifts our attention to a different type of

career, in which artists’ major contributions appear precipitously, and generally at an earlier age.

The quantitative measures for Edvard Munch both point to a peak period early in his 30s, during

which he was systematically using insights he had gained from the work of Gauguin and other

Symbolists to express his own states of mind. Munch’s most famous single work, and one of the

most celebrated paintings of the late 19th century, was developed from a series of sketchbook
                                                32


drawings, and then was worked out in pastel, before being painted in oils. That painting, The

Scream, uses distortions of perspective and of shapes to create a visual image of extreme anxiety.

As Munch recorded the experience that inspired the painting, as he walked one day at sunset:

“Suddenly the sky became a bloody red ... I stood there, trembling with fright. And I felt a loud,

unending scream piercing nature...”105 Both Munch’s goal of expressing emotions and his

routine use of preparatory studies mark him clearly as a conceptual innovator. Although he lived

past the age of 80, he never again produced work as powerful, or influential, as that of his youth.

       The auction market and the textbooks, both English and French, agree that André Derain

produced his most important work in his mid-20s. This was during a short span of time, 1904-

06, when Derain joined Matisse, Vlaminck, and several other young artists in the invention and

practice of Fauvism. The movement extended Symbolism, which had developed during the late

19th century, to a logical extreme through the use of bright, exaggerated color, flattened images,

and visible brushwork. Recognizing the conceptual basis of the art, Derain later admitted that

“We painted with theories, ideas.”106 Fauvism was the most short-lived of major movements in

modern art, as Derain and his friends largely abandoned it within little more than three years.

Derain thereafter began to work in a Cubist style before painting for many decades in a more

conservative manner that led him to be “displaced from the center of the progressive effort.”

Historian George Heard Hamilton concludes that “the tragedy of André Derain, if such it was,

lay in the discrepancy between his early promise and his later ambitions,” and this may be an

epitaph not only for Derain, but for a number of conceptual innovators who have become

prominent by making a dramatic early contribution but have been unable to follow it with

comparable later innovations.107
                                                33


       Georges Braque was a minor member of the Fauve movement, but the measures of Table

3 show that his greatest work came a few years later, when he was in his late 20s. This was of

course when he joined Picasso in developing Cubism, as from 1909 until Braque joined the

French army in 1914 the two worked together “like two mountaineers roped together.”108 As

noted earlier, Cubism was a conceptual innovation in which the artists expressed their full

knowledge of objects, without being bound by the constraint of what they could see of an object

from a single location. Thus Braque ridiculed the single viewpoint of Renaissance perspective,

saying “It is as if someone spent his life drawing profiles and believed that man was one-

eyed.”109 Although he was wounded in World War I, Braque painted for many years afterwards,

but he never again worked with Picasso. His later work is more highly regarded than that of

Derain, but it produced no further major innovations, as up to the age of 80 and beyond Braque

continued to work within a Cubist style that he had largely worked out by the age of 30.

       Picasso admitted one other young painter, Juan Gris, into his and Braque’s inner circle of

Cubism in 1911. Gris contributed to the development of the later, Synthetic phase of Cubism,

and all the evidence of Table 3 places his best work in the short span of time just after he began

working with Picasso and Braque. The critic Guillaume Apollinaire called Gris a “demon of

logic” for his effort to make Cubism a more systematic and rigorous form. Instead of beginning

with fragments of objects and building compositions, like Picasso and Braque, in Gris’

“deductive method” abstract compositions were plotted out in advance, with shapes and

positions often calculated mathematically or constructed with a compass, and objects were then

fitted into this framework.110 Historian Christopher Green observed that Gris’ planning for his

paintings was followed by “an immaculacy of oil technique that masked utterly the trace of
                                                  34


process,” while John Golding described Gris’ papier collés as having a look of “tailor-made

precision,” equally a consequence of Gris’ meticulous preparation.111 Gris’ goals also revealed

his conceptual attitude, as in 1919 he wrote to his dealer and friend Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler

that “I hope to be able to express an imagined reality with great precision using the pure

elements of the mind.”112 Although Gris died prematurely, at the age of just 40, his most

innovative work was already more than a decade in the past.

       Giorgio de Chirico arrived in Paris in 1911, at the age of 23, and during the next six years

produced a series of strikingly original paintings in which he sought to paint imagined scenes

that would give art the clarity “of the dream and of the child mind.” He called these works

metaphysical, and the poet André Breton, the founder and leader of the Surrealist movement,

considered them the most important twentieth-century inspiration for Surrealist painting.113

After serving in the Italian army in World War I, de Chirico remained in Italy, and changed his

style dramatically under the influence of his study of the work of a number of Old Masters.

Historian James Thrall Soby observed that de Chirico’s adoption of a neo-classical, academic

style led abruptly to his “collapse ... as an original, creative artist.”114 The change also led to a

falling out with the Surrealists. Breton continued to praise de Chirico’s early work, but

denounced the paintings he did after World War I. The Surrealists tried to induce de Chirico to

return to his earlier style, but he resisted; Soby argues that his inspiration had disappeared, as

“the hallucinatory intensity of his early art was spent.”115 De Chirico’s curious reaction against

the Surrealists’ continued attacks on him led him not only vehemently to denounce modern art,

but to produce numerous exact copies of the great early paintings that had established his

reputation. By falsely dating these copies, de Chirico became a forger of his own early work.
                                                 35


Whether motivated by spite or financial gain, de Chirico was never able to establish the

superiority of his late over his early work. Although he continued to paint until his death at 90,

as the measures of Table 3 suggest, de Chirico’s reputation rests almost entirely on the paintings

he produced in his mid-20s, which directly influenced almost every important Surrealist painter.

       This brief examination of the careers of ten important modern artists serves to illustrate

the value of measuring systematically, and in several ways, the timing of artists’ major

contributions. Although many more artists could be considered, these cases demonstrate that the

auction market and textbook treatments tend to agree quite closely on when painters produced

their best work. Table 3 also shows how sharply the careers of experimental artists can differ

from those of conceptual innovators, as for the artists included all the measures indicate that the

experimental painters produced their best work beyond the age of 40, whereas the conceptual

artists had generally reached their peaks by the age of 30.

Retrospective Exhibitions

               “Jasper Johns: A Retrospective” is the most significant survey of
               this artist’s work ever organized, a full and clear mapping of his
               four decades of exploration, traced in paintings, drawings, prints,
               and sculptures.
                                              Geoffrey C. Bible, 1996116

       Unlike textbook illustrations, which are most often chosen to represent the author’s

judgment of an artist’s most important work, systematic critical evaluations of the relative

quality of artists’ work over their course of their entire careers are implicit in the composition of

retrospective exhibitions. Museum curators who organize retrospective exhibitions reveal their

judgments of the importance of an artist’s work at different ages through their decisions on how

many paintings to include from each phase of the artist’s career. The distribution by age at
                                                  36


execution of an artist’s works that are included in these exhibitions can consequently serve as a

third quantitative measure of artists’ careers.

       Retrospectives are often organized by a single curator, and it might consequently be

objected that their composition is an unreliable guide to an artist’s career because it is subject to

idiosyncratic preferences or simply ignorance. Yet organizers of major retrospectives normally

work with many other art historians, both within and outside their own institutions. The

composition of a retrospective therefore typically represents the collective judgment of a group

of scholars. In general, it also appears that the larger the museum arranging the retrospective, the

greater the number of scholars who work to assemble and analyze it. Retrospectives presented

by major museums may consequently be least subject to this criticism. Important artists are

usually given retrospectives by wealthy museums, so for the painters considered here

retrospectives can generally be assumed to represent careful and considered reviews of their

careers.

       Table 4 presents the age distributions of the works included in the most recent full

retrospective exhibitions for Cézanne and Picasso. These closely resemble the age distributions

of textbook illustrations of the two artists’ work shown above in Tables 1 and 2. For both artists

the retrospectives’ age distributions are slightly less skewed toward the peak ages, and this is to

be expected since one obvious purpose of these exhibitions is to illustrate the artist’s work at all

stages of his career. But it is nonetheless clear that the Cézanne respective gave its greatest

emphasis to his final decades, and that the Picasso exhibition gave the greatest weight to his

early years. The single years most heavily emphasized by the retrospectives - age 67 for

Cézanne, and age 26 for Picasso - were precisely the same as the estimated ages at peak value for
                                                 37


both artists, and were therefore also the same ages most heavily represented in both the

American and French textbooks.

       Retrospectives may less often be useful for earlier modern artists than for more recent

artists. The paintings of earlier great modern artists, like Cézanne and Picasso, have become so

valuable, and are in many cases so important in attracting visitors to museums’ permanent

collections, that full retrospective exhibitions of their work are rarely held. Thus although parts

of these artists’ careers are frequently featured in special exhibitions, comprehensive

retrospectives are rarely mounted. The Cézanne exhibition used for Table 4 was held in 1996,

but it was the first full survey of his work since 1936, and the Picasso retrospective used for

Table 4 was held more than 20 years ago, in 1980. This is less true, however, for important

artists of the more recent past. Thus for example just within the past ten years comprehensive

retrospectives have been held for such important artists of the post-World War II era as Jasper

Johns, Willem de Kooning, Roy Lichtenstein, Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, and Mark

Rothko. Retrospective exhibitions can consequently be a particularly valuable source for

studying the careers of recent modern artists.

Examples: Ten Important American Painters

               We believe that we can find the end, and that a painting can be
               finished. The Abstract Expressionists always felt the painting’s
               being finished was very problematical. We’d more readily say that
               our paintings were finished and say, well, it’s either a failure or it’s
               not, instead of saying, well, maybe it’s not really finished.
                                              Frank Stella, 1966117

       The effect of adding the evidence of retrospective exhibitions to the two measures used

earlier can be demonstrated by considering the careers of ten prominent members of the two
                                                  38


generations of American painters who dominated modern art after World War II. The first of

these generations was dominated by experimental innovators, and the second by conceptual

innovators.

       The first five artists listed in Table 5 are the leading members of the Abstract

Expressionists. This was a group united not by a style but by a desire to draw on the

subconscious to create images, and all the members of the group used an experimental approach.

The absence of preconceived outcomes was a celebrated feature of Abstract Expressionism.

Jackson Pollock’s signature drip method of applying paint, with the inevitable puddling and

spattering that could not be completely controlled by the artist, became the trademark symbol of

this lack of preconception, reinforced by his statement, “When I am in my painting, I’m not

aware of what I’m doing.”118 Mark Rothko wrote that his paintings surprised him: “Ideas and

plans that existed in the mind at the start were simply the doorway through which one left the

world in which they occur.”119 Barnett Newman expressed the same idea less dramatically: “I

am an intuitive painter ... I have never worked from sketches, never planned a painting, never

‘thought out’ a painting before.”120 Arshile Gorky’s widow recalled that he “did not always

know what he intended and was as surprised as a stranger at what the drawing became ... It

seemed to suggest itself to him constantly.”121

       The Abstract Expressionists developed their art by a process of trial and error. In 1945

Rothko wrote to Newman that his recent work had been exhilarating but difficult: “Unfortunately

one can’t think these things out with finality, but must endure a series of stumblings toward a

clearer issue.”122 This description applied equally to the production of individual paintings.

Elaine de Kooning recalled that her husband repeatedly painted over his canvases: “So many
                                                 39


absolutely terrific paintings simply vanished because he changed them and painted them

away.”123 An assistant who worked for Rothko in the 1950s remembered how he “would sit and

look for long periods, sometimes for hours, sometimes for days, considering the next color,

considering expanding an area;” a biographer observed that the extent of these periods of study

was such that “since the late 1940s Rothko, building up his canvases with thin glazes of quickly

applied paint, had spent more time considering his evolving works than he had in the physical act

of producing them.”124 Like the other Abstract Expressionists, Rothko believed that progress

came slowly, in small increments. He made his trademark image of stacked rectangles the basis

for hundreds of paintings over the course of two decades, declaring that “If a thing is worth

doing once, it is worth doing over and over again - exploring it, probing it.”125

       With enormously ambitious but extremely vague goals, the Abstract Expressionists were

continually uncertain not only whether their paintings were successful, but even whether

individual works were finished. Newman declared simply that “I think the idea of a ‘finished’

picture is a fiction.”126 De Kooning recalled that he considered his series of paintings of Women

- now generally considered his most important achievement - a failure, but that hadn’t fazed him:

“In the end I failed. But that didn’t bother me ... I didn’t work on it with the idea of perfection,

but to see how far one could go - but not with idea of really doing it.”127 Pollock’s widow, Lee

Krasner, recalled that during the early 1950s, even after he had been recognized as a leader of the

Abstract Expressionists, one day “in front of a very good painting ... he asked me, ‘Is this a

painting?’ Not is this a good painting, or a bad one, but a painting! The degree of doubt was

unbelievable at times.”128

       The Abstract Expressionists came to dominate American art during the 1950s, and many
                                                 40


younger artists directly followed their methods and goals. Yet some aspiring artists found the art

and attitudes of the Abstract Expressionists oppressive. Reacting against what they considered

the exaggerated and pretentious emotional and philosophical claims of Abstract Expressionism,

these younger artists created a variety of new forms of art. Although these new approaches did

not belong to any single movement or style, they shared a desire to replace the complexity of

Abstract Expressionist gestures and symbols with simpler images and ideas. In the process,

during the late 1950s and the ‘60s, they succeeded in replacing the experimental methods of the

Abstract Expressionists with a conceptual approach.

       These younger artists planned their work carefully in advance. Frank Stella explained

that “the painting never changes once I’ve started to work on it. I work things out beforehand in

the sketches.”129 Roy Lichtenstein prepared for his paintings by making drawings from original

cartoons, then projecting the drawings onto canvas and tracing these projected images to create

the outlines for the figures in his paintings. Although Lichtenstein’s cartoon paintings were very

different from Stella’s geometric patterns, in 1969 Lichtenstein specifically compared the central

concern of his work to Stella’s: “I think that is what’s interesting people these days: that before

you start painting the painting, you know exactly what it’s going to look like.”130

       These artists wanted the images in their work to be clear and straightforward. Stella

emphasized that “all I want anyone to get out of my paintings ... is the fact that you can see the

whole idea without any confusion.”131 Jasper Johns explained that he chose to paint flags,

targets, maps, and numerals because “they seemed to me preformed, conventional,

depersonalized, factual, exterior elements.”132 Some of the artists produced their paintings, or

had them produced, mechanically. Andy Warhol used silk screens because “hand painting
                                                 41


would take much too long and anyway that’s not the age we’re living in. Mechanical means are

today.”133 Lichtenstein mimicked mechanical production: “I want my painting to look as if it

had been programmed. I want to hide the record of my hand.” He stressed the contrast with his

predecessors: “Abstract Expressionism was very human looking. My work is the opposite.”134

       These younger artists emphatically rejected the emotional and psychological symbolism

that the Abstract Expressionists had considered central to their art. Stella told an interviewer:

               I always get into arguments with people who want to retain the old
               values in painting - the humanistic values they always find on the
               canvas. If you pin them down, they always end up asserting that
               there is something there besides the paint on the canvas. My
               painting is based on the fact that only what can be seen there is
               there.135

Similarly, when asked if he was anti-experimental, Lichtenstein replied, “I think so, and anti-

contemplative, anti-nuance, anti-movement-and-light, anti-mystery, anti-paint-quality, anti-Zen,

and anti all those brilliant ideas of preceding movements which everyone understands so

thoroughly.”136

       A generation dominated by experimental artists was thus followed by one dominated by

conceptual artists. Many implications of this shift have been discussed by art critics and

historians. Yet what has not received systematic attention from art scholars is the consequences

of the shift for artists’ life cycles. The three measures introduced above are presented in Table 5

for the leading members of each of the two generations.137

       A comparison of the three measures shows that they agree quite closely on when each

individual artist produced his best work. The age at which an artist did his work of peak auction

value is never more than eight years away from either the age of most textbook illustrations or
                                                 42


the age most heavily represented in the artist’s retrospective exhibition, and for eight of the ten

artists this difference is five years or less. The three measures all clearly agree on the phases of

their careers when these artists made their major contributions.

       Table 5 also shows that the generational shift from experimental to conceptual innovators

was accompanied by a sharp drop in the ages at which artists produced their best work. All three

measures agree that Pollock’s best period was in his late 30s, and that the other Abstract

Expressionists’ peaks all came after the age of 40. In contrast, of the next generation the three

measures place Lichtenstein’s peak in his late 30s, and those of the other four artists from their

mid-20s to their early 30s.

Museum Collections

               Artists of genius are few in number... [T]he museum collection
               aspires to show a chronological sequence of the work of such
               artists, carrying forward an argument which forms the material of
               any history of modern art.
                                              Alan Bowness, 1989138

       The decisions of museums, even apart from their assembly of retrospective exhibitions,

are another source of information on artists’ major contributions. Museums wish to present the

best work of the most important artists, and they consequently reveal their judgments of what

this best work is in a number of ways. One is through their decisions on what to display. Most

museums have the space to exhibit only a small fraction of all the paintings they own at any

given time. Curators’ decisions of what paintings to display therefore indicate what they

consider the most important among the works available to them. These selections are of course

constrained by the contents of the museums’ collections. But the greatest museums, with the

largest and best collections of the work of major artists, will be the least constrained in this way.
                                                43


The paintings these museums choose to hang will consequently tend to communicate their

curators’ judgments about when artists produced their best work.

       A related source of information on curators’ judgments is even more readily accessible.

Nearly all major museums now publish illustrated books presenting their collections to the

public. These books vary in size, but often serve as highly selective introductions to what the

museums judge to be their best works. An example of how these books can be used is afforded

by An Invitation to See, the revised edition of which was published in 1992 by New York’s

Museum of Modern Art, and which contains photographs and brief discussions of 150 works

selected from the museum’s collection.139 For the same artists included in Tables 3 and 5, Tables

6 and 7 present the ages of the artists when they executed those of their works included in

Invitation to See.

       In Table 6, the median age of Degas, Kandinsky, O’Keeffe, and Dubuffet - the four

experimental artists from Table 3 included in Invitation to See - when they executed the eight

paintings reproduced in the book was 48 years, whereas the median age of the conceptual

innovators Derain, Braque, Gris, and de Chirico when they produced the six of their paintings

treated in the book was just 29.5 years. Table 7 shows that the six paintings of the Abstract

Expressionists reproduced in Invitation to See were made by the artists at a median age of 44.5,

whereas the six reproduced works by the five conceptual painters of the next generation were

made at a median age of just 30.5. In addition, Invitation to See includes three paintings by

Cézanne, executed at a median age of 59, and ten works by Picasso, done at a median age of 36.

Analysis of the Museum of Modern Art’s own selection of works from its collection therefore

demonstrates that the museum’s curators strongly agree that the experimental artists considered
                                                 44


here produced their most important work considerably later in their careers than did the

conceptual innovators.

         The Museum of Modern Art is known for the strength of its collection of American

paintings of the post-World War II era.140 In view of this, it is striking to note how closely the

Museum’s selection of works by the artists in Table 7 agrees with the auction market. Of the 12

paintings illustrated in Invitation to See by these 10 American artists, none was made more than

seven years from the respective artist’s estimated age at peak value, 10 of the 12 were made

within five years of that age, and fully half were made within just two years of the age at peak

value.

         Systematic measurement of the quality of artists’ work over the course of their careers is

a recent development, so it is perhaps not surprising that art historians are not widely aware of

how, and how well, it can be done. It is clear, however, that art historians had not anticipated

that such measurements were possible - and, unfortunately, that they continued to deny the

possibility of these measurements even after they had begun to appear. Thus for example as

recently as 1998, a curator at New York’s Museum of Modern Art declared that an artist’s

success “is completely unquantifiable.”141 This paper’s survey of methods of measurement, and

illustrations of their use, demonstrate clearly that this curator was wrong, and that artistic success

can be measured, not only with evidence drawn from the auction market and from textbooks of

art history, but even from decisions made by the curators of his own museum. The consistency

of the evidence from this remarkably wide variety of sources on the hypothesis examined here

constitutes powerful evidence not only that conceptual artists arrive at their major contributions

at younger ages than their experimental counterparts, but also that, as Clement Greenberg
                                                45


asserted, there is a strong consensus among those in the art world on what is important in art.

       The variety of methods by which artists’ careers can be quantified is valuable, as noted

above, for checking and reinforcing the validity of any single measurement. It is also valuable,

however, for cases in which some sources of evidence are unavailable for an artist of interest.

Marcel Duchamp produced very few works of art during his career, and only nine of his

paintings came to auction during 1970-97, a number much too small to support meaningful

statistical analysis. Yet Duchamp’s work plays an important role in the development of modern

art, and consequently has been examined intensively by textbooks and museums. The timing of

his principal innovation emerges clearly from these sources. The surveys of both the American

and French textbooks described above identify 1912, when Duchamp was 25 years old, as the

most important year of his career, represented by the most illustrations.142 An Invitation to See

reproduces two works by Duchamp, executed in 1912 and 1918, when Duchamp was 25 and 31

years old, respectively. Since Duchamp lived past the age of 80, this concentration on his early

work strongly suggests that his principal innovation was conceptual. The text of an Invitation to

See immediately indicates this. The first sentence of the book’s discussion of The Passage from

Virgin to Bride (1912) reads: “While still in his twenties, Duchamp determined to get away from

the physical aspect of painting in order to create ideas rather than mere ‘visual products.’” To

emphasize that Duchamp’s goal was a conceptual one conceived at an early age, the first

sentence of the same book’s discussion of his To Be Looked at (From the Other Side of the

Glass) with One Eye, Close To, for Almost an Hour (1918) again made this point: “While still in

his twenties, Duchamp determined to get away from the physicality of painting and ‘put painting

once again at the service of the mind’ by creating works that would appeal to the intellect rather
                                                  46


than to the retina.”143 These sources thus leave little doubt that art scholars judge Duchamp to

have been a conceptual young genius rather than an experimental old master.

The Spectrum of Approaches

                       If the artist carries through his idea and makes it into
               visible form, then all the steps in the process are of importance ...
               All intervening steps - scribbles, sketches, drawings, failed works,
               models, studies, thoughts, conversations - are of interest. Those
               that show the thought process of the artist are sometimes more
               interesting than the final product.
                                                 Sol LeWitt, 1967144

       Before examining some important implications of this analysis of artists’ life cycles, it is

useful to consider in more detail the nature of the categorization being done here. To this point,

the distinction between conceptual and experimental approaches has been treated as binary. Yet

as in virtually all scientific analysis, the true distinction between these concepts is not qualitative

but quantitative. This does not mean the binary distinction is not valid, or useful; as the

preceding empirical measurements have illustrated, the distinction is valuable in understanding

artists’ careers. The usefulness of the distinction is analogous to the value of the distinction

made by economists between theorists and empiricists. Although we recognize that much, if not

most, research is based on both theory and evidence, it is rarely difficult to identify in which area

any particular work makes its primary contribution.

       Economists often speak colloquially of high-brow and low-brow theorists, in order to

refer to differences in the degree of abstraction the scholar typically uses. In similar fashion, we

can ask not only how to distinguish conceptual from experimental artists, but how to understand

systematic differences in the practices of artists within both groups. Doing this may help us to

gain a better understanding of artists’ life cycles, and it is likely to give us a deeper appreciation
                                                  47


for the problems modern artists have confronted, and how they have solved them.

       For present purposes, I propose to distinguish between two types of practitioner - extreme

and moderate - within both the conceptual and experimental approaches. One dimension along

which many artists can be arrayed with some confidence is the degree to which they make

decisions about a work of art before as opposed to during the execution of the final work. This is

the dimension I will primarily consider here.

       Taking first conceptual artists, it might seem that extreme practitioners are most readily

described and identified: they are artists who make all the decisions for a work before beginning

it. It is unclear, however, if this practice is literally possible. There are artists who came close to

it, and perhaps achieved it, during the 1960s, by making plans for their work and having these

plans executed by others. The artists often did this not simply by describing a desired image, but

by specifying the process by which the work was to be made. Yet even in these cases the artists

often supervised the execution, and in most cases retained the right of approval of the final work

- thus continuing to make decisions, or at least retaining the option of making decisions, after the

planning stage. Andy Warhol approached the extreme of complete preconception in the silk-

screened paintings based on photographs that he began to do with his assistant Gerard Malanga

in 1962. Warhol would begin by selecting a photograph from a magazine or newspaper. He then

sent this to a silkscreen manufacturer with instructions about the size of the screens and the

number of colors he wished to use. The printers would then deliver the screens to Warhol’s

Factory.145 An assistant would then press a variety of inks through these screens to create the

image on canvas. Warhol sometimes helped; Gerard Malanga explained that “When the screens

were very large, we worked together; otherwise, I was pretty much left to my devices.” Yet
                                                   48


Warhol’s intent was apparently to accept all the paintings produced in this way. Thus Malanga

recalled that:

                 Each painting took about four minutes, and we worked as
                 mechanically as we could, trying to get each image right, but we
                 never got it right. By becoming machines we made the most
                 imperfect works. Andy embraced his mistakes. We never rejected
                 anything. Andy would say, “It’s part of the art.”146

Malanga’s account suggests that no decisions were made by Warhol after the initial selection of

the photographs and paints, though his use of the first-person plural might raise the question of

whether Warhol also automatically accepted works made by Malanga working in Warhol’s

absence. Another approach to the extreme of complete preconception was described in Sol

LeWitt’s rules of 1971 for the execution of his wall drawings. LeWitt stipulated that the artist

planned the drawing, which was then realized, and interpreted, by a draftsman. LeWitt

recognized that “The draftsman may make errors in following the plan. All wall drawings

contain errors, they are part of the work.” Yet LeWitt left open the question of whether the artist

was to play any role after the planning stage when he declared that “The wall drawing is the

artist’s art, as long as the plan is not violated.”147 Since LeWitt did not explain who would

determine whether the plan was violated, or according to what criteria, his qualification left the

possibility of a role for the artist after the planning stage.

        Leaving aside these relatively minor questions about the practices of Warhol and LeWitt,

it is clear that they should be classified as extreme conceptual artists. Yet for most of the modern

era, having a painting executed entirely by someone other than the artist was not an option. Any

artist making a painting obviously makes innumerable decisions in the process, as to what

materials to use, where and when to work, and so on. Yet the real issue here does not concern
                                                49


these routine procedural decisions, but rather the major decisions that have the greatest impact on

the appearance of the finished work. In this regard it is possible to define an extreme conceptual

painter as one who makes extensive preparations in order to arrive at a precisely formulated

desired image before beginning the execution of the final work.

       Clear examples of modern artists who created these precise preparatory images can be

cited. Georges Seurat’s preparations for his early masterpiece, Sunday Afternoon on the Island

of the Grande Jatte, involved making more than 50 studies, including drawings, painted wood

panels, and canvases.148 The painting was considerably more complicated than his earlier major

work, Une Baignade à Asnieres: “The greater complexity of the subject he planned to offset by

completer documentation.”149 Seurat’s preparations led to a painting approximately one-tenth

the size of the final work, that has been titled “Definitive Study for ‘La Grande Jatte.’”150 By the

time he executed the final canvas, he therefore knew precisely what he wanted to do:

               Standing on his ladder, he patiently covered his canvas with those
               tiny multi-colored strokes ... At his task, Seurat always
               concentrated on a single section of the canvas, having previously
               determined each stroke and color to be applied. Thus he was able
               to paint steadily without having to step back from the canvas in
               order to judge the effect obtained ... His extreme mental
               concentration also enabled him to keep on working late into the
               night, despite the treacherous character of artificial lighting. But
               the type of light in which he painted was unimportant, since his
               purpose was completely formulated before he took his brush and
               carefully ordered palette in hand.151

        Henri Matisse’s preparations for Luxe, Calme, et Voluptè, the large Divisionist painting

he produced in 1905, occupied the entire preceding winter. He not only made a series of

drawings and smaller oil paintings, but at the end of these studies he drew a full-scale cartoon, or

charcoal drawing on paper, of the work. He then had his wife and daughter transfer this drawing
                                                50


to canvas using the traditional technique of pouncing.152 The use of this mechanical procedure

clearly points to Matisse’s wish to begin his painting from an unaltered replica of his final

preparatory drawing.

       The extensive preparations for these two major paintings, involving a large number of

studies made over a considerable period of time, culminated in both cases in elaborate

preparatory works that appear to signal that each artist had succeeded in making all the major

decisions for his painting before he began to work on the final canvas. This identifies Seurat and

Matisse as extreme conceptual painters.

       To identify the opposite end of the spectrum being examined here, we can consider

extreme experimental artists. Their description appears equally straightforward: these should be

artists who make no decisions for a painting before beginning to create what will become the

final work. This extreme is of course not literally possible. The artist must obviously make

some preparations for a painting, by buying materials, having a place to work, and the like. But

as above we can put aside these routine problems and consider only those decisions that

significantly affect the specific appearance of the finished work.

       We can readily find examples of modern artists whose goal it was to begin their works

without conscious preconception. A number of Surrealist painters began their paintings with

what they called automatic drawing. André Masson, for example, would begin a work by

allowing his brush to move freely over the canvas. “Only after the drawing was well under way

did Masson permit himself to ‘step back’ to consider the results.”153 The shapes he saw on the

canvas would then suggest forms to him, and he would develop these into a finished image.

Under the influence of the Surrealists, a number of the Abstract Expressionists also adopted
                                                 51


automatism as a device to begin their paintings. The most celebrated of these was Jackson

Pollock. He explained in 1948 that he would tack an unstretched length of canvas on the floor,

then begin to work by dripping paint on it from all four sides: “It is only after a sort of ‘get

acquainted’ period that I see what I have been about.”154 Like Masson, Pollock would then

examine the pattern on the canvas, and work toward developing this into a coherent composition.

Pollock’s avoidance of preconception was such that often it was not until he was in the final

stages of working that he would decide how large the final painting would be, and how it would

be oriented.155

       Identifying the extremes of both approaches is thus relatively easy; the more difficult

problem is to separate the moderate conceptual from the moderate experimental artists. Artists

in both of these groups make some preparatory studies for their paintings, but these are not as

extensive as the meticulous preparations of the extreme conceptual artists. Where do we then

draw the dividing line between conceptual and experimental?

       One resolution of this problem could be to consider other dimensions of the artists’ work,

including whether their goals are visual or ideational. This is obviously something we should do

before making definite assignments of artists for whom there is any uncertainty regarding

whether they preconceive their works. Yet it is worth working a bit more on the latter dimension

before proceeding to other criteria. The test I would propose for separating moderate

practitioners of the two types is whether their preliminary works suggest that they have in fact

made the major decisions about the appearance of the images in their paintings before beginning

to execute them.

       Examples are obviously necessary to clarify this criterion. In 1860, Edouard Manet made
                                                 52


a preparatory drawing for a painting of his parents that he squared up for transfer to the canvas.

The drawing’s exact resemblance to the finished work and the squaring-up together indicate that

Manet had precisely preconceived the double portrait.156 On these grounds, we might identify

Manet as a conceptual painter. Yet this painting dates from a period before Manet had made a

major contribution, and he did not often make similar full compositional studies in later years.

During 1862-3, however, Manet made a small number of drawings of reclining nudes that

several scholars believe to have been explicitly related to his celebrated Olympia of 1863.

Theodore Reff discusses four such drawings, and concludes that “none corresponds to the

painting, whereas the final study, executed in watercolor over a swift pencil sketch, is virtually

identical.”157 Reff’s judgment is consistent with the observation of Manet’s friend, the critic

Theodore Duret, that “In his early years, his favorite method was to use watercolor for the

preliminary studies for his pictures, in order to establish the proper color-scheme and

composition.”158 The combination of a limited body of preparatory works with a single small

study that closely resembles the finished painting, which itself ranks as one of his major

achievements, situates Manet as a moderate conceptual innovator in this scheme.

       Claude Monet serves as an example of a moderate experimental artist. In his study of

Monet’s technique, John House observed that Monet did make sketches and drawings to record

possible compositions for his paintings, but argued that “they were not preparatory studies for

individual paintings, but rather preliminary notations of possible viewpoints, a sort of repertory

of potential subjects, which Monet might use in deciding which motifs to paint and how to frame

a particular scene.” The use of the sketches to identify a motif before beginning the final work

means that Monet was not an extreme experimental artist: unlike Masson and Pollock, he had a
                                                53


clear idea from the outset of what his subject was to be. Once Monet had selected a motif,

however, the drawings played no additional role in the production of the final work: “Once he

fixed on the viewpoint for a painting, the drawings would have no further use.” House describes

precisely why Monet’s practice identifies him as an experimental artist according to the

definition used here:

               His search for a promising subject completed, whether with or
               without the assistance of drawings, the moment of precise
               formulation came when Monet first confronted his bare canvas.
               The essential forms of a picture were generally established in the
               early stages of its execution, in an initial mapping out which often
               included elements of considerable complexity.159

Thus the specific formulation of the images in Monet’s paintings was not determined before he

began a painting, but during its execution.

       Monet’s goals often required him to make significant changes in his paintings during the

working stage. House observed that:

               the execution of the canvas was not one continuous progression
               from the discovery of an interesting effect to its final pictorial
               realization. Difficulties might arise at any stage, and the variety of
               things that might go wrong helps to highlight the particular points
               in Monet’s working process where decisions had to be taken.

Monet’s working method also evolved over time:

               The frequency and extent of the pentimenti to be found in his
               paintings increase during the 1880s and 1890s - a further indication
               of the growing complexity of his methods during these years.160

Many of the changes in Monet’s paintings were caused by his insistence on “painting directly in

front of nature,” as his scenes might change more quickly than he could capture them. This was

sometimes caused by human agency, as when boats were moved on the beach at Etretat in
                                                54


stormy weather, but it was often due to natural causes: “Water levels may be raised or lowered;

the state of wind or waves may change; snow may be added or erased; the angle or quality of

lighting may be transformed; and the seasons themselves may be altered.”161 Evidence of

Monet’s willingness to change his paintings in the course of their execution has been added by

recent x-ray examination of some of his works. So for example in On the Seine at Bennecourt,

executed in 1868, x-rays show that the figure of a child was painted out of an earlier version, and

replaced by a dog. Similarly, x-ray analysis of his 1869 Bathers at La Grenouillère revealed a

number of revisions in the composition made during its execution, and led a group of scholars

from England’s National Gallery to describe its production as “impulsive and experimental.”162

The evidence of these changes testifies to the sincerity of Monet’s advice that “one ought ...

never be afraid ... of doing over the work with which one is not satisfied, even if it means ruining

it.”163

          Much more work remains to be done, in studying the practices of many more painters,

before the scheme proposed here can be considered fully developed. Yet these examples suggest

that it may be useful to consider the experimental-conceptual distinction not simply as a binary

categorization, but rather as a quantitative difference. In this view there is a continuum, with

extreme practitioners of either type at the far ends, and moderate practitioners of the two

categories arrayed along the intermediate positions of the scale. The greatest difficulties in

categorizing painters will obviously arise among the moderates of both groups, who may appear

to be quite similar in their practices. Yet close examination may often allow them to be

separated and classed clearly as experimental or conceptual, according to whether, in Reff’s

terms, any single preparatory work is “virtually identical” to the finished work, or whether, in
                                                 55


House’s language, the “essential forms” of their pictures were established only during their

execution.

       The need for careful study of artists’ methods in making these distinctions is occasioned

by the fact that subtle differences in practices can be associated with sharp differences in artistic

goals. At the start of his career as a painter, Paul Gauguin studied informally with Camille

Pissarro. A recent monograph argued that Gauguin’s temperament would not have attracted him

to the direct approach of Monet, Renoir, or Sisley, but would have led him to prefer Pissarro’s

“careful preparation of the composition of a painting.”164 Consistent with this position, a recent

analysis of Pissarro’s method produced the conclusion that among the leading Impressionists,

Pissarro was apparently “least comfortable with the direct rendering and informal compositions

that characterized Impressionism in the early 1870s.”165 Neither Pissarro nor Gauguin can be

placed at either of the extreme positions on the spectrum described here. Yet the significant

question is whether both should be placed at the same intermediate position: did they share a

moderate experimental or moderate conceptual approach? In fact the answer appears to be that

they did not; a difference appears between the practices of teacher and student that places them at

different positions within the middle range of the spectrum considered here, on opposite sides of

the divide between experimental and conceptual. In 1886, Gauguin began to square up

preparatory figure drawings for transfer to the canvas, and thereafter he regularly followed this

process in preparing to paint the major figures in his paintings.166 In contrast, although Pissarro

accumulated scores of drawings of individual figures that he could place in his paintings as he

desired, he rarely if ever transferred these drawings to the canvas by a mechanical process like

squaring-up. Thus the authors of a study of Pissarro’s drawings concluded that they were rarely
                                                  56


made for any specific projected painting, and that his preparatory process was “as experimental

as the manner of painting itself.”167 Gauguin’s desire to preconceive central elements in his

paintings, and Pissarro’s avoidance of doing so, appear symptomatic of the substantial

difference that arose in their artistic goals and caused a rift between the two friends. Thus

Gauguin emerged as a leading Symbolist painter in the late 1880s, having arrived at the belief

that artists should not copy nature too closely, since “art is an abstraction.”168 In contrast,

Pissarro remained steadfastly committed to the visual goal of “capturing the so random and so

admirable effects of nature.”169 The contrast in their goals confirms the categorization, initially

based on consideration of their preparation for their paintings, of Pissarro as a moderate

experimental painter, and Gauguin as a moderate conceptual one.

       An interesting issue related to the placement of artists on the experimental-conceptual

spectrum concerns possible differences between their desired and actual practices. A variety of

constraints, including existing technology as well as artists’ abilities, may prevent artists from

achieving the degree of preconception of their work that they would like. An apparent example

has been revealed by recent research. Thomas Eakins was a quintessential extreme conceptual

artist. He planned his paintings meticulously, regularly making preparatory drawings of

individual figures, elaborate perspective studies, and eventually full compositional studies for his

paintings, which he then transferred to canvas through the use of a grid. Eakins was so

committed to achieving representational accuracy that when possible he would borrow from

boatbuilders the plans they had used to build the boats he painted.170 A great deal of attention

has recently been given to the discovery by two conservators that Eakins began a number of

paintings by projecting photographic images onto his canvases, which he then traced to establish
                                                57


the contours for figures and objects.171 Much less attention has been devoted to another finding

of the conservators, however. In examining Eakins’ paintings, they found an element for which

his procedures contrasted sharply with the careful preconception of his compositions. Thus they

observed that Eakins “often followed an indirect course of successive approximations toward a

harmonious arrangement and ordering of color.” Color frustrated Eakins, for it posed

complicated problems that he could not solve to his satisfaction in advance. Early in his career

he complained of his inability to use color without the need to “change & bother, paint in & out.”

Color presented problems that were extremely complicated: “there is the sun & gay colors & a

hundred things you never see in a studio light & ever so many botherations that no one out of the

trade could ever guess at.” Lacking a satisfactory way of determining color relationships before

he began a painting, Eakins followed a systematic process in which he applied layers of paint,

working incrementally from brighter to darker colors in the course of executing a painting.

Eakins clearly considered this working by stages to be the lesser of two evils. Thus he was

appalled at Delacroix’s attempts “to seek the tones throughout his painting at the same time;” he

found the results “abominable,” and attributed this to the fact that Delacroix worked intuitively,

and thus “didn’t have any process” to find the proper color relationships.172

       Eakins’ response to the problem of color is intriguing and suggestive. It demonstrates

that even extreme conceptual artists may be unable to plan their works as completely as they

would like. Eakins’ solution was to design a process that advanced systematically, and thus

minimized the impact of any single decision that had to be made during the process of execution.

This example appears to open up a wider research agenda, of examining how other conceptual

artists have coped with obstacles that prevented them from preconceiving their works as
                                                  58


thoroughly as they would have liked.

       Much work remains to be done before the continuum described here can be used with

confidence. A key question in determining the value of this work will involve the implications

of the analysis for understanding artists’ life cycles. As surveyed earlier in this paper, there is

very strong evidence that artists’ creativity over the life cycle is systematically related to their

approach, when the approach is simply measured qualitatively, as conceptual or experimental.

Will the finer categorization discussed in this section add even greater explanatory power to the

study of life cycles? There is currently not sufficient evidence to begin to answer this question.

One conjecture might be made, however. Specifically, it might be hypothesized that extreme

conceptual artists will tend to achieve their major contributions earlier in their careers than any

other type of innovator. The basis of this hypothesis is that these artists’ innovations may tend to

be both the most radical and the least complex. The former effect is a product of lack of

experience, and consequent freedom from acquired restrictions on extreme departures in the

form of habits of thought, while the latter means that the innovations can often be realized with

only minimal requirements for acquired skills. But until much more research is done to classify

many more artists with precision, this must be considered no more than an untested conjecture.

Can Artists Change?

               Seurat has something new to contribute ... I am personally
               convinced of the progressive character of his art and certain that in
               time it will yield extraordinary results.
                                              Camille Pissarro, 1886173

               Seurat, who did indeed have talent and instinct, ... destroyed his
               spontaneity with his cold and dull theory.
                                             Camille Pissarro, 1895174
                                                  59


        As is the case for practitioners of other intellectual disciplines, it appears that the typical

pattern is for artists to find the approach that best suits them in the course of arriving at their

mature style. The approach they settle on may not be the one in which they were originally

trained. Thus since the time of the Impressionists, many modern artists who have studied in

academies have been taught to make careful preparatory studies for their paintings, but after

leaving their schools have discovered that they preferred to work without fully preconceived

images. So for example John Rewald observed of Cézanne that “He hardly ever did preliminary

sketches, since his canvases are not the product of a long, abstract reflection but the result of

direct observation which did not allow such preparations.”175 This of course applies to the

mature artist. Cézanne in fact made four sketches, a watercolor, and two compositional studies

for The Abduction of 1867, two preparatory drawings for his Portrait of Achille Emperaire of

1870, and at least six preparatory drawings and a compositional study for The Feast of 1872.176

Yet these paintings were made before Cézanne traveled to Pontoise later in 1872, where under

Pissarro’s influence he began to paint directly from nature, and ceased to make preparatory

drawings for his paintings. This practice suited him, and he followed it with few exceptions

thereafter.

        Some artists have also changed in the opposite direction in the course of arriving at their

mature styles. So for example Paul Signac worked under the influence of Impressionism early in

his career. It was only after he met Georges Seurat that he quickly discovered that he preferred a

conceptual approach, and that he began to plan his paintings carefully in advance, the practice he

followed for the rest of his life.177

        But artists’ changes in practice in the course of arriving at their mature styles, whenever
                                                 60


that occurs, are not at issue here. The significant question about changes in approach is whether

artists can make important, mature contributions in both experimental and conceptual approaches

at different stages of their careers.

        This question has never been posed directly before, so no systematic research has been

aimed specifically at producing evidence that bears on it. Surveying many available detailed

analyses of the careers of individual artists suggests that there have been few who have

attempted to change their approach after arriving at a mature style. Yet some artists’ careers do

show indications that they may have made a genuine change over time from one approach to the

other, and in at least one well-documented case an important artist specifically tried and failed to

change approaches. A few examples can briefly be considered here.

        Edouard Manet was classified in the preceding section as a moderate conceptual artist, on

the basis of the preparatory studies he did for paintings of the 1860s, including his famous

Olympia of 1863. This was evidently not an uncommon practice for Manet around this time.178

Yet as is well known, Manet’s art changed considerably during the 1870s; one element of this

was that “From 1870 on, Manet seldom felt the need to elaborate a preliminary composition in

drawing form.”179 Nonetheless, there are specific drawings from the 1870s that are “reproduced

practically unchanged in design and detail, in the medium of oils.”180 X-ray analysis of Manet’s

last great work, A Bar at the Folies-Bergère, completed in 1882, reveals that he twice shifted the

position of the reflection of the barmaid who is the painting’s central subject. These changes

made in the course of executing the painting appear to be a prime source of the visual

contradiction between the placement of the barmaid and the mirrored reflection of her encounter

with a customer that has made the painting a source of a vast amount of scholarly inquiry and
                                                   61


debate. Thus an oil study Manet had made in preparation for the painting, which appears to have

served as his point of departure for the final version, presents much less exaggerated distortions

from a realistic portrayal of the scene.181 It is possible that the important modifications Manet

made in the course of working on his final masterpiece serve as evidence that during the 1870s

he had in fact evolved from his early moderate conceptual approach to a moderate experimental

one, as in this time his “solution to composition became increasingly bound to the act of seeing

or experiencing a motif or a scene directly.”182

       Together with his friends Claude Monet, Auguste Renoir, and Alfred Sisley, Camille

Pissarro was a member of the core group of Impressionists who developed new ways of

portraying nature, and influenced virtually every advanced artist in Paris during the 1870s. Like

his friends, however, Pissarro suffered from the uncertainty that is typical of experimental artists,

and during the 1880s he became increasingly dissatisfied with his art. Thus in 1883 he confessed

to his son Lucien that “I am much disturbed by my unpolished and rough execution; I should like

to develop a smoother technique.”183 In 1885 Pissarro, then 55 years old, met Georges Seurat,

who was just 26. Pissarro was quickly converted to Seurat’s ideas and techniques, and began to

use them himself. During the next few years, Pissarro’s attempts to follow Seurat apparently

involved not only using smaller brushstrokes and pure contrasting colors that were intended to

achieve more luminous effects, but also greater planning of his paintings. Thus a number of his

landscape drawings from this period appear to have served as compositional studies for

paintings.184 In a letter of 1886 to his dealer Paul Durand-Ruel, Pissarro explained that the Neo-

impressionist art developed by Seurat was based on planning and preconception:

               As far as execution is concerned, we regard it as of little
                                                                 62


               importance: art, as we see it, does not reside in the execution:
               originality depends only on the character of the drawing and the
               vision peculiar to each artist.185

       Pissarro’s decision to join the Neo-Impressionists was a brave departure. Although his

work had not yet gained great commercial success, he was an established figure in Paris’

advanced art world, and his defection from Impressionism to join the much younger Neo-

Impressionists came at considerable personal costs in lost friendships with Monet and others, as

well as warnings from Durand-Ruel that his abrupt change in style would slow the growth of

demand for his work. These costs confirm the enthusiasm of Pissarro’s rhetoric in attesting to

the depth of his conviction that the conceptual approach of Neo-Impressionism represented a real

advance over the unsystematic, experimental approach of Impressionism. In spite of the strength

of his commitment, however, Pissarro soon found the conceptual approach of Neo-

Impressionism unduly confining. In 1888 he wrote to Lucien of his frustration with Seurat’s

small touches of pure color: “How can one combine the purity and simplicity of the dot with the

fullness, liberty, spontaneity and freshness of sensation postulated by an impressionist art?”186

Similarly, the next year he complained to the critic Felix Fénéon of his problems with a

“technique which ties me down and prevents me from producing with spontaneity of

sensation.”187 In 1891, when he reported to Lucien his sadness at Seurat’s premature death,

Pissarro wrote that “I believe you are right, pointillism is finished.”188 Several years later, with

his customary honesty Pissarro wrote to a friend and former fellow Neo-Impressionist to explain

his decision to give up the method:

               I believe that it is my duty to write you frankly and tell you how I
               now regard the attempt I made to be a systematic divisionist,
               following our friend Seurat. Having tried this theory for four years
                                                                 63


               and having now abandoned it, not without painful and obstinate
               struggles to regain what I had lost and not to lose what I had
               learned, I can no longer consider myself one of the neo-
               impressionists who abandon movement and life for a diametrically
               opposed aesthetic which, perhaps, is the right thing for the man
               with the right temperament but is not right for me, anxious as I am
               to avoid all narrow, so called scientific theories. Having found
               after many attempts (I speak for myself), having found that it was
               impossible to be true to my sensations and consequently to render
               life and movement, impossible to be faithful to the so random and
               so admirable effects of nature, impossible to give an individual
               character to my drawing, I had to give up. And none too soon!189

       Pissarro’s account shows a clear awareness that an artist’s ability to use a conceptual

approach was not simply a matter of choice, but instead stemmed from basic traits of personality

that he did not possess. Plagued as he was by self-doubt throughout his career, Pissarro must

have envied the young Seurat, who dealt in “clear certainties,” who “went his own way, sure of

himself, trusting in the fertility and richness of his own esthetic sense,” and who believed he

could accomplish “the mission of releasing art from the tentative, the vague, the hesitant, and the

imprecise.”190 In 1886, Pissarro must have hoped that he would acquire these attitudes if he

adopted Seurat’s artistic philosophy and practices. Within just a few years, however, he

discovered that his lack of self-confidence was as immutable a feature of his personality as his

need for spontaneity in painting. Thus true to his experimental nature, in 1889 he confided to

Lucien that his only certainty in abandoning his attempt to follow Seurat was that he had to

continue searching:

               I am at this moment looking for some substitute for the dot; so far I
               have not found what I want, the actual execution does not seem to
               me to be rapid enough and does not follow sensation with enough
               inevitability; but it would be best not to speak of this. The fact is I
               would be hard put to express my meaning clearly, although I am
               completely aware of what I lack.191
                                                               64



       Pablo Picasso’s artistic output was so vast that it is dangerous to generalize about his

career without extended study, but it appears likely that as he grew older he tended to make

fewer preparatory drawings for individual paintings, and that he also tended more often to

produce paintings without any preparatory drawings.192 It might be supposed that this implies

that as he aged he evolved from a conceptual to a experimental approach. This is not necessarily

the case, however, for particularly for an experienced artist, preparatory drawings may be

unnecessary for preconception of a painting. A few accounts of Picasso’s practices suggest this.

       Francoise Gilot recalled that when she first went to live with Picasso in 1946 he tried to

draw her, but was not satisfied with the results. He then asked her to pose for him in the nude.

When she had undressed, Picasso had her stand with her arms at her sides:

               Pablo stood off, three or four yards from me, looking tense and
               remote. His eyes didn’t leave me for a second. He didn’t touch his
               drawing pad; he wasn’t even holding a pencil. It seemed a very
               long time.
                       Finally he said, “I see what I need to do. You can dress
               now. You won’t have to pose again.” When I went to get my
               clothes I saw that I had been standing there just over an hour.

The next day Picasso began, from memory, a series of works of Gilot in that pose, including a

well-known portrait of her titled La Femme-Fleur.193 Another account of Picasso’s ability to

preconceive a work without the use of sketches was given by his friend and dealer, Daniel-Henry

Kahnweiler, to the photographer Brassaï in 1962. It involved Picasso’s production of a linocut

with multiple colors, in an unusual way. Instead of the normal procedure of cutting a separate

linoleum plate for each color, Picasso used only one: after printing one color, he would recut the

plate and print another color. Kahnweiler observed that by repeating this process Picasso
                                                 65


produced very complex prints, with as many as a dozen colors. Whereas the traditional approach

permitted adjustments during the printing process, by allowing changes to any of the plates at the

time of printing to make the separate images of the individual plates consistent with each other,

Picasso’s method provided no such margin for error, since the image for each color was

irreversibly altered when the unique plate was recut to print the next color. Kahnweiler marveled

at Picasso’s ability to use this uncompromising process: “He must see in advance the effect of

each color, because there’s no pentimento possible! ... [I]t’s a kind of clairvoyance. I would call

it ‘pictorial premonition.’ I was at his home a few days ago and saw him working. When he

attacks the lino, he makes out or sees in advance the final result.”194 Although this issue has not

been systematically studied, these anecdotes about Picasso’s practice suggest that it is possible

that experienced conceptual painters, like chess masters, can preconceive their works without

having to fix their preparatory images on paper.

       The lack of systematic study of the careers of individual painters aimed at answering the

question posed in this section makes it premature to offer any general conclusions as to whether

it is possible for painters to change from one approach to the other. Yet as in the preceding

section I can offer a conjecture, to be tested in future. This is that whereas it may be possible for

conceptual artists to evolve gradually into experimental ones, it is not likely that experimental

artists can change into conceptual ones. The logic of this conjecture is that accumulation of

experience and knowledge over time may allow an early deductive way of thinking to develop

into a more nuanced inductive one, but that it is much less likely that the uncertainty and

complexity of an artist who initially follows an inductive approach can ever be changed

successfully into the simplicity and certainty of the deductive thinker.
                                                 66


Anomalies

               The life of an artist is rightly a unit of study in any biographical
               series. But to make it the main unit of study in the history of art is
               like discussing the railroads of a country in terms of the
               experiences of a single traveler on several of them. To describe
               railroads accurately, we are obliged to disregard persons and states,
               for the railroads themselves are the elements of continuity, and not
               the travelers or the functionaries thereon.
                                                 George Kubler, 1962195

       Like other behavioral relationships in the social scientists, the predicted relationships

between the categories of analysis used here and artists’ life cycles are not laws, but tendencies.

It is particularly important to remember this when using quantitative evidence to examine artists’

careers, because of a significant departure of the analyses presented here from the normal

practice of empirical economics. Economists often carry out econometric estimation of

relationships involving the human life cycle, but they invariably do this with data that represent

the experiences of large numbers of people. The resulting estimates summarize the average

behavior of members of the relevant groups. The behavior of many of the people included in the

data sets may differ sharply from that of the average, but the measurements of population

averages can nonetheless remain powerful as long as these divergent cases are relatively

uncommon. In the present case, however, the estimates of artists’ life cycles given above are for

individual artists. The visibility of any deviation from the typical relationship is obviously

enormously magnified by this microscopic procedure, and consequently the possibility of

unusual or anomalous cases should be kept in mind.

       Yet although anomalies exist, some cases that initially appear anomalous can in fact be

understood through relatively straightforward extensions of the analysis used above. These
                                                  67


extensions typically involve placing the case at issue within a broader context - either seeing the

career of the artist in relation to those of others, or situating the innovation within the specific

experiences of the artist. Several examples involving important modern artists provide

illustrations.

        As discussed earlier, Claude Monet was an experimental innovator. Monet believed that

progress in art was possible only with total commitment to the study of nature and long hours of

work. As late as 1890, at the age of 50, he wrote a friend that he was “profoundly disgusted with

painting. It really is a continual torture! Don’t expect to see anything new, the little I did

manage to do has been destroyed, scraped off or torn up.” Monet’s goals were famously visual:

                 [T]he further I get, the more I see that a lot of work has to be done
                 in order to render what I’m looking for: “instantaneity,” the
                 “envelope” above all, the same light spread over everything, and
                 more than ever I’m disgusted by easy things that come in one
                 go.196

Although Monet was a great experimental artist, his major contribution was made at a very early

age. The peak of his age-price profile occurs for work he did at age 29, and the five-year period

from which the largest number of his paintings are illustrated in both the American and French

textbooks is 1869-73, when he was 29-33.

        These dates are hardly surprising, for they precisely locate the period when Monet was

making his breakthrough innovations in Impressionism, which proved to be one of the most

influential artistic achievements of the nineteenth century. During the summer of 1869, when

Monet was 29, he painted with Renoir at a riverside café near Paris. Kenneth Clark called that

café, La Grenouillère, the birthplace of Impressionism, as the two artists’ novel treatment of the

reflection of light on the waters of the Seine produced a new technique so powerful that it not
                                                 68


only directly affected sympathetic artists like Pissarro and Sisley, but induced a wide variety of

artists whose interests were less obviously related, including Manet, Cézanne, Gauguin, and van

Gogh, to experiment with Impressionist methods.197 That this seminal experimental discovery

was made by Monet before the age of 30 appears to be a powerful violation of the prediction that

important experimental innovations require lengthy periods of development.198

       The resolution of this apparent contradiction follows from the recognition that the

development of innovations need not be made entirely by individual artists. Monet’s early

breakthrough appears to have resulted from his ability to take advantage of a research project

that several older artists had begun. Art historians have long repeated Monet’s account of how,

early in his career, he had initially rejected the advice of the older artist Eugène Boudin to paint

from nature, but how he had then learned valuable lessons from Boudin and his friend Johan

Jongkind after he had understood their methods and goals. Thus in an interview in 1900, Monet

recalled that “Boudin, with untiring kindness, undertook my education,” teaching him to study

nature, and that Jongkind later “completed the teachings that I had already received from

Boudin.” Monet never hid his debt to his informal teachers, acknowledging in the 1900

interview that after he met Jongkind in 1862, “from that time on he was my real master,” while

in 1920 he wrote to a friend that “I’ve said it before and can only repeat that I owe everything to

Boudin.” Monet explained that he came to be fascinated by Boudin’s studies, “the products of

what I call instantaneity.”199 But after learning the results of the research of the two older

landscape painters, Monet formulated goals more ambitious than theirs, and it was only after

several years of further experimentation that he discovered “the principle of the subdivision of

colors” that allowed him to achieve the novel “effects of light and color” that transformed Paris’
                                                  69


advanced art world.200

       Monet’s career illustrates George Kubler’s warning that “biographies ... are only way

stations where it is easy to overlook the continuous nature of artistic traditions.”201 The

innovation of Impressionism provides an example of a substantial difference between the overall

duration of a research project and the work on that project by a key member. Monet’s leadership

in the discoveries of Impressionism appears to have been a consequence of his ability to build on

the extended studies of the older artists: his relationship with Boudin and Jongkind was

equivalent to joining a research project already in progress, and allowed him to formulate the

goals and develop the techniques of Impressionism much sooner, and at a much younger age,

than if he had had to work without the benefit of their lessons.

       It is interesting to note that the pattern of Monet’s career reflects his experimental

approach in spite of his early great achievement. Unlike many conceptual innovators who made

important early discoveries and simply declined thereafter, Monet made several significant

contributions later in his life. Table 8 presents the distributions by age of the illustrations of

Monet’s paintings in the collections of American and French textbooks described earlier.

Although both groups of scholars give clear precedence to the work of Monet’s late 20s and 30s,

both distributions also include large numbers of illustrations from Monet’s 50s and for the work

he did after the age of 60. The paintings presented from Monet’s 50s are from the series he

executed during the 1890s, including the grain stacks, the poplars, and the views of Rouen

Cathedral, while the illustrations of works he produced after 60 give primary emphasis to the

many paintings of water lilies he made at Giverny. Both of these later bodies of work made

innovations independent of the earlier discoveries in Impressionism. Thus during the 20th
                                                 70


century many artists would adopt the practice of painting in series. This would often stem from a

belief about the value of seriality that Monet articulated in 1891, when he said of the grain stacks

that the individual canvases would “only acquire their value by the comparison and succession of

the entire series.”202 And during the 1950s, a number of critics and artists pointed to Monet’s

late paintings of water lilies as a forerunner of Abstract Expressionism, in their size,

composition, and use of color.203 Because of his experimental approach, however, Monet did not

arrive at these later innovations suddenly, but as John House observed, “this transformation ...

was the result of a protracted process of evolution.”204

       Vincent van Gogh’s career appears to present an anomaly of an opposite type. Van Gogh

was a conceptual innovator, hailed in 1890 by the critic Albert Aurice as a great Symbolist

painter who “considers this enchanting pigment only as a kind of marvelous language destined to

express the Idea.”205 Yet van Gogh produced his most valuable work not in his 20s, but at the

age of 36. Although van Gogh became a painter relatively late, after failing as an art dealer and

pastor, his greatest achievements were nonetheless made in the final few years of his life, when

he had been a full-time artist for nearly a decade. Yet van Gogh’s career illustrates the necessity

of a knowledge of advanced art in allowing an artist to make new contributions.

       Van Gogh was largely a self-taught artist. He spent the first five years of his career as a

painter in his native Holland and Belgium, where he could not see the most recent developments

in modern art. Before he went to Paris, his brother Theo had told him of Impressionism, but

Vincent didn’t know what it was. When Vincent decided to join his brother in Paris in 1886, he

quickly realized that, as he wrote to a fellow artist who had remained in Antwerp, “There is but

one Paris ... What is to be gained is progress and what the deuce that is, it is to be found here.”206
                                                71


In Paris, under the guidance of Camille Pissarro, with astonishing speed van Gogh gained a

knowledge of the methods and goals not only of Impressionism but also of Neo-Impressionism,

and he became acquainted with Paul Gauguin, Emile Bernard, and a number of other young

artists who were developing a new Symbolist art. Exhausted by two years of intense work in

Paris, in 1888 van Gogh left for Arles. It was there that he developed the personal form of

Symbolist painting that became his distinctive contribution to advanced art. Van Gogh

recognized that the Impressionists would find fault with his new style, “because instead of trying

to reproduce exactly what I have before my eyes, I use color more arbitrarily, in order to express

myself forcibly.” His exaggerations of color and form allowed him to communicate the intensity

of his ideas and emotions, which he couldn’t do within the constraints of Impressionism: “If you

make the color exact or the drawing exact, it won’t give you sensations like that.”207

       Clement Greenberg emphasized that “the ambitious artist ... has to assimilate the best

new art of the moment, or the moments, just before his own.”208 Vincent van Gogh did not begin

to assimilate the best new art of his time until 1886, when he arrived in Paris. It was only then

that he learned the techniques and motivations of the art that he would have to build on, and

depart from, in order to make a significant contribution to advanced art. He did this remarkably

quickly, as the landmark works of his career began to appear in 1888, just two years after he

began his real education as an advanced artist, and continued from then through the remaining

two years of his life. The art of these final years became a central influence on Fauvism and

Expressionism. That van Gogh could make such a great contribution in such a short period is a

clear consequence of his conceptual approach to art.

       Roy Lichtenstein’s career provides another example of the effect of a conceptual artist’s
                                                72


delayed exposure to advanced art. Tables 5 and 7 show that Lichtenstein was the oldest of the

leading conceptual artists of his era when he made his greatest contribution. Early in his career,

Lichtenstein lived in the Midwest and upstate New York. In 1960 he took a teaching job at

Rutgers University, where his colleagues included Allan Kaprow and Claes Oldenberg, who

were experimenting with Happenings, and using a variety of objects as props in their

performances and sculptures. Although Lichtenstein told an interviewer that at the time he

hadn’t been aware of being influenced by his colleagues, he later realized that “Of course, I was

influenced by it all.”209 His art began to change almost immediately, as during 1961 he first

inserted cartoon characters into his paintings, and soon thereafter began to make entire paintings

that copied comic strips. In 1963 he arrived at the technique that he would generally use

thereafter, as he began by making a small drawing that he then projected onto a larger canvas to

allow him to trace the outlines for the images in his paintings.210 Lichtenstein made most of his

best-known works in 1963, including Whaam!, which is the single painting by any American

artist of his generation that is most often reproduced in textbooks.211 Thus although Lichtenstein

did not produce his breakthrough work until he was 40 years old, he arrived at the images that

embodied his major conceptual innovation less than three years after his first exposure to New

York’s advanced art world.

       The social sciences do not produce deterministic laws from which there are no deviations,

so inevitably there will be experimental artists who make major contributions early in their

careers, and conceptual artists who make major contributions late in theirs. Yet what the

examples considered here suggest is that we should not immediately assume that these

occurrences are anomalous. Monet’s life cycle appears as an anomaly only if we consider his
                                                 73


career in isolation. When we place it in context, it serves as a reminder that artistic innovations

are not made by isolated geniuses, but are usually based on the lessons of teachers and the

collaboration of colleagues. Unlike many other instances in which young artists have reacted

against the art of their teachers, Monet embraced the goals and methods of Boudin and Jongkind,

and used their work as a point of departure for the development of even more radical techniques

and intentions. The careers of van Gogh and Lichtenstein demonstrate that innovative artists

must understand the advanced art of their time before they can make new contributions. What

appears to be necessary for radical conceptual innovation is not youth, but an absence of

acquired habits of thought that inhibit sudden departures from existing conventions. When van

Gogh learned the methods and goals of Impressionism, he could see almost immediately that it

was not an art that was suited to his temperament, but his own subsequent discoveries were then

aided by his relationships with other young artists who were also reacting against Impressionism

out of similar motives. Even less consciously, Lichtenstein responded just as quickly to the

conceptual innovations that were changing advanced American art in the early 1960s.

Masters and Masterpieces

               In order to be noticed at the exhibition, one has to paint rather large
               pictures that demand very conscientious preparatory studies and
               thus occasion a good deal of expense; otherwise one has to spend
               ten years until people notice you, which is rather discouraging.
                                               Frédéric Bazille, 1866212

       This analysis of artists’ life cycles has implications for a number of significant issues in

the history of modern art. Some of these have long been of interest to art historians, but others

have actually not been noticed by historians. One of the latter is posed by Tables 9 and 10.

These list the individual paintings, by artists who lived and worked in France during the late 19th
                                                 74


and early 20th centuries, that are most often reproduced in the American and French textbooks

surveyed earlier in this paper. Both lists rank the top ten paintings by number of illustrations;

because of ties, this yields a total of 11 paintings in Table 9, and 12 in Table 10.

       The paintings in Tables 9 and 10 are all classic works of modern art, their images

immediately familiar to students of modern art. Their importance is the subject of little

disagreement among scholars of different nations; eight paintings appear in both tables, and no

painting ranked among the top five works in either table fails to appear in the other table. It

might therefore be concluded that these lists hold no surprises.

       Yet Tables 9 and 10 do hold a major surprise. Some of the very greatest painters of this

era, including Cézanne, Degas, Pissarro, and Renoir, fail to appear on either list. At the same

time, a number of artists, including not only Picasso and Manet, but also Courbet and Duchamp,

have multiple entries on the lists. The puzzle is considerable: why does Cézanne, one of the very

most important painters of the modern era, have no painting among those works identified by a

consensus of art scholars as the most important, while Courbet and Duchamp, who are not

generally considered nearly as important, both have several paintings that are ranked among the

most important individual works by both American and French scholars?

       A hint as to the resolution of this puzzle is suggested by an examination of Tables 9 and

10 in light of the two categories of artist defined by this study. The two tables include a total of

15 paintings. Of these, all but one were executed by conceptual artists. Monet’s Impression,

Sunrise, which ranks seventh in Table 10, is the only painting in either table produced by an

experimental artist. The other 14 paintings, which fill 22 of the 23 places in the two tables, were

all made by conceptual painters.
                                                  75


       The puzzle is resolved by combining this recognition of the conceptual origin of nearly

all of these modern masterpieces with an understanding of the institutions of the art market in

France during this period. Throughout the first three quarters of the 19th century, French artists

understood that the government’s official Salon was the sole means of having their work

presented to the public in a setting that would assure critics and collectors of its worth: the Salon

had an effective monopoly of the legitimate presentation of new art to the public. The enormous

size of these annual or biennial exhibitions, which typically had thousands of entries, produced a

considerable danger that even if an artist succeeded in having his work selected by the Salon’s

jury, it would be ignored because it was hung in a bad location. Historian George Heard

Hamilton observed that “one way for an artist to avoid such a calamity was to paint a picture so

large it could not possibly be overlooked. Such huge ‘machines,’ by reason of their size along,

attracted critical and popular attention quite out of proportion to their merit.”213

       Conceptual painters had a decisive advantage in producing large and complex works that,

in Bazille’s words, “demand very conscientious preparatory studies.” Six of the paintings in

Tables 9 and 10 - three each by Courbet and Manet - were initially submitted to the official

Salon. Producing these large works was a regular part of these artists’ annual routines. So for

example late in 1854, Courbet wrote to a friend that “I have managed to sketch my painting, and

at the moment it is entirely transferred to the canvas, which is twenty feet wide and twelve feet

high. This will be the most surprising painting imaginable: there are thirty life-size figures.” He

noted that “I have two and a half months to carry it out ... so that all told I have two days for each

figure.”214 This schedule was dictated by the deadline for submitting works to the Salon of 1855,

and Courbet met it. His confidence that he would be able to do this resulted from his knowledge
                                                  76


that once he had made a full compositional drawing of a painting, the execution of the work

would follow without unforeseen difficulties: “Works of art are conceived all at once, and the

composition, once it is well established and firmly outlined in the mind in all its details, casts it

into its frame on paper or on canvas in such a way that there is no need to modify it in the course

of execution.”215

       The importance of the official Salon declined considerably during the final quarter of the

19th century, but the importance of great individual works nonetheless persisted. In large part,

this was because for the remainder of the century other large-scale group exhibitions continued

to be the necessary venues for the legitimate presentation of new art to the public. Thus many

painters, including Matisse and Seurat, persisted in the practice of regularly planning large,

ambitious paintings for display in group exhibitions. But even after exhibiting at group shows

ceased to be necessary, the machine continued to be the chief token of success in Paris’ advanced

art world. Although Picasso was the first major modern artist who established himself without

participating in group exhibitions, his greatest single work was nonetheless prompted by the

tradition of the Salon machine. Early in his Paris career, the ambitious young Picasso

recognized Matisse as his rival for the informal leadership of the advanced art world, and he

envied the attention Matisse gained from showing his Joy of Life (listed in Table 9) at the 1906

Salon des Indépendants. Challenged by Matisse’s painting’s “success within the terms of

traditional Salon canvases,” Picasso methodically and deliberately set out to produce a “large

salon-type painting” that would be recognized as a masterpiece by the artists, critics, and

collectors who made up Paris’ advanced art world.216 He succeeded in producing the painting

that many art historians consider the most important painting of the 20th century, as the
                                                 77


Demoiselles d’Avignon dominates both Tables 9 and 10.

       The importance of group exhibitions in the French art world of the 19th century thus

profoundly influenced artists’ practices. Ambitious painters devoted disproportionate effort to

making important individual paintings as a means of establishing and advancing their

reputations. And this type of competition afforded a great advantage to conceptual artists, whose

practices better enabled them to plan and carry out large and complex individual paintings.

Ambitious experimental painters struggled under the burden of trying to do this. Recognizing

this leads to another important implication of the present analysis for our understanding of the

history of modern art.

The Impressionists’ Challenge to the Salon

               I shan’t sent anything more to the jury. It is far too ridiculous...to
               be exposed to these administrative whims ... What I say here, a
               dozen young people of talent think along with me. We have
               therefore decided to rent each year a large studio where we’ll
               exhibit as many of our works as we wish.
                                             Frédéric Bazille, 1867217

       The Impressionists’ decision to secede from the official Salon and hold their own

independent group exhibitions is among the most celebrated episodes in the history of modern

art. Yet in spite of the vast amount of scholarly attention that has been devoted to describing

these exhibitions and their consequences, one basic question that has been surprisingly neglected

is why it was Monet and a few of his friends, rather than any others among the vast number of

other neglected painters in mid-nineteenth century Paris, who actually undertook to devise an

institutional alternative to the Salon. Understanding the differing working methods of

conceptual and experimental artists provides a key element of the answer to this question.
                                                78


       A major motivation for the Impressionists’ desire to hold their own exhibitions appears to

have been their recognition that, as experimental painters, their procedures were not well suited

to fighting for acceptance on the Salon’s terms. Bazille and Monet first formulated the idea of

holding independent group exhibitions in 1867. For Monet, this came at a point when he had

failed at two time-consuming attempts to produce major individual paintings for the Salon.

During 1865 and early 1866, he had spent months working on a large painting, 15 by 20 feet,

that would be his Déjeuner sur l’herbe. He made a number of figure drawings for the painting, a

large charcoal sketch of the composition, and an oil sketch of the whole composition before

beginning the final canvas. Unable to complete the painting on time, Monet missed the

submission deadline for the 1866 Salon. He ultimately abandoned the enormous unfinished

work, which he later described as “incomplete and mutilated.”218 In 1866, he set out to make a

smaller but still ambitious painting, eight by seven feet in size, of Women in the Garden. This

painting, made without preparatory sketches or studies, was rejected by the Salon jury in 1867.219

These two unsatisfactory attempts appear to have convinced Monet that it was a mistake for him

to try to follow his friends Courbet and Manet in producing large individual paintings for the

Salon. Bazille’s account of the two friends’ original plans for a group exhibition in 1867

described a show “where we’ll exhibit as many of our works as we wish,” a format more

appropriate for an experimental approach that naturally produced groups of smaller paintings

rather than impressive individual works.

       Manet’s persistent refusal to stop exhibiting at the official Salon and join his friends at

their independent shows is similarly illuminated by the fact that unlike Monet, Degas, Pissarro,

and Sisley, Manet was a conceptual artist. Despite a number of snubs by the Salon’s jury,
                                                  79


including the rejection of his Déjeuner sur l’herbe in 1863, Manet held to the position that “the

Salon is the true field of battle - it is there that one must measure oneself.”220 Although his style

often created conflict with the Salon’s jury, Manet’s conceptual approach allowed him regularly

to create the large and complex individual paintings that were well suited to compete for

attention at the great official exhibitions. In contrast, Monet and his Impressionist friends appear

to have realized that they could create large paintings for the Salon only by sacrificing quality in

their art.

        Table 11 demonstrates the extent to which the Impressionists adapted their independent

exhibitions to their experimental approach, listing the number of paintings by the leading

members of the group included in each of the eight shows. Monet exhibited nine paintings at the

first show and at least twice that number in each of the four later shows in which he participated.

Five artists - Degas, Monet, Pissarro, Renoir, and Sisley - each displayed 20 or more works in at

least one of the exhibitions, and three of them did so more than once. These large numbers of

paintings, which were much greater than they could ever have hoped to enter in the official

Salon, could almost serve effectively to give the leaders of the movement one-man shows in the

midst of their group exhibitions. In light of the analysis of this paper, the Impressionists’ group

exhibitions can thus be seen as the response of a group of ambitious young experimental painters

to an official institution that they recognized to be better suited in format to conceptual artists.

Contrasting Careers

               The young master is a new phenomenon in American art.
                                           Harold Rosenberg, 1970221

        The dramatic innovations that many conceptual artists have made early in their careers
                                                 80


have often allowed them to gain attention at much younger ages than their experimental

counterparts. There were instances of this in the 19th century, as Manet became the focal point

for controversy in Paris’ advanced art world at the age of just 31 when his Déjeuner sur l’herbe

was shown at the Salon des Refusés in 1863, and Georges Seurat similarly gained widespread

attention at the age of 27, when his Sunday Afternoon on the Island of the Grande Jatte was

exhibited in the final Impressionist exhibition in 1886. But this would become much more

common in the next century, as critics, dealers, and collectors became more aware of the fact that

the paintings that introduced radical innovations often rose sharply in value within as little as a

decade after their appearance.

       One consequence of this recognition was that many art dealers became more willing to

give exhibitions to young and unproven painters. This can be seen in a shift that occurred in

New York during the late 1950s and early ‘60s, as the experimental Abstract Expressionists gave

way to the conceptual artists of the next generation. Table 12 shows that the median age at

which 11 leading Abstract Expressionist had their first one-man shows in New York was 34, but

that this age fell to just 27.5 for a dozen leading members of the next generation. Only two of

the 11 Abstract Expressionists had their first shows before the age of 30, compared to 10 of the

12 artists of the following cohort. Three major Abstract Expressionists - de Kooning, Still, and

Newman - did not debut until after 40, whereas all the leaders of the next generation had their

first shows well before they reached 40.

       When Frank Stella was given a retrospective exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in

1970 at the age of just 33, the critic Harold Rosenberg, who was a prominent supporter of the

Abstract Expressionists, was indignant. He observed acidly that “The indispensable qualification
                                                 81


of the creators of American art has been longevity.” Nor was this unique to American art, for

Rosenberg declared that “It is inconceivable that Cézanne, Matisse, or Miró could have qualified

for a retrospective in a leading museum after their first dozen years of painting; certainly Gorky,

Hofmann, Pollock, and de Kooning did not.” Rosenberg argued that major artistic contributions

required long gestation periods: “Self-discovery has been the life principle of avant-garde art ...

and no project can, of course, be more time-consuming than self-discovery. Every step is bound

to be tentative; indeed, it is hard to see how self-discovery can take less than the individual’s

entire lifetime.” In closing his scathing review of Stella’s exhibition, Rosenberg protested that

“For a coherent body of significant paintings to spring directly out of an artist’s early thoughts, a

new intellectual order had to be instituted in American art.”222 Although Rosenberg deplored

this situation, his analysis of it was correct. As the experimental methods of the Abstract

Expressionist were replaced by a variety of conceptual approaches, the artistic value of

experience declined sharply, and the new intellectual order gave rise to a new career pattern in

which artists would routinely gain fame, and often fortune, at an early age.223

Conflicts

               We worked for years to get rid of all that.
                                            Mark Rothko, on Jasper Johns’ first
                                            one-man show, 1958224

               I’m neither a teacher nor an author of manifestos. I don’t think
               along the same lines as the Abstract Expressionists, who took those
               sorts of things all too seriously.
                                               Jasper Johns, 1969225

       The difference in the timing of the careers of experimental and conceptual artists has

been capable of causing considerable resentment, as experimental artists who have spent years
                                                 82


struggling, often in poverty and obscurity, to make contributions to art have been jealous of

younger conceptual artists’ quick commercial success. Yet conflicts between the two types of

artist have often arisen from a deeper source than mere jealousy. For although it need not always

be manifest, there is a powerful potential for hostility and distrust between artists of the two

groups as a result of differences in their philosophies of art, and consequent differences in their

practices and products.

       There is a strong tendency for conceptual artists to regard experimental painters as mere

artisans, lacking in intelligence. The conceptual innovator Marcel Duchamp complained that

modern art had been addressed not to the mind, but to the eye: “I was interested in ideas - not

merely in visual products. I wanted to put painting once again at the service of the mind.”226

Duchamp explained that his art was a reaction against what he considered an excessive emphasis

on appearance: “In French there is an old expression, la patte, meaning the artist’s touch, his

personal style, his ‘paw.’ I wanted to get away from la patte and all that retinal painting.” The

one modern artist he exempted from his criticism was his fellow conceptual artist Seurat: “He

didn’t let his hand interfere with his mind.”227 Duchamp had little regard, however, for those he

considered retinal painters: “‘Bête comme un peintre’ was the saying in France all through the

last half of the nineteenth century, and it was true, too. The kind of painter who just puts down

what he sees is stupid.”228 Duchamp’s disdain for “la patte and all that retinal painting” was

echoed by a number of conceptual artists during the 1960s. So for example Frank Stella

explained that “I do think that a good pictorial idea is worth more than a lot of manual

dexterity.”229

       Conversely, experimental painters often consider conceptual artists to be intellectual
                                                 83


tricksters, lacking in artistic ability and integrity. So for example in 1887 when his former

protégé Paul Gauguin began to gain recognition for his conceptual contributions to Symbolism,

Camille Pissarro could only conclude that Gauguin was not seriously committed to art: “at

bottom his character is anti-artistic, he is a maker of odds and ends.” With bitter irony, Pissarro

wrote to his son that Gauguin had gained “a group of young disciples, who hung on the words of

the master... At any rate it must be admitted that he has finally acquired great influence. This

comes of course from years of hard and meritorious work - as a sectarian!” Several years later,

when a journalist praised Gauguin for his innovations, Pissarro again complained of the younger

artist’s insincerity: “When one does not lack talent and is young into the bargain how wrong it is

to give oneself over to impostures! How empty of conviction are this representation, this décor,

this painting!” In what may have been the last meeting between the two former friends, Pissarro

attended an exhibition of Gauguin’s paintings at Durand-Ruel’s gallery on the occasion of the

younger artist’s return from his first stay in Tahiti in 1893. Pissarro again found the work to be

dishonest, and told his former pupil as much:

               I saw Gauguin; he told me his theories about art and assured me
               that the young would find salvation by replenishing themselves at
               remote and savage sources. I told him that this art did not belong
               to him, that he was a civilized man and hence it was his function to
               show us harmonious things. We parted, each unconvinced.
               Gauguin is certainly not without talent, but how difficult it is for
               him to find his own way! He is always poaching on someone’s
               ground; now he is pillaging the savages of Oceania.

Pissarro noted that his friends agreed: “Monet and Renoir find all this simply bad.”230 Gauguin’s

remarks to Pissarro at the gallery were prophetic, for his work would in fact influence many of

the leading painters of the next generation, including Picasso and Matisse. Yet although these
                                                  84


later conceptual artists could find inspiration in Gauguin’s Symbolism and his imaginative use of

primitive art, Pissarro and his Impressionist friends, whose lives were devoted to the painstaking

experimental development of a visual art, could see in his work only insincerity, opportunism,

and plagiarism.231

       The Impressionists’ reaction to their conceptual successors was later echoed by the

Abstract Expressionists’ rejection of the conceptual artists who followed them in New York.

Thus when Robert Motherwell first saw Frank Stella’s early paintings of black stripes, he

remarked “It’s very interesting, but it’s not painting.”232 And in 1962, Motherwell explained that

the new art was not in the true line of descent of fine art:

               Immediately contemporary painting seems to be developing in the
               direction of pop art. Coca-Cola! There will be a tremendous
               excitement about what, in effect, will be the “folk art” of industrial
               civilization and thus different from preceding art: i.e., the reference
               will not be to high art, but to certain effects of industrial society.
               The pop artists couldn’t care less about Picasso or Rembrandt.

With obvious irony, Motherwell added that “I am all in favor of pop art ... I’m glad to see young

painters enjoying themselves.”233

       Admirers of conceptual art typically praise its brilliance, clarity, and structure; detractors

often criticize it as cold, calculated, and superficial. Experimental artists are often praised for

their touch, and for the wisdom that comes with experience; they are often criticized for their

lack of discipline, and for their mysticism.

       During the era of modern art, experimental painters have been recognized as leaders

during relatively brief periods, while conceptual artists have dominated for longer intervals.

Thus the experimental art of Impressionism was the central form of advanced modern art for
                                                 85


little more than a decade, then was quickly succeeded by a variety of conceptual approaches

including Neo-Impressionism and Symbolism, which were in turn followed by the conceptual

approaches of Fauvism and Cubism. Most of the major movements that followed Cubism were

conceptual, though Surrealism included both conceptual and experimental painters among its

diverse and numerous followers. Some of the latter were an early influence on Abstract

Expressionism, which became the dominant movement in the advanced painting of the 1950s.

Yet this experimental art was quickly displaced by a variety of conceptual approaches in the late

‘50s and beyond, as Pop, Minimalism, and a number of other innovations captured the attention

of the art world. Although it does not appear that there is any necessary pattern or cycle in this

alternation between approaches, several factors do appear to exert systematic influences. One is

that the perceived excesses of either approach can create an interest in reacting against it, not

only on the part of young artists, but also among critics, dealers, and others in the art world who

can encourage and help these young artists. Thus for example a common theme in the

recollections of many of the conceptual innovators of the 1960s is that when they were

beginning their careers they found the art and attitudes of the Abstract Expressionists oppressive.

These younger artists used humor and irony to combat what they considered the pretentious

emotional and philosophical claims of the Abstract Expressionists, and they substituted

impersonal execution for what they perceived to be the excessively personal styles of their

predecessors.

       Reactions against a dominant approach can of course occur in either direction, as

experimental artists can equally seek to overthrow dominant conceptual paradigms. Today’s art

world, with its frequent complaints against the current excesses of conceptual art, may be ripe for
                                                 86


an experimental revolution. Yet considering this possibility points to a different influence that

may be a key factor in understanding why the predominantly conceptual phases of the modern

era have been longer than the experimental ones. This is simply that because radical conceptual

innovations can be made much more quickly than experimental ones, conceptual artists will tend

to have an advantage in any situation in which there is a strong demand for innovation. Arthur

Danto recently observed that “In many ways, the Paris art world of the 1880s was like the New

York art world of the 1980s - competitive, aggressive, swept by the demand that artists come up

with something new or perish.”234 The artists who thrive in these situations tend to be the young

geniuses who can innovate deliberately and systematically, before giving way to the next cohort

of young geniuses; thus Seurat emerged as a leader in Paris’ advanced art world in the 1880s,

just as young conceptual artists like Julian Schnabel and Jean-Michel Basquiat emerged in the

New York art world of the 1980s. In contrast, experimental painters were largely eclipsed in

both these eras, perhaps overwhelmed by the urgent demand quickly to produce dramatic new

results. So for example one of the greatest experimental painters of the 19th century largely

retreated from Paris during the contentious 1880s, as after 1882 Cézanne lived in relative

seclusion in Provence, seeking not only the inspiration of the southern landscape he loved, but

also the peace and solitude he felt he needed for the slow and painstaking development of his art.

His letters refer to his mistrust of the conceptual debates that were raging in Paris’ cafes, as when

he explained in 1889 that “I had resolved to work in silence until the day when I should feel

myself able to defend theoretically the result of my attempts.”235 We may not yet know the

identity of today’s important experimental artists if they are similarly developing their art out of

the limelight, away from the hectic central battlegrounds of the art world where artists feel that
                                                  87


“There is this pressure now to be surer, quicker, more confident.”236

       When the early conceptual innovations of a young artist are recognized quickly, the

reassurance - and income - they provide the artist can be of great value, in affording him the

freedom to experiment further. It was in recognition of this that Picasso described the success of

his early blue and rose periods as “screens that shielded me ... It was from within the shelter of

my success that I could do what I liked, anything I liked.”237 His subsequent radical departure

into Cubism may have been a product of this shelter. Yet the greatest danger to conceptual

artists may be the dry spells that occur when they run out of ideas.238 Although many

experimental painters suffer from chronic uncertainty about the quality of their work, they appear

to be less likely to stop working altogether in crises of confidence, for their trial-and-error

approach usually presents many possible avenues for further research. And experimental artists

can draw some comfort from the realization that their work is more likely to improve over time

than that of their aging conceptual counterparts.

The Globalization of Modern Art

               It was for me the greatest revelation. I understood instantly the
               mechanics of the new painting.
                                              Raoul Dufy, on seeing Matisse’s
                                      Luxe, calme, et volupté, 1905239

       Just as conceptual innovations can often be created immediately, as the expression of

new ideas, so can they often be communicated immediately. Experimental art, with more

complex methods and goals, usually requires direct contact between teacher and student for

instruction that leads to real understanding and mastery, but conceptual art, with its less complex

methods and goals, can often be transmitted without direct contact between artists, merely
                                                88


through seeing reproductions of works of art, or even reading written texts.

       This difference in the ease and speed of transmission of the two types of art has had

important implications for the changing geographic locus of the production of advanced art

during the modern era. Artists who wanted to learn the techniques and philosophy of

Impressionism had to spend time talking and working with members of the core group. Pissarro

was the most welcoming of them, and Cézanne and Gauguin both spent time working in Pontoise

under his guidance in the late 1870s and early ‘80s. In addition, Pissarro appears to have spent

time explaining Impressionism to van Gogh in Paris during 1886-87, and to Matisse in the late

1890s.240 Mary Cassatt similarly served an informal apprenticeship with Degas.241 In all these

cases, the instruction occurred gradually, for studying Impressionism involved learning a variety

of techniques, as well as understanding a diffuse set of visual goals that were more easily

demonstrated than expressed verbally.

       Even in the late 19th century, the communication of conceptual innovations apparently

began to be made more quickly, with considerably less contact. A celebrated instance occurred

late in the summer of 1888 in the artists’ colony of Pont-Aven, when the 25-year-old art student

Paul Sérusier introduced himself to Gauguin and spent a single morning painting under the

master’s supervision. Gauguin told Sérusier not to hesitate to use pure colors to express the

intensity of his feelings about the landscape of a small wood. Upon Sérusier’s return to Paris,

the small painting he had made under Gauguin’s supervision electrified a group of his fellow

students, including Maurice Denis, Edouard Vuillard and Pierre Bonnard. The students named

the painting The Talisman, gave themselves the collective name of the Nabis, from the Hebrew

word for prophets, and began to meet regularly to discuss Gauguin’s Symbolist ideas as
                                                89


transmitted by Sérusier. Thus the instruction of just a few hours, embodied largely in a single

small painting that “seemed crude because of its synthetic formulation,” gave rise to one of the

leading conceptual movements of the 1890s. This was of course possible because Gauguin’s

message was not visual, but conceptual. As Denis later wrote in a eulogy for Gauguin,

Sérusier’s experience provided the group of young painters with a liberating new idea, for it

               introduced to us for the first time, in a paradoxical and
               unforgettable form, the fertile concept of the “plane surface
               covered with colors assembled in a certain order.” Thus we
               learned that every work of art was a transposition, a caricature, the
               passionate equivalent of a sensation received.242

       The first major artistic movements of the 20th century also originated in Paris, as Fauvism

and Cubism were both products of collaborations among young painters in the city. Most of the

movements that built on Fauvism and Cubism also took their mature form only after their

leading members had seen that work at first hand in Paris, and encountered some of the artists

who had worked in those earlier movements. Thus before the outbreak of World War I not only

the most important French painters of the next generation, but also such major figures from

elsewhere in Europe as Wasily Kandinsky, Franz Marc, Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severini, and

Piet Mondrian were among the scores of young artists who spent time in Paris working and

studying the accomplishments of Picasso, Matisse, and their collaborators.

       A major departure from this pattern occurred, however, as Kazimir Malevich made a

radical breakthrough to abstract painting in Moscow in 1915 without ever having visited Paris.

Malevich’s Suprematism was based on Cubism as well as other Western European conceptual

advances, but Malevich was able to learn about these without leaving Moscow. Malevich had

moved to Moscow from his native Ukraine in 1907. There he met a group of talented young
                                                 90


artists, including Mikhail Larionov and Natalia Goncharova, with whom he worked and

exhibited. In Moscow, Malevich saw the results of recent developments in advanced art in

several settings. In 1908 a major public group exhibition organized by Russian artists included a

survey of French art from Cézanne to Picasso. For a number of years Malevich was able to see

the most recent work of Matisse, Picasso, Braque, and others in the private collection of Sergei

Shchukin, a wealthy Russian merchant who was one of the first major collectors of the young

French artists. Malevich followed the development of Léger’s work through photographs carried

to Moscow by a Russian painter, Alexandra Exter, a pupil of Léger’s who divided her time

between France and Russia. He learned of Italian Futurism by reading the manifestos and

pamphlets published by Boccioni and his colleagues. As John Golding observed in considering

the impact of these published articles on Malevich and other young artists, these manifestos

               were almost invariably blueprints for art that was about to be
               produced, ... and this explains why the influence of Italian
               Futurism was to be ... entirely disproportionate to that of its artistic
               and intellectual achievements: it provided artists all over the world
               with instant aesthetic do-it-yourself kits.243

       Malevich’s paintings from the years leading up to his 1915 departure into abstraction

reveal the direct influence of the most recent innovations of many advanced French and Italian

conceptual painters, including Matisse, Picasso, Braque, Léger, Duchamp, and the Futurists, in

spite of the fact that he had never worked with, or even met, any of these artists. Even

Malevich’s conceptual leap of 1915, in which he launched the Suprematist movement with an

exhibition that included his painting Black Square, demonstrated his understanding of the

process of conceptual innovation, as it had developed in Western Europe. Thus not only did the

flat geometric shapes of his abstract paintings reflect his analysis of the Synthetic Cubist collages
                                                 91


of Picasso and Braque, but the paintings were accompanied by a Suprematist Manifesto that

presented an ambitious intellectual rationale for the art works, reflecting lessons Malevich had

learned from the Futurists about the value of theoretical declarations for new conceptual art

movements.244

       Later in the 20th century major geographic shifts occurred in the production of advanced

art. The transmission of experimental art, however, continued to require direct extended contact

between the artists, or groups of artists, involved. The development of Abstract Expressionism

benefitted decisively from the presence in New York of a number of European artists who came

to the United States to escape Fascism. Hans Hofmann, who founded an art school in New York

in 1933, had lived in Paris and Munich, and brought with him a deep understanding not only of

the art of the School of Paris but also of German Expressionism, which he communicated

through his lectures as well as his paintings. The young Chilean Surrealist painter Roberta Matta

came to New York from Paris, and introduced Robert Motherwell, William Baziotes, and

Jackson Pollock to the theory of automatism.245 Some of the Abstract Expressionists served

informal apprenticeships with American painters. Milton Avery attracted a group of young

followers, including Adolph Gottlieb, Barnett Newman, and Mark Rothko, who met in weekly

sketching classes in Avery’s apartment. Avery’s simplified forms, flat areas of expressive color,

and quiet atmospheric effects influenced these younger painters, and even Rothko’s use of

thinned paint in his later work may have resulted from his early studies with Avery. Rothko

stressed the importance of this direct contact for his education as an artist in his eulogy for Avery

in 1965: “The instruction, the example, the nearness in the flesh of this marvelous man - all this

was a significant fact - one which I shall never forget.” 246 Whoever their teachers, and whatever
                                                  92


the form their lessons took, the Abstract Expressionists’ educations were heavily based on long

sessions spent working together in studios, and arguing in cafeterias and bars, for their

achievements were based on gradual development rather than sudden breakthroughs.

       The same would not necessarily be true for the conceptual innovators of the next

generation, whose achievements arrived quickly and early. Frank Stella first saw Jasper Johns’

paintings, at Johns’ first one-man show, at Leo Castelli’s gallery in 1958. Stella later recalled his

reactions to Johns’ targets and flags: “The thing that struck me most was the way he stuck to the

motif... the idea of stripes - the rhythm and interval - the idea of repetition. I began to think a lot

about repetition.” Stella was then a senior in college. He did not meet Johns, and his teachers at

Princeton were hardly sympathetic to his new interest in Johns’ art. (One of them, the artist

Stephen Greene, was so amused by one of Stella’s paintings that resembled a flag that he wrote

“God Bless America” across the canvas.247) Yet Stella persisted, and just a year later, during

1959, he painted most of the Black Series, which remains the most often reproduced body of

work of his celebrated career.248 In 1960, Stella exhibited these paintings at his own first one-

man show, also at Leo Castelli’s gallery.

       Soon significant instances of borrowing conceptual innovations would occur that did not

involve even direct sight of the original art. As a student in Dusseldorf in the early 1960s,

Sigmar Polke saw reproductions of early examples of American Pop art. Polke quickly adapted

to his own purposes Warhol’s use of enlarged newspaper photographs and Lichenstein’s painted

imitations of printed Ben Day dots. When Polke showed the resulting paintings in Dusseldorf in

1963, in an exhibition that he and two fellow students presented in the condemned premises of a

vacant furniture store, his German version of Pop art quickly established him, at the age of 22, as
                                                 93


a leader of his generation of German artists.249 Polke and his friends had no desire to hide the

foreign source of their techniques, as they proudly declared their relationship to the Anglo-

American Pop movement, stating in a press release that theirs was “the first exhibition of

‘German Pop Art’.”250

       Rapid borrowing and utilization of new artistic devices, across ever wider geographic

areas, has become increasingly common in recent decades, in which conceptual approaches to art

have predominated. One indication of this progressive globalization of modern art is that art

historians are finding that they are no longer able to divide their subject as neatly along

geographic lines as in the past. There are many published histories of French, or European,

modern art from the mid-19th century to World War I or to the mid-20th century, and there are

many histories of American art from World War II to the 1960s. For more recent periods,

however, art historians are finding these geographic restrictions to be more problematic in

producing their narratives, not only because it is less clear that there is a single dominant locus of

the advanced art of the past half century, but also because artistic influence has spread more

rapidly and freely over a wider area in recent times.251

       Conceptual innovations can often be borrowed more readily than experimental ones

because they are typically less complex, and because they are less tied to specific artistic goals.

Thus during recent decades many artists have used earlier conceptual techniques in ironic ways,

without concern for their original intent. If the art world continues to be dominated by

conceptual approaches, we should expect that the major innovators of the future will not only

continue to emerge at very young ages, but that they will also be spread ever more widely across

countries and continents.
                                                  94


Beyond Modern Art

               One of the most noteworthy statements in Vasari’s Life of Titian,
               and possibly the most important one for an understanding of
               Rembrandt’s development is the remark that behind the apparently
               effortless “pittura di macchia” (painting with splotches) lay a vast
               store of knowledge and experience. Vasari accordingly warned
               young artists not to attempt this technique, stressing ... that an artist
               should begin with a painstaking and fine technique and only adopt
               the rough manner later in life. Surveying Rembrandt’s career, it is
               as if he took this advice very much to heart.
                                              Ernst van de Wetering, 2000252

       Recent research has begun to indicate that the difference in conception and practice that

has distinguished experimental and conceptual artists is not a phenomenon solely of the modern

era, but that the two types can be identified much earlier.253 Although the process of

categorizing premodern artists has just started, an understanding of the distinction may serve to

provide a coherent and unified framework for many of the features of the art of great painters of

the past that have previously been regarded as unrelated or idiosyncratic.

       An example is afforded by findings produced by recent analyses of Rembrandt’s art.

Although Rembrandt made hundreds of drawings, few appear to have been intended or used as

preparatory works for his paintings.254 Rembrandt did not begin his paintings with underdrawing

on the primed canvas, but instead began painting directly with a brush, as he arrived at the forms

in his paintings only in the course of executing them.255 He developed his paintings slowly,

returning to particular passages again and again: his “often laborious working of the paint”

served to “call attention to invention as a process.”256 X-rays of his paintings reveal many

pentimenti.257 He found it difficult to complete his paintings, was apparently reluctant to let

even commissioned works go, and he often left paintings unfinished.258 Like other masters of his
                                                 95


day, Rembrandt had students and assistants in his studio, but unlike many other masters, he did

not sign works produced by other members of his studio, and he never collaborated with these

assistants: “His merging of invention with execution, his distinctive handling of the paint (or of

the etched line), his invention and use of his signature presented his works and those of his studio

as an extension of himself.”259

       Art historians have established each of these features of Rembrandt’s practice separately,

and have generally offered no unifying analysis for them. Yet all are consistent with the

proposition that Rembrandt was an experimental artist. Also consistent with this proposition is

Rembrandt’s arrival late in life at what art historians have called an “‘ultima maniera’ - that

magical apotheosis which typifies some artists’ biographies.”260

       Among the greatest masters of the premodern era, a survey of evidence of this sort

suggests that Masaccio and Raphael were conceptual innovators, and that Michelangelo and

Titian, like Rembrandt, were experimental. Evidence on these artists’ life cycles furthermore

shows that art historians consider Masaccio and Raphael to have done their greatest work very

early, and Michelangelo, Titian, and Rembrandt to have done theirs late in their careers.261

Recognition of the differences between conceptual and experimental artists of the premodern era

may resolve as many questions as it has for the modern period. Although this study is at an early

stage, it appears to hold great promise in presenting a more systematic history of the

development of Western art.

Beyond Art

               There is a line among the fragments of the Greek poet Archilochus
               which says: “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows
               one big thing ...” [T]aken figuratively, the words can be made to
                                                                96


               yield a sense in which they mark one of the deepest differences
               which divide writers and thinkers, and it may be, human beings in
               general. For there exists a great chasm between those, on one side,
               who relate everything to a single central vision ... and, on the other
               side, those who pursue many ends... The first kind of intellectual
               and artistic personality belongs to the hedgehogs, the second to the
               foxes.
                                              Isaiah Berlin, 1953262

       The implications of this research on the life cycles of modern artists may go not only

beyond modern art, but beyond art in general. Since the pioneering research of Harvey Lehman

in the 1950s, psychologists have taken an active interest in measuring the life cycles of creative

people in a wide range of fine arts and academic disciplines. This has produced conclusions like

those referred to earlier in this paper, that important mathematicians and poets have typically

done their best work at younger ages than have important philosophers and novelists. Yet a

potentially severe flaw with the psychologists’ research can be illustrated by examining

Lehman’s study of painters. Lehman compiled a list of all the paintings mentioned in at least

two of 60 different books on art history published between 1890 and 1939. This list contained

650 paintings by 168 different artists. Distributing these paintings by the artists’ ages when the

paintings were produced yields a curve which “exhibits a definite peak at 35 to 39,” and Lehman

concludes that “The consensus of experts suggests that the best oil paintings have been executed

most frequently by artists from 35 to 39.”263 The theory and evidence considered above in this

paper suggests that the construction of a single age distribution from evidence like that collected

by Lehman potentially poses an enormous barrier to our understanding of creativity at the

individual level. This is because it may conceal the existence of two distinct age distributions -

for experimental and conceptual artists - with very different peaks. And this barrier may exist
                                                    97


not only for painters, but also for the many other activities that Lehman and his successors have

generally analyzed at the aggregate level of the discipline.264

        The most dramatic differences in creative life cycles may occur within, rather than

across, disciplines. I believe it is likely that in all intellectual activities, including the fine arts as

well as academic disciplines, there are important practitioners of both types described in this

paper - experimental and conceptual - and that in all these activities there are consequently two

distinct life cycles of creativity. If this is true, the differences psychologists have found across

disciplines in the central tendency of important contributors’ peak achievements by age may be

largely a consequence of differences across disciplines in the relative numbers of the two types

of innovator. The results noted above would thus indicate that a larger proportion of important

mathematicians and poets have been conceptual innovators than has been the case for important

philosophers and novelists.

        I am currently studying the careers of Nobel laureates in economics and of important

American poets of the 20th century. Although neither study is complete, I can present

preliminary results that appear to demonstrate that both of these groups of creative people

include both conceptual young geniuses and experimental old masters.

        The study of the life cycles of the eminent economists is based on an analysis of all the

citations to their work recorded in the Social Science Citation Index for the years 1970-2000.265

A straightforward measure of the timing of each scholar’s single most important contribution is

to locate the year from which their publications received the most citations. Table 13 presents

this measure for ten Nobel laureates. These are only a subset of all the laureates in economics,

who now total more than 50. Yet it is clear that Kenneth Arrow, Gary Becker, Paul Samuelson,
                                                98


and Robert Solow are among the most important economic theorists of the second half of the 20th

century, just as Milton Friedman, Simon Kuznets, and Theodore Schultz are among the most

important empirical economists of the same era.

       The difference in the timing of these scholars’ major contributions is striking. Thus

whereas the four theorists named above published their most-cited work during the ages of 30-

34, the three empiricists published theirs at ages ranging from 41 to 62. In addition, Table 13

shows that the mathematician John Nash published his seminal contribution to game theory at

the age of just 22, but that the two economic historians who have won the Nobel Prize, Robert

Fogel and Douglass North, published their most-cited work at the considerably more advanced

ages of 48 and 70, respectively.

       Modern economic theory is studied at a very high level of abstraction, and there is no

doubt that successful theorists, who work deductively, are conceptual innovators. In contrast,

modern empirical economics is based on the analysis of large bodies of data. Successful

practitioners are typically highly skilled at drawing inferences from abundant evidence, and most

work inductively, and thus experimentally. Table 13 therefore shows that several of the most

important conceptual economists of the past half century produced their most important work

very early in their careers, and that several of the most important experimental economists of the

same era published their most important work considerably later in their careers.

       My study of poets’ life cycles is based on an analysis of the frequency with which their

poems are reprinted in anthologies. A straightforward measure of the timing of their major

contributions is again the year of their careers from which the anthologies contain the largest

number of entries. Table 14 presents this measure for nine important twentieth-century
                                                99


American poets, tabulated from a total of 44 anthologies published since 1980. The table also

shows the percentage of each poet’s total entries in the anthologies that were written before the

poet reached the age of 40.

       T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound are both known for their precocity as poets, and specifically

for the technical excellence of their early work. Eliot wrote “The Love Song of J. Alfred

Prufrock” at the age of just 23, when he was still a graduate student at Harvard. Although he

would later produce other landmark works, many consider “Prufrock” not only “the basic Eliot

poem,” but also “perhaps the most famous [poem] ever written by an American.”266 Noting the

technical mastery and sophisticated tone of Eliot’s early work, one scholar commented that he

“seems never to have been a young man.”267 At the age of 34 Eliot published his monumental

work, The Waste Land, “which seemed to change English poetry for good.”268 Eliot’s poetry

was based on a vast knowledge of literary history, and its academic orientation made its

intellectual appeal to young poets very strong; thus William Carlos Williams, who hoped to

move American poetry in a very different direction, later remarked that Eliot’s work “wiped out

our world as if an atomic bomb had dropped on it.”269

       Ezra Pound published five volumes of poems by the age of 30, and this early output is

marked by “an astonishing display of variety and versatility,” with “poems in a wide range of

styles and modes”.270 The achievement was primarily in technique: “Pound is more interested in

the technical elements of the poem than its subject. His poetry of this period is a learned poetry

rather than one that grows from personal experience.”271

       In contrast, William Carlos Williams’ poetry developed more gradually, “his radical and

distinctly American style emerging more and more assuredly with each successive book.”272
                                                100


Williams lacked the technical facility and clarity of purpose of Eliot and Pound: “if ability to

handle abstractions is taken as the mark of intelligence, then he was also very much less

‘intelligent’ than ... Eliot or Pound ... He could never resolve in his mind what he was trying to

do as a poet.”273 Yet Williams’ enterprise differed from those of Eliot and Pound, as he wanted

“to invent a poetry rooted in American speech and experience, to convey a sense of felt life in his

work by bringing poetry down from the pedestal of high art and locating it firmly in the familiar

terrain of the poet’s immediate environment.”274

       Robert Lowell also arrived at his mature style relatively late. Life Studies, published

when Lowell was 42, was quickly recognized as an important achievement for its introduction of

what became known as confessional poetry. The poet Donald Hall observed that “Lowell was

not the first poet to undertake great change in mid-career, but he was the best poet to change so

much.” This change involved a loosening of structure, as Lowell “abandoned syllabic tightness

and formal diction for idiom, improvisation, surprise, and for details of the American scene.”275

Lowell’s poetry was open-ended, as he constantly revised old poems, for “what he was after was

not so much a poem as a poetic process - something that denied coherence, in the traditional

sense, and closure.”276

       Lowell’s introspective writing about his own troubled life inspired many younger poets to

create autobiographical works. Sylvia Plath was among these, as she wrote that Life Studies

excited her with “this intense breakthrough into very serious, very personal emotional

experience.”277 She followed Lowell in writing vividly and painfully about her personal life.

Yet her innovative contribution lay not in subject matter but in her language, with “her use of

metaphors so strong that they displace what they set out to define and qualify.”278 Plath’s most
                                                101


celebrated poems date from the final two years of her life, before her suicide at the age of 31.

During this time she wrote “at top speed, as one might write an urgent letter,” and she frequently

began and completed a poem in a single day.279 She had no doubt that this was her best work, as

in October, 1962, four months before her death, she wrote to her mother that “I am writing the

best poems of my life; they will make my name.”280

       Robert Frost made the people of New England his subject. His carefully metered

rhythms transferred their conversational language and diction into poetry. One scholar noted that

“no poet of the twentieth century, with the exception of William Carlos Williams, has placed so

much emphasis on the spoken language as the source of poetry.”281 Frost believed that poems

should not be carefully planned or rehearsed, but that their composition should be a process of

immediacy and discovery. Thus in the preface to his collected poems he declared:

               No tears in the writer, no tears in the reader. No surprise for the
               writer, no surprise for the reader. For me the initial delight is in
               the surprise of remembering something I didn’t know I knew.282

Frost matured slowly as a poet, and he believed strongly that the wisdom that came from

experience was more valuable than the more intense but less sustained brilliance of youth. So

for example he wrote in 1937, at the age of 63, that:

               Young people have insight. They have a flash here and a flash
               there ... It is later in the dark of life that you see forms,
               constellations. And it is the constellations that are philosophy.283

       Wallace Stevens emphasized that his poetry grew from real experiences. Thus he once

wrote to a friend that “While , of course, my imagination is a most important factor, nevertheless

I wonder whether, if you were to suggest any particular poem, I could not find an actual

background for you.”284 Stevens did not make precise plans or outlines for his poems, but
                                               102


improvised as he wrote. One critic observed that “he loved the process of thinking, not the

thought that presses for a conclusion.”285 Robert Lowell faulted Stevens for his casual execution,

declaring that “few poets of Stevens’s stature have tossed off so many half-finished

improvisations,” but nonetheless praised him for “understanding with the understanding of

having lived long.”286 On the occasion of Stevens’ 75th birthday, William Carlos Williams

observed that Stevens’ work had not reached its full power until late in his life, and concluded

that

               It is a mark of genius when an accomplished man can go on
               continually developing, continually improving his technique as
               Stevens shows by his recent work ... Patiently the artist has
               evolved until we feel that should he live to be a hundred it would
               be as with Hokusai a perspective of always increasing power over
               his materials until the last breath.287

       Gwendolyn Brooks is known for bringing the common language and everyday

experiences of black Americans into poetry. Her best work came only after a long period of

development, as she gradually abandoned the academic style and elegant phrases of her early

poetry in favor of looser forms and more idiomatic language. Her most reprinted poem, “We

Real Cool,” published when Brooks was 43, tersely portrayed the rebellious attitudes and violent

lives of poor urban blacks.288

       Richard Wilbur is praised for being “witty, versatile, good-humored, intelligent, and

technically dazzling,” and for writing “elegant exquisitely regular, jewel-like verse.”289 His

poetry is concerned with form rather than substance: “the subject of a poem need not be in any

sense great; the death of a toad would do nicely ... This was art, not life.”290 Although Wilbur’s

early work is highly regarded, there is a critical consensus that “Wilbur has changed or
                                                 103


developed very little in his eight collections of verse.”291

       In an essay published in 1946, the English poet Stephen Spender wrote that

               I make a sharp distinction between two types of concentration: one
               is immediate and complete, the other is plodding and only
               completed in stages. Some poets write immediately works which,
               when they are written, scarcely need revision. Others write their
               poems by stages, feeling their way from rough draft to rough draft,
               until finally, after many revisions, they have produced a result
               which may seem to have very little connection with their early
               sketches.292

Spender’s two categories of poets appear to correspond directly to those developed for painters

in the present study. Thus it seems likely that poets who produce immediately are conceptual,

while those who work in stages are experimental. The brief survey of the nine American poets

considered here might suggest that Eliot, Pound, Wilbur, and Plath belong in the first of

Spender’s groups, and Frost, Stevens, Williams, Lowell, and Brooks in the second. The logic of

this division is that the more highly literary and technical contributions of the first four could be

made quickly, whereas the efforts of the second group at transforming real experiences into art

would require more time. Spender himself appears to have recognized this difference in the time

required by the two types, for he observed that “the difference between the two types of genius is

that one type ... is able to plunge the greatest depths of his own experience by the tremendous

effort of a moment, the other ... must dig deeper and deeper into his consciousness, layer by

layer.” 293 The quantitative measures of Table 14 show that Pound, Eliot, Wilbur, and Plath all

made their most valued contributions by the age of 30, whereas Frost, Stevens, Williams,

Brooks, and Lowell only found their voice later, usually after the age of 40. Thus the evidence

of these poets’ single best years suggests that great conceptual poets, who innovate through the
                                                  104


“effort of a moment,” tend to arrive at their major contributions considerably earlier in their

careers than great experimental poets, who must engage in a more time-consuming process of

exploring their own consciousness “layer by layer.” And the evidence of the age distributions of

their anthology entries furthermore suggests that the conceptual poets had made the bulk of their

original contributions before the age of 40, while the experimental poets made most of theirs

after that age.

        Systematic studies of the careers of significant numbers of innovators in other intellectual

disciplines remain to be carried out, but it seems apparent from the evidence examined to this

point for painters, economists, and poets that there are strong ties in this wide range of activities

between creative individuals’ working methods and their life cycles. Obvious examples appear

in other settings. Thus Virginia Woolf appears to be a clear example of an experimental novelist

who reached the peak of her achievement after the age of 40. In 1928 Woolf wrote an

introduction to Mrs. Dalloway, which had first been published three years earlier. In it she took

pains to deny the claim that the book was “the deliberate offspring of a method.” Although

Woolf admitted that she had been dissatisfied with the forms of fiction that were then in use, she

insisted that Mrs. Dalloway was anything but a planned or systematic reaction to this feeling.

Rather, she wrote,

                  the idea started as the oyster starts or the snail to secrete a house
                  for itself. And this it did without any conscious direction. The
                  little note book in which an attempt was made to forecast a plan
                  was abandoned, and this book grew day by day, week by week,
                  without any plan at all, except that which was dictated each
                  morning in the act of writing. The other way, to make a house and
                  then inhabit it, as Wordsworth did and Coleridge, is, it need not be
                  said, equally good and much more philosophic. But in the present
                  case it was necessary to write the book first and to invent a theory
                                                                105


               afterwards.294

When Woolf wrote this description of her experimental approach she was 46 years old. Six

years earlier, she had noted in her diary that she had “found out how to begin (at 40) to say

something in [her] own voice.”295 Later critics would agree with Woolf’s assessment, generally

considering her finest period to begin with Mrs. Dalloway.296

       A biographer observed of Woolf that “Even more than other novelists who have recorded

the birth and growth of their works, she appears to begin without any detailed knowledge of how

she will proceed.”297 Like many experimental painters, this uncertainty persisted throughout

Woolf’s process of composition. Thus having begun To the Lighthouse early in 1926, on

September 5 Woolf noted in her diary that “At this moment I’m casting about for an end ...

[W]hat becomes [of] Lily & her picture?”298 Woolf later recorded that she had “finished,

provisionally,” 11 days later.299 The final sentences of the novel in fact describe the moment

when the experimental artist Lily Briscoe completed her painting:

               [S]he looked at her canvas; it was blurred. With a sudden
               intensity, as if she saw it clear for a second, she drew a line there,
               in the centre. It was done; it was finished. Yes, she thought,
               laying down her brush in extreme fatigue, I have had my vision.300

Allowing Lily to achieve her vision may have reflected not only Woolf’s satisfaction at her

achievement in the novel but also a judgment of her own creative life cycle. Lily was 44 at the

novel’s end, the same age as Woolf herself, and she would later write in her diary that “With The

Lighthouse I may just have climbed to the top of my hill.”301

Conclusion

               Why do you think I date everything I make? Because it’s not
               enough to know an artist’s works. One must also know when he
                                                                 106


               made them, why, how, under what circumstances. No doubt there
               will some day be a science, called “the science of man,” perhaps,
               which will seek above all to get a deeper understanding of man via
               man-the-creator. I often think of that science, and I want the
               documentation I leave to posterity to be as complete as possible.
               That’s why I date everything I make.
                                             Pablo Picasso, 1943302

       A number of art scholars have been aware of the dramatic difference in working methods

between painters who seek and those who find. Yet perhaps only Roger Fry has understood the

remarkable difference in the career patterns of these two types of painter, with young geniuses

making radical conceptual leaps, and old masters arriving at their innovations only after years of

cautious experimentation.

       This paper has documented the differences in working methods between conceptual and

experimental artists for a significant number of important modern painters, and has shown that

these differences are clearly associated with contrasting life cycles of innovation. The paper has

also pointed out a number of important implications for the history of modern art of the

recognition of the two approaches and their corresponding life cycles.

       The research done to date has only begun to develop this subject. Much more work

remains to be carried out before its implications for modern art are fully understood. The

hostility and incomprehension of art historians who reject systematic measurement and social

scientific methods should not be allowed to deter the pursuit of this research. With the prospect

of this revolution in our understanding of a discipline, art history is too important, and too

exciting, to be left to art historians. And beyond modern art may lie not only a richer

understanding of the history of premodern painting, but a new and more comprehensive

approach to the analysis of human creativity in all intellectual activities.
                                               107


Footnotes

This paper will be presented at a conference, “Measuring Art: A Scientific Revolution in Art
History,” to be held at the American University of Paris, May 31 - June 1, 2003, under the joint
sponsorship of the American University and the University of Chicago. I thank Robert Jensen
and Clayne Pope for discussions, Oren Bassik, Peter Northup, Matthias Regan, and Alison Tisza
for research assistance, and the National Science Foundation for financial support.



1.     Paul Gauguin, The Writings of a Savage (New York: Da Capo Press, 1996), pp. 212, 267.

2.     Gertrude Stein, The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas (New York: Harcourt, Brace,
       1933), p. 120.

3.     The life cycle in question here is that of creativity; my assumption is that the quality of
       artists’ work is a function of innovation. For discussion of this see David W. Galenson,
       Painting outside the Lines: Patterns of Creativity in Modern Art (Cambridge: Harvard
       University Press, 2001), Chapter 4.

4.     Alan Bowness, Modern European Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1972), p. 73.

5.     Richard Shiff, Cézanne and the End of Impressionism (Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press, 1984), p. 222.

6.     Françoise Gilot and Carlton Lake, Life with Picasso (New York: Doubleday, 1964), p.
       199.

7.     Paul Cézanne, Paul Cézanne, Letters (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), pp. 329-30.

8.     Roger Fry, Cézanne (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), p. 3.

9.     Bowness, Modern European Art, p. 37

10.    Michael Doran, editor, Conversations with Cézanne (Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 2001), pp. 59, 78.

11.    Clive Bell, “The Debt to Cézanne,” in Francis Frascina and Charles Harrison, editors,
       Modern Art and Modernism (New York: Harper and Row, 1982), p. 77.

12.    Alfred H. Barr, Jr., Picasso (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1946), pp. 270-71.

13.    Marilyn McCully, editor, A Picasso Anthology (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
       1982), p. 145.
                                            108




14.   John Berger, The Success and Failure of Picasso (New York: Random House, 1993), pp.
      35-36.

15.   Pierre Cabanne, Pablo Picasso (New York: William Morrow, 1977), p. 272.

16.   David W. Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters - and
      Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism,” Historical Methods, Vol. 35, No. 1 (Winter
      2002), Table 3, p. 8; Galenson, “Measuring Masters and Masterpieces: French Rankings
      of French Painters and Paintings from Realism to Surrealism,” Histoire et Mesure, Vol.
      17, No. 1-2 (2002), Table 3, p. 54.

17.   William Rubin, Hélène Seckel, and Judith Cousins, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (New
      York: Museum of Modern Art, 1994), pp. 14, 119.

18.   John Richardson, A Life of Picasso, Volume 2: 1907-1917 (New York: Random House,
      1996), pp. 45-83.

19.   John Golding, Cubism (London: Faber and Faber, 1959), p. 60.

20.   Paul Valéry, Degas, Manet, Morisot (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989), p. 51.

21.   This is an extension of the scheme presented by Richard Wollheim, “Minimal Art,” in
      Gregory Battcock, editor, Minimal Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995),
      p. 396.

22.   John Rewald, Post-Impressionism (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1956), p. 86.

23.   Gauguin, The Writings of a Savage, p. 5.

24.   Vincent van Gogh, The Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 2 (London: Thames
      and Hudson, 1958), pp. 606-07.

25.   Marcel Duchamp, The Writings of Marcel Duchamp (New York: Da Capo Press, 1989),
      p. 125.

26.   Martin Friedman, Charles Sheeler (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1975), p. 72.

27.   Kristine Stiles and Peter Selz, editors, Theories and Documents of Contemporary Art
      (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), p. 89.

28.   Steven Henry Madoff, editor, Pop Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997), p.
      104.
                                             109




29.   Adachiara Zevi, editor, Sol LeWitt Critical Texts (Rome: Inonia, 1994), p. 78.

30.   Lisa Lyons and Robert Storr, Chuck Close (New York: Rizzoli, 1987), p. 29.

31.   Robert Smithson, Robert Smithson: The Collected Writings (Berkeley: University of
      California Press, 1996), p. 192.

32.   Richard Shiff, et. al., Robert Mangold (London: Phaidon Press, 2000), p. 163.

33.   Gerhard Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995), pp. 23,
      30.

34.   Thalia Gouma-Peterson, Breaking the Rules: Audrey Flack (New York: Harry N.
      Abrams, 1992), p. 60.

35.   Neal Benezra and Kerry Brougher, Ed Ruscha (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
      Institution, 2000), p. 146.

36.   Michael Kimmelman, “Modern Op,” New York Times Magazine, (August 27, 2000), p.
      48.

37.   Richard Kendall, editor, Monet by Himself (New York: Knickerbocker Press, 1999), p.
      178.

38.   Jean Renoir, Renoir, My Father (New York: New York Review Books, 2001), p. 188.

39.   Kenneth C. Lindsay and Peter Vergo, editors, Kandinsky (New York: Da Capo Press,
      1994), p. 370.

40.   Felix Klee, editor, The Diaries of Paul Klee, 1898-1918 (Berkeley: University of
      California Press, 1964), pp. 236-37.

41.   Carl Holty, “Mondrian in New York: A Memoir,” Arts, Vol. 31, No. 10 (September
      1957), p. 21.

42.   Joan Miró, Joan Miró: Selected Writings and Interviews (New York: Da Capo Press,
      1992), p. 211.

43.   David Sylvester, Looking at Giacometti (New York: Henry Holt, 1997), pp. 76-77.

44.   David Shapiro and Cecile Shapiro, editors, Abstract Expressionism (Cambridge:
      Cambridge University Press, 1990), p. 397.
                                             110




45.   B. H. Friedman, Jackson Pollock (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), p. 100.

46.   Elaine de Kooning, The Spirit of Abstract Expressionism (New York: George Braziller,
      1994), p. 69.

47.   Ann Eden Gibson, Issues in Abstract Expressionism (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press,
      1990), p. 241.

48.   Stephanie Terenzio, editor, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell (New York:
      Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 227.

49.   Andrew Graham-Dixon, Howard Hodgkin (London: Thames and Hudson, 2001), p. 214.

50.   Balthus, Vanished Splendors (New York: Harper Collins, 2001), p. 55.

51.   John Gruen, The Artist Observed (Chicago: a cappella books, 1991), p. 302

52.   Michael Kimmelman, Portraits (New York: Modern Library, 1999), p. 43.

53.   Sandor Kuthy, editor, Pierre Soulages (Geneva: Skira, 1999), p. 23.

54.   Jane Livingston, The Art of Richard Diebenkorn (New York: Whitney Museum of Art,
      1997), p. 72.

55.   Barbara Rose, Frankenthaler (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1981), p. 36.

56.   Judith E. Bernstock, Joan Mitchell (New York: Hudson Hills Press, 1988), p. 57.

57.   Joan Simon, Susan Rothenberg (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1991), p. 137.

58.   Ambroise Vollard, Cézanne (New York: Dover, 1984), p. 86.

59.   John Rewald, The Paintings of Paul Cézanne: A Catalogue Raisonné, 2 volumes (New
      York: Harry N. Abrams, 1996).

60.   Patrick O’Brian, Pablo Ruiz Picasso (New York: W. W. Norton, 1976), p. 288.

61.   Gilot and Lake, Life with Picasso, pp. 123-24.

62.   Harvey C. Lehman, Age and Achievement (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1953),
      pp. 330-31.

63.   Paul Joyce, Hockney on “Art” (London: Little, Brown, 2000), p. 214.
                                                111




64.   Lehman, Age and Achievement, pp. 324-25.

65.   Dean Keith Simonton, Scientific Genius (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988),
      pp. 68-75.

66.   William Rubin, editor, Cézanne: The Late Work (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
      1977), p. 37.

67.   Golding, Cubism, p. 15.

68.   George Kubler, The Shape of Time (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962), p. 10.


69.   Andy Warhol, The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1975), p.
      178.

70.   Maurice Tuchman and Stephanie Barron, David Hockney: A Retrospective (Los Angeles:
      Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1988), p. 87.

71.   Michael Baxandall, Patterns of Intention (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985),
      Chapters 1-2.

72.   Meyer Schapiro, Worldview in Painting - Art and Society (New York: George Braziller,
      1999), pp. 142-43.

73.   Kubler, The Shape of Time, p. 10.

74.   Referring to art and literature, the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu observed that “There are in
      fact very few other areas in which the glorification of ‘great individuals,’ unique creators
      irreducible to any condition or conditioning is more common or uncontroversial;” The
      Field of Cultural Production (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), p. 29.

75.   As is the case for scholars, the initial recognition of important artists is typically by their
      fellow artists. See the interesting comments by Alan Bowness, The Conditions of
      Success: How the Modern Artist Rises to Fame (New York: Thames and Hudson, 1989).

76.   Calvin Tomkins, Off the Wall (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1980), p. 118.

77.   Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, pp. 24, 256.

78.   Bowness, Modern European Art, p. 73.

79.   David Sylvester, About Modern Art (New York: Henry Holt, 1997), pp. 229-30.
                                              112




80.   Roger Fry, Last Lectures (Boston: Beacon Press, 1962), pp. 3, 14-15.

81.   Kubler, The Shape of Time, p. 83.

82.   Harold Rosenberg, Art on the Edge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 80.

83.   Rewald, The Paintings of Paul Cézanne.

84.   A regression in which the binary dependent variable was equal to 1 for paintings owned
      by museums, and 0 otherwise, produced the following estimate (t-statistics are given in
      parentheses):
      Probability of museum ownership = .249 + .0041 age at execution
                                               (4.04) (3.08)

                                    n=945, R2=.01


85.   Thus for example eight paintings by Cézanne appeared in four or more of the textbooks
      surveyed for Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success,” footnote 1, p. 17. The mean size
      of these eight paintings was 2,151 sq. in. This is more than three times as large as the
      overall mean, of 657 sq. in., of all Cézanne’s paintings in Rewald’s catalogue raisonné.

86.   A regression with the natural logarithm of a painting’s surface area in square inches
      yields the following estimate:
              Ln(size) = 4.86 + 0.22 age at execution +.337 museum ownership
                        (43.7) (9.33)                 (5.80)

                                    n=945, R2=.124
      Thus controlling the age at which the painting was made, paintings by Cézanne owned by
      museums at the time of publication of Rewald’s catalogue were on average one-third
      larger than those privately owned.

87.   These results for Cézanne are likely to extend to other artists as well. It will be
      demonstrated below that art scholars’ judgments of when artists have done their best
      work generally agrees with market valuations. As a result, because these best works are
      most sought after by museums, the auction market will generally understate the true value
      of work from the artist’s best period relative to that of the rest of is career. This effect
      typically serves to strengthen the usefulness of using auction data to date the timing of
      the artist’s best work.

88.   Clement Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Volume 4 (Chicago: University
      of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 118.
                                               113




89.    Giorgio de Chirico, The Memoirs of Giorgio de Chirico (New York: Da Capo Press,
       1994), pp. 70.

90.    Théodore Duret, Manet and the French Impressionists (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott,
       1910), p. 72.

91.    Camille Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien (New York: Da Capo Press, 1995), p. 49.

92.    Ibid., p. 277.

93.    Marcel Guérin, editor, Lettres de Degas (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1931), p. 107.

94.    Ambroise Vollard, Degas (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1928), p. 102.

95.    Valéry, Degas, Manet, Morisot, p. 50.

96.    George Moore, Impressions and Opinions (New York: Brentano, 1913), p. 229.

97.    Wassily Kandinsky, Kandinsky, Complete Writings on Art (New York: Da Capo Press,
       1994), pp. 369-70.

98.    John Golding, Paths to the Absolute (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 67.

99.    Katharine Kuh, The Artist’s Voice (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), p. 191.

100.   Lloyd Goodrich and Doris Bry, Georgia O’Keeffe (New York: Whitney Museum, 1970),
       p. 19.

101.   Kuh, The Artist’s Voice, p. 190.

102.   Barbara Buhler Lynes, O’Keeffe, Stieglitz and the Critics, 1916-1929 (Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1989), p. 288.

103.   Peter Selz, The Work of Jean Dubuffet (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1962), p.
       105.

104.   John Russell, Matisse: Father and Son (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1999), p. 286.

105.   Reinhold Heller, Edvard Munch: The Scream (New York: Viking, 1973), pp. 70-80, 107.

106.   Marcel Giry, Fauvism (New York: Alpine Fine Arts, 1982), p. 250.

107.   George Heard Hamilton, Painting and Sculpture in Europe, 1880-1940 (Harmondsworth:
                                             114



       Penguin, 1967), p. 166.

108.   Douglas Cooper, The Cubist Epoch (London: Phaidon, 1970), p. 42.

109.   Richardson, A Life of Picasso, Volume 2, p. 105.

110.   Christopher Green, Juan Gris, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), pp. 41, 55;
       Golding, Cubism, pp. 130-31.

111.   Green, Juan Gris, pp. 18-19; John Golding, Visions of the Modern (Berkeley: University
       of California Press, 1994), p. 92.

112.   Green, Juan Gris, p. 51.

113.   James Thrall Soby, Giorgio de Chirico (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1955), pp.
       42, 161.

114.   Ibid., p. 157.

115.   Ibid., p. 161.

116.   Kirk Varnedoe, Jasper Johns: A Retrospective (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
       1996), p. 7.

117.   Battcock, Minimal Art, p. 161.

118.   Friedman, Jackson Pollock, p. 100.

119.   Shapiro and Shapiro, Abstract Expressionism, p. 397.

120.   Barnett Newman, Barnett Newman: Selected Writings and Interviews (Berkeley:
       University of California Press, 1992), p. 248.

121.   Matthew Spender, From a High Place: A Life of Arshile Gorky (New York: Alfred A.
       Knopf, 1999), p. 275.

122.   James E. B. Breslin, Mark Rothko (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 232.

123.   De Kooning, The Spirit of Abstract Expressionism, p. 226.

124.   Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 317, 469.

125.   Ibid., p. 526.
                                             115




126.   Newman, Barnett Newman, p. 240.

127.   Thomas B. Hess, Willem de Kooning (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1968), p. 149.

128.   Friedman, Jackson Pollock, p. 183.

129.   Caroline A. Jones, Machine in the Studio (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996),
       p. 90.

130.   David Sylvester, Interviews with American Artists (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       2001), p. 224.

131.   Battcock, Minimal Art, p. 158.

132.   Jasper Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews (New York: Museum of Modern
       Art, 1996), p. 113.

133.   Jones, Machine in the Studio, pp. 197-98.

134.   Gruen, The Artist Observed, p. 225.

135.   Battcock, Minimal Art, pp. 157-58.

136.   Madoff, Pop Art, pp. 107-08.

137.   On the selection of these ten artists, see David W. Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the
       Greatest Modern American Painter? A Quantitative Investigation,” Historical Methods,
       Vol. 35, No. 3 (Summer 2002), Table 2, p. 119.

138.   Bowness, The Conditions of Success, pp. 9-11.

139.   Helen M. France, An Invitation to See: 150 Works from the Museum of Modern Art (New
       York: Museum of Modern Art, 1992). For a list of individuals consulted in the selection
       of the works, see p. 185.

140.   E.g. see Paul Wood, et. al., Modernism in Dispute (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       1993), pp. 77-81.

141.   Christina Duff, “In Payscales, Life Sometimes Imitates Art,” Wall Street Journal (May
       22, 1998), p. B1.

142.   Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success,” Table 5, p. 14; Galenson, “Measuring Masters
       and Masterpieces,” Table 5, p. 63.
                                               116




143.   France, An Invitation to See, pp. 58, 170.

144.   Zevi, Sol LeWitt, p. 80.

145.   Rainer Crone, “Form and Ideology: Warhol’s Techniques from Blotted Line to Film,” in
       Gary Garrels, editor, The Work of Andy Warhol (Seattle: Bay Press, 1989), pp. 87-88;
       Marco Livingstone, “Do It Yourself: Notes on Warhol’s Techniques,” in Kynaston
       McShine, editor, Andy Warhol: A Retrospective (New York: Museum of Modern Art,
       1989), pp. 69-72.

146.   Victor Bockris, Warhol (New York: Da Capo Press, 1997), pp. 164, 170.

147.   Zevi, Sol Le Witt, p. 95.

148.   John Russell, Seurat (London: Thames and Hudson, 1965), pp. 135-65; Robert L.
       Herbert, Seurat (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001), pp. 83-84.

149.   Daniel Catton Rich, Seurat and the Evolution of “La Grande Jatte” (Chicago: University
       of Chicago Press, 1935), p. 10.

150.   Ibid., p. 58.

151.   John Rewald, Georges Seurat (New York: Wittenborn, 1943), p. 26.

152.   Hilary Spurling, The Unknown Matisse (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998), p. 293.

153.   William Rubin and Carolyn Lanchner, André Masson (New York: Museum of Modern
       Art, 1976), p. 21

154.   Friedman, Jackson Pollock, p. 100.

155.   E. A. Carmean, Jr., and Eliza E. Rathbone, American Art at Mid-Century (Washington,
       D.C.: National Gallery of Art, 1978), pp. 133-39.

156.   Alain de Leiris, The Drawings of Edouard Manet (Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 1969), pp. 30-31.

157.   Theodore Reff, Manet: Olympia (New York: Viking Press, 1977), pp. 69-77; de Leiris,
       The Drawings of Edouard Manet, pp. 13, 61, 109.

158.   Duret, Manet and the French Impressionists, p. 90.

159.   John House, Monet: Nature into Art (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986), pp. 45,
                                                117



       230.

160.   Ibid., p. 183.

161.   Ibid., pp. 145-46, 188.

162.   David Bomford, et. al., Art in the Making: Impressionism (London: National Gallery,
       1990), pp. 122-23; also see House, Monet, Chapter 11.

163.   House, Monet, p. 191.

164.   Vojtech Jirat-Wasiutynski and H. Travers Newton, Jr., Technique and Meaning in the
       Paintings of Paul Gauguin (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), p. 44.

165.   Bomford, Art in the Making, p. 165.

166.   Jirat-Wasiutynski and Newton, Technique and Meaning, p. 76.

167.   Richard Brettell and Christopher Lloyd, A Catalogue of the Drawings by Camille
       Pissarro in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980), pp. 42-49;
       also see John House, “Camille Pissarro’s idea of unity,” in Christopher Lloyd, editor,
       Studies on Camille Pissarro (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1986), p. 20.

168.   Gauguin, Writings of a Savage, p. 22.

169.   Rewald, Georges Seurat, p. 68.

170.   Kathleen A. Foster, Thomas Eakins Rediscovered (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       1997), pp. 128-29, 142-43.

171.   Mark Tucker and Nica Gutman, “Photographs and the Making of Paintings,” in Darrel
       Sewell, editor, Thomas Eakins (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001), pp. 225-38.

172.   Tucker and Gutman, “The Pursuit of ‘True Tones,’” in Ibid., pp. 353-66.

173.   Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien, p. 73.

174.   Ibid., pp. 273-74.

175.   John Rewald, Paul Cézanne (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1948), p. 203.

176.   Françoise Cachin, et. al., Cézanne (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1996), pp. 100-02, 104-
       08, 116-20.
                                                118




177.   Françoise Cachin, Signac (Paris: Gallimard, 2000), pp. 8-18.

178.   Bomford, Art in the Making, pp. 114-15; Michael Wilson, Manet at Work (London:
       National Gallery, 1983), pp. 22-27; de Leiris, The Drawings of Edouard Manet, pp. 54-
       63; Reff, Manet: Olympia, p. 78.

179.   de Leiris, The Drawings of Edouard Manet, pp. 33, 170-71.

180.   Ibid., p. 33.

181.   Bradford R. Collins, editor, 12 Views of Manet’s Bar (Princeton: Princeton University
       Press, 1996), pp. 13, 177.

182.   de Leiris, The Drawings of Edouard Manet, p. 33.

183.   Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien, p. 30.

184.   Brettell and Lloyd, A Catalogue of the Drawings by Camille Pissarro, p. 23.

185.   Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien, p. 64.

186.   Ibid., p. 132.

187.   Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p. 130.

188.   Pissarro, Letters to His Son Lucien, p. 158.

189.   Rewald, Georges Seurat, p. 68.

190.   Norma Broude, editor, Seurat in Perspective (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1978), pp.
       28-29.

191.   Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien, p. 135.

192.   E.g. see Pierre Daix, Picasso (New York: Harper Collins, 1994), p. 336.

193.   Gilot and Lake, Life with Picasso, pp. 115-16.

194.   Brassaï, Conversations with Picasso, p. 347.

195.   Kubler, The Shape of Time, p. 6.

196.   Kendall, Monet by Himself, p. 172.
                                              119




197.   Kenneth Clark, Landscape into Art, second edition (New York: Harper and Row, 1976),
       pp. 170-76.

198.   For a detailed analysis of the specific elements of Monet’s early innovation, see House,
       Monet, pp. 51-53, 77, 115.

199.   Charles F. Stuckey, editor, Monet (New York: Park Lane, 1986), pp. 206, 217; Kendall,
       Monet by Himself, p. 255.

200.   Stuckey, Monet, p. 217.

201.   Kubler, The Shape of Time, p. 6.

202.   House, Monet, p. 201. For later examples of this attitude, see Newman, Selected
       Writings and Interviews, p. 198; Sylvester, Interviews with America Artists, p. 187.

203.   E.g. Greenberg, The Collected Essays and Criticism, Vol. 3, p. 228; Vol. 4, pp. 3-11;
       William C. Agee, Sam Francis (Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, 1999), p.
       20.

204.   House, Monet, p. 217.

205.   Rewald, Post-Impressionism, p. 368.

206.   Van Gogh, Complete Letters of Vincent van Gogh, Vol. 2, p. 515.

207.   Ibid., Vol. 3, pp. 6, 28-31.

208.   Clement Greenberg, Homemade Esthetics (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), p.
       117.

209.   Gruen, The Artist Observed, p. 222.

210.   Madoff, Pop Art, p. 198.

211.   Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest Modern American Painter?,” Table 3, p.
       119.

212.   Rewald, The History of Impressionism, p. 140.

213.   George Heard Hamilton, Manet and his Critics (New Haven: Yale University Press,
       1954), p. 15.
                                               120




214.   Gustave Courbet, Letters of Gustave Courbet (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1992), p. 129. The painting was of course L’Atelier, which is included in Table 9.

215.   Ibid., p. 230.

216.   Daix, Picasso, p. 56; David Cottington, “What the Papers Say: Politics and Ideology in
       Picasso’s Collages of 1912,” Art Journal, Vol. 47, No. 4 (Winter 1988), p. 353.

217.   Rewald, The History of Impressionism, p. 172.

218.   Joel Isaacson, Monet: Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (New York: Viking Press, 1972), Chaps.
       1-5; Stuckey, Monet, p. 334.

219.   Rewald, The History of Impressionism, pp. 166-68.

220.   Anne Coffin Hanson, Manet and the Modern Tradition (New Haven: Yale University
       Press, 1977), p. 44.

221.   Harold Rosenberg, The De-definition of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1983), p. 130.

222.   Ibid., pp. 130-31.

223.   David W. Galenson and Bruce A. Weinberg, “Age and the Quality of Work: The Case of
       Modern American Painters,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 108, No. 4 (August,
       2000), pp. 761-77.

224.   Breslin, Mark Rothko, p. 427.

225.   Johns, Writings, Sketchbook Notes, Interviews, p. 136.

226.   Sanouillet and Peterson, The Writings of Marcel Duchamp, p. 125.

227.   Calvin Tomkins, The Bride and the Bachelors (New York: Viking Press, 1965), p. 24.

228.   Calvin Tomkins, Duchamp (New York: Henry Holt, 1996), p. 58.

229.   Rubin, Frank Stella, p. 32.

230.   Pissarro, Letters to his Son Lucien, pp. 96-97, 174, 221.

231.   David W. Galenson and Bruce A. Weinberg, “Creating Modern Art: The Changing
       Careers of Painters in France from Impressionism to Cubism,” American Economic
                                              121



       Review, Vol. 91, No. 4 (September, 2001), pp. 1063-71.

232.   Thierry de Duve, Kant after Duchamp (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996), p. 216.

233.   Terenzio, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, pp. 137-38.

234.   Arthur Danto, Embodied Meanings (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1994), p. 85.

235.   Cézanne, Paul Cézanne, Letters, p. 231.

236.   Irving Sandler, Art of the Postmodern Era (New York: Harper Collins, 1996), p. 443.

237.   Brassaï, Conversations with Picasso, p. 180.

238.   E.g. see Tomkins, Duchamp, pp. 240-50; Golding, Paths to the Absolute, pp. 78-79.

239.   Spurling, The Unknown Matisse, p. 297.

240.   Rewald, Post-Impressionism, pp. 37-38; Spurling, The Unknown Matisse, pp. 134-35,
       178.

241.   Nancy Mowell Mathews, Mary Cassatt (New York: Villard Books, 1994), pp. 125-26,
       140-42, 146-50.

242.   Herschel B. Chipp, Theories of Modern Art (Berkeley: University of California Press,
       1969), p. 101.

243.   Golding, Paths to the Absolute, pp. 48-53; Golding, Visions of the Modern, pp. 172-76.

244.   Golding, Paths to the Absolute, pp. 47-58; Golding, Visions of the Modern, pp. 171-77.

245.   Terenzio, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, pp. 155-67.

246.   Breslin, Mark Rothko, pp. 93-96.

247.   Rubin, Frank Stella, p. 12.

248.   Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest Modern American Painter?,” Table 5, p.
       122; Rubin, Frank Stella, p. 171.

249.   Sandler, Art of the Postmodern Era, pp. 301-05; David Hopkins, After Modern Art, 1945-
       2000 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 126-27.

250.   Richter, The Daily Practice of Painting, p. 16.
                                              122




251.   E.g. see Sandler, Art of the Postmodern Era, p. xxvi; Hopkins, After Modern Art, p. 2.

252.   Ernst can de Wetering, Rembrandt (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), pp.
       164-65.

253.   David W. Galenson and Robert Jensen, “Young Geniuses and Old Masters: The Life
       Cycles of Great Artists from Masaccio to Jasper Johns,” NBER Working Paper 8368
       (July 2001).

254.   Svetlana Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988),
       pp. 70-71; van de Wetering, Rembrandt, pp. 75, 81.

255.   Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise, pp. 59-60; van de Wetering, Rembrandt, p. 23.

256.   Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise, p. 7; van de Wetering, Rembrandt, p. 5.

257.   Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise, p. 40; van de Wetering, Rembrandt, p. 168.

258.   Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise, pp. 16, 91 ; van de Wetering, Rembrandt, pp. 5, 211.

259.   Alpers, Rembrandt’s Enterprise, pp. 101-02.

260.   van de Wetering, Rembrandt, p. 160.

261.   Galenson and Jensen, “Young Geniuses and Old Masters,” Table 1, p. 34.

262.   Isaiah Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox (Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1993), p. 3.

263.   Lehman, Age and Achievement, pp. 77, 82.

264.   For a later example of this practice, see e.g. Simonton, Scientific Genius, Chap. 4;
       Simonton, Genius and Creativity (Greenwich, Conn.: Ablex Publishing, 1997), Chap. 10.

265.   I am doing this analysis of economists’ careers in collaboration with Bruce Weinberg,
       and the results will be presented more fully in future.

266.   Donald Barlow Stauffer, A Short History of American Poetry (New York: E. P. Dutton,
       1974), p. 267; Alan Shucard, Fred Moramarco, and William Sullivan, Modern American
       Poetry (Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1989), p. 99.

267.   Stauffer, A Short History, p. 266.

268.   Michael Schmidt, Lives of the Poets (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999), p. 602.
                                             123




269.   Shucard, et. al., Modern American Poetry, p. 98.

270.   Ibid., p. 259.

271.   Shucard, et. al., Modern American Poetry, p. 124.

272.   Ibid., p. 139.

273.   Hyatt H. Waggoner, American Poets, revised edition (Baton Rouse: Louisiana State
       University Press, 1984), p. 371.

274.   Shucard, et. al., Modern American Poetry, p. 139.

275.   Donald Hall, The Weather for Poetry (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1982),
       p. 195.

276.   Richard Gray, American Poetry of the Twentieth Century (London: Longman, 1990), p.
       255.

277.   Ibid., p. 261.

278.   Michael Schmidt, Lives of the Poets (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999), p. 829.

279.   Sacvan Bercovitch, editor, The Cambridge History of American Literature, Volume 8
       (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), p. 249; Paul Alexander, Rough Magic
       (New York: Viking, 1991), pp. 6-7.

280.   Ibid., p. 7.

281.   Stauffer, A Short History of American Poetry, pp. 231-32.

282.   Elaine Barry, Robert Frost on Writing (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1973),
       p. 126.

283.   Lawrance Thompson, Fire and Ice (New York: Russell and Russell, 1961), p. 133.

284.   George S. Lensing, Wallace Stevens (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press,
       1986), p. 113.

285.   Ibid., pp. 140-42.

286.   Charles Doyle, editor Wallace Stevens (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1985), pp.
       286-88.
                                             124




287.   Ibid., p. 393.

288.   Gray, American Poetry, pp. 183-84.

289.   Stauffer, A Short History of American Poetry, p. 385; Bercovitch, The Cambridge History
       of American Literature Vol. 8, p. 256.

290.   Ibid., p. 58.

291.   Stauffer, A Short History of American Poetry, p. 58; Bercovitch, The Cambridge History
       of American Literature, Vol. 8, p. 57; Gray, American Poetry of the Twentieth Century, p.
       223.

292.   Stephen Spender, “The Making of a Poem,” in Brewster Ghiselin, ed., The Creative
       Process (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1952), p. 115.

293.   Ibid., p. 116.

294.   Virginia Woolf, Mrs. Dalloway (New York: Modern Library, 1928), pp. vii-viii.

295.   Sue Roe and Susan Sellers, editors, The Cambridge Companion to Virginia Woolf
       (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), p. 29.

296.   E.g. Ibid., p. 29; Joan Bennett, Virginia Woolf, second edition (Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press, 1964), p. 98.

297.   Ibid., p. 142.

298.   Virginia Woolf, The Diary of Virginia Woolf, Volume 3 (New York: Harcourt Brace
       Jovanovich, 1980), p. 106.

299.   Ibid., p. 111.

300.   Virginia Woolf, To the Lighthouse (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1990), p. 236.

301.   Woolf, The Diary of Virginia Woolf, Volume 3, p. 152; Roe and Sellers, The Cambridge
       Companion to Virginia Woolf, p. 58.

302.   Brassaï, Conversations with Picasso, p. 133.
                          Figure 1: Age − Price Profile for Paul Cezanne
             15




            14.5




             14




            13.5
Ln(Price)




             13




            12.5




             12




            11.5
                20   25   30     35      40      45      50      55        60   65   70
                                                Age
                         Figure 2: Age − Price Profile for Pablo Picasso
            14.5




             14




            13.5
Ln(Price)




             13




            12.5




             12
               10   20      30        40        50        60        70     80   90
                                               Age
Table 1: Illustrations by Age, Cézanne and Picasso, from Books Published in English

 Age                              Cézanne                               Picasso
                           n                  %                  n                    %
 10 - 19                   0                  0                  3                     1
 20 - 29                   3                  2                 127                   38
 30 - 39                   21                 16                 85                   25
 40 - 49                   30                 22                 64                   19
 50 - 59                   33                 24                 46                   14
 60 - 69                   49                 36                 5                     2
 70 - 79                                                         3                    1
 80 - 89                                                         0                    0
 90 - 92                                                         0                    0

 Total                    136                100                333                   100
 Age with most
 illustrations             67                                    26

Source:       Tabulated from books listed in David W. Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic
              Success: Ranking French Painters - and Paintings - from Impressionism to
              Cubism,” Historical Methods, Vol 35, No. 1 (Winter 2002), p. 17, fn. 1.
Table 2: Illustrations by Age, Cézanne and Picasso, from Books Published in French


 Age                              Cézanne                              Picasso
                           n                  %                  n                   %
 10 - 19                   0                  0                  0                    0
 20 - 29                   7                  6                 77                   38
 30 - 39                   15                13                 44                   22
 40 - 49                   29                25                 27                   13
 50 - 59                   30                26                 34                   17
 60 - 69                   34                30                  8                    4
 70 - 79                                                         7                   3
 80 - 89                                                         5                   2
 90 - 92                                                         0                   0

 Total                    115                100                203                  100
 Age with most
 illustrations             67                                   26

Source:       Tabulated from books listed in David W. Galenson, “Measuring Masters and
              Masterpieces: French Rankings of French Painters and Paintings from Realism to
              Surrealism,” Histoire et Mesure, Vol. XVII, No. 1-2 (2002) Appendix, pp. 83-85.
Table 3: Peak Ages, Ten Early Modern Artists

Artist                         Age At:          Peak Value               Peak Illustrations
                                                                  American texts    French texts
Experimental
   Camille Pissarro (1830-1903)                     45                   43               47
   Edgar Degas (1834-1917)                          46                   42               43
   Wasily Kandinsky (1866-1944)                     52                   47               --
   Georgia O’Keeffe (1887-1986)                     48                   39               --
   Jean Dubuffet (1901-1985)                        46                   53           46, 59, 83


Conceptual
   Edvard Munch (1863-1944)                         34                   30               --
   André Derain (1880-1954)                         24                 25, 26             26
   Georges Braque (1882-1963)                       28                   29               31
   Juan Gris (1887-1927)                            28                   28               25
   Giorgio de Chirico (1888-1978)                   26                   26               --

Sources:       Age at peak value: Galenson, Painting outside the Lines, Tables 2.1, 2.2. For
               artists who do not appear in those tables, prices were estimated as described there.

               Age at peak illustrations: Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success;” Table 5;
               Galenson, “Measuring Masters and Masterpieces,” Table 5; Galenson, “The New
               York School vs. the School of Paris: Who Really Made the Most Important Art
               after World War II?” Historical Methods, Vol. 35, No. 4 (Fall 2002), pp. X-y;
               Galenson, “Toward Abstraction: Ranking European Painters and Paintings of the
               Early Twentieth Century,” in preparation; Galenson, “Before Abstract
               Expressionism: Ranking American Painters and Paintings of the Early Twentieth
               Century,” in preparation.

               The entry given is the artist’s age in the single year from which the textbooks
               reproduce the largest number of the artist’s paintings.
Table 4:     Distribution by Artist’s Age of Paintings Included in Retrospective Exhibitions,
             Cézanne and Picasso

                                     Cézanne                              Picasso
                               n                 %                 n                %
 10 - 19                       0                  0                25                3
 20 - 29                      13                  6               212               28
 30 - 39                      42                 18               134               18
 40 - 49                      61                 27                78               10
 50 - 59                      56                 24               149               20
 60 - 69                      57                 25                64                8
 70 - 79                                                           56                7
 80 - 89                                                           35                4
 90 - 92                                                           3                 0

 Total                        229                100              756
 Age with most                67                                   26
 illustrations

Source:      Françoise Cachin, Isabelle Cahn, Walter Feilchenfeldt, Henri Loyrette, and
             Joseph J. Rishel, Cézanne (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1996); William J.
             Rubin, editor, Pablo Picasso: A Retrospective (New York: Museum of Modern
             Art, 1980).
Table 5: Peak Ages, Ten American Painters

Artist                         Age At:      Peak Value     Peak Textbook     Peak for Works in
                                                           Illustrations     Retrospective
Experimental
   Mark Rothko (1903-70)                         54               54                 46
   Arshile Gorky (1904-48)                       41               40                 43
   Willem de Kooning (1904-97)                   43               48                 45
   Barnett Newman (1905-70)                      40               46                 44
   Jackson Pollock (1912-56)                     38               38                 36


Conceptual
   Roy Lichtenstein (1923-97)                    35               40                 39
   Robert Rauschenberg (1925- )                  31               34                 35
   Andy Warhol (1928-87)                         33               34                 34
   Jasper Johns (1930- )                         27               25             28, 29, 32
   Frank Stella (1936- )                         24               23                 25

Sources:       Age at peak value: Galenson, Painting outside the Lines, Table 2.2.

               Age at peak textbook illustrations: Galenson, “Was Jackson Pollock the Greatest
               Modern American Painter?” Table 5.

               Age at peak number of works in retrospective: tabulated from retrospective
               catalogues listed in Galenson, Painting outside the Lines, Table B.1.
Table 6:        Ages at Which Artists Included in Table 3 Executed Paintings Reproduced in An
                Invitation to See

 Artist                                      Age at execution of MoMA      Age at peak value
                                                      paintings
 Experimental
   Pissarro                                              --                        45
   Degas                                                 48                        46
   Kandinsky                                       48, 48, 48, 48                  52
   O’Keeffe                                              42                        48
   Dubuffet                                            50, 60                      46


 Conceptual
   Munch                                                 --                        34
   Derain                                                27                        24
   Braque                                            30, 31, 55                    28
   Gris                                                  27                        28
   de Chirico                                            29                        26

Sources:        Age at execution of MoMA paintings: Franc, An Invitation to See.

                Age at peak value: see Table 3.
          Table 7:Ages at Which Artists Included in Table 5 Executed Paintings Reproduced in An
                 Invitation to See

 Artist                                      Age at execution of MoMA       Age at peak value
                                                      paintings
 Experimental
   Rothko                                                55                         54
   Gorky                                                 43                         41
   de Kooning                                            48                         43
   Newman                                                46                         40
   Pollock                                              31, 38                      38


 Conceptual
   Lichtenstein                                          40                         35
   Rauschenberg                                          30                         31
   Warhol                                                34                         33
   Johns                                                25, 31                      27
   Stella                                                29                         24

Sources: see Table 5.
Table 8: Illustrations by Age, Monet, from Books Published in English and in French

                                  English                               French
 Age
                           n                  %                  n                    %
 20 - 29                   28                 22                 25                   24
 30 - 39                   42                 34                 43                   41
 40 - 49                   6                  5                  2                    2
 50 - 59                   27                 22                 18                   17
 60 - 69                   5                  4                  6                    6
 70 - 79                   4                  3                  10                   10
 80 - 86                   13                 10                 0                    0


 Total                    125                100                104                   100

Source: see text.
Table 9:        Ranking of Paintings of French Artists, by Total Illustrations in American
                Textbooks

 Rank      Illustrations   Artist, title                               Date     Location
 1              30         Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon          1907     New York
 2              25         Picasso, Guernica                           1937     Madrid
 3              24         Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of   1886     Chicago
                           the Grande Jatte
 4(t)           21         Duchamp, Nude Descending a Staircase,       1912     Philadelphia
                           No. 2
 4(t)           21         Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe              1863     Paris
 6              20         Manet, A Bar at the Folies-Bergère          1882     London
 7              16         Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her     1923     Philadelphia
                           Bachelors, Even
 8(t)           15         Courbet, L’Atelier                          1855     Paris
 8(t)           15         Gauguin, The Vision After the Sermon        1888     Edinburgh
 8(t)           15         Manet, Olympia                              1863     Paris
 8(t)           15         Matisse, The Joy of Life                    1906     Merion

Source: Galenson, “Quantifying Artistic Success,” Table 3, p. 8.
Table 10:      Ranking of Paintings by French Artists, by Total Illustrations in French
               Textbooks


 Rank     Illustrations   Artist, title                               Date     Location
 1             25         Picasso, Les Demoiselles d’Avignon          1907     New York
 2             18         Manet, Olympia                              1863     Paris
 2(t)          18         Picasso, Guernica                           1937     Madrid
 4             17         Seurat, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of   1886     Chicago
                          the Grande Jatte
 5             16         Manet, Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe              1863     Paris
 6             14         Duchamp, Nude Descending a Staircase,       1912     Philadelphia
                          No. 2
 7             13         Monet, Impression, Sunrise                  1872     Paris
 8(t)          12         Courbet, Burial at Ornans                   1850     Paris
 8(t)          12         Duchamp, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her     1923     Philadelphia
                          Bachelors, Even
 10 (t)        11         Courbet, Young Women on the Banks of the 1856        Paris
                          Seine
 10(t)         11         Gauguin, The Vision After the Sermon        1888     Edinburgh
 10(t)         11         Rousseau, The Snake Charmer                 1907     Paris

Source: Galenson, “Measuring Masters and Masterpieces,” Table 3, p. 54.
Table 11:   Number of Entries by Selected Artists at Impressionist Exhibitions

                                                               Year
Artist


                                  1874   1876    1877   1879      1880     1881   1882   1886



Cassatt                             --     --     --      11          16    11     --     7



Cézanne                             3      --     16      --          --    --     --     --



Degas                               5      5      25      25          12    8      --     15



Monet                               9      18     30      29          --    --     35     --



Morisot                             9      17     12      --          15    7      9      14



Pissarro                            5      12     22      38          16    28     36     19



Renoir                              3      18     21      --          --    --     17     --



Sisley                              5      8      17      --          --    --     27     --




Source:     Charles S. Moffett, The New Painting: Impressionism 1874-1886 (San Francisco:
            Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, 1986).
Table 12:        Ages of American Artists at the Time of Their First One-Man New York Gallery
                 Exhibitions
Artist                                          Year of birth   Year of show     Artist’s age


Experimental
Adolph Gottlieb                                      1903            1930             27
Mark Rothko                                          1903            1933             30
Arshile Gorky                                        1904            1938             34
Willem de Kooning                                    1904            1948             44
Clyfford Still                                       1904            1946             42
Barnett Newman                                       1905            1950             45
Franz Kline                                          1910            1950             40
William Baziotes                                     1912            1944             32
Jackson Pollock                                      1912            1943             31
Philip Guston                                        1913            1945             32
Robert Motherwell                                    1915            1944             29

Conceptual
Roy Lichtenstein                                     1923            1951             28
Larry Rivers                                         1923            1951             28
Robert Rauschenberg                                  1925            1951             26
Sol LeWitt                                           1928            1965             37
Cy Twombly                                           1928            1955             27
Andy Warhol                                          1928            1962             34
Jasper Johns                                         1930            1958             28
James Rosenquist                                     1933            1962             29
Jim Dine                                             1935            1960             25
Frank Stella                                         1936            1960             24
David Hockney                                        1937            1964             27
 Robert Mangold                                    1937              1964             27
Source: Galenson, Painting outside the Lines, Appendix C.
Table 13:       Ages at Which Selected Nobel Laureates in Economics Published their Most-
                Cited Work

                                                  birth year                 peak age
 Conceptual
    Kenneth Arrow                                   1921                       30
    Gary Becker                                     1930                       34
    John Nash                                       1928                       22
    Paul Samuelson                                  1915                       32
    Robert Solow                                    1924                       33


 Experimental
    Robert Fogel                                    1926                       48
    Milton Friedman                                 1912                       41
    Simon Kuznets                                   1901                       54
    Douglass North                                  1920                       70
    Theodore Schultz                                1902                       62

Source: see text.
Table 14:         Peak Ages of Selected American Poets

                                  birth year    peak age   percentage of anthology entries
                                                                written before age 40
 Conceptual
    Ezra Pound                      1885           28                    80
    T. S. Eliot                     1888           23                    72
    Richard Wilbur                  1921           27                    65
    Sylvia Plath                    1932           30                   100


 Experimental
    Robert Frost                    1874           42                    8
    Wallace Stevens                 1879           36                    20
    William Carlos Williams         1883           40                    22
    Gwendolyn Brooks                1917           43                    42
    Robert Lowell                   1917           41                    18

Source: see text.
