NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES INSIDER TRADING RAISE MARKET VOLATILITY?
Julan Du
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 9541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9541
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

We thank Win-Lin Chou, Guy Meredith, Martin Feldstein, Andrew Sheng, Andrei Shleifer, Kafu Wong, and
seminar participants at an NBER meeting in China, Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission, Hong
Kong Institute for Monetary Research, University of Hong Kong, and the Institute for International Economic
Studies in Tokyo for helpful discussion, and Hayden Smith and Yi Wu for superb research assistance. The
views in the paper are the authors’ own and may not be shared by any organization that the authors are or
have been associated with. All errors are the authors’ responsibilities. The data used in the paper will be
made available in the year after its publication. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Julan Du and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Does Insider Trading Raise Market Volatility?
Julan Du and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 9541
March 2003
JEL No. I2
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the role of insider trading in explaining cross-country differences in stock market
volatility. It introduces a new measure of insider trading. The central finding is that countries with
more prevalent insider trading have more volatile stock markets, even after one controls for
liquidity/maturity of the market, and the volatility of the underlying fundamentals (volatility of real
output and of monetary and fiscal policies). Moreover, the effect of insider trading is quantitatively
significant when compared with the effect of economic fundamentals.
Julan Du

Shang-Jin Wei

Department of Economics

Research Department, Room 10-700m

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

International Monetary Fund

Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong

700 19th Street N.W.

julandu@cuhk.edu.hk

Washington, DC 20431, USA
and Brookings Institution and NBER
swei@imf.org

3
1. Introduction
Stock markets are volatile. That is not news. But the volatility varies
substantially across countries. Suppose we use the standard deviation of the monthly
returns of a major market index as the measure, then the volatility in Italy is almost twice
as high as in the United States. The volatility in developing countries is typically even
higher. For example, the Chinese and the Russian markets, respectively, are 350% and
650% as volatile as the U.S market1.
Market volatility affects the incentive to save and to invest. In almost any model
with a representative agent maximizing utility under uncertainty, the more volatile the
asset market, holding the average return constant, the less the agent will save, and hence
the less the investment will be. A certain degree of market volatility is unavoidable,
even desirable, as one would like the stock price fluctuation to indicate changing values
across economic activities so that resources can be better allocated. However, precisely
because stock prices are supposed to serve as signals for resource allocation, excessive
volatility that is not related to economic fundamentals would diminish the signaling
function and impede resource allocation2.
The purpose of this paper is to assess the role of insider trading in explaining the
difference in market volatility across countries. As far as we know, this has not been
examined on a systematic basis. To do this, we first consider major factors other than
inside trading that could also be potential explanations for market volatility. These
factors can be grouped in several categories. First, the volatility of the underlying
fundamentals, in particular, the volatility of the real output stream whose present discount
value that the asset price is supposed to reflect, should matter. In addition, the maturity
of the asset market also matters. For example, it may be reasonable to expect a young
market to be more volatile than a long established and highly liquid one, even holding
constant the volatility of the underlying fundamentals, just because the average

1

We calculated the numbers based on a monthly sample during 1984:12 – 1998:12. The details are
explained later in the paper.
2
There is a long literature on whether stock price volatility is excessive relative to the present discounted
values of the future dividend streams. After the pioneering work by Shiller (1981) and a large volume of
subsequent work, no consensus has emerged. While this literature focuses on a single country case (most
typically, the U.S.), the current paper examines the difference in volatility across countries.

4
experience and skill of the investors and of the market regulators may improve with
market maturity.
The implication of insider trading for stock price volatility and economic
efficiency is ambiguous in theory. The first view is that, by allowing relevant
information to be reflected in the stock price faster than otherwise, insider trading should
increase the signal-to-noise ratio(Manne, 1966). Conditional on the variance of the
signals (i.e., the fundamentals), this should lead to a reduction in market volatility and an
improvement in economic efficiency A more sophisticated refinement is that, by
allowing a one-time jump in the price, insider trading may temporarily raise the price
volatility at the time of the price adjustment, but improve the overall efficiency
nonetheless (Leland, 1992). Under this view, if one measures the return volatility at an
appropriately long horizon, insider trading should not raise market volatility.
On the other end of the spectrum, it has been argued that insider trading can raise
price volatility in the long run and reduce economic efficiency. Access to inside
information is more valuable when there is either a big rise or a big fall in prices.
Therefore, there may be two channels through which insiders may choose to generate
more volatility. First, other things equal, insiders may have an incentive to choose riskier
projects than they otherwise would. Second, even holding the inherent risk
characteristics of a production process constant, insiders have an incentive to manipulate
the timing and content of the information release in a such way that will generate more
price volatility than otherwise (Brudney, 1979; Easterbrook, 1981; Allen and Gale, 1992;
and Benabou and Laroque, 1992).
Relative to the active theoretic modeling, empirical work on the subject is lagging
behind3. The small empirical literature on insider trading so far has made use of three
types of data. The first is based on self-reported legal trading by corporate insiders filed
with government regulators, mostly in the U.S. and the U.K.(see Seyhun, 1986; Elliot,
Morse, and Richardson, 1984; Givoly and Palmon, 1985; John and Lang, 1991;
Chowdhury, Howe and Lin, 1993; and Gregory, Matatko, Tonks and Purkis, 1994). Of
course, reported legal trading by insiders, by its nature, is unlikely to be associated with a
large price movement. The second type of data is a compilation of illegal insider trading
3

The discussion in this and the following paragraphs is derived from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002).

5
cases as discovered by the government regulator. We are aware of only one published
paper on the subject by Meulbroke (1992) who studied the impact on the stock prices of
the illegal insider trading in the U.S. market. A possible concern is that the link between
insider trading and market volatility may be exaggerated by this type of data: presumably
only a subset of insider trading cases are discovered by the government, often as a result
of observing a large price movement.
All of these papers are studies of a single country (typically either the U.S. or the
U.K.). Moreover, the countries in these studies have relatively comprehensive
regulations against insider trading, and the enforcement of the laws is reasonably
vigorous. It may not be possible to draw strong inferences from these studies about what
would happen to the stock market volatility when insider trading is rampant and
unchecked by the legal system. In a well regulated market such as the U.S. and the U.K.,
even though there are violations of the insider trading laws from time to time, the
majority of insiders or would-be “insiders” are deterred from engaging in illegal insider
trading. Non-insider investors understand this and can still have confidence in the
system. In a market where insider trading is either explicitly or implicitly tolerated, noninsider investors would assume that insider trading takes place routinely and take
measures accordingly (including withdrawing from the domestic stock market
altogether). In other words, we need to exercise caution when extrapolating lessons from
well-regulated markets to emerging markets.
The third type of data is a cross-country measure developed by Bhattacharya and
Daouk (2002). These authors collected information on the existence of anti-insidertrading laws and the year of first prosecution under the law (if any) for 103 countries.
They then show that the enforcement of anti-insider trading laws is rewarded in the
market in the sense of a higher level of stock prices.
This paper differs from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) both in terms of the
objectives and in terms of the measure of insider trading. First, the aim of this paper is to
study stock market volatility, whereas they focused on the cost of equity. Second, their
information on the year of first enforcement potentially still does not capture how
aggressive the law has been enforced and how comprehensive the anti-insider-trading law
covers different countries. We will introduce a new measure of the prevalence of insider

6
trading that may improve on these dimensions. The correlation coefficients between our
index of insider trading and their two measures are only 0.04 and –0.30, respectively. So
our index evidently captures certain things not in the Bhattacharya and Daouk measures4.
To summarize our main messages, we will report evidence that the difference in
the degree of insider trading, is a crucial factor in understanding the vastly different
market volatility across countries. This is true even after we take into the account the
effects of the volatility of economic and policy fundamentals, and of market liquidity and
maturity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Since insider trading plays a central
role in our study, and its measurement is most problematic, Section 2 is devoted to issues
related to its definition and measurement. Section 3 presents the empirical findings.
Section 4 concludes.
2. Insider Trading: Variation and Measurement
The central objective of the paper is to assess the role of insider trading in
explaining the differences in volatility across different national markets. Insider trading
is an elusive concept to measure and its effect on market volatility is somewhat
controversial. Therefore, we choose to devote this section to discuss the definition of this
concept and the sources of variation in the degree of insider trading across countries.
Sources of Variation in Insider Trading across Countries
Insider trading refers to trading by people who possess some material non-public
information – where “material” means “relevant for the price of a stock or stocks.” To
make comparisons across countries, a natural benchmark to use is the United States. This
is because it has perhaps the most comprehensive anti-insider trading laws, the most
stringent requirement on information disclosure, and the strictest enforcement. In
addition, the U.S. insider trading laws, accounting rules, and their enforcement are two
frequent subjects of the economic and legal literature.

4

For comparison, we will report statistical results with both their and our measures of insider trading. As it
turns out, their measures are not statistically significant.

7
The definition of illegal insider trading in the U.S. is not an immutable concept,
but evolves over time5. The notion that some form of insider trading is wrong was well
established before the passing of the federal securities laws. For example, back in 1909,
the United States Supreme Court held that a director of a corporation who knew that the
value of the stock would soon change, committed fraud when he bought the stock from
uninformed outsiders. The U.S. Securities Exchange Act (SEA) of 1934 addressed insider
trading directly (through Section 16(b)), by prohibiting profits realized in any short
period (less than six months) by corporate insiders. Corporate insiders are defined as
directors or officers of the corporation or major shareholders (with over 10% of the
shares).
What about the type of insider trading not covered by the law directly? The law
(SEA, Section 109b)) authorizes the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue
rules and regulations to prevent security fraud. In that context, Rule 10b-5 issued by the
SEC prescribed the principle of “disclose or abstain”: any person should either disclose
truthfully what he/she knows before trading or abstain from trading. This has been used
to prohibit trading on material non-public information acquired by people other than
“corporate insiders” defined in the SEA. These people can include outside auditors,
outsider lawyers, investment bankers and so on that are temporarily retained by the
corporation but have access to material non-public information. People in this category
are labeled as “temporary insiders” or “constructive insiders,” and are prohibited from
trading on the information.
In the early 1980s, in response to some legal challenges, the SEC promulgated a
new rule (Rule 14e-3), which made it illegal for anyone to trade on the basis of material
non-public information regarding a tender offer if he/she knows the information comes
from an insider. This came to be known as the “misappropriation” theory in the parlance
of insider trading jargon.
Relative to the United States, the prevalence of insider trading varies widely from
country to country. The market integrity in the United Kingdom is perhaps similar to the

5

The following discussion is based on Newkirk and Robertson (1998).

8
U.S., whereas that in China is different. We will make these cross-country comparisons
more precise later.
There are three reasons why these dimensions of market integrity vary across
countries. First, the set of activities that are defined as illegal under a national law or
regulation can vary from country to country. For example, some countries may choose
not to prohibit certain activities that are prohibited in the U.S. such as trading by “tipees”
or “mis-appropriators.” Indeed, there are countries that still do not prohibit any type of
insider trading.
Second, for a given violation, the penalties allowed by laws in different countries
can also vary. In the U.S., insider trading is a criminal offense. So the set of penalties
can include jail terms. The Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984 provides penalties for
up to three times the profit gained or the loss avoided by the insider trading. The Insider
Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988 further expanded the power of the
SEC, including a greater scope for cooperation with foreign governments. In
comparison, in several other economies, including Hong Kong, insider trading is a civil
violation. So the maximum penalty is a fine rather than a combination of a jail term and
a fine. In Europe, extensive insider trading regulation occurred relatively recently in
1989 with the adoption of the European Community Directive Coordinating Regulations
on Insider Trading (the “EC Directive”). The EC Directive was modeled after French
and English laws that treat insider trading as a criminal offense. It prohibits insiders from
trading on inside information and from tipping other people to take advantage of the
information. It also prohibits people who receive a tip from the insiders from trading on
the information. However, the EC Directive allows individual member countries to enact
stricter laws and decide on appropriate penalties at their own preference.
Third, holding constant the set of prohibited activities and penalties on the book,
the vigor with which a country chooses to enforce the laws and the punishment also
differs widely. It is believed that the U.S. SEC’s effort to enforce the laws on truthful
and timely information disclosure as well as insider trading is vigorous. For example, in
the fiscal year of 1997 (Oct. 96-Sept. 97) alone, the SEC brought 57 insider trading cases
(Newkirk and Robertson, 1998). [Among those, 90% of all the cases have been settled
out of court.]

9
In Europe, the extent of enforcement differs across countries. For example, Italy
is still perceived to be a place where insider trading is relatively common. Some
observed that “[i]n spite of the passage of laws on takeovers and insider trading since
1992, the bourse has not shaken its reputation as a fiefdom of an inward-looking financial
community that treats small shareholders shabbily.” (Graham, 1997, as quoted in
Newkirk and Robertson, 1998, p7). In Hong Kong, as mentioned before, insider trading
is considered a civil offense (so the penalty on the book is not as grave as in the U.S. or
many European countries). However, Hong Kong compensates for the small penalty
with a relatively tough enforcement. It has a tight anti-fraud regulation and relatively
rigorous and predictable law enforcement. The government regulators enjoy a good
reputation for being well trained, professional, and relatively uncorrupt. This makes
Hong Kong less likely to have a situation in which corporate insiders release misleading
information or commit financial fraud than might otherwise be the case.
In contrast, both South Africa and China prohibit insider trading on the book and
in principle the penalty can be severe. For example, in South Africa, insider trading is a
criminal offense, with penalties of up to 10 years in prison and a fine up to half a million
Rand (Business Times, February, 1997). However, the enforcement has been lax, without
a single person convicted of insider trading at least up until May 1999 (Business Times,
May 16, 1999). In China, while the exact number is not available, an informal discussion
between the authors and some market participants suggested that corporate information
release is considered not comprehensive and unreliable. Insider trading and price
manipulation is perceived to be widespread and relatively unchecked.
To sum up, prevalence of insider trading depends on three sources: the scope of
prohibited behavior, the penalty for a given offense, and the enforcement of existing laws
and regulations. In this conjuncture, it is clear that the information on the existence of an
insider trading law only provides an imperfect description on the scope of prohibition and
does not carry information on the severity of penalty and the rigor of enforcement.
Information on the year of first prosecution tells us when the law was first enforced, but it
does not necessarily capture the rigor of the enforcement over a sustained period of time
and does not necessarily capture the severity of punishment.

10
A New Measure of the Extent of Insider Trading
The new measure is derived from the Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) in
1997 and 1998. The GCR report was developed jointly by the World Economic Forum
and Harvard University. A survey of corporate officers in around 3000 firms around the
world was conducted where respondents were asked a variety of questions about the
business environment in the countries. In one of the questions (Question 3.13), the
respondents were asked to rate the extent of insider trading on a scale of 1 to 7. The
exact question was
“Do you agree that insider trading is not common in domestic stock market?”
(1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree)
For each country, the report presents the average answer from all respondents in
that country. To avoid awkwardness in interpretation, we define our variable, “Insider
Trading Index” = 8 – country mean answer to Question 3.13, so that a large value means
more insider trading. To further reduce sample variations, we use the average of the
ratings in 1997 and 1998 as our measure of insider trading.
A potential shortcoming of this measure is that a perception based measure may
not be accurate.6 Furthermore, most firms in the survey are not financial firms.
However, many firms are multinational, and generally the corporate officers who
responded to the survey were likely to be sophisticated in matters related to financial
markets.
There are also advantages associated with this measure. Since the respondents
were asked to assess the prevalence of insider trading in reality rather than in law,
presumably the answer reflects the consequences of all three dimensions (whether a given
act is illegal, how likely the offender will be caught, and how severe the penalty will be).
In this sense, the index might contain information that is not captured by the earlier
measure in Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002). Indeed, the correlation between our index

6

Worse, systematic bias could be introduced by the survey question. In the empirical part, we will discuss
the possibility of a systematic bias and an instrumental variable approach to deal with it.

11
and their measure is low. Therefore, at a minimum, the new index supplements the
existing measure.
3. Empirical Evidence
We now turn to the empirical results. As we do not have a time-series measure of
insider trading7, we focus exclusively on the cross-sectional variation. Let V(k) be the
volatility of stock returns for country k – measured by the standard deviation of the
monthly returns over December 1984 – December 1998. Our benchmark specification is
the following.
V(k) = α + F(k)β1 + G(k)β2 + L(k)β3 + M(k)β4 + β5 I(k) + e(k)
where F(k) is a vector of variables measuring economic fundamentals; G(k) is a vector
for government macroeconomic policy fundamentals; L(k) is a vector for liquidity of the
market; M(k) is a vector for maturity of the market; and finally, I(k) is an index of the
degree of insider trading. α, β1, β2, β3, β4, and β5 are parameters to be estimated (with
appropriate dimensions). And e(k) is a random variable that is assumed to be normally
distributed with zero mean and a constant variance.
Our cross-national sample has a relatively small number of observations (55 at a
maximum). As a result, we adopt a strategy of sequential estimation. Starting with the
volatility of economic fundamentals, we progressively augment the regression with other
factors as additional explanations: uncertainty regarding a government’s macroeconomic
policies, liquidity and maturity of the market, and insider trading. As we need to
conserve the degrees of freedom, in each successive regression, we drop those regressors
that have consistently been insignificantly different from zero in prior regressions. To be
on the safe side, in each round, we keep all regressors that are statistically significant at
the 15% in the previous round. In other words, we keep more control variables in each
round than it would have been the case if we were to drop all regressors not significant at

12
the 10% level. [In the final set of regressions, we add the dropped regressors one by one
to ensure that our procedure does not bias our inference.]
Uncertainty about Economic Fundamentals
To measure the volatility of the economic fundamentals that underlie the stock
prices, we use several proxies. First, we use the standard deviation of the real GDP
growth rate, computed over the same sample period as the volatility of the stock market.
Figure 1 presents a scatter plot of the stock market volatility against the volatility of the
GDP growth rate. It suggests a positive relationship between the two variables. The
regression result is reported in Column 1 of Table 2. The coefficient is positive and
statistically significant. In other words, as consistent with our intuition, countries with
more volatile GDP growth processes also have more volatile GDP growth rates8. In fact,
one cannot reject the hypothesis that the slope coefficient is equal to one at the tenpercent level. That means that, on average, there is a one-to-one correspondence between
the volatility of real GDP growth and the volatility of the stock returns. If the GDP in
7

While the insider trading measure is available in all GCR reports since 1997, we found that there is very
little time series variation in terms of the ranking of the countries. Thus, we choose to use the earliest
available index.
8
Using standard deviation of the GDP growth as a regressor in a regression for market volatility can be
justified relatively easily. Let p(t) be the level of stock index and use “stdv” to denote standard deviation.
Recall that stock market volality is defined as the standard deviation of the monthly stock returns, or
stdv[p(t+1)-p(t)].
We make an assumption which is fairly common in macroeconomics that log real GDP, denoted
by y(t), follows a random walk. Without loss of generality in the subsequent discussion, we assume that
there is no drift.
(a1)
y(t) = y(t-1) + e(t)
where e(t) is iid normal (o, v). Note, here, var(e) is the volatility of the real GDP grwoth Now we assume
that p(t) is (approximately) the present discounted value of current and all future log real GDPs.
(a2)
p(t) = ∑s=0 [y(t+s) / (1+r)s]
where r is the discount rate – for simplicity, invariant over time and across countries. Then,
(a3)

p(t+1) – p(t) = ∑s=0 {[y(t+1+s)-y(t+s)] / (1+r)s}

Therefore, var[p(t+1) – p(t)] = K var(e)
where K = ∑s=0 [1 / (1+r)s] which is a constant. We then have
(a4)

stdv[p(t+1)-p(t)] = (√K) stdv (e)

Therefore, in this formulation, the volatility of the stock returns would be proportional to the volatility of
the real GDP growth.

13
country A is more volatile than country B by 10%, the stock market in country A is also
likely to be more volatile by 10%.
Not all firms whose output values go into a country’s GDP figure are publicly
listed companies9. An alternative way to measure the uncertainty of the corporate
fundamentals is to look at the variability of operating income for publicly traded
companies in a country. More precisely, we utilize the standard deviation of the change
in operating income for a subject of major listed companies over 1991-96, scaled by the
mean operating income in absolute value during the same period10. The regression result
with this alternative measure of the volatility of the fundamentals is reported in the
second column of Table 2. The coefficient is positive, consistent with the hypothesis that
a more volatile corporate operating income stream generates a more volatile aggregate
stock return. Unfortunately, this estimate comes with a relatively large standard error so
that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that it is equal to zero. Of course, the same large
standard error also indicates that we cannot reject either the null hypothesis that it is
equal to one.
At this point, it is useful to note that there may be many reasons why some
countries’ real output or operating income is more volatile than others’. The discussion
in the introductory section suggests that more prevalent insider trading itself may
contribute to a higher volatility of real output as the managers of firms may have an
added incentive to choose riskier projects than they may have otherwise.
Other aspects of economic fundamentals may also be relevant. In particular,
firms in some economies are more leveraged (i.e., with a higher debt-to-equity ratio) than
other economies. It has been recognized at least since Black and Scholes (1973) that a
higher leverage ratio may induce firm managers to undertake riskier projects than they
otherwise would have. To measure this effect, we adopt an economy-wide leverage ratio
measure, which is the ratio of aggregate corporate debt to the sum of corporate debt and
equity. The third column of Table 2 reports the regression with this leverage ratio

9

One might assume, however, that the output of the non-listed firms and that of the listed companies within
a common country are highly correlated. Indirect evidence on this is seen in the empirical findings that
business cycles are far more correlated for regions within a country than across different countries (e.g.,
Rose and Engel, 2000).
10
This comes from Claessens, Djankov and Nenova (1999).

14
measure as the only regressor. The coefficient is positive, consistent with the notion that
a higher economy-wide debt-to-equity ratio leads to more volatile stock returns. Like the
cash flow variability measure, this measure by itself is not statistically significant at the
10% level.
Concentration of wealth in an economy might also raise the market volatility if
one thinks that concentrated wealth might imply that large shareholders are more likely to
expropriate small shareholders. The effect could also go the other way if one thinks that
concentrated wealth implies that companies are mostly controlled by a concentrated
group of large shareholders who can overcome the principal-agent problem more
effectively vis-à-vis the managers. As we do not have a perfect measure of the wealth
concentration, we experiment with two different proxies. As a first proxy, we use the
ratio of the total wealth of all billionaires in a country relative to the size of its GDP. As
reported in Column 4 of Table 2, this measure of wealth concentration turns out to be
insignificant as an explanatory variable for stock return volatility.
As a second proxy, we adopt a more direct measure of income inequality, namely
the Gini coefficient. The regression result is reported in Column 5 of Table 2. This time,
the coefficient is positive and statistically significant at the ten percent level. In other
words, countries with more polarized income distribution tend to have more volatile
stock markets.
Interestingly, when they are introduced collectively into the regression, only the
volatility of real GDP growth, leverage ratio, and Gini coefficient (and Cash flow risk if
Gini coefficient is left out) are marginally significant. Collectively, these proxies for
economic fundamentals explain about 38-43% of the variation in the cross-country
dispersion in stock market volatility.
Uncertainty about Macroeconomic Policies
Another potentially important factor is uncertainty associated with
macroeconomic policies. As proxies for monetary policy uncertainty, we use volatility of
the exchange rate and volatility of the inflation rate. As a proxy for fiscal policy
uncertainty, we use the volatility of the fiscal deficit as a share of GDP. In addition, we

15
use to the ratio of trade (exports plus imports) to GDP as a measure of the government’s
willingness to adopt pro-competition policies. The results are reported in Table 3.
We first look at the regression results when these policy variables are included
one by one. Either a more volatile exchange rate or a more volatile inflation rate is
associated with a higher volatility of stock returns (Columns 1-2 in Table 3). So a less
predictable monetary policy is indeed associated with a higher volatility. In addition,
countries with more open trade regimes tend to have a less volatile stock market.
However, fiscal policy uncertainty does not appear to matter: the coefficient on the
volatility of the ratio of fiscal deficit-to-GDP is not statistically different from zero even
though the point estimate is positive.
When these measures of policy uncertainty are included simultaneously (together
with the economic fundamentals from the previous table), the volatility of the exchange
rate continues to be positive and significant (at the 5% level). The coefficient on the
volatility of inflation switches the sign, probably indicating a relatively high correlation
between inflation volatility and exchange rate volatility. Hence, one may say that stock
market volatility is related (weakly) to some measure of monetary policy uncertainty, but
is unrelated to fiscal policy uncertainty. Uncertainty about economic fundamentals,
particularly the real GDP growth rate, the leverage ratio, and the Gini coefficient
continue to play a role in explaining the dispersion in the market volatility.
Liquidity and Maturity of the Market
Less liquid or less matured markets may be more volatile. We measure liquidity
of the market by the ratio of the stock market turnover to market capitalization. The
notion of the maturity of a market lacks a precise definition. But it is sometimes asserted
that a newer and less matured market may be more volatile. In this paper, we examine
three possible dimensions of market maturity: the ratio of stock market capitalization to
GDP, the age of the stock exchange (i.e., number of years since the inception of the main
exchange), and the level of economic development as proxied by per capita GDP. All
three are imperfect, but each may capture something that is useful. The results are
reported in Tables 4-5.

16
We found that the ratio of the stock market turnover to market capitalization is not
significant. That is, across countries, there is no discernible association between liquidity
and the market volatility. Both the ratio of market capitalization to GDP and the age of
the stock exchange are significant when entered alone in the regression, but not when
economic and policy fundamentals are taken into account. On the other hand, the
average income level (log GDP per capita) is consistently negative across specifications.
In other words, richer countries have consistently lower stock market volatility even after
one takes into account economic and policy fundamentals. Note that income level may
also be a proxy for the quality of institutions, in addition to being a proxy for market
maturity. So we are not able to pin down a precise interpretation of this coefficient, but
simply note that the effect of economic development on market volatility is controlled
for.
Insider Trading
A central question in this paper is whether insider trading contributes to market
volatility. To start with, we first make use of the information on the existence of an
insider trading law and the date of first prosecution collected by Bhattacharya and Daouk
(2000). More specifically, we construct a measure of the fraction of the time during our
sample (1985-98) in which a country has an insider-trading law. For example, if the law
went into effect in 1990, then, this fraction would be (98-90)/(98-85)=0.62. Next, based
on the year that the first prosecution occurs, we construct a measure of the fraction of the
time in the sample since the first prosecution. For example, if the first prosecution took
place in 1995, then this ratio would be equal to (98-95)/(98-85)=0.23.
The regression results are reported in Table 6. From the first three columns, we
see that the fraction of time an insider-trading law is in place is not different from zero
statistically. This could simply reflect the fact that some countries that have such laws on
the books do not seriously enforce them. In the last three columns of Table 6, the
fraction of time since the first prosecution is used as a regressor. The coefficients are all
negative, consistent with the notion that law enforcement on insider trading is associated
with a reduction in stock market volatility. However, these coefficients are not
statistically different from zero either. Therefore, the supportive evidence is fairly weak.

17
As suggested in Section 2, the information on first prosecution may not capture all
aspects of the rigor of enforcement or the severity of punishment. As an alternative, we
also adopt the new GCR-survey-based index of insider trading.
To obtain some visual impression, Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of the stock
market volatility against the index of insider trading. As can be seen clearly, more
insider trading is associated with a higher market volatility. To see if the positive
association remains when one controls for other determinants of the market volatility, we
perform a sequence of regressions. In the first column of Table 7, we regress stock
market volatility on the GCR measure of insider trading. The coefficient is positive
(2.62) and statistically significant at the five percent level. This regression is no more
than simply summarizing the positive associated demonstrated in Figure 2 by a linear
line. In the second column, we add several regressors (per capita GDP, volatility of GDP
growth, volatility of exchange rate change and the number of listed companies) that have
been found to be important for market volatility in the earlier part of the paper. Two of
these regressors (volatility of exchange rate change and the number of listed companies)
are found to be statistically significant. For our purpose, it is important to note that the
coefficient on insider trading continues to be positive and statistically significant. In
Column 3, we add corporate leverage ratio, cash flow risk and Gini coefficient to the
regression. Only corporate leverage ratio is statistically significant. Insider trading
remains positively associated with stock market volatility. Since cash flow risk and Gini
coefficient are not statistically significant, in Columns 4-6, we experiment with dropping
one at a time or both. These exercises are designed to see whether the positive
association between insider trading and market volatility is sensitive to small variations in
the specification. In all these cases, the coefficient on insider trading stays positive and
statistically significant at the ten percent level, although the point estimates fluctuate a
bit. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that a more prevalent insider trading
is associated with a higher volatility of the stock market.
Besides statistical significance, it might be useful to ponder over the quantitative
and economic significance of the point estimate. Let us use the point estimate in Column
6 of Table 7 for illustration. Note that the insider trading index in the table has already
been re-scaled by its standard deviation (0.84). The point estimate 1.03 means that a one

18
standard deviation increase in insider trading tends to be associated with a rise in market
volatility by 103 basis points. To illustrate the economic significance of the estimate in a
different way, consider a thought experiment of a rise in the extent of insider trading from
what prevails in the U.S (with the index of insider trading=2.62) to what prevails in
China (with the index value = 4.62). This increase in insider trading would increase the
volatility of stock returns by 245 basis points {=[(4.62-2.62)/0.84]*1.03}. As a
comparison, the increment in the volatility of the GDP growth rate from the U.S. level of
1.7 percent to the Chinese level of 3 percent generates only an extra volatility in the stock
market by 104 basis points ( =(3-1.7)X0.8 ). So the higher stock market volatility in
China relative to the U.S. is explained more by the excessive insider trading in China
than by the extra volatility of China’s economic fundamentals11.
Instrumental Variable Regressions
One potential concern with the previous regressions is the possible endogeneity of
insider trading. For example, some countries may have higher volatility in their stock
markets for reasons unrelated to insider trading. But higher volatility per se offers more
opportunity for insiders to profit from insider trading and may induce them to do more of
it. In this case, the direction of causality could run from market volatility to insider
trading rather than the reverse. Secondly, the perception of the survey respondents about
the insider trading in their country can be influenced by the actual extent of market
volatility (this is another form of reverse causality). Either of the two reasons could
generate a spurious correlation between the insider trading index and market volatility
even if the insider trading activities do not cause a rise in the volatility.
To deal with this possibility, we adopt an instrumental variable approach. In fact,
we consider two potential sets of possible instruments. The first is the extent of
corruption in a country’s judicial system (“legal corruption” for short). On an ex ante
basis, it is plausible to expect that legal corruption and insider trading are positively
correlated: if the judges can be influenced by bribery, then it is highly probable that the
laws regarding insider trading prohibition are not vigorously and/or fairly enforced.

11

Other factors may have reduced the market volatility in China, such as a relatively stable exchange rate
and a relatively large number of listed companies.

19
Furthermore, it seems unlikely that the extent of legal corruption is caused/influenced by
the volatility of the stock market.
The legal corruption measure comes from a different question in the GCR survey.
Question 8.09 of the survey asked the respondents to rate the level of corruption in the
country’s legal system on a one to seven scale. The exact question is the following:
“Do you agree that irregular payments to judges or other officials involved in the
enforcement and execution of judgement are not common and do not influence the
outcome of court proceedings?” (1= strongly disagree, 7= strongly agree)
We define legal corruption for a particular country = 8 - the average of the
answers for that country. A bigger number implies a higher degree of legal corruption.
As another candidate for instrument variables, we also consider the origin of a
country’s legal system (“legal origin” for short). The legal origin classification, proposed
by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanez, Shleifer and Vishny (1998), separates legal systems
around the world into five categories: British common law, French civil law, German
tradition, Scandinavian tradition, and the socialist legal system. Because legal systems
are by and large determined by colonial expansion or revolution in history, they are
unlikely to be influenced by stock market volatility in the last fifteen years. On the other
hand, as legal origins influence a country’s preference to offer protection for minority
shareholder rights and creditor rights, they may also influence a country’s proclivity to
disallow insider trading, which may be a form of exploitation of minority shareholders.
To have an idea of whether the instruments are actually correlated with the
insider-trading index, we report in Table 8 two regressions of the insider-trading index on
the instrumental variables. We observe that legal corruption is positively and
significantly associated with insider trading: countries with a higher degree of legal
corruption are also likely to have more prevalent insider trading. Legal origins are not
successful: none of the legal origin dummies is shown to be statistically significant in
explaining insider trading once legal corruption is taken into account. In light of this, we
will use legal corruption as the instrumental variable for insider trading.

20
The results of the 2SLS estimation are reported in Table 9. In the first column,
we use the specification identical to Column 6 of Table 7. The coefficient is positive,
consistent with the hypothesis that insider trading and market volatility are positively
associated. In fact, the point estimate from the IV regression (2.66) is bigger than the
corresponding OLS regression. However, because the standard error of the IV estimate is
more than three times as large as that of the OLS estimate, the coefficient is only
statistically different from zero at the fifteen percent level. We perform a formal
Hausman test for the null hypothesis that the differences in the coefficients between the
IV regressions and the corresponding OLS regressions are not systematic. This null
hypothesis cannot be rejected even at the 28% level. In other words, from a pure
statistical point of view (as indicated by the Hausman test), we cannot say that the IV
regression is necessary.
We note that four of the other regressors, leverage ratio, number of listed
companies, volatility of GDP growth rate, and log per capita GDP are not statistically
significant either. In Column 2 of Table 9, we omit leverage ratio from the IV regression.
In this case, insider trading becomes statistically significant at the five percent level. In
Column 3, we omit volatility of GDP growth rate from the regression (but still retain
lverage ratio as a regressor). In this case, insider trading becomes statistically significant
at the ten percent level. In Column 4, we omit log per capita GDP from the IV regression
(but retain volatility of GDP growth rate and leverage ratio). In this case, the coefficient
on insider trading again becomes statistically significant (at the 5% level). The same is
true when we omit the number of listed companies from the regression (reported in
Column 5). Therefore, the significance of the insider trading variable improves when one
omits any of the other insignificant regressor. In Column 6, we omit log GDP per capita,
volatility of exchange rate change, and leverage ratio simultaneously. In this case, the
coefficient on insider trading variable is positive and statistically significant at the one
percent level.
Note also that when legal corruption is used as the instrument for insider trading,
the system is exactly identified. As a result, we cannot perform a formal over-identifying
restriction test on the validity of the instrument. We can add the dummies for legal
origins to the list of the possible instruments (and ignore the fact that the legal origins are

21
not statistically significant according to Table 8). This allows us to formally test the null
hypothesis that the instruments and the error term are not correlated. We find that the
null hypothesis cannot be rejected with a p-value equal to 0.24 (the regression results not
reported to save space). This bolsters the validity of the instruments.
To summarize, the coefficients on insider trading in all OLS regressions are
always positive and significant. In the IV regressions, if we drop any of the insignificant
regressors, the coefficient on insider trading – instrumented by legal corruption – is
positive and statistically significant at the ten level or better. Therefore, the instrumental
variable approach supports the notion that insider trading raises market volatility.
Further Robustness Checks
We have pursued a number of additional robustness checks. First, we note that
we have assumed that the error term is normally distributed in all previous regressions.
The assumption was made for expedience. Of course, since volatility of stock returns –
the left-hand-side variable – is always non-negative, the normality assumption on the
error term cannot be literally true. To see if this assumption is innocuous or not, we have
tried an alternative distributional assumption on the error term. More specifically, we
assume that the error term (and by extension, the dependent variable in the regression)
follows a Gamma distribution12. This way, we ganrantee that the error term is nonnegative.
A sequence of regressions with this assumption are run. The results are reported
in Table 10. With the new non-negative Gamma distribution for the error term, the
qualitative features of our previous results remain largely the same. Most importantly,
the insider trading index is consistently positive and statistically significant.
Second, we have employed an alternative definition of stock market volatility.
Instead of using standard deviation of the returns, we define the volatility of a country’s
stock market as the difference between the first and third quartile of the monthly returns
for that country during 1985:1 and 1998:12. The advantage of this alternative notion of
12

A (non-negative) random variable is said to follow a (generalized) gamma distribution if its probability
density function is given by
x>0
f(x) = [θ / Γ(ρ)] (xθ ρ-1 /γ θρ ) exp[-(x/γ)θ],
where γ, θ, and ρ are all positive parameters, and Γ(a) is the Gamma function, i.e., Γ(a) = ∫∞0 ua-1e-adu.

22
volatility is that it is less sensitive to possible extreme values in the data (the outliers).
We have repeated all the main regressions reported before with this new definition of
volatility. The qualitative results remain the same (not reported to save space). In
particular, the extent of insider trading as measured by the GCR index is positively and
statistically related to the stock market volatility.
Third, because we do not have a meaningful time-series variation in the insider
trading measure, we cannot do a fixed-effects panel regression. Nonetheless, we have
attempted a random-effects panel regression on three years of data (1997, 1998 and
1999). The results are reported in Table 11. The coefficient on the insider trading
measure are always positive and mostly statistically significant at the 10% level.
Fourth, we have reversed the order of conducting the regressions. Specifically,
we start with a regression with the insider trading variable as the only regressor. The
coefficient on this regression is positive and statistically significant (as one can see from
Figure 2). We then retain this regressor in all subsequent regressions. We sequentially
add blocks of regressors, from economic fundamentals, macro policy fundamentals, to
liquidity and maturity of the markets. To conserve the degree of freedom, we
sequentially drop out regressors that are consistently insignificant. We do not report
these regressions to conserve space, but the main message is clear. As this new order of
adding/deleting the regressors intends to show, the insider trading measure is a
statistically and economically significant explanatory variable for stock market volatility
when it is put to compete with each block of potential explanatory variables.
4. Conclusion
The volatility of the stock market varies widely across countries. This paper
studies whether insider trading contributes to a rise in market volatility. The evidence
suggests that it is indeed important. More insider trading is found to be associated a
higher market volatility even after one controls for the volatility of the real output
growth, volatility of monetary and fiscal policies, and maturity of the stock market.
Moreover, the quantitative effect of insider trading on market volatility is also big when
compared with the effect of the volatility of other fundamentals. For example, a rise in

23
the extent of insider trading from what prevails in the U.S to what prevails in China
would increase the annual stock market volatility by 245 basis points.
In future research, it would be useful to ascertain the precise mechanisms through
which insider trading raises market volatility and to investigate if the rise in volatility
translates into reduced economic efficiency.

24
References:
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 1992, "Stock Price Manipulation", Review of
Financial Studies, vol. 5, issue 3, 503-529.
Ausubel, Lawrence M., 1990, “Insider Trading in a Rational Expectations
Economy”, The American Economic Review, vol. 80, issue 5, 1022-1041.
Benabou, Roland and Guy Laroque, 1992, "Using Privileged Information to
Manipulate Markets: Insiders, Gurus, and Credibility", The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, vol. 107, issue 3, 921-958.
Bhattacharya, Utpal and Hazem Daouk, 2002, “The World Price of Insider
Trading,” Journal of Finance, vol. 57, 75-108.
Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes, 1973, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, issue 3, 637-654.
Brudney, Victor, 1979, “Insiders, Outsiders, and Informational Advantages Under
the Federal Securities Laws”, Harvard Law Review , vol. 93, 322-76.
Business Times, 1997, “Legislation to curb insider trading looms,” February 2.
South Africa. www.btimes.co.za/97/0202/news/news5.htm.
Business Times, 1999, “Time Ripe to Stop the Insider Trading Rot,” May 16.
South Africa. www.btimes.co.za/99/0516/comp/comp17.htm.
Chowdhury, Mustafa, John S. Howe, and Ji-Chai Lin, 1993, “The Relation
between Aggregate Insider Transactions and Stock Market Returns,” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 28, issue 3, 431-437.
Claessnes, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Tatiana Nenova, 1999, “Corporate Risk
around the World”, mimeo, The World Bank Group.
Easterbrook, Frank H., 1981, "Insider Trading, Secret Agents, Evidentiary
Privileges, and the Production of Information", Supreme Court Review, vol. 11, 309-65.
Givoly, d., and D. Palmon, 1985, “Insider Trading and the Exploitation of Inside
Information: Some Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Business, vol. 58, 69-87.
Graham, Robert, 1997, “New Broom for Bourse: the Head of Italy’s Stock Market
Watchdog Outlines His Plans,” Financial Times (London Edition), March 24, 22.

25
Gregory, Alan, John Matatko, Ian Tonks, and Richard Purkis, 1994, “UK
Directors’ Trading: The Impact of Dealings in Smaller Firms,” The Economic Journal,
vol. 104, 37-53.
John, K. and L.H. Lang, 1991, “Insider Trading around Dividend
Announcements: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, vol. 46, 1361-1389.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny,
1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 6, 1113-1155.
Leland, Hayne E., 1992, "Insider Trading: Should It Be Prohibited?" The Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 100, issue 4, 859-887.
Manne, Henry, 1966, Insider Trading and the Stock Market, New York: The Free
Press, Collier Macmillan.
Manove, Michael, 1989, "The Harm from Insider Trading and Informed
Speculation", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 104, issue 4, 823-845.
Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, “The Information Content
of Stock Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price
Movements?" Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 58, issue 1, 215-260.
Morck, Randall, David Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung, 1998, “Inherited Wealth,
Corporate Control and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease”, NBER Working
Paper 6814.
Meulbroek, Lisa K., 1992, “An Empirical Analysis of Illegal Insider Trading,”
Journal of Finance, vol. 47, issue 5, 1661-1699.
Newkirk, Thomas C. and Melissa A. Robertson, “Insider Trading – A U.S.
Perspective.” Speech at the 16th International Symposium on Economic Crime, Jesus
College, Cambridge, England, September 19, 1998. The authors were (at the time of the
speech), respectively, the Associate Director and the Senior Counsel of the Division of
Enforcement, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Available on the SEC web:
www.sec.gov/news/speeches/spch221.htm.
Rose, Andrew K. and Charles Engel, 2000, “Currency Unions and International
Integration,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7872.
Seyhun, H.N, 1986, “Insiders’ Profits, Costs of Trading, and Market Efficiency,”
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 16, 189-212.

26
Shiller, Robert, 1981, “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by
Changes in Subsequent Dividends?” American Economic Review, vol. 71, issue 3, 421436.
World Economic Forum and Harvard University, 1997, Global Competitiveness
Report, Geneva: World Economic Forum.

27
Table 1: Summary Statistics
Name of variables

# of Obs.

Stock Market Volatility (%)

54

Fundamentals
Real GDP growth volatility (%)
Cash flow risk
Leverage ratio
Billionaire wealth/GDP (%)
Gini coefficient
Policy Unpredictability
Exchange rate volatility
Volatility of inflation rate
Volatility of real interest rate (X1000)
Volatility of fiscal deficit/GDP
(export + import) /GDP (%)
Market Liquidity and Maturity
Market capitalization/GDP (%)
Turnover / market cap (%)
Age of stock exchange
Log of GDP per capita
Number of listed companies
(average over 1995-96)
Market Integrity
% time insider trading law in place
% time since first prosecution
Insider trading prevalence (GCR)

Mean

Minimum

Maximum

9.8

Std.
Deviation
4.7

4.3

29.0

54
45
46
39
52

3.0
0.57
0.42
31.6
37

1.7
0.28
0.38
57.2
10

1.0
0.20
0.079
0
19.5

7.5
1.39
2.49
351.0
59.3

54
54
53
51
53

0.086
1.25
4.99
2.60
34.9

0.23
5.03
35.46
1.53
28.6

0
5.7-E5
6.6-E7
0.25
8.2

1.18
25.51
258.2
6.04
181

52
49
54
53
53

29.07
45.54
115
8.63
704

35.43
37.72
77.1
1.43
1519

0.045
1.25
4
5.40
47

143.02
205.67
413
10.73
8665

54
54
49

0.80
0.34
3.70

0.28
0.37
0.84

0
0
2.11

1
1
5.12

28
Table 1b: Pair-wise Correlation
Stock
Market
volatility

GDP
Growth
volatility

Cash
flow
risk

Leverage
ratio

Billionaire
wealth
/GDP

Exchange
Rate
Volatility

Inflation
Rate
Volatility

GDP
volatility

0.62

Cash flow
risk

0.26

0.083

Leverage
ratio

0.16

-0.12

0.088

Billionaire
wealth
/GDP

0.15

0.034

-0.31

-0.0015

Exchange
rate
volatility

0.57

0.21

0.49

0.22

0.0025

Inflation
volatility

0.51

0.72

0.29

-0.048

-0.099

0.45

Volatility
of fiscal
deficit

0.20

0.29

0.029

-0.11

-0.070

0.24

0.029

Total trade
/GDP

-0.18

-0.0064

-0.15

-0.085

0.26

-0.19

-0.23

Volatility
of Fiscal
Deficit
/GDP

0.31

29
Table 1c: Pair-wise Correlation
Stock
market
volatility

Stock
mkt cap
/GDP

Mkt
turnover
/mkt cap

Age of
stock
exchange

Log
GDP
/capita

# of listed
companies

%time
insider
trading
law is in
place

Stock
mkt
cap/GDP

-0.37

Stock
market
turnover
/mkt cap

-0.077

-0.14

Age of
stock
exchange

-0.22

-0.031

0.56

Log of
GDP/
Capita

-0.45

0.41

0.32

0.40

# of listed
companies

-0.24

0.10

0.15

0.14

-0.13

%time
insider
trading
law
in place

-0.040

0.15

-0.17

-0.41

-0.12

0.0028

%time
since the
first
prosecution

-0.19

0.26

0.17

-0.034

0.38

0.24

0.42

Insider
trading
Index

0.53

-0.44

0.0017

-0.49

-0.76

-0.14

0.035

%time
since
the first
prosecu
tion

-0.30

30

Table 2: Stock Market Volatility and Economic Fundamentals
Dependent Variable: Standard deviation of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
Volatility of Real
GDP Growth Rate

(1)
1.15 ***
(0.51)

Cash Flow Risk

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

2.25
(2.55)

Leverage Ratio

0.909
(1.02)

Billionaire Wealth
/GDP

(6)
1.86 ***
(0.55)

(7)
1.70 ***
(0.63)

(8)
1.44***
(0.61)

1.72
(1.60)

2.67 *
(1.77)

0.94
(1.41)

1.84***
(0.73)

1.94 ***
(0.76)

1.77***
(0.70)

0.0046
(.0055)

0.0046
(0.0073)
0.11**
(0.06)

Gini Coefficient

0.087**
(0.049)

Constant

6.3 ***
(1.2)

8.41 ***
(1.36)

9.30 ***
(0.80)

9.23 ***
(0.71)

0.054 ***
(0.024)

3.00 *
(1.83)

2.41
(1.86)

1.19
(2.51)

# of observations
Adj. R-squared

54
0.15

45
0.023

46
-0.015

39
-0.022

52
0.042

45
0.43

39
0.39

44
0.38

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically
significant at the 5%, 10%, and 15% level, respectively.

31
Table 3: Macroeconomic Policy Uncertainty and Economic Openness
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
Volatility of
Exchange Rate

(1)
0.150***
(0.029)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.31***
(0.15)

Volatility of Inflation
Rate
Volatility of Fiscal
Deficit/GDP

(5)
0.075 ***
(0.019)
-0.30 ***
(0.10)

0.31
(0.48)

0.10
(0.28)
-0.029**
(0.018)

Economic Openness:
(exports+imports)/GDP

-0.017 **
(0.010)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

1.46 ***
(0.44)

Leverage Ratio

1.79 ***
(0.54)

Cash Flow Risk

1.37
(1.37)

Gini Coefficient

0.13 ***
(0.042)

Constant

8.55 ***
(0.47)

9.42 ***
(0.62)

9.15 ***
(1.28)

10.8***
(1.06)

-0.91
(1.96)

#Observations
Adjusted R-squared

54
0.48

54
0.092

51
-0.01

53
0.012

42
0.62

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically
significant at the 5%, 10%, and 15% level, respectively.

32
Table 4: Liquidity of the Market
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
(2)

(3)
-0.017
(0.012)

(4)
-0.017
(0.013)

(5)
-0.027 ***
(0.012)

0.0099
(0.017)

0.0033
(0.012)

0.0026
(0.012)

0.013
(0.0092)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

1.40 ***
(0.55)

1.53 ***
(0.62)

0.76
(0.57)

Volatility of
Exchange Rate

0.063 ***
(0.030)

0.058
(0.032)

0.071 ***
(0.021)

Economic Openness:
(Exports+Imports)/GDP

-0.0066
(0.013)

-0.0042
(0.011)

0.0071
(0.010)

Leverage Ratio

3.10 *
(1.89)

2.71
(2.03)

2.08
(1.77)

0.86
(1.52)

-0.92
(1.44)

Stock Market
Capitalization /GDP

(1)
-0.050 ***
(0.018)

Stock Market Turnover/
Market Capitalization

Cash Flow Risk

0.14 ***
(0.044)

Gini Coefficient
Constant

11.17 ***
(0.93)

9.54 ***
(1.13)

4.94 ***
(1.51)

4.30***
(1.90)

Number of observations
52
49
40
39
Adjusted R-squared
0.12
-0.015
0.53
0.63
(1) Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically
significant at the 5%, 10%, and 15% level, respectively.
(2) Stock market volatility is re-scaled by multiplying by 100

1.45
(1.77)
38
0.61

33
Table 5: Market Maturity
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
(2)

(3)
0.0012
(0.0038)

(4)
-0.0013
(0.0035)

(5)
-0.0032
(0.0037)

-1.32 ***
(0.31)

-0.95 ***
(0.29)

-1.00 ***
(0.29)

-0.95 ***
(0.28)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth rate

1.16 ***
(0.53)

1.21 ***
(0.60)

0.76 *
(0.49)

Volatility of
Exchange Rate

7.27 ***
(3.10)

6.51 ***
(2.54)

7.42 ***
(1.80)

Leverage Ratio

1.55 ***
(0.63)

1.10 **
(0.60)

1.19 ***
(0.48)

2.62 ***
(1.02)

1.57 *
(0.98)

Stock Exchange Age

(1)
-0.015 **
(0.008)

Log GDP/Capita

Cash Flow Risk

0.067 **
(0.040)

Gini Coefficient
Constant

11.59 ***
(1.33)

21.09 ***
(3.01)

13.57 ***
(3.24)

13.12 ***
(3.37)

11.45 ***
(3.71)

# observations
Adjusted R-squared

54
0.046

53
0.14

45
0.64

44
0.69

43
0.66

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistically
significant at the 5%, 10%, and 15% level, respectively.

34
Table 6: Insider Trading In Terms of Law and First Prosecution
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
Fraction of Time in
Which Insider Trading
Law is in Place

(1)
2.31
(2.13)

(2)
0.86
(1.82)

(3)
0.85
(1.30)

Fraction of Time Since
The First Prosecution
Of Insider Trading

(4)

(5)

(6)

-1.14
(1.79)

-1.20
(1.17)

-1.03
(0.96)

Log GDP/capita

-0.90 ***
(0.24)

-1.02 ***
(0.26)

-0.74 ***
(0.31)

-0.84 ***
(0.33)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

0.29
(0.39)

0.59
(0.49)

0.34
(0.41)

0.69 *
(0.44)

Volatility of
Exchange Rate

0.13 ***
(0.032)

7.21 ***
(1.81)

0.13 ***
(0.027)

8.19 ***
(2.00)

Log (# of
Listed Companies)

-0.25
(0.33)

-0.55 ***
(0.25)

-0.0022
(0.38)

-0.37
(0.29)

Leverage Ratio

1.31 ***
(0.48)

1.45 ***
(0.52)

Cash Flow Risk

1.34
(1.25)

0.88
(1.07)

Gini Coefficient

0.071 **
(0.038)

0.078 ***
(0.038)

Constant

7.96 ***
(1.67)

16.22 ***
(3.25)

14.91 ***
(4.10)

10.20 ***
(0.94)

14.38 ***
(0.44)

Number of Observations 54
53
43
54
53
Adjusted R-squared
0.001
0.57
0.68
-0.011
0.57
Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically
significant at the 5%, 10%, and 15% level, respectively.

12.96 ***
(4.73)
43
0.69

35
Table 7: Insider Trading as Measured by the GCR Index
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1.65 ***
(0.48)

1.05 ***
(0.48)

0.81 **
(0.44)

1.39 ***
(0.45)

1.03 **
(0.55)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.14
(0.41)

-0.66
(0.41)

-0.75 ***
(0.35)

-0.43
(0.45)

-0.67
(0.46)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

0.24
(0.42)

0.54
(0.46)

0.41
(0.36)

0.99 *
(0.61)

0.80 *
(0.51)

Volatility of the Change
In Exchange Rate

0.12 ***
(0.028)

0.072 ***
(0.018)

0.076 ***
(0.016)

0.065 ***
(0.025)

0.072***
(0.028)

Log # of Listed
Companies

-0.49***
(0.22)

-0.43*
(0.26)

-0.57 ***
(0.21)

-0.28
(0.26)

-0.57 ***
(0.24)

Leverage Ratio

0.99 ***
(0.43)

1.17 ***
(0.45)

0.90 **
(0.45)

1.25 ***
(0.56)

Cash Flow Risk

0.69
(1.06)

Gini Coefficient

0.039
(0.041)

0.059
(0.041)

Insider Trading Index

2.62 ***
(0.52)

1.48
(1.21)

Constant

-1.56
(1.89)

5.00
(6.24)

9.17 **
(6.02)

11.71 ***
(5.14)

4.86
(6.87)

11.31 **
(7.33)

No. of Observations
Adjusted R-squared

49
0.29

48
0.67

41
0.72

42
0.72

42
0.70

43
0.67

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 5%, 10%,
and 15% level, respectively.
Insider trading index has been re-scaled by its standard deviation in the sample. Hence, the associated
coefficient can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard-deviation increase in insider trading on market
volatility.

36
Table 8: Explaining Insider Trading
(First stage in 2SLS regressions)
Dependent Variable: Insider Trading Index
Legal Corruption Index

0.56 ***
(0.057)

0.53 ***
(0.067)

French Legal Origin

-0.15
(0.26)

German Legal Origin

-0.12
(0.30)

Scandinavian Legal Origin

-0.45
(0.42)

Socialist Legal Origin

0.25
(0.32)

Constant

2.88***
(0.18)

3.04***
(0.24)

Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared

49
0.64

49
0.64

37
Table 9: Insider Trading Measured by the GCR Index, 2SLS Regressions
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Insider Trading Index

2.66 *
(1.70)

4.41 ***
(1.69)

3.83 **
(2.12)

Log GDP Per Capita

0.27
(1.10)

1.31
(1.02)

0.73
(1.35)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

0.61
(0.49)

-0.036
(0.49)

Volatility of the Change
In Exchange Rate

0.078 ***
(0.025)

0.12 ***
(0.021)

Log # of Listed
Companies

-0.45
(0.30)

-0.45
(0.37)

Leverage Ratio

0.48
(0.69)

Constant

-3.96
(17.69)

No. of Observations
Adjusted R-squared

(4)

2.29***
(0.47)

(5)

3.17 **
(1.69)

(6)

2.77 ***
(0.49)

0.64
(1.05)
0.64
(0.49)

0.64
(0.52)

0.091***
(0.021)

0.076***
(0.025)

0.082***
(0.024)

-0.52
(0.33)

-0.49 **
(0.25)

-0.40
(1.11)

0.64
(0.49)

0.22
(0.70)

-19.29
(16.47)

-10.81
(21.66)

0.16
(2.17)

-12.10
(16.11)

-0.18
(2.53)

43
0.60

48
0.53

43
0.46

43
0.64

43
0.55

48
0.65

p-value for Hausman test 0.28

0.77

0.94

0.46

0.96

0.31

0.11 ***
(0.023)
-0.53 **
(0.28)

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 5%, 10%,
and 15% level, respectively.
Insider trading index has been re-scaled by its standard deviation in the sample. Hence, the associated
coefficient can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard-deviation increase in insider trading on market
volatility.

38
Table 10: Assuming a (Non-negative) Gamma Distribution for the Error Term
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns (1985-98)
(2)
1.14 ***
(0.33)

(3)
0.87 ***
(0.40)

(4)
1.02 ***
(0.35)

(5)
0.67 **
(0.38)

(6)
0.87 ***
(0.37)

Log GDP Per Capita

-0.37
(0.30)

-0.69 ***
(0.35)

-0.59 **
(0.35)

-0.76 ***
(0.31)

-0.68 ***
(0.34)

Volatility of Real GDP
Growth Rate

0.44
(0.40)

0.78 **
(0.43)

1.10 ***
(0.43)

0.59 **
(0.33)

0.92 ***
(0.39)

Volatility of the Change
In Exchange Rate

0.14 ***
(0.043)

0.081 ***
(0.030)

0.086 **
(0.043)

0.085 ***
(0.025)

0.097 ***
(0.047)

Log # of Listed
Companies

-0.42 ***
(0.17)

-0.36 **
(0.21)

-0.29 *
(0.19)

-0.48 ***
(0.18)

-0.41 ***
(0.16)

Leverage Ratio

0.93 ***
(0.45)

0.84 **
(0.46)

1.07 ***
(0.47)

0.96 **
(0.49)

Cash Flow Risk

0.40
(1.03)

0.65
(1.01)

Gini Coefficient

0.025
(0.037)

Insider Trading Index

(1)
2.51 ***
(0.41)

0.046
(0.039)

Constant

-1.09 ***
(1.39)

8.10 ***
(4.49)

9.84 ***
(4.59)

8.08 ***
(4.61)

11.80 ***
(4.32)

10.81 ***
(4.93)

No. of Observations
Pearson Residual
Log Likelihood

49
6.04
65.94

48
2.42
66.26

41
1.19
58.41

42
1.34
58.88

42
1.25
59.75

43
1.50
60.18

Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistically significant at the 5%, 10%,
and 15% level, respectively.
Insider trading index has been re-scaled by its standard deviation in the sample. Hence, the associated
coefficient can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard-deviation increase in insider trading on market
volatility.

39
Table 11: GLS Random Effects Regressions
Dependent Variable: Volatility of monthly stock market returns
(separate years for 1997, 1998, and 1999)
(1)

Insider Trading Index

1.23
(0.84)

(2)
1.31 **
(0.77)

Log GDP Per Capita

-1.51 ***
(0.62)

-1.50 ***
(0.60)

-1.27***
(0.60)

-1.47***
(0.54)

Volatility of Real GDP 0.32 ***
(0.16)
Growth Rate

0.32 ***
(0.15)

0.32 ***
(0.16)

0.33***
(0.15)

Exchange Rate Change

0.37 ***
(0.12)

0.37 ***
(0.11)

0.38 ***
(0.12)

0.37***
(0.11)

Log # of Listed
Companies

-0.60
(0.41)

-0.59
(0.39)

Leverage Ratio

3.05 ***
(1.32)

2.97 ***
(1.27)

2.12 **
(1.17)

2.35 ***
(1.09)

Cash Flow Risk

-1.36
(1.75)

-1.20
(1.67)

-0.26
(1.60)

Gini Coefficient

0.0069
(0.055)

Year dummies?
Country random effects?

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

No. of Countries
No. of Observations
Wald Chi2(1)
Prob>chi2

39
112
130.70
0.00

40
115
136.64
0.00

39
112
127.41
0.00

41
118
134.62
0.00

Volatility of the

*

(3)
1.45 **
(0.83)

(4)
1.12 **
(0.68)

0.0025
(0.055)

Notes:
1)Year dummies and constant term are included but not reported to save space.
2) Robust standard errors are in the parentheses. ***, ** and * denote statistically significant at
the 5%, 10% and 15% level, respectively.
3) Insider trading index has been re-scaled by its standard deviation in the sample. Hence, the
associated coefficient can be interpreted as the effect of a one standard-deviation increase in
insider trading on market volatility.

40
Appendix A: Data Definition and Source
Volatility of stock returns
The stock return volatility is defined as the standard deviation of monthly returns over
December 1984 to December 1998, multiplied by 100. The monthly return in U.S. dollars is
defined as the change in the log of the stock market index (in dollar terms). Suppose Pt-1 and Pt
denote the values of the stock market index in months t-1 and t, respectively. The return in period
t is rt = log(Pt)-log(Pt-1).
The US$ denominated stock market price index data for emerging stock markets comes
mainly from the International Finance Corporation's Emerging Markets Database (EMDB). We
include all countries for which we also have data on insider trading. The countries covered are:
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Czech, Egypt, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Israel, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey,
Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
The data for most of the developed markets are derived from the Morgan Stanley Capital
International database, which covers a wide range of countries including Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK and US. In addition, stock
price indexes for Ireland, Singapore and South Africa are derived from the Financial Times
database.
A few countries have data only after December 1984. The exact starting dates for these
countries are as follows: China (01/93), Czech (01/94), Egypt (01/96), Hungary (01/93),
Indonesia (01/90), Morocco (01/96), Peru (01/93), Poland (01/93), Portugal (01/86), Russia
(01/96), Saudi Arabia (01/98), Slovakia (01/96), South Africa (01/93), Sri Lanka (01/93), and
Turkey (01/87).
Economic Fundamentals
Volatility of real GDP growth rate
This variable is computed as the standard deviation of the annual real GDP growth rate
over 1985-1998, multiplied by 100. Real GDP growth rate is the first difference in the log of
GDP in 1995 constant U.S. dollars. The data are obtained from the World Bank's World
Development Indicators.
Cash flow risk
Cash flow risk measures the variability of operating income, defined as the standard
deviation of the change in operating income relative to mean operating income in absolute value
over the period of 1991-96. Data are taken from Claessens, Djankov and Nenova (1999).
Leverage ratio
The leverage ratio is the ratio of total debt to the sum of total debt and the market value
of the equity, from Classens, Djankov, and Nerova (1999).
Entrepreneurial billionaire wealth/GDP:
This variable is defined as the ratio of the wealth of the billionaires (acquired through
entrepreneurship or inheritance) relative to GDP, in 1993. The data are originally from Forbes
magazine, cited by Morck, Stangeland, and Yeung (1998).

41
Policy Fundamentals
Volatility of inflation
The volatility of the inflation rate is the standard deviation of the monthly inflation rate
over January 1985 to December 1998. Inflation data is defined as the change in the log consumer
price index, which is from the IMF’s IFS data base (line 64). For Ireland, CPI data is not
available and the wholesale price index is used instead (IFS, line 63). The CPI indexes for Hong
Kong, New Zealand and Taiwan are from the National Government Statistics dataset in
Datastream. Inflation for Australia is computed from the manufacturing producer price index
from the National Government Statistics dataset in Datastream.
Volatility of real interest rate
The volatility of the real interest rate is the standard deviation of the monthly real interest
rate from January 1985 to December 1998. The real interest rate is defined as the nominal
interest rate minus the monthly inflation rate. The nominal interest rate is the monthly central
bank discount rate from IFS (line 60). For Hong Kong, it is the one-month interbank offered rate.
For Taiwan, it is the 91-day Treasury Bill rate in primary market. Both are from Datastream’s
International/National Government Dataset.
Volatility of fiscal deficit/GDP
This is computed as the standard deviation of the annual ratio of the government budget
deficit to GDP over 1985 to 1998. The data on the overall budget deficit/GDP are obtained from
the World Bank's World Development Indicators CD Rom.
Exchange rate volatility
The exchange rate volatility is measured as the standard deviation of the change in
monthly log nominal exchange rate with respect to US$, multiplied by 100. The nominal
exchange rate is the monthly average exchange rate from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics. The period covered is 1985-1998.
Trade openness
The average value of (imports + exports)/GDP over the period of 1985-98.
Market Liquidity and Maturity
GDP per capita
GDP per capita is measured in 1995 constant U.S. dollars, averaged over 1985-1998,
taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicator.
Ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP
The source of this data is the World Bank’s World Development Report, various issues.
Age of stock exchange
The age of the main stock exchange in each country is calculated as 1998 minus the
founding year of the exchange. The data on the founding year of the exchange are obtained from
Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000).
Number of listed companies
This variable is computed as the average number of listed companies during 1990-1996.
Source: the World Bank's World Development Report 2000 (Table 3).

42
Insider Trading
Fraction of the time an insider trading law is in place
This is calculated as the fraction of the sample time that an insider trading law already
exists for each country. Data on the year when an insider trading law is introduced are obtained
from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000).
Fraction of the time since the first insider trading prosecution
The data on the year of the first prosecution are extracted from Bhattacharya and Daouk
(2000).
Insider trading index and legal corruption index:
The source for both variables is The Global Competitiveness Report (1997 and 1998).
The insider trading index is created from the question: “insider trading is not common in
domestic stock markets”, 1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree.
The legal corruption index is created from the question: “Irregular payments to judges or
other officials involved in the enforcement and execution of judgements are not common and do
not influence the outcome of court proceedings”, 1=stronly disagree, 7=strongly agree.
We scale these two variables by the following formula: new value = 8-original value. We
use the average of the values in 1997 and 1998. As a result, a higher number implies more
insider trading or legal corruption.
In the regressions, we re-scale the insider-trading index further by dividing it by its
standard deviation in the sample. The regression coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of
an increase in insider trading by one standard deviation on market volatility.

43
Appendix 2: Market volatility and insider trading index by country
Country
Name

Stock Market
Volatility

GCR Insider
Trading Index

Country
Name

Stock Market
Volatility

GCR Insider
Trading Index

Argentina
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Czech
Denmark
Egypt
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hong Kong
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Jordan
Korea
Malaysia

0.212
0.077
0.078
0.054
0.182
0.050
0.081
0.146
0.084
0.094
0.054
0.075
0.077
0.063
0.064
0.110
0.093
0.119
0.093
0.144
0.070
0.068
0.076
0.075
0.046
0.112
0.103

4.04
2.57
3.19
2.80
4.24
2.71
3.64
4.62
4.31
5.12
2.11
4.21
2.61
3.07
2.48
4.50
3.87
4.08
4.53
4.56
2.62
3.77
3.87
2.85
4.32
4.09
4.47

Mexico
Morocco
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Russia
Saudi Arabria
Singapore
Slovakia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan
Thailand
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Zimbabwe

0.140
0.046
0.046
0.083
0.157
0.077
0.089
0.098
0.110
0.176
0.105
0.285
0.043
0.091
0.082
0.090
0.074
0.090
0.068
0.056
0.132
0.118
0.183
0.056
0.043
0.147
0.109

4.49
3.09
2.54
3.55
4.11
4.60
3.82
3.56
4.63
2.44
4.64
4.20
3.45
2.47
3.02
4.70
4.73
4.08
2.26
2.62
4.83
4.14

Notes:
1. Market volatility is the standard deviation of the monthly returns in US dollars over 1984.12 – 1998.12.
2. Insider trading index is derived from the Global Competitiveness Report in 1997 and 1998. Insider
trading index = 8 – the average of the orignal index in 97 and 98. A higher number implies a higher degree
of insider trading.

44

R US

Volatility of Stock Market Return in US$

0.28533

ARG

TUR

BRA

POL

NGA
CH N

ID N

MEX

VEN

TWN
GRC

IN
D
ZPAK
AF
LKA
C OL
NZL
CHL
AUT
NOR
AUS
I TA
EGY ESP
J PN
SWEISR
D EU
F RA
GBR
CHE
DNK
BEL
CAN
N LD
USA

0.04334

HUN
ZW E

THA
PHL
MY S
HKG SGP

KOR
PRT

SVK

FIN

I RL

MAR

SAU

0.01026

PER

C ZE

JOR

0.07488

Volatility of Real GDP Growth Rate

Figure 1: Volatility of Stock Returns versus Volatility of GDP Growth Rate
(Country names are denoted by the World Bank’s 3-letter country codes)

R US

Volatility of Stock Return in US$

0.28533

AR G

POL

TU R BRA

VEN
IDCH
N N
MEX
TW N

PRT

D NK GBR

0.04334
2.10500

SGP
N ZL
F IN
AUS
SW E I RL
D EU

H KG
J PN

BEL
C AN
U SA

AUT
F RA
C HE
N LD

C HL
NOR
ESP

I TA
I SR

HU N
THA
KOR
GR CPHL
ZW E
MY S
PER
IN D
Z AF
C OL
SVK
EGY

C ZE

JOR

Insider Trading Index

5.12000

Figure 2: Volatility of Stock Returns versus the Extent of Insider Trading
(Country names are denoted by the World Bank’s 3-letter country codes)

