NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A CATERING THEORY OF DIVIDENDS
Malcolm Baker
Jeffrey Wurgler
Working Paper 9542
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9542
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

We would like to thank Viral Acharya, Raj Aggarwal, Katharine Baker, Randy Cohen, Gene D'Avolio, Steve
Figlewski, Xavier Gabaix, Paul Gompers, Florian Heider, Laurie Hodrick, Dirk Jenter, Kose John, Steve
Kaplan, John Long, Asis Martinez-Jerez, Colin Mayer, Holger Mueller, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eli Ofek,
Lubos Pastor, Lasse Pedersen, Gordon Phillips, Raghu Rau, Jay Ritter, Rick Ruback, David Scharfstein,
Hersh Shefrin, Andrei Shleifer, Erik Stafford, Jeremy Stein, RyanTaliaferro, Jerold Warner, Luigi Zingales
and seminar participants at Dartmouth, Harvard Business School, London Business School, LSE, MIT, NBER
Behvioral and Corporate Conferences, NYU, Oxford, the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan,
the University of Rochester, and Washington University for helpful comments; John Long and Simon
Wheatley for data; and Ryan Taliaferro for superb research assistance. Baker gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

A Catering Theory of Dividends
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 9542
March 2003
JEL No. G35
ABSTRACT
We develop a theory in which the decision to pay dividends is driven by investor demand. Managers
cater to investors by paying dividends when investors put a stock price premium on payers and not
paying when investors prefer nonpayers. To test this prediction, we construct four time series
measures of the investor demand for dividend payers. By each measure, nonpayers initiate dividends
when demand for payers is high. By some measures, payers omit dividends when demand is low.
Further analysis confirms that the results are better explained by the catering theory than other
theories of dividends.

Malcolm Baker
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02136
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu

Jeffrey Wurgler
New York University School of Business
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu

I.

Introduction
Miller and Modigiliani (1961) prove that dividend policy is irrelevant to stock price in

perfect and efficient capital markets. In that setup, no rational investor has a preference between
dividends and capital gains. Arbitrage ensures that dividend policy is irrelevant.
Over forty years later, the only assumption in this proof that has not been thoroughly
scrutinized is market efficiency. 1 In this paper, we present a theory of dividends that relaxes this
assumption. It has three basic ingredients. First, for either psychological or institutional reasons,
some investors have an uninformed, time-varying demand for dividend-paying stocks. Second,
arbitrage fails to prevent this demand from driving apart the prices of stocks that do and do not
pay dividends. Third, managers cater to investor demand – paying dividends when investors put
a higher price on the shares of payers, and not paying when investors prefer nonpayers. We
formalize this catering theory of dividends in a simple model.
The catering theory differs from the standard view of the effect of investor demand on
dividend policy. The standard view emphasizes the irrelevance of dividend policy to share prices
even when some investor clienteles have a rational preference for dividends. For example, Black
and Scholes (1974) write: “If a corporation could increase its share price by increasing (or
decreasing) its payout ratio, then many corporations would do so, which would saturate the
demand for higher (or lower) dividend yields, and would bring about an equilibrium in which
marginal changes in a corporation’s dividend policy would have no effect on the price of its
stock” (p. 2). This equilibrium intuition for dividend irrelevance can also be found in corporate
finance textbooks.

1

Allen and Michaely (2002) provide a comprehensive survey of payout policy research.

1

The catering theory and the clientele equilibrium theory differ on several key points. One
is that catering takes seriously the possibility that investor demand for dividends is affected by
sentiment. This adds a new and unexplored source of demand to the rational dividend clienteles
considered by Black and Scholes. Another difference is that the catering view focuses more on
the demand for shares that pay dividends, whereas the determinate supply response in a clientele
equilibrium view is the overall level of dividends. For example, we discuss the possibility that
managers cater to investors who categorize dividend-paying shares more or less together, and
pay less attention to whether the yield on a particular share is three or four percent.
But perhaps the most crucial difference is that catering takes a less extreme view on how
fast managers or arbitrageurs eliminate an emerging dividend premium or discount. According to
Black and Scholes, managers compete so aggressively that a nontrivial dividend premium or
discount never arises, and so for a given firm dividend policy remains effectively irrelevant. This
argument is compelling only if fluctuations in the demand for dividends are small relative to the
capacity of firms to adjust supply. It is not obvious a priori that this is the case, particularly if
demand is affected by sentiment. The catering theory acknowledges the possibility of a nontrivial
dividend premium, and thus the relevance of dividend policy.
The main prediction of the catering theory is that the propensity to pay dividends depends
on a measurable dividend premium in stock prices. To test this hypothesis, we construct four
time series measures of the demand for dividend-paying shares. The broadest one is what we
simply call the dividend premium – it is the difference between the average market-to-book ratio
of dividend payers and nonpayers. The other measures are the difference in the prices of Citizens
Utilities’ cash dividend and stock dividend share classes (between 1956 and 1989 CU had two
classes of shares which differed in the form but not the level of their payouts); the average

2

announcement effect of recent dividend initiations; and the difference between the future stock
returns of payers and nonpayers. Intuition suggests that the dividend premium, the CU dividend
premium, and initiation effects would be positively related to investor demand for dividends. In
contrast, the difference in future returns of payers and nonpayers would be negatively related to
any such demand – if demand for payers is so high that they are relatively overpriced, their
future returns will be relatively low.
We then use these four measures of demand to explain time variation in aggregate rate of
dividend initiation and omission. The results on initiations are the strongest. Each of the four
demand measures is a significant predictor of the rate of initiation. The lagged dividend premium
variable by itself explains a remarkable sixty percent of the annual variation in the initiation rate.
Another perspective is future stock returns. When the initiation rate increases by one standard
deviation, returns on payers are lower than nonpayers by nine percentage points per year over the
next three years. Conversely, the omission rate increases when the dividend premium is low, and
when future returns on payers are high.
After considering several alternative explanations, we conclude that the results are best
explained by catering. Explanations based on time-varying firm characteristics such as
investment opportunities or profitability, for example, do not account for the results: The
dividend premium variable helps to explain the residual “propensity to initiate” dividends that
remains after controlling for changing firm characteristics, including investment opportunities,
profits, and firm size using the methodology of Fama and French (2001). Alternative
explanations based on time-varying contracting problems, such as agency or asymmetric
information theories, do not address many aspects of the results, for instance why dividend
policy would related to the CU dividend premium and future returns. The lack of a compelling

3

alternative explanation, plus the close connection between the predictions of catering and the
patterns that we document, favors the catering explanation.
We then investigate which source of investor demand creates the time-varying dividend
premium that attracts caterers. One possibility is rational dividend clienteles based on taxes,
transaction costs, or institutional investment constraints. We would expect such clienteles to be
satisfied by changes in the overall level of dividends, rather than the number of shares that pay
dividends. The evidence does not support this prediction – initiations and omissions are related
to the dividend premium, but the aggregate dividend yield, the aggregate payout ratio, or the
aggregate rate of dividend increases are not. Moreover, the relationship between initiations and
omissions and the dividend premium is also apparent after controlling for plausible proxies for
rational clienteles. Another possibility is that demand is driven by investor sentiment. Consistent
with this hypothesis, we find a strong correlation between the dividend premium and the closedend fund discount.
In summary, we develop and test a catering theory of dividends that relaxes the market
efficiency assumption of the M&M dividend irrelevance proof. The theory rounds out the
collection of theories that relax other assumptions of the proof, and adds to the literature of
behavioral corporate finance. In an early contribution, Shefrin and Statman (1984) develop
theories of investor preference for dividends based on self-control problems, prospect theory, and
regret aversion. The current paper is closer to recent research that views managerial decisions as
rational responses to security mispricing. For example, Baker and Wurgler (2000) and Baker,
Greenwood, and Wurgler (2002) view security issuance decisions as responses to mispricing or
perceived mispricing, and Baker and Wurgler (2002a) develop this into a market timing theory
of capital structure that relaxes the market efficiency assumption of the M&M capital structure

4

irrelevance proof. Shleifer and Vishny (2002) develop a theory of mergers based on rational
responses to mispricing. Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1990), Stein (1996), Baker, Stein, and
Wurgler (2001), and Polk and Sapienza (2001) study rational corporate investment in inefficient
capital markets. Graham and Harvey (2001) and Jenter (2001) provide more evidence that
managers react to mispricing.
Section II develops the catering theory. Section III presents the main empirical results.
Section IV considers alternative explanations. Section V discusses the source of investor demand
for dividends. Section VI concludes.

II.

A catering theory of dividends
The theory has three ingredients. First, there is a time-varying, uninformed demand for

the shares of firms that pay cash dividends. Second, limits on arbitrage allow this demand to
affect prices. Third, managers rationally cater in response. After discussing these ingredients, we
combine them in a simple model.
A.

Investor demand for dividends
We posit that at some times investors generally prefer stocks that pay cash dividends, and

other time generally prefer nonpayers. A useful framework for developing this hypothesis is
categorization. Categorization refers to the pervasive cognitive process of grouping objects into
discrete categories such as “birds” or “chairs.” This allows related objects to be considered
together, in terms of a small set of common features that define category membership, rather
than as individual objects, each with its own list of identifying attributes. Categorization thus
speeds up communication and inference. Rosch (1978) provides a detailed review.

5

In standard theory, investors do not categorize. Instead, they identify each security with a
list of abstract statistics, such as mean return, variance, and covariance. In reality, as Barberis
and Shleifer (2002) point out, investors often do categorize securities into “small stocks,” “value
stocks,” “tech stocks,” “old-economy stocks,” “junk bonds,” “utilities,” and so forth. For many
investors, these labels appear to capture all they want to know, or have the ability to process,
about the securities within the category.
There are several reasons to suspect that certain investors and institutions categorize
“dividend payers” directly or use dividends to classify stocks as “old economy,” for example.
Whether a stock pays dividends is clearly a salient characteristic, perhaps even more so than
industry, size, or index membership, and the financial press often categorizes firms according to
dividend payment. 2 The fact that many firms pay small but nonzero dividends suggests that there
is a discrete component to attracting attention through dividends.
One reason why dividends are salient is a belief that dividend-paying stocks are less
risky. 3 This notion is common in the popular financial press, and was once common in the
academic literature – Graham and Dodd (1951) and Gordon (1959) are recognized for this idea,
but Miller and Modigliani (1961) cite a number of other papers of this vintage that make the
same argument. Naïve investors, such as retirees and those who hold dividend-paying stocks for
“income” despite the tax penalty, would seem especially likely to fall prey to this bird-in-thehand argument. For them, the quarterly dividend check is much more salient than daily gyrations
in the stock price. If the risk tolerance of bird-in-the-hand investors changes over time, their
2

For example, a July 16, 2002 Wall Street Journal article titled “Where should you invest now?” categorizes
appealing investment options into TIPs, Ginnie Maes, Real Estate, and Dividend Paying Stocks. Quoting from the
article: “As of Friday, prices for dividend-paying stocks in the S&P 500 stock index had fallen 8.04% vs. a loss of
28.18% for stocks in the index without dividends.”
3

Hyman (1988) describes investor reaction to Consolidated Edison’s 1974 dividend omission. “It smashed the
keystone of faith for investment in utilities: that the dividend is safe and will be paid.” (p. 109).

6

preferences for payers and nonpayers will also change. This is one possible mechanism by which
unsophisticated investors may display a time-varying sentiment for payers.
Another way dividends can become salient is if investors use them to infer managers’
investment plans. For example, investors may interpret nonpayment, controlling for profitability,
as evidence that the firm thinks it has excellent investment opportunities. Conversely, dividends
may be taken as evidence that opportunities are weak. These inferences create another channel
though which payers and nonpayers become categories, and suggest a second realistic
mechanism to generate a time-varying sentiment across categories. That is, when investors’
perceptions of overall growth opportunities are high, they prefer nonpayers, and vice-versa. Note
that time variation is driven here by perceptions of growth opportunities, not risk tolerance as
above. One popular model (Shiller (1984, 2000)) that combines both effects is that steady
dividends mean “old-economy.” Old-economy stocks are viewed as safer but also as having less
potential than the “new-economy” stocks which plow back everything to finance growth.
Black and Scholes (1974) and Allen, Bernardo, and Welch (2000), among others, suggest
that institutional frictions also lead to the rational categorization of payers by dividend clienteles.
Imperfections that have been proposed to cause clienteles include transaction costs, taxes, and
institutional investment constraints. Many endowed institutions are restricted to spending from
income, for example, a clear reason to categorize payers. Others may take dividends as evidence
that a stock is a “prudent” investment. Time variation in these imperfections can then induce
time-varying clientele preferences. The 1970s witnessed a number of events that may have led to
clientele demand shifts. The 1974 ERISA may have increased the attractiveness of payers to
pension funds (Del Guercio (1996) and Brav and Heaton (1998)). The 1975 advent of negotiated

7

commissions reduced the transaction cost of creating homemade dividends. And of course tax
code changes can differentially affect payers and nonpayers.
Given that categorization occurs, time-varying demand between categories could also
arise from what Mullainathan (2002) calls categorical inference. Investors using categorical
inference could, for example, overestimate the impact of news about a particular payer for other
payers, and underestimate its impact for nonpayers. Thus even without any explicit preference
for cash dividends, the fact that categories have already been built around them could lead to
variation in demand between payers and nonpayers.
Finally, building on ideas in Thaler and Shefrin (1981), Shefrin and Statman (1984)
propose that some investors prefer dividend-paying stocks to homemade dividends to combat
self-control problems. Shefrin and Statman also motivate an investor preference for dividends
with prospect theory and regret aversion arguments. The prospect theory argument combines
ideas in Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Thaler (1980, 1983) with the result that dividends
and capital gains allow investors a more flexible and agreeable mental accounting. When capital
gains are low, investors can find a silver lining in the dividend; when capital gains are high,
dividends and capital gains are individually-wrapped presents that can be savored separately.
These theories offer additional reasons why investors view payers and nonpayers as distinct. To
the extent that the germane considerations vary over time, they might also lead to a time-varying
preference for payers.
B.

Limited arbitrage
In perfect and efficient markets, uninformed demand for dividends would not affect stock

prices. Arbitrage would prevent it. Arbitrageurs could short the firm with a preferred dividend
policy and go long a correctly priced “perfect substitute” – a firm with the same investment

8

policy but a different dividend policy. In perfect and efficient markets, only investment policy
affects stock prices, so an arbitrage follows by making homemade dividends on the long firm to
match the dividends declared by the short firm. In the absence of further frictions, this position
delivers an up-front gain and can be risklessly held forever, or liquidated when prices move back
in line. Competition for such arbitrage opportunities, it is argued, would eliminate any dividend
premium or discount and maintain dividend policy irrelevance.
In practice, the long-short arbitrage that drives this irrelevance proof is risky and costly. 4
Limited arbitrage is the second postulate of the catering theory. An obvious risk in long-short
arbitrage is fundamental risk, which arises simply because individual stocks do not have perfect
substitutes (Wurgler and Zhuravskaya (2002)). This risk is in principle diversifiable, but
arbitrageurs also face a systematic risk, often called noise-trader risk or interim price risk, if they
try to trade against systematic sentiment. With short horizons or limited capital, they are
sensitive to this risk (De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990) and Shleifer and
Vishny (1997)). Finally, long-short arbitrage is costly. Nontrivial shorting costs are reported by
D’Avolio (2002), Geczy, Musto, and Reed (2002), and Lamont and Jones (2002).
If arbitrage is limited and uninformed demand varies at the category level, as Barberis
and Shleifer propose, then prices may also vary at the category level. Barberis, Shleifer, and
Wurgler (2001) and Greenwood and Sosner (2001) find evidence for demand-induced
comovement within the categories defined by stock indexes. If payers and nonpayers are

4

Limited arbitrage explanations have been developed for closed-end fund discounts (Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler
(1991) and Pontiff (1996)), risk arbitrage returns (Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) and Baker and Savasoglu (2002)),
post-earnings-announcement drift (Mendenhall (2002)), the Internet bubble (Ofek and Richardson (2002a, 2002b)),
seasoned equity issue returns (Pontiff and Schill (2001)), negative stub values (Lamont and Thaler (2000) and
Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford (2001)), IPO underpricing (Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2002)), index inclusion
effects (Greenwood (2001) and various papers on S&P 500 additions), and the predictive power of such variables as
breadth of ownership (Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002)), market liquidity (Baker and Stein (2002)), and book-tomarket (Alti, Hwang, and Trombley (2002)).

9

investment categories, the same logic implies that uninformed demand may also affect their
relative prices.
Our empirical work is soon to come. For the impatient reader, we point to Long (1978) as
some initial evidence that uninformed, time-varying demand for cash dividends affects stock
prices. Long studies the Citizens Utilities Company, which between 1956 and 1989 had one
share class that paid cash dividends and another that paid stock dividends. By charter, the
payouts to the two classes were supposed to have equal pretax value. In practice, the stock
dividend averaged ten percent higher than the cash dividend. Long finds that during his sample
period, the cash-paying share’s relative price was too high, given its pretax dividend
disadvantage and its further tax disadvantage. 5 More interesting, the relative price fluctuates
substantially over time. Long, Poterba (1986), and Hubbard and Michaely (1997) conclude that
these fluctuations cannot be explained by traditional theories of dividends.
C.

Catering as a rational response
The third element of the theory is that managers cater to uninformed investor demand. In

the setting of dividends, catering implies that managers will tend to initiate or continue paying
dividends when investors put a higher price on payers, and omit dividends or avoid initiating
them when investors favor nonpayers.
The objective of catering is to capture the stock price premium associated with the
characteristics investors currently favor. Catering is thus distinct from the usual policy of
maximizing shareholder value. In inefficient markets, managers have to decide which of two
prices to maximize: A short-run price affected by uninformed demand, and a fundamental or

5

In 1955 CU obtained a special IRS exemption making the stock dividends not taxable as ordinary income. In
general, regular stock dividends have been taxable since the 1969 Tax Reform Act, but CU received a grandfather
clause in that Act.

10

long-run value determined by investment policy. Catering maximizes the short-run price, while
the traditional policy emphasizes fundamental value.
In general, whether managers will rationally cater to a short-run mispricing is an
empirical question. 6 One element in their decision is how much of a fundamental tradeoff there
between catering and investment policy – if they can maximize short-run and long-run price
without conflict, they will do both. 7 Another element is whether managers can personally profit
from any short-term overvaluation that follows from successful catering. If they hold a
significant amount of equity themselves, they can sell their overvalued shares. Or they may be
able to issue dilutive, overpriced shares. A final consideration is the horizon of managers, or the
horizon of the investors they care about most. Managers with short horizons, for instance those
with compensation tied to short-run performance, will be more likely to cater.
D.

A model of dividend catering
A short model makes these tradeoffs precise, and illustrates the more subtle features and

limits of the catering theory. The model assumes that investors strictly categorize payers and
nonpayers. While extreme, this is a convenient way of capturing the distinction that we want to
emphasize – zero versus nonzero payout, not small versus large payout. Fama and French (2001)
also focus on this dimension of dividend policy.
Consider a firm with Q shares outstanding. At t = 1, it pays a liquidating distribution of V
= F + ε per share, where ε is a normally distributed error term with mean zero. At t = 0, it has the
6

Conditions under which managers will pursue short-run over long-run value are also discussed by Miller and Rock
(1985), Stein (1989), Shleifer and Vishny (1990), Blanchard, Rhee and Summers (1993) and Stein (1996).
7

An example of a setting in which no tradeoff exists is firm names. Cooper, Dimitrov, and Rau (2001) and Rau,
Patel, Osobov, Khorana, and Cooper (2001) document that when investor sentiment favored the Internet (before
March 2000), a number of firms added “dot com” to their names, but when sentiment turned away (after March
2000), firms were changing back. While many of these name changes surely coincided with changes in investment
policy, Rau et al. argue that at least some of them were simply catering to sentiment for the Internet.

11

choice of paying an interim dividend d∈{0,1} per share, which reduces the liquidating
distribution by d(1+c). The risk-free rate is zero. The cost c captures any tradeoff between
dividend and investment policy, such as would result from costly external finance or taxes. The
Miller and Modigliani case has c equal to zero – dividend policy does not in any way affect the
cash flows to investors.
There are two types of investors, category investors and arbitrageurs. Both have constant
absolute risk aversion. Arbitrageurs have aggregate risk tolerance per period of γA. They have
rational expectations over the terminal distribution, and they know the long-run cost of an
interim dividend. Thus they expect a liquidating distribution of F if the firm does not pay an
interim dividend and F-c if it does.
Category investors have aggregate risk tolerance per period of γC = γ. They have an
irrational expectation of the terminal distribution, and they do not recognize the cost of an
interim dividend. Their irrational expectation introduces a source of uninformed demand. For
purposes of developing the model, we suppose that they categorize because they view nonpayers
as growth firms, and they judge the prospects of those firms relative to their own assessment of
growth opportunities. (Alternatively, their irrational expectations could reflect biased inferences
that overweight within-category information as in Mullainathan (2002), biased risk perceptions
arising from the bird-in-the-hand fallacy, or capture institutional constraints in a reduced form.)
Specifically, they expect a final payment of VD from payers and VG from nonpayers. For
simplicity, we assume that they misestimate the mean payout, but not the distribution around the
mean. Typically, their net result is to cause VD and VG to fall on opposite sides of F.
If the firm meets its criteria, investor group k demands
D0k = γ k (E (V ) − P0 ) .

(1)

12

Prices of dividend payers PD (cum dividend) and growth firms PG are therefore

 P0D ≡ γ A V D + γ A A ( F − c) − Q A

γ +γ
γ +γ
γ +γ
P0 = 
.
G
γ
G
γA
Q
 P0 ≡ γ +γ A V + γ + γ A F − γ +γ A

(2)

Given these prices, the manager chooses whether to pay dividends. We assume that the
manager is risk neutral and cares about both the current stock price and the value of total
distributions. The manager’s only effect on the latter is through the cost of dividends c. With his
horizon measured as λ, the manager solves:

max (1 − λ )P0 + λ (− dc )

(3)

d

The solution is straightforward. The manager pays dividends if the dividend premium is
positive and exceeds the present value of the long-run cost that he incorporates. That is, when
P0 − P0 ≡
D

G

γ
γ +γ

A

(V

D

−V

G

)−

γA
γ +γ

A

 λ 
c≥
c .
1 − λ 

(4)

The first term in the middle is the immediate positive price impact of switching categories. The
second is the immediate negative price impact of the arbitrageurs’ recognition of the cost c. To
induce payment, the net of these must exceed the long-run cost that the manager incorporates,
the term on the right. Qualitatively, the propensity to pay is increasing in the dividend premium,
decreasing in c, decreasing in the prevalence of arbitrage (the relative risk-bearing capacity of
arbitrageurs and category investors), and decreasing in managers’ horizons. The announcement
effect of an initiation is positive and increasing in the dividend premium. 8

8

Note that an uninformed demand interpretation of announcement effects could explain why dividend changes have
price impacts while at the same time appear to contain more information about past earnings than future earnings
(Lintner (1956), Fama and Babiak (1968), Watts (1973), DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (1996) and Benartzi,
Michaely, and Thaler (1997)).

13

Equation (4) contains the basic time series predictions that we test, plus several crosssectional predictions that we leave to future work. However, this two-category version is too
simplistic to incorporate key stylized facts, such as the persistence of dividend payment and the
negative announcement effect of omissions. To address these facts, we briefly outline extensions
of the model that make use of a third category, former payers. These stocks lack the
characteristics noticed by category investors, as they pay no dividends and have low (historical)
earnings growth. 9 Thus they attract only arbitrageurs, so their price is P0FD = F − γQA .
With this third category, the model can address the stylized fact that dividend payment is
empirically quite persistent. That is, equation (4) shares the feature of many theories of dividends
(for example, Miller and Rock (1985)) that the decisions to initiate and omit are symmetric. With
former payers, dividends can be sticky. In particular, the decision for growth firms to initiate is
still governed by (4), while current payers continue when:

P0D − P0FD ≡

γ
γ +γ

A

 D 
A

V −  F − QA   − γ γ+γ A c ≥  λ c .
γ 
1− λ 



(5)

Like the propensity to initiate, the propensity to continue is decreasing in the long-run cost and
increasing in the dividend premium. The new insight is that continuing may be desirable even
when initiating is not. More formally, if γA is small, or if c is small and VG and VD fall on opposite
sides of F, then (5) is satisfied whenever (4) is satisfied. Intuitively, former payers are neglected
stocks, attracting only arbitrageurs. Even if initiating is undesirable, current payers may want to
continue if the price impact to omitting is large. Note that this third category also suggests why

9

The low historical earnings growth can be motivated by assuming that former payers’ past dividends were not fully
replenished by stock issues (perhaps as a result of the same external finance costs represented by c) or, more
intuitively, on empirical grounds. Fama and French (2001) report that dividend payers have average (asset) growth
rates of 8.78%, while nonpayers average 11.62% and former payers average only 4.67%. These averages are for the
1963-98 full sample. Between 1993-98, the averages are 6.65%, 17.67%, and 7.61% respectively.

14

some firms might initiate (reinitiate) dividends even when the dividend premium is negative, and
why such initiations would still have a positive announcement effect.
A third category is also useful in addressing the stylized fact that the announcement effect
of omissions is negative (Healy and Palepu (1988) and Michaely, Thaler, and Womack (1995)),
whereas in the simplest two-category model it is not. Specifically, consider an intermediate time
period between t = 0 and t = 1, in which the neglected former payers face a positive probability
of being recategorized as growth firms – for example, because of a random earnings shock. In
this setup, dividend payers may choose to omit a dividend at t = 0 even when (5) is not satisfied.
They suffer a short-run negative announcement effect, but the expected value of being
recategorized may be worth it. It is straightforward to formally incorporate this effect.
Of course, there are many other ways to explain some of these facts, such as fundamental
risk, financial constraints, or asymmetric information. Our goal here is to illustrate the pros and
cons of a model that isolates the market efficiency assumption of Miller and Modigliani. Such a
model predicts that the propensity to pay dividends is robustly increasing in the dividend
premium, and decreasing in the long-run costs of paying dividends. Realistic variants of it
suggest that the decisions to initiate and to continue paying should be analyzed separately.

III.

Empirical tests
We test the prediction that the decision to pay dividends depends on uninformed demand

for dividend payers as revealed through stock price signals. The model illustrates some crosssectional wrinkles, but this is primarily a time series prediction because uninformed demand is
hypothesized to be systematic.

15

A.

Dividend payment variables
Our measures of dividend payment are derived from aggregations of Compustat data. The

observations in the underlying 1962-2000 sample are selected as in Fama and French (2001, p.
40-41): “The Compustat sample for calendar year t … includes those firms with fiscal year-ends
in t that have the following data (Compustat data items in parentheses): total assets (6), stock
price (199) and shares outstanding (25) at the end of the fiscal year, income before extraordinary
items (18), interest expense (15), [cash] dividends per share by ex date (26), preferred dividends
(19), and (a) preferred stock liquidating value (10), (b) preferred stock redemption value (56), or
(c) preferred stock carrying value (130). Firms must also have (a) stockholder’s equity (216), (b)
liabilities (181), or (c) common equity (60) and preferred stock par value (130). Total assets must
be available in years t and t-1. The other items must be available in t. … We exclude firms with
book equity below $250,000 or assets below $500,000. To ensure that firms are publicly traded,
the Compustat sample includes only firms with CRSP share codes of 10 or 11, and we use only
the fiscal years a firm is in the CRSP database at its fiscal year-end. … We exclude utilities (SIC
codes 4900-4949) and financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999).”
Within this sample we count a firm-year observation as a dividend payer if it has positive
dividends per share by the ex date, else it is a nonpayer. To aggregate this firm-level data into
useful time series, two aggregate identities are helpful:
Payerst = New Payerst + Old Payerst + List Payerst ,

(6)

Old Payerst = Payerst-1 - New Nonpayerst - Delist Payerst .

(7)

The first identity defines the number of payers and the second describes the evolution. Payers is
the total number of payers at time t, New Payers is the number of initiators among last year’s
nonpayers, Old Payers is the number of payers that also paid last year, List Payers is the number

16

of firms that are payers this year and were not in the sample last year, New Nonpayers is the
number of omitters among last year’s payers, and Delist Payers is the number of last year’s
payers that are not in the sample this year. Note that two analogous identities hold if one
switches “Payers” and “Nonpayers” everywhere. Also note that lists and delists are with respect
to our sample, which involves several screens. Thus new lists include both IPOs that survive the
screens in their Compustat debut as well as established Compustat firms when they first survive
the screens. It also includes the established NASDAQ firms that appear in Compustat for the first
time in the 1970s. Similarly, delists include both delists from Compustat and firms that fall
below the screens.
We use these aggregate totals to define three basic measures of the dynamics of dividend
payment among certain subsets of firms:

Initiatet =

New Payers t
,
Nonpayers t −1 − Delist Nonpayers t

Continuet =

Listpay t =

Old Payers t
,
Payers t−1 − Delist Payers t

List Payers t
.
List Payers t + List Nonpayers t

(8)

(9)

(10)

In words, the rate of initiation Initiate is the fraction of surviving nonpayers that become new
payers. The rate at which firms continue paying Continue is the fraction of surviving payers that
continue paying. It can also be viewed as one minus the rate at which firms omit dividends. The
rate at which new lists in the sample pay Listpay is self-explanatory.
These variables capture the decision whether to pay dividends, not how much to pay. We
take this approach for several reasons. First, these are the natural dependent variables in a theory
in which investors categorize shares based on whether they pay dividends. (Wings make a

17

“bird,” regardless of their length.) Second, as an empirical matter, the payout ratio is sensitive to
profitability and the dividend yield is sensitive to changes in share prices. The decision to initiate
or omit dividends, in contrast, is always a policy decision. Third, Fama and French (2001)
document a decline in the number of payers, and no comparable pattern in the payout ratio.
Nonetheless, measures of the level of dividends turn out to be useful in discriminating among
alternative interpretations for the basic results.
Table 1 lists the aggregate totals and the dividend payment variables. The sample
displays similar characteristics to the sample in Fama and French (2001). For our purposes, the
most notable feature of the data is the time variation in the dividend variables. The rate of
initiation starts out high in the early years of the sample, then drops dramatically in the late
1960s, rebounds in the mid 1970s, drops again in the late 1970s and remains low through the end
of the sample. The rate at which firms continue paying displays less variation, as expected. The
rate at which lists pay displays the most variation. As Fama and French point out, it has declined
steadily over the past few decades.
While we do not focus on the level of dividends, as just discussed, it is useful to get a
rough sense of the aggregate economic significance of initiations. In the average year in our
sample, newly-initiated dividends amount to 0.5% of dividends already paid by payers, and 29%
of the change in the amount that is paid by payers (in years when this change is positive). The
fact that the first number is so small is not surprising. The numerator is small because the rate of
initiation is low and the typical initiator is small and starts off with a small dividend, while the
denominator is high because the persistence of payment is high and the typical surviving payer
tends to increase dividends over time. We also caution that the 29% figure is affected by outlying

18

years in which the change in the amount paid by existing payers is barely positive. Nonetheless,
these figures provide some sense of the aggregate economic significance of initiations.
B.

Investor demand for dividends variables
We relate dividend payment choices to several stock market measures of the uninformed

demand for dividend-paying shares. Conceptually, an ideal measure would be the difference
between the market prices of firms that have the same investment policy and different dividend
policies. In the frictionless and efficient markets of Miller and Modigliani (1961), of course, this
price difference is zero. But uninformed demand combined with limits to arbitrage, as discussed
above, can lead to a time-varying price difference.
Our first measure, which we simply call the dividend premium because it is the broadest
measure, is motivated by this intuition. It is the difference in the logs of the average market-tobook ratios of payers and nonpayers – that is, the log of the ratio of average market-to-books.10
We define market-to-book following Fama and French (2001). Market equity is end of calendar
year stock price times shares outstanding (Compustat item 24 times item 25). 11 Book equity is
stockholders’ equity (Item 216) [or first available of common equity (60) plus preferred stock par
value (130) or book assets (6) minus liabilities (181)] minus preferred stock liquidating value
(10) [or first available of redemption value (56) or par value (130)] plus balance sheet deferred
taxes and investment tax credit (35) if available and minus post retirement assets (330) if
available. The market-to-book ratio is book assets minus book equity plus market equity all
divided by book assets.

10

Market-to-book ratios are approximately lognormally distributed. As a result, levels of the market-to-book ratio,
unlike logs, have the property that the cross-sectional variance increases with the mean. In our context, this means
that the absolute size of a premium measured in levels could proxy for a market-wide valuation ratio.
11

Here we want an aggregate market-to-book measure for a precise point in time, the end of the calendar year. Later
in the paper, when we use market-to-book as a firm characteristic, we use the end of fiscal year stock price.

19

We then average the market-to-book ratios across payers and nonpayers in each year. The
equal- and value-weighted dividend premium series are the difference of the logs of these
averages. These variables are listed by year in Table 2 and the value-weighted series are plotted
in Figure 1. The figure shows that the average payer and nonpayer market-to-books diverge
significantly at short frequencies. It reveals several interesting patterns. Dividend payers start out
at a premium, by this measure, in the first years of the sample. The valuation of nonpayers then
spikes up in 1967 and 1968 and falls sharply, in relative terms, through 1972. The dividend
premium takes another dip in 1974, and for over two decades now payers have traded at a
discount by this measure. The discount widened in 1999 but closed somewhat in 2000. At this
point it is premature to speculate on the forces that move the dividend premium variable over
time. In Baker and Wurgler (2002b), we draw on academic histories of the capital market and a
review of historical articles in the financial press to provide a detailed, but still highly stylized,
account of its variation.
The primary disadvantage of the dividend premium variable is that it may also reflect the
relative investment opportunities of payers and nonpayers, as opposed to uninformed demand for
dividend-paying shares. We consider this in our discussion of alternative explanations.
Our second measure of investor demand for dividend payers is the difference in the prices
of Citizens Utilities cash dividend and stock dividend share classes. Between 1956 and 1989 the
Citizens Utilities Company had two classes of shares outstanding on which the payouts were to
be of equal value, as set down in an amendment to the corporate charter. In practice, the relative
payouts were close to a fixed multiple. Long (1978) describes the case in detail. We measure the
CU dividend premium as the difference in the log price of the cash payout share and the log price
of the stock payout share. The 1962 through 1972 data were kindly provided by John Long and

20

the 1973 through 1989 data are from Hubbard and Michaely (1997). 12 Table 3 reports the CU
dividend premium year by year.
By its nature, the CU dividend premium does not reflect anything about investment
opportunities. This reduces the number of alternative explanations for why it fluctuates, but it
also means that arbitraging the premium entails no fundamental risk, only noise-trader risk, so
the amount of sentiment that it reflects may be muted. Other disadvantages include the fact that
CU is just one firm; the stock payout share is more liquid than the cash payout share; there was a
one-way, one-for-one convertibility of the stock payout class to the cash payout class, truncating
the ability of the price ratio to reveal pro-cash-dividend sentiment; certain sentiment-based
mechanisms outlined above involve categorization of firms rather than shares, so a case in which
one firm offers two dividend policies may lead to weaker results; and the experiment ended in
1990, when CU switched to stock payouts on both classes.
Our third measure of uninformed demand for dividends is the average announcement
effect of recent initiations. 13 Intuitively, if investors are clamoring for dividends, they may make
themselves heard through their reaction to initiations. Asquith and Mullins (1983) find that
initiations are greeted with a positive return on average, but they do not study whether this effect
varies over time. We define a dividend initiation as the first cash dividend declaration date in
CRSP in the twelve months prior to the year in which the firm is identified as a Compustat New
Payer. Since Compustat payers are defined using fiscal years while CRSP allows us to use

12

There are two further adjustments made throughout the 1962 through 1989 series. The annual value that we
consider is the log of the average of the monthly price ratios, because the relative prices fluctuate dramatically even
within a year. And to control for the fact that cash dividends were quarterly, in practice, while the stock dividends
were semiannual, the cash dividends are assumed to be reinvested until the corresponding stock dividend is paid.
13

In closer analogy with the other demand variables, one might like to define an announcement effect variable that
combines the reactions to initiations and omissions. That is, when demand for dividend payers is high, initiation
effects may be particularly positive and omission effects particularly negative. Unfortunately, CRSP data do not
provide precise omission announcement dates.

21

calendar years, the resulting asynchronicity means that the number of initiation announcements
identified in CRSP for year t does not equal the number of Compustat New Payers in year t.
Another difference arises because the required CRSP data are not always available.
Given an initiation in calendar year t, we calculate the cumulative abnormal return over
the three-day window from day –1 to day +1 relative to the CRSP declaration date as the
cumulative difference between the firm return and the CRSP value-weighted market index. To
control for the differences in volatility across firms and time (see Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and
Xu (2000)), we scale each firm’s three-day excess return by the square root of three times the
standard deviation of its daily excess returns. The standard deviation of excess returns is
measured from 120 calendar days through five trading days before the declaration date.
Averaging these across initiations in year t gives a standardized, cumulative abnormal
announcement return A. To determine whether the average return in a given year is statistically
significant, we compute a test statistic by multiplying A by the square root of the number of
initiations in year t. This statistic is asymptotically standard normal and has more power if the
true abnormal return is constant across securities (Brown and Warner (1980) and Campbell, Lo,
and MacKinlay (1997)), which is a natural hypothesis in our context. Table 3 reports the average
standardized initiation announcement effects year by year.
Our last demand measure is the difference between the future returns on value-weighted
indexes of payers and nonpayers. Under the rather stark version of catering outlined in the
previous section, managers rationally initiate dividends to exploit a market mispricing. If this is
literally the case, then a high rate of initiations should forecast low returns on payers relative to
nonpayers as the overpricing of payers reverses. The opposite should hold for omissions.

22

Table 4 reports the correlation between the sentiment measures. We correlate the first
three measures at year t with the excess real return on payers over nonpayers rD - rND in year t+1
and the cumulative excess return RD - RND from years t+1 through t+3. To the extent that these
variables capture a common factor in uninformed investor demand for dividends, we expect the
dividend premium, the CU premium, and announcement effects to be positively correlated with
each other, and negatively correlated with the future excess returns of payers. Table 4 shows that
these correlations are as expected, with two exceptions: the CU premium and the initiation effect
are negatively correlated, and the initiation effect and one-year-ahead excess returns are
positively correlated. The dividend premium is correlated with all of the other variables in the
expected direction, however. This suggests that the dividend premium may be the single best
reflection of the common factor. In any case, given that each measure has its own advantages and
disadvantages, it is reassuring that they correlate roughly as expected. 14
Table 4 also reports autocorrelations and Dickey-Fuller tests for unit roots. These
statistics shed light on the time series properties of the data and the potential for spurious
correlation in the regressions to follow. Of course, the textbook case of spurious correlation
involves nonstationary variables, and so before one puts too much weight on the Dickey-Fuller
tests it is worth noting the theoretical considerations that suggest that these variables are indeed
stationary. For example, if the market-to-book ratio is itself stationary, the dividend premium
cannot grow without bound. In the absence of this prior information, however, Table 4 shows
that we cannot reject a unit root in the dividend premium or the CU dividend premium. A similar
logic holds for the dividend payment variables: Each one is mathematically bounded between

14

We have also considered average ex-dividend day returns as a fifth measure of investor demand. Ex-day returns
do vary over time (e.g., Eades, Hess, and Kim (1994)). However, they have less of a category-switching
interpretation than our other four measures: A dividend payer seems likely to be viewed as a payer before, during,
and after the ex-day.

23

one and zero, but we cannot formally reject a unit root (unreported). More practically, what these
statistics suggest is that in certain cases we should control for a time trend before concluding that
a relationship is robust.
C.

Time series relationships
Here we document the basic relationships between the rates of dividend payment and the

measures of the demand for dividend-paying shares. The top panel of Figure 2 plots the dividend
premium against the raw rate of dividend initiation in the following year.
The figure reveals a strong positive relationship, consistent with catering. On average, the
rate of initiation is 11.0% when the dividend premium is positive and only 3.1% when it is
negative. In the first half of the sample, the dividend premium and subsequent initiations move
almost in lockstep. The premium then submerges in the late 1970s, leading the rate of initiation
down once again. A qualitatively similar figure obtains with the rate of initiations by large firms,
small firms, or firms that have been listed for at least five years (unreported).
The dividend premium has been negative since around 1978, and the initiation rate has
also remained low. The figure gives a visual impression that the relationship has broken down in
this period. In fact, this pattern is not inconsistent with the theory. Equation (4) indicates that
there is no reason to initiate dividends when they are discounted. A monotonic relationship
between initiations and the dividend premium is predicted only when the latter is positive.
Consistent with this prediction, the correlation between the two series is 0.53 for the 14 years in
which the lagged dividend premium is positive, and 0.03 for the 24 years in which it is negative.
Of course, another (less flattering) possibility is that exogenous factors such as the growth in
dividend-unprotected executive stock options, or the emergence of repurchases as a substitute for

24

dividends, have suppressed initiations in recent years. Still another interpretation of the 1980s
and 1990s data is mentioned below (where we discuss the lower panel of Figure 2).
To examine the basic relationship in the figure more formally, Table 5 regresses the
dividend policy measures on the lagged demand for dividends measures. For example, the
initiation rate is modeled as:
Initiatet = a + bPt D−1− ND + cAt −1 + dPt CU
−1 + ut ,

(11)

where Initiate is the rate of initiation, PD-ND is the market dividend premium (value-weighted or
equal-weighted), A is the average initiation announcement effect, and PCU is the Citizens Utilities
dividend premium. All independent variables are standardized to have unit variance and all
standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation to four lags using the
procedure of Newey and West (1987).
Panel A reports the determinants of initiations. The regression in the first column
corresponds to Figure 2. It shows that a one-standard-deviation increase in the value-weighted
market dividend premium is associated with a 3.90 percentage point increase in the initiation rate
in the following year, or roughly three-quarters of the standard deviation of that variable. 15 This
one measure explains a striking 60 percent of the variation in the rate of initiation. The second
column shows that the effect of the equal-weighted dividend premium is essentially the same. 16
The remaining columns show the effect of other variables, and the results of a multivariate horse

15

If nonpayers are trading at a discount to payers, a large number of initiations may mechanically dilute the price of
payers and hence lower the premium. This can create the sort of Stambaugh (1999) bias that is described in the
Appendix in connection with return predictability. This bias is increasing in the correlation between the errors of the
prediction regression in Table 5 and the errors in an autogression of the dividend premium on the lagged dividend
premium. In the case of Initiate, these errors have a correlation of less than 0.01, so the bias is inconsequential. In
the case of Continue and Listpay, the correlation is also not statistically significant.
16

The dependent variable is implicitly an equal-weighted measure, so an equal-weighted independent variable may
seem appropriate. On the other hand, the value-weighted premium, which emphasizes larger firms, is likely to be
more visible to potential initiators. The two measures perform almost identically in this and future tables. We
proceed with value weights alone for the sake of brevity.

25

race. The lagged initiation announcement effect and the CU premium have significant positive
coefficients, as predicted. But they disappear in a multivariate regression that includes the
dividend premium. This is consistent with earlier indications that the dividend premium best
captures the common factor in these variables.
Panel B reports analogous regressions for the rate of continuation. The dividend premium
effect is again as predicted by catering: When dividends are at a discount, payers are more likely
to omit (not continue). The dividend premium effect is smaller here, consistent with the lower
sensitivity predicted by certain versions of the model. Specifically, a one-standard-deviation
increase in the dividend premium increases the continuation rate by 0.85 percentage points.
Indeed, to the extent that some omissions are forced by profitability circumstances, which we
control for in the next section, it may be surprising that the effect is as strong as it is. The other
columns of Panel B show that the other measures of demand do not have explanatory power for
the rate of continuation, however.
Panel C shows that the rate at which lists are pay is also positively related to the dividend
premium. A one-standard-deviation increase in the dividend premium increases Listpay by 16.08
percentage points. The relative size of the coefficient here again reflects the relative variation in
the dependent variable. Using a dividend premium variable defined just over recent new lists has
at least as much explanatory power (unreported). The CU premium also has a strong univariate
effect here, but as before the dividend premium wins a horse race.
Table 6 shows the relationship between dividend policy and our fourth demand variable,
the future excess returns of payers over nonpayers. In Panel A, the dependent variable is the
difference between the returns on value-weighted indexes of payers and nonpayers. Panels B and
C look separately at the returns on payers and nonpayers, respectively, to examine whether any

26

results for relative returns are indeed coming from the difference in returns, which the theory
emphasizes, and not payer or nonpayer returns alone. Each panel examines one, two, and threeyear ahead returns, and cumulative three-year returns. The table reports ordinary least-squares
coefficients as well as coefficients adjusted for the small-sample bias analyzed by Stambaugh
(1999). The p-values reported in the table represent a two-tailed test of the hypothesis of no
predictability using a bootstrap technique described in the Appendix.
Panel A indicates that dividend policy does have predictive power for relative returns. A
one-standard-deviation increase in the rate of initiation forecasts a decrease in the relative return
of payers of around eight percentage points in the next year, and thirty percentage points over the
next three years. This strikes us as a substantial magnitude – arguably, a magnitude worth
catering to. The predictive power of the standardized continuation rate is similar. The rate at
which lists pay has no predictive power, however, unless a time trend is included, in which case
it displays a similar level of predictability to the other dividend policy variables. The bottom
panels confirm that the relative return predictability cannot be attributed to just payer or
nonpayer predictability. As theory suggests, it is the relative return that matters.
Tables 5 and 6 provide some support for the catering theory’s basic predictions. Firms
appear more likely to initiate dividends when the demand for dividend-paying shares is high, and
more likely to omit when demand is low.

IV.

Alternative explanations
The catering explanation for these results is that dividend payment is, to an important

extent, a rational managerial response to a real or perceived stock market mispricing. While it is
often possible to reinterpret an individual empirical relationship, it turns out to be very difficult

27

to construct a coherent, non-catering alternative explanation for the full set of results. We discuss
a variety of alternative hypotheses below.
A.

Statistical robustness
Time-series regressions raise a standard set of statistical issues. One is spurious

correlation. Recall that despite theoretical reasons to believe that the variables are stationary,
formal tests do not always reject a unit root. On the other hand, the key for statistical inference is
that the residuals are stationary. In the regression of initiation on the dividend premium, we can
reject a unit root in the residuals at the 10 percent level (unreported).
A more practical question is whether these relationships are robust to the inclusion of a
time trend. One would not expect future relative stock returns to be predictable from a time
trend, but the other measures of investor demand are worth checking. Table 7 includes a trend
alongside the dividend premium. The coefficient remains strongly significant for initiations. For
continuations, however, inclusion of a trend pushes the coefficient to the 10 percent level of
significance, and considerably reduces the size of the coefficient on new lists, though it does not
eliminate statistical significance.
In unreported results, we include a trend alongside the CU dividend premium and the
initiation announcement effect. This changes our earlier inferences only in the case of the CU
dividend premium: It does not have explanatory power beyond a common trend. We have also
considered the raw (unstandardized) average initiation announcement effect, which we did not
examine earlier. It turns out to have a positive but insignificant univariate relationship with
initiations; however, it becomes significant in the presence of a trend term.

28

B.

Time-varying investment opportunities
We now turn to economics-based alternative explanations. The relationship in Figure 2

could be an artifact of time variation in investment opportunities, in an environment of rational
managers and rational investors. That is, nonpayers may be initiating dividends not because they
are chasing the relative premium on payers but because their investment opportunities are low in
an absolute sense. An inverse relationship between dividends and investment opportunities could
follow if external finance is costly, as in Myers (1984) and Myers and Majluf (1984), or if
dividends are a response to agency costs of free cash flow, as in Jensen (1986). This is a natural
alternative explanation that is worth considering in some detail.
A first point is that this explanation makes the converse prediction that payers will be
more likely to omit when their investment opportunities are high. This would imply a negative
relationship between the dividend premium and the rate at which firms continue paying, not
positive as we found earlier. Therefore, this alternative could apply only to initiations.
To examine its bite (for initiations), a straightforward test is to simply control for the
level of investment opportunities and see if the dividend premium retains residual explanatory
power. We consider two potential measures of investment opportunities, the average market-tobook of the set of firms in question and the overall CRSP value-weighted dividend yield. The
first and fourth columns in Table 7 show the results. The investment opportunities proxies enter
with the predicted signs – nonpayers are less likely to initiate when their average market-to-book
is high, and when the overall dividend-price ratio is low. For continuations and new lists,
however, these variables enter with the wrong sign for the alternative explanation. More
important, the dividend premium coefficient is not much affected.

29

The investment opportunities view also makes similar predictions for both repurchases
and dividends, while catering involves only the latter. Thus we can examine whether the rate of
repurchase is also related to the dividend premium, or only the rate of dividend initiation. We
construct aggregate time series measures of the rate of repurchase, defining a repurchase as
nonzero purchase of common and preferred stock (Compustat item 115). The first useable year is
1972. We find that the rate of repurchase among all firms, and the rate at which firms “initiate”
repurchases (new repurchasers in year t divided by surviving non-repurchasers), have an
insignificant negative correlation with the lagged dividend premium (unreported). The dividend
initiation rate, by contrast, has a correlation of 0.73 over the same 29-year period.
Finally, time-varying investment opportunities leads more naturally to variation in the
level of dividends, not necessarily the number of firms paying a dividend as is the essence of
initiations and omissions. Thus, this alternative hypothesis would predict that the dividend
premium should bear an even stronger relationship to the level of dividends, whereas catering to
category investors would not necessarily predict a relationship in levels. Consistent with the
latter view, we find that neither the payout ratio nor the dividend yield is significantly correlated
with the lagged dividend premium (unreported), where we use updated data from Shiller (1989)
on earnings and dividends for the S&P 500 and the CRSP value-weighted dividend yield. Also
note that we control for the dividend yield directly in the last three columns of Table 7. This
actually increases the effect of the dividend premium on the initiation rate.
All of this casts doubt on the ability of investment opportunities to explain the connection
between initiations and the dividend premium. Moreover, this story has fundamental difficulties
addressing the connection to future relative returns or the CU dividend premium (though as
mentioned above, this relationship is not apparent beyond a common time trend).

30

C.

Correlated errors in forecasting investment opportunities
The second alternative explanation we consider is a variant of the first and is suggested

by the referee. Perhaps managers and investors make correlated errors in their forecasts. That is,
investors sometimes get excited about growth prospects and bid up the price of nonpayers, who
they feel are better suited to exploit new opportunities. Managers, rather than catering to this
sentiment, are equally smitten and choose to invest all available resources rather than paying any
dividends. This story is better than the rational expectations version outlined above in that it can
address the return predictability results, but otherwise it has the same shortcomings.
D.

Time-varying sample characteristics
The results could arise because our dividend demand measures are somehow related to

the cross-sectional distribution of dividend-relevant characteristics within payer and nonpayer
samples. This is a more general version of the investment opportunities explanation discussed
above. As a contrived example, suppose the variance of investment opportunities among
nonpayers increases (for some reason) whenever the dividend premium increases. Then an
increasing initiation rate could indicate that a relatively high fraction of nonpayers do not need to
retain cash, not that nonpayers as a group are catering to the dividend premium. Note that in this
example, the average investment opportunities of nonpayers are held constant, so the time series
exercises in Table 7 would mistakenly attribute the effect to the dividend premium.
We can evaluate this explanation by controlling directly for sample characteristics. In
particular, we examine whether the dividend premium helps to explain the residual variation in
dividend decisions after controlling for the characteristics studied by Fama and French (2001).
They model the expected probability that a firm is a payer as a function of four variables:
M
dA
E 

Pr ( Payerit = 1) = logit  a + bNYPit + c
+d
+e
 + uit ,
B it
A it
A it 


31

(12)

where size NYP is the NYSE market capitalization percentile, i.e. the percentage of firms on the
NYSE having smaller capitalization than firm i in that year. Market-to-book M/B is measured as
defined previously, with the slight modification that here we use the fiscal year closing stock
price (Compustat item 199) instead of the calendar year close. Growth dA/A in book assets
(Compustat item 6) is self-explanatory. Profitability E/A is earnings before extraordinary items
(18) plus interest expense (15) plus income statement deferred taxes (50) divided by book assets.
The error term u is the residual propensity to pay dividends for a given firm-year.
The tests proceed in two stages. In the first stage, we follow Fama and French in
estimating firm-level logit regressions using these firm characteristics. As before, we examine
dividend payment separately among surviving nonpayers, surviving payers, and new lists. We
also follow them in estimating specifications that exclude M/B – they suggest that the degree to
which this variable measures investment opportunities may change over time, and indeed we
have been arguing that this variable is affected by uninformed investor demand.
In the second stage, we regress the average annual prediction errors, or the aggregate
“propensity to pay,” on the value-weighted dividend premium. For example, naming PTI the
residual rate of initiation or the “propensity to initiate,” we estimate:

~
D− ND
PT I t = f + gPt−1
+ v t , where
~
PT I t ≡

1
N

∑u

i it

(13)

.

Explanatory power for the propensity to initiate (or, analogously, the propensity to continue

~
~
PTC or propensity to list as a payer PT L ) would mean that the dividend premium is not
affecting dividend policy through the average or the cross-sectional distribution of any of these

32

four characteristics. 17 The regression in (13) is analogous to our earlier time series regressions,
such as equation (11), but now the effect of varying characteristics has been removed. Note that
the two-stage approach gives deference to the characteristics variables by allowing the dividend
premium to explain only residual variation. And in terms of statistical power, the dividend
premium is using only 38 data points to fit, not thousands like the characteristics.
Table 8 shows the results of this exercise. The first stage results indicate that size and
profitability have the most robust effects on the propensity to pay, as Fama and French find. The
right column shows the second stage results. In general, controlling for characteristics directly,
the dividend premium retains statistically significant explanatory power for most subsamples.
Comparing these coefficients to our earlier time series results, one can see that controlling for
firm characteristics barely affects the initiation rate coefficient. It is 3.90 in Table 5, and
controlling for characteristics moves it only slightly, and does not affect its statistical
significance. We view this as compelling evidence that the dividend premium is not working
through a background correlation with the level or distribution of characteristics.
Controlling for characteristics also tends to improve the post-1980 correlation between
initiations and the dividend premium, as shown in Panel B of Figure 2. This suggests another
perspective on the poor post-1980 fit of the raw initiation rate. Namely, that the raw rate was
depressed by the recent influx of small, unprofitable, high market-to-book firms noted by Fama
and French. Within the language of the model, firms with these characteristics would tend to
have high fundamental costs of paying dividends. Controlling for characteristics may better

17

Including the dividend premium directly in equation (13) and estimating the coefficients in a panel regression
gives qualitatively similar results to our two-stage procedure (unreported). A panel regression is necessary in that
specification because the dividend premium does not vary within a year, as the Fama-MacBeth procedure requires.

33

reveal the partial effect of the dividend premium. 18 Interestingly, the only period where the rate
of initiation is sharply lower than would be expected from the dividend premium is the early
1970s. The most obvious explanation is the Nixon dividend controls (1971-1974).
Controlling for characteristics does tend to reduce the effect of the dividend premium
among the other samples, however. That characteristics would help to explain omissions might
be expected given that they are known to be associated with characteristics such as low
profitability. Nevertheless, the dividend premium approaches statistical significance even in this
sample, and remains statistically significant in the new list sample.
The methodology in Table 8 is also useful for confirming once again that our empirical
results, like our theory, are mainly about the decision whether to pay dividends, not how much to
pay. That is, we have constructed a time series of the raw rate of dividend increases and found
that it has a significant positive correlation with the dividend premium (unreported), but that this
result comes entirely from changing characteristics like profitability. When these characteristics
are accounted for using the two-stage procedure, there is no relationship between the residual
propensity to increase dividends and the dividend premium (unreported).
Finally, we can also ask whether the average annual prediction errors from Table 8
predict the relative returns of payers and nonpayers. In other words, whether the noncharacteristics-related variation in dividend policy, which is presumably more closely related to
catering, also predicts returns. We find that the average prediction errors indeed have comparable

18

To be fully consistent with the theory, this interpretation of the 1980s and 1990s also involves low-frequency
measurement error in the dividend premium. If the true dividend premium was negative, then as mentioned before,
the low post-1980 correlation with the raw level of initiations is not problematic for the theory. The fact that
controlling for characteristics improves the correlation suggests that the true dividend premium may have been
positive over some of this period, but that we measure it with low-frequency error. For example, if nonpayers
typically have greater intangible assets, their market-to-books could be naturally higher than those of payers, but
higher-frequency variation in the dividend premium might still be informative about demand for dividends.

34

or greater predictive power than the raw dividend payment measures (unreported). This indicates
that the predictability results also do not work through firm characteristics.
E.

Time-varying contracting problems
Another class of alternative explanations involves time-varying contracting problems,

such as adverse selection or agency. With regard to adverse selection, it is possible that when
nonpayers trade at a low value, this is a particularly important time for them to signal their
investment opportunities. Initiating dividends serves as a signal in the models of Bhattacharya
(1979), Hakansson (1982), John and Williams (1985), and Miller and Rock (1985). Once again,
the natural way to evaluate this hypothesis is to control for the level of nonpayer market-to-book
directly, and examine whether the dividend premium has residual explanatory power. The results
in Table 7 show that it does. Moreover, it is hard to imagine a rational expectations equilibrium
model in which dividend policy choices predict future returns, or would have any natural reason
to be correlated with the CU dividend premium.
Agency costs may also vary over time, with high agency costs requiring dividend
payments. For example, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2000) find that
dividend policy varies across countries according to the degree of investor protection. If the
dividend premium were a simple time trend, this could be a more compelling explanation for our
results. As it stands, this explanation requires governance to improve briefly in the late 1960s,
deteriorate, and then improve again. Of course, it is possible that variation in investment
opportunities and profits might affect agency costs, but this would be addressed in Table 8. Here,
one must imagine agency problems that arise independent of firm characteristics.

35

V.

On the source of demand for dividends
Process of elimination, as well as the close connection between the results and

predictions of the model, suggests that managers are catering to investor demand. Here we ask
the follow-up question: Which investors are managers catering to? Put differently, what drives
the dividend premium? These are hard questions and we offer only preliminary conclusions. The
two basic possibilities are traditional dividend clienteles or sentimental investors.
A.

Dividend clienteles
Black and Scholes (1974) suggest that uninformed demand for dividends result from

dividend clienteles, which in turn derive from such imperfections as taxes, transaction costs, or
institutional investment constraints. 19 In general, rational clienteles would be satisfied by a
supply response in the aggregate level of dividends, not the number of dividend-paying shares.
Also, if they are diversified, rational clienteles will not care about how the supply response is
distributed across firms. In fact, Marsh and Merton (1987) point out that current dividend payers,
with high financial slack and modest investment opportunities, are probably the lowest marginal
cost suppliers of dividends. These considerations suggest that if the dividend premium were
varying in response to rational clientele demands, it should have a closer connection to the level
of dividends than the number of payers. We find the opposite.
Another approach is to see if we can directly match up the dividend premium with any
plausible proxies for clienteles. A natural proxy for tax clienteles, for example, is the relative tax
advantage of dividend income versus capital gains. Figure 1 suggests that the 1986 Tax Reform
Act, which should have shrunk the anti-dividend clientele, had no visible effect on the dividend
19

Miller and Scholes (1978) propose that tax code changes could have no influence, because taxes on dividends can
be postponed indefinitely. However, Peterson, Peterson, and Ang (1985) find empirically that most investors do not
avoid taxation.

36

premium. Similarly, Hubbard and Michaely (1997) study the reaction of the CU dividend
premium to the 1986 reform. They conclude that tax-motivated clienteles do not seem to affect
that variable. As an aside, the lack of a differential reaction to the reform by payers and
nonpayers also seems inconsistent with dividend tax capitalization.
Table 7 contains a more formal test of whether firms are catering to tax clienteles. The
personal tax advantage for dividends (typically a net disadvantage) is measured as the ratio of the
after-tax income from a dollar of dividends to a dollar of long-term capital gains. That is, we take
one minus the average marginal income rate, divided by one minus the average marginal longterm capital gains rate. The tax rates in this calculation are weighted average rates across
shareholder groups as calculated by the NBER TAXSIM model. They are reported at
www.nber.org/~taxsim/mrates/mrates2.html and described by Feenberg and Coutts (1993). Table
7 shows that if anything, the initiation rate is positively related to this variable, not negatively
related, and in any case its inclusion does not much affect the dividend premium coefficient. (In
Panel C, the large t-statistic on taxes disappears when a trend is included because of trends in
both the rate at which lists pay and the tax advantage variable.)
Transaction costs also vary over time, changing the cost of homemade dividends. Perhaps
this induces changes in demand by transaction cost clienteles. Black (1976) dismisses this
argument, pointing out that there are simple institutional solutions to the problem of the small
investor’s transaction costs. However, Jones (2001) shows that transaction costs have declined
dramatically since the mid-1970s, which coincides with the reduction in the rate of initiation that
we document. 20 Jones’s Figure 3 shows the average annual one-way transaction cost for the
NYSE, or one half of the bid-ask spread plus commissions. This series is strongly positively
20

The rise of mutual funds roughly coincides with these falling transaction costs, potentially lowering an individual
investor’s cost of monetizing capital gains further still.

37

correlated with the rate of initiation, though this comes mostly from a common time trend; the
correlation between the detrended variables is not significant (unreported). More importantly, in
regressions that include both variables, the dividend premium has more statistical significance
than transaction costs in explaining the initiation rate (unreported).
Another theoretical possibility is that dividend clienteles are motivated by institutional
investment constraints. For instance, the 1974 Employee Retirement Income Security Act may
have increased the pro-dividend clientele by creating a vague “prudent man” rule for pension
funds. The law was revised in 1979 to allow pension funds to provide venture capital, thus
erasing any doubt that nonpayers were acceptable investments and perhaps shrinking the
dividend clientele. Figure 2 could be broadly consistent with these institutional shifts. However,
the dividend premium seems to anticipate the law, peaking in 1972 and beginning its drop in
1977. Perhaps ERISA is part of the story in this period, but we are not aware of investment
constraints that could explain the dividend premium over the 1960s and early 1970s.
The rational clientele explanations for the dividend premium also face some difficulty
accounting for the magnitude of the return predictability effects. Even under limited arbitrage, in
equilibrium the marginal clientele investor should still be indifferent to leaving the clientele or
taking advantage of the mispricing that his colleagues presumably induce. But the marginal
clientele investor’s savings on transaction costs or taxes, for example, seem unlikely to be worth
a tradeoff of nine percentage points per year in pre-tax expected returns.
B.

Sentiment for dividends
For these reasons we conclude that rational dividend clienteles are unlikely to be driving

the dividend premium. This leaves time-varying sentiment between payers and nonpayers as the
remaining explanation. Of course, economists are just beginning to understand sentiment, so

38

such hypotheses are harder to reject by construction. Here we attempt to provide some rejectable
tests for the sentiment-based view of demand for dividends.
We outlined two specific sentiment mechanisms earlier in the paper. One was based on
the bird-in-the-hand fallacy and time-varying risk aversion. It proposes that when investors are
highly tolerant of risk, they stray more from the perceived safety of dividend-paying stocks.
Another story involves time-varying investor perceptions of growth opportunities. It holds that
uninformed or unsophisticated investors use dividend policy to infer a firm’s investment plans.
From a zero-payout policy (controlling for profitability), they tend to infer that the firm wants to
reinvest and grow. And so when they believe the outlook for growth stocks is generally good,
they favor nonpayers. When they feel it is bad, they favor payers. Either sentiment mechanism
seems consistent with most of our results, including return predictability.
As a first test of these mechanisms, we compare the closed-end fund discount with the
dividend premium. Zweig (1973) and Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991) view the closed-end fund
discount as a measure of general investor sentiment. Whether it reflects risk tolerance,
expectations for growth stocks, or both, is far from clear. A positive correlation between the
closed-end fund discount and the dividend premium would therefore be consistent with both
mechanisms outlined above, and would not be predicted by any of the alternative explanations
we have considered. We gather value-weighted discounts on closed-end stock funds for 1962
through 1993 from Neal and Wheatley (1998), for 1994 through 1998 are from
CDA/Wiesenberger, and for 1999 and 2000 from the discounts on stock funds reported in the
Wall Street Journal in the turn-of-the-year issues.

39

Figure 3 shows the relationship between the dividend premium and the closed-end fund
discount. They are not perfectly synchronous, but they are visibly related. The correlation is 0.37
with a p-value of 0.02. This provides some initial support for the sentiment mechanisms.
To tie this back to our basic results, Table 9 uses the closed-end fund discount as an
instrumental variable for the dividend premium. The table also uses lagged capital gains and
future relative returns on payers and nonpayers as instruments. The logic for using future relative
returns is that they are arguably a purer (though perhaps noisier) measure of sentiment for
dividends than the dividend premium. Recent capital gains on the market could capture either of
the mechanisms outlined above – after a crash, unsophisticated investors may tend more toward
the “bird in the hand” rationale, and also view general growth opportunities as bleak. 21
Table 9 shows that the instrumental variables coefficients are, in general, about as
statistically and economically significant as the basic OLS coefficients. For the specification that
uses future returns as an instrument, this merely puts the earlier predictability results in units of
the dividend premium. For the other specifications, the results have a more novel value. At a
minimum, they confirm that that the specific component of the dividend premium associated
with these variables helps to explain rates of initiation and omission, thus casting doubt on
generic “omitted third factor” alternative explanations. To the extent that the instruments pick up
investor sentiment, the results provide affirmative support for a sentiment interpretation.

VI.

Conclusion
We develop a catering theory of dividends that focuses on the market efficiency

assumption of the M&M dividend irrelevance proof. It adds to the collection of theories of

21

We thank Lubos Pastor for suggesting that we use past capital gains in this manner.

40

dividends that relax other specific assumptions of the proof. The essence of catering is that
managers give investors what they want. In the setting of dividends, catering implies that
managers will tend to initiate dividends when investors put a relatively high stock price on
dividend payers, and tend to omit dividends when investors prefer nonpayers. A simple model
formalizes the key tradeoffs between maximizing fundamental value and catering, and offers
testable time-series and cross-sectional predictions.
Our empirical work focuses on the central time-series prediction of the model: a positive
relationship between the rates of dividend initiation and omission and the difference between the
prevailing stock prices of payers and nonpayers. We test this relationship using four measures of
investor demand for payers. The aggregate initiation rate is significantly positively related to all
four (however, in one case this does not amount to more than a common trend). One proxy for
investor demand for payers, the difference between the average market-to-book ratios of payers
and nonpayers – the “dividend premium” – explains a statistically impressive three-fifths of the
annual variation in the rate of initiation. In addition, the rate of omission is significantly
negatively related to two of the four proxies for investor demand. After reviewing other
possibilities, we conclude that catering is the most natural explanation.
We then inquire about the source of time-varying demand for dividends. We do not find
strong evidence for a traditional dividend clientele. Instead, investor sentiment appears to affect
the demand for dividends. This is suggested in the connection between the closed-end fund
discount and the dividend premium, and in instrumental variables estimates of the effect of the
dividend premium on dividend payment. In Baker and Wurgler (2002b), we review academic
histories of the capital markets and historical financial news articles to construct a detailed
timeline of how investor attitudes toward dividends have changed over time.

41

Appendix
This appendix describes the simulations that generate the bias-adjusted coefficients and
p-values reported in Table 6. As discussed by Stambaugh (1999), a small-sample bias arises
when the explanatory variable is persistent and there is a contemporaneous correlation between
innovations in the explanatory variable and stock returns. For example, in the following system
Rt = a + bX t −1 + ut

(A1)

X t = c + dX t−1 + v t ,

(A2)

the bias is equal to

E[ bˆ − b] =

σ uv
σ v2

E[ dˆ − d ] ,

(A3)

where the hats represent OLS estimates. Kendall (1954) shows the OLS estimate of d has a
negative bias. The bias for OLS b is therefore of the opposite sign to the sign of the covariance
between innovations in dividend policy and returns.
The sign of this covariance is not obvious a priori (unlike when the predictor is a scaledprice variable). To address the potential for bias and conduct inference, we use a bootstrap
estimation technique. The approach is identical to Baker and Stein (2002) and is similar to that
used in Vuolteenaho (2001), Kothari and Shanken (1997), Stambaugh (1999), and Ang and
Bekaert (2001). For each regression in Table 6, we perform two sets of simulations.
The first set generates a bias-adjusted point estimate. We simulate (A1) and (A2)
recursively starting with X0 , using the OLS coefficient estimates, and drawing with replacement
from the empirical distribution of the errors u and v. We throw out the first 100 draws (to draw
from the unconditional distribution of X), then draw an additional N observations, where N is the
size of the original sample. (For the cumulative three-year regressions, the number of additional

42

draws is one third the size of the original sample, since it contains overlapping returns.) With
each simulated sample, we re-estimate (A1). This gives us a set of coefficients b* . The biasadjusted coefficient BA reported in Table 6 subtracts the bootstrap bias estimate (the mean of b*
minus the OLS b) from the OLS b.
In the second set of simulations, we redo everything as above under the null hypothesis of
no predictability – that is, imposing b equals zero. This gives us a second set of coefficients b** .
With these in hand, we can determine the probability of observing an estimate as large as the
OLS b by chance, given the true b = 0. These are the p-values in Table 6.

43

References
Allen, Franklin, Antonio E. Bernardo, and Ivo Welch, 2000, A theory of dividends based on tax
clienteles, Journal of Finance 55, 2499-2536.
Allen, Franklin, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Payout policy, University of Pennsylvania working
paper.
Alti, Ashiq, Hwang, Lee-Seok, and Mark A. Trombley, 2002, Arbitrage risk and the book-tomarket mispricing, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, 2001, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, NBER working
paper #8207.
Asquith, Paul, and David W. Mullins, Jr., 1983, The impact of initiating dividend payments on
shareholders’ wealth, Journal of Business 56, 77-96.
Baker, Malcolm, and Serkan Savasoglu, 2002, Limited arbitrage in mergers and acquisitions,
Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, Market liquidity as a sentiment indicator, Harvard
University working paper.
Baker, Malcolm, Stein, Jeremy C., and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2001, When does the market matter?
Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Harvard University working
paper.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002a, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of
Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Baker, Malcolm and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002b, Why are dividends disappearing? An empirical
analysis, Harvard University working paper.
Baker, Malcolm, Robin Greenwood, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, The maturity of debt issues and
predictable variation in bond returns, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2002, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics
(forthcoming).
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, A model of investor
sentiment, Journal of Financial Economics 49, 307-343.
Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2001, Comovement, University of
Chicago working paper.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely, and Richard Thaler, 1997, Do changes in dividends signal the
future or the past?, Journal of Finance 52, 1007-1034.

44

Black, Fischer, and Myron S. Scholes, 1974, The effects of dividend yield and dividend policy
on common stock prices and returns, Journal of Financial Economics 1, 1-22.
Black, Fischer, 1976, The dividend puzzle, Journal of Portfolio Management, 5-8.
Blanchard, Olivier, Chanyong Rhee, and Lawrence Summers, 1990, The stock market, profit,
and investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 115-136.
Boehme, Rodney D., and Sorin M. Sorescu, 2002, The long-run performance following dividend
initiations and resumptions: Underreaction or product of chance?, Journal of Finance 57,
871-900.
Brav, Alon, and J. B. Heaton, 1998, Did ERISA's prudent man rule change the pricing of
dividend omitting firms?, Duke University working paper.
Brown, Stephen, and Jerold Warner, 1980, Measuring security price performance, Journal of
Financial Economics 8, 205-258.
Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual
stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
Finance 56, 1-44.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1997, The Econometrics of
Financial Markets, (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2002, Breadth of ownership and stock
returns, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Cooper, Michael J., Orlin Dimitrov, and P. Raghavendra Rau, 2001, A rose.com by any other
name, Journal of Finance 56, 2371-2388.
Daniel, Kent, Hirshleifer, David, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1998, Investor psychology and
security market under- and overreactions, Journal of Finance 53, 1839-85.
D’Avolio, Gene, 2002, The market for borrowing stock, Journal of Financial Economics
(forthcoming).
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas J. Skinner, 1996, Dividend signaling and the
disappearance of sustained earnings growth, Journal of Finance 40, 341-371.
DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmann, 1990,
Noise trader risk in financial markets, Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-738.
Del Guercio, Diane, 1996, The distorting effect of the prudent-man laws on institutional equity
investments, Journal of Financial Economics 40, 31-62.
Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending, shorting,
and pricing, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Eades, Kenneth M., Patrick J. Hess, and E. Han Kim, 1994, Time-series variation in dividend
pricing, Journal of Finance 49, 1617-1638.

45

Fama, Eugene F., and Harvey Babiak, 1968, Dividend policy: An empirical analysis, Journal of
the American Statistical Association 53, 1132-1161.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm
characteristics or lower propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-44.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Elizabeth Coutts, 1993, An introduction to the Taxsim model, Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 12, 189-194.
Geczy, Christopher, David K. Musto, and Adam Reed, 2002, Stocks are special too: An analysis
of the equity lending market, Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Gordon, Myron J., 1959, Dividends, earnings, and stock prices, Review of Economics and
Statistics 41, 99-105.
Graham, Benjamin, and David L. Dodd, 1951, Security Analysis: Principles and Techniques
(McGraw-Hill, New York, NY).
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 2001, The theory and practice of corporate finance:
Evidence from the field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187-244.
Greenwood, Robin, 2001, Large events and limited arbitrage: Evidence from a Japanese stock
index redefinition, Harvard University working paper.
Greenwood, Robin, and Nathan Sosner, 2001, Where do betas come from?, Harvard University
working paper.
Grullon, Gustavo, and Roni Michaely, 2002, Dividends, share repurchases, and the substitution
hypothesis, Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Hakansson, Nils H., 1982, To pay or not to pay dividends, Journal of Finance 37, 415-428.
Healy, Paul M., and Krishna G. Palepu, 1988, Earnings information conveyed by dividend
initiations and omissions, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 149-176.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A unified theory of underreaction, momentum
trading and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Hubbard, Jeff, and Roni Michaely, 1997, Do investors ignore dividend taxation? A
reexamination of the Citizens Utilities case, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 32, 117-135.
Hyman, Leonard, 1988, America’s Electric Utilities: Past, Present, and Future (Arlington, VA:
Public Utility Reports).
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers,
American Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jenter, Dirk, 2001, “Managerial portfolio decisions and market timing,” Harvard University
working paper.

46

John, Kose, and Joseph Williams, 1985, Dividends, dilution, and taxes: A signaling equilibrium,
Journal of Finance 40, 1053-1070.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, 1979, Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
risk, Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kendall, M. G., 1954, Note on bias in estimation of auto-correlation, Biometrika 41, 403-404.
Kothari, S. P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected market
returns: A time series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 169-203.
Lamont, Owen A., and Charles M. Jones, 2002, Short sale constraints and stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
tech-stock carve-outs, University of Chicago working paper.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 2000, Agency
problems and dividend policies around the world, Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.
Lee, Charles M., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the closedend fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75-110.
Lintner, John, 1956, The distribution of incomes among corporations among dividends, retained
earnings, and taxes, American Economic Review 46, 97-113.
Long, John B., 1978, The market valuation of cash dividends: A case to consider, Journal of
Financial Economics 6, 235-264.
Malkiel, Burton G., 1999, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, (Norton, New York, NY).
Marsh, Terry A., and Robert C. Merton, 1987, Dividend behavior for the aggregate stock market,
Journal of Business 60, 1-40.
Mendenhall, Richard R., 2002, Post-earnings announcement drift and arbitrage risk, Journal of
Business (forthcoming).
Miller, Merton H., and Franco Modigliani, 1961, Dividend policy, growth and the valuation of
shares, Journal of Business 34, 411-433.
Miller, Merton H., and Kevin Rock, 1985, Dividend policy under asymmetric information,
Journal of Finance 40, 1031-1051.
Miller, Merton H., and Myron Scholes, 1978, Dividends and taxes, Journal of Financial
Economics 6, 333-364.
Mitchell, Mark, and Todd C. Pulvino, 2001, Characteristics of risk and return in risk arbitrage,
Journal of Finance 56, 2135-2176.
Mitchell, Mark, Todd C. Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2002, Limited arbitrage in equity markets,
Journal of Finance 57, 551-584.

47

Morck, Randall, Robert Vishny, and Andrei Shleifer, 1990, The stock market and investment: Is
the market a sideshow?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1990, 157-215.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, 2002, Thinking through categories, MIT working paper.
Myers, Stewart, 1984, The capital structure puzzle, Journal of Finance 39, 575-592.
Myers, Stewart, and Nicholas Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when
firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13,
187-221.
Neal, Robert, and Simon M. Wheatley, 1998, Do measures of investor sentiment predict
returns ?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33, 523-547.
Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite,
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55,
703-708.
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2002a, DotCom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock
prices, Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Ofek, Eli, and Matthew Richardson, 2002b, The valuation and market rationality of internet
stock prices, NYU working paper.
Peterson, Pamela, David Peterson, and James Ang, 1985, Direct evidence on the marginal rate of
taxation on dividend income, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 267-82.
Polk, Christopher, and Paola Sapienza, 2001, The real effects of investor sentiment,
Northwestern University working paper.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, 1996, Costly arbitrage: Evidence from closed-end funds, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111, 1135-1152.
Pontiff, Jeffrey, and Michael J. Schill, 2001, Long-run seasoned equity offering returns: Data
snooping, model misspecification, or mispricing? A costly arbitrage approach, University
of Washington working paper.
Poterba, James M., 1986, The market valuation of cash dividends: The Citizens Utilities case
reconsidered, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 395-405.
Rau, P. Raghavendra, Ajay Patel, Igor Osobov, Ajay Korana, and Michael J. Cooper, 2001, The
game of the name: Value changes accompanying dot.com additions and deletions, Purdue
University working paper.
Rosch, Eleanor, 1978, Principles of categorization, in Eleanor Rosch and Barbara B. Lloyd, eds.:
Cognition and Categorization (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ).
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Meir Statman, 1984, Explaining investor preference for cash dividends,
Journal of Financial Economics 13, 253-282.

48

Shiller, Robert J., 1984, Stock prices and social dynamics, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 2, 457-498.
Shiller, Robert J., 1989, Market Volatility, (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Shiller, Robert J., 2000, Irrational Exuberance, (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Equilibrium short horizons of investors and firms,
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 80, 148-153.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52,
35-55.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 2002, Stock market driven acquisitions, Harvard
University working paper.
Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375421.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1989, Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655-669.
Stein, Jeremy C., 1996, Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world, Journal of Business 69,
429-455.
Thaler, Richard H., 1980, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice, Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 1, 39-60.
Thaler, Richard H., 1983, Using mental accounting in a theory of consumer behavior, Cornell
University working paper.
Thaler, Richard H., and Hersh M. Shefrin, 1981, An economic theory of self-control, Journal of
Political Economy 89, 392-406.
Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2000, Understanding the aggregate book-to-market ratio and its
implications to current equity-premium expectations, Harvard University working paper.
Watts, Ross, 1973, The information content of dividends, Journal of Business 46, 191-211.
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Katia Zhuravskaya, 2002, Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for
stocks?, Journal of Business 75, 583-608.
Zweig, Martin E., 1973, An investor expectations stock price predictive model using closed-end
fund premiums, Journal of Finance 28, 67-87.

49

Figure 1. Valuation of dividend payers and nonpayers and the dividend premium, 1962-2000. The average
market-to-book ratio for dividend payers and nonpayers and the dividend premium (the log difference in average
market-to-book ratios). A firm is defined as a dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per share by the ex
date (Item 26). The market-to-book ratio is the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book value. Market value
is equal to market equity at calendar year end (Item 24 times Item 25) plus book debt (Item 6 minus book equity).
Book equity is defined as stockholders’ equity (generally Item 216, with exceptions as noted in the text) minus
preferred stock (generally Item 10, with exceptions as noted in the text) plus deferred taxes and investment tax
credits (Item 35) and post retirement assets (Item 330). The average market-to-book ratios are constructed by valueweighting (by book value) across dividend payers and nonpayers and are plotted in Panel A. Panel B plots the log
difference between the market-to-book ratio of payers and nonpayers.
Panel A. Average market-to-book ratio of dividend payers (dash) and nonpayers (solid)
3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

1977

1978

1976

1975

1974

1973

1972

1971

1970

1969

1968

1967

1966

1965

1964

1963

0.00

1962

0.50

Panel B. The dividend premium %
40

30

20

-10

-20

-30

-40

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

1972

1971

1970

1969

1968

1967

1966

1965

1964

1963

0

1962

10

Figure 2. The dividend premium and the rate of dividend initiation, 1962-2000. The log difference in the
market-to-book ratio of dividend payers and nonpayers (the dividend premium) and one-year-ahead dividend
initiations. A firm is defined as a dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per share by the ex date (Item
26). Panel A plots the dividend premium against the raw initiation rate Initiate in t+1, defined as the number of new
dividend payers at time t+ 1 among surviving nonpayers from t. Panel B plots the dividend premium against the
~
estimated propensity to initiate PT I in t+1 (the rate of initiation controlling for prevailing firm characteristics in
t+1). The propensity to initiate is estimated following Fama and French (2001). First, we estimate a set of annual
Fama-MacBeth logit regressions of dividend payment on firm characteristics over the sample of surviving
nonpayers, using as firm characteristics the NYSE market capitalization percentile NYP, the market-to-book ratio
M/B, asset growth dA/A, and profitability E/A. Second, we define the propensity to initiate as the average annual
prediction error (actual initiation rate minus predicted rate) of these regressions.
Panel A. Initiate (solid – right axis) and the dividend premium
40

18

16

30

14
20

12
10

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

1968

1966

1964

1962

10
0

8

-10
6

-20
4

-30

2

-40

0

~

Panel B. Propensity to initiate ( PT I ) (solid – right axis) and the dividend premium
40

13

30
8
20

10
3

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

1968

1966

1964

1962

0

-2
-10

-20
-7
-30

-40

-12

Figure 3. The dividend premium and the closed-end fund discount. The log difference in the market-to-book
ratio of dividend payers and nonpayers (the dividend premium) and the closed-end fund discount. The valueweighted closed-end fund discount uses data on net asset values and market prices for general equity and convertible
funds from Simon and Wheatley (1997) for 1962 to 1993, from CDA/Wiesenberger for 1994 to 1998, and from the
Wall Street Journal for 1999 to 2000. The dividend premium (dash – left axis) is plotted against the
contemporaneous closed end fund discount (solid – right axis).
40

30

25

30

20
20

15
10
10
2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

1970

1968

1966

1964

1962

0
5

-10
0

-20
-5

-30

-40

-10

-15

Table 1. Summary measures of dividend payment, 1962-2000. Dividend payers, nonpayers, and the rates at
which subsamples pay dividends. A firm is defined as a dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per share
by the ex date (Item 26). A firm is defined as a new dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per share by
the ex date at time t and zero dividends per share by the ex date at time t-1. A firm is defined as an old payer at time
t if it has positive dividends per share by the ex date at time t and positive dividends per share by the ex date at time
t-1. A firm is defined as a new list payer if it has positive dividends per share by the ex date at time t and is not in the
sample at time t-1. A firm is defined as a nonpayer at time t if it does not have positive dividends per share by the ex
date. New nonpayers are firms who were payers at time t -1 but not at t. Old nonpayers a firms who were nonpayers
in both t-1 and t. New list nonpayers are nonpayers at t who were not in the sample at t -1. The initiation rate Initiate
expresses payers as a percentage of surviving nonpayers from t-1. The rate at which firms continue paying dividends
Continue expresses payers as a percentage of surviving payers from t-1. The rate at which lists pay Listpay expresses
payers as a percentage of new lists at t.
Payers
Year
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Mean
SD

Nonpayers

Payment rates %

Total

New

Old

List

Total

New

Old

List

Initiate

Continue

Listpay

529
585
681
821
888
954
1,018
1,048
1,030
1,281
1,627
1,719
1,802
1,878
1,944
1,956
1,925
1,854
1,738
1,631
1,523
1,450
1,378
1,270
1,214
1,185
1,162
1,148
1,128
1,140
1,148
1,163
1,165
1,153
1,101
1,042
975
871
1,247
402

21
17
24
16
13
11
14
10
20
43
97
130
118
167
146
96
64
58
48
37
40
59
57
39
49
92
83
61
51
62
60
61
66
44
38
37
27
30
55
38

467
519
565
659
793
849
908
946
951
953
1,221
1,535
1,593
1,670
1,756
1,747
1,761
1,735
1,634
1,545
1,434
1,346
1,282
1,176
1,112
1,057
1,041
1,053
1,052
1,036
1,043
1,059
1,068
1,061
1,027
978
916
824
1,119
379

41
49
92
146
82
94
96
92
59
285
309
54
91
41
42
113
100
61
56
49
49
45
39
55
53
36
38
34
25
42
45
43
31
48
36
27
32
17
73
63

149
154
167
238
288
361
438
554
639
862
1,127
1,044
1,052
941
821
856
1,046
1,137
1,417
1,621
1,929
2,111
2,133
2,373
2,651
2,563
2,432
2,403
2,497
2,674
3,049
3,286
3,416
3,774
3,784
3,501
3,320
3,042
1,693
1,180

8
6
3
5
14
19
16
54
75
52
22
44
65
58
30
53
45
68
90
78
100
50
42
73
61
50
59
49
59
56
55
55
31
40
52
35
31
50
45
24

123
121
119
145
216
263
330
406
502
568
719
908
853
813
721
651
708
882
962
1,210
1,380
1,605
1,698
1,744
1,971
2,123
2,036
2,011
2,015
2,085
2,342
2,634
2,772
2,924
3,110
2,997
2,806
2,587
1,336
974

18
27
45
88
58
79
92
94
62
242
386
92
134
70
70
152
293
187
365
333
449
456
393
556
619
390
337
343
423
533
652
597
613
810
622
469
483
405
312
219

14.6
12.3
16.8
9.9
5.7
4.0
4.1
2.4
3.8
7.0
11.9
12.5
12.2
17.0
16.8
12.9
8.3
6.2
4.8
3.0
2.8
3.5
3.2
2.2
2.4
4.2
3.9
2.9
2.5
2.9
2.5
2.3
2.3
1.5
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.1
6.1
5.0

98.3
98.9
99.5
99.2
98.3
97.8
98.3
94.6
92.7
94.8
98.2
97.2
96.1
96.6
98.3
97.1
97.5
96.2
94.8
95.2
93.5
96.4
96.8
94.2
94.8
95.5
94.6
95.6
94.7
94.9
95.0
95.1
97.2
96.4
95.2
96.5
96.7
94.3
96.2
1.7

69.5
64.5
67.2
62.4
58.6
54.3
51.1
49.5
48.8
54.1
44.5
37.0
40.4
36.9
37.5
42.6
25.4
24.6
13.3
12.8
9.8
9.0
9.0
9.0
7.9
8.5
10.1
9.0
5.6
7.3
6.5
6.7
4.8
5.6
5.5
5.4
6.2
4.0
27.0
22.5

Table 2. The dividend premium, 1962-2000. The market valuations of dividend payers and nonpayers. A firm is
defined as a dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per share by the ex date (Item 26). The market-tobook ratio is the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book value. Market value is equal to market equity at
calendar year end (Item 24 times Item 25) plus book debt (Item 6 minus book equity). Book equity is defined as
stockholders’ equity (generally Item 216, with exceptions as noted in the text) minus preferred stock (generally Item
10, with exceptions as noted in the text) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credits (Item 35) and post retirement
assets (Item 330). The market-to-book ratio is equal-weighed (EW) and value-weighted by book value (VW) across
dividend payers and nonpayers. These ratios are calculated for the entire sample and for new lists. A firm is defined
as a new list if it is not in the sample at time t-1. The dividend premium PD-ND is the difference between the logs of
the dividend payers and nonpayers market-to-book ratios.
Payers
Total
Year
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Mean
SD

Dividend Premium (PD-ND )

Nonpayers
List

Total

List

Total

List

EW
M/B

VW
M/B

EW
M/B

VW
M/B

EW
M/B

VW
M/B

EW
M/B

VW
M/B

EW

VW

EW

VW

1.50
1.58
1.68
1.76
1.52
1.87
1.99
1.60
1.43
1.64
1.62
1.19
0.93
1.03
1.08
1.06
1.08
1.14
1.25
1.15
1.23
1.41
1.31
1.43
1.53
1.47
1.48
1.54
1.39
1.59
1.63
1.68
1.55
1.64
1.69
1.86
1.79
1.68
1.65
1.48
0.26

1.55
1.70
1.79
1.80
1.50
1.66
1.69
1.47
1.41
1.50
1.59
1.32
1.01
1.12
1.16
1.05
1.03
1.04
1.12
1.01
1.05
1.14
1.13
1.21
1.29
1.28
1.24
1.32
1.26
1.40
1.41
1.43
1.40
1.55
1.67
1.89
2.12
2.05
1.90
1.42
0.30

1.50
1.71
2.09
1.60
1.35
2.34
2.35
1.84
1.51
2.14
1.70
1.27
1.11
0.90
1.37
1.24
1.13
1.33
1.87
1.46
1.37
1.76
1.72
1.64
1.93
1.85
1.47
1.51
1.79
1.31
2.03
1.74
1.48
1.83
2.05
1.83
1.98
1.40
2.18
1.66
0.35

1.36
1.49
2.10
1.47
1.20
1.83
2.89
1.67
1.67
2.01
1.74
1.27
0.91
0.86
1.11
1.23
1.48
0.92
1.20
1.11
1.32
1.21
1.47
0.91
1.44
1.53
1.38
1.25
1.80
1.24
1.34
1.38
1.47
1.86
1.88
1.52
2.21
1.34
1.48
1.48
0.40

1.19
1.30
1.37
1.61
1.52
2.36
2.73
1.78
1.38
1.48
1.48
1.16
0.91
1.05
1.13
1.18
1.34
1.75
2.33
1.87
2.03
2.31
1.79
2.00
2.27
2.03
1.94
1.97
1.76
2.32
2.23
2.33
2.04
2.57
2.41
2.35
2.22
3.54
2.26
1.88
0.55

1.10
1.23
1.26
1.43
1.43
1.98
2.03
1.52
1.20
1.25
1.22
1.02
0.89
0.95
0.99
1.00
1.08
1.19
1.40
1.29
1.24
1.48
1.28
1.36
1.39
1.38
1.35
1.44
1.27
1.47
1.49
1.60
1.51
1.80
1.84
1.99
2.09
2.86
2.33
1.45
0.41

1.25
1.88
1.46
1.74
1.55
3.42
3.32
1.90
1.77
2.23
1.84
1.46
1.08
1.40
1.69
1.32
1.63
2.71
3.86
2.69
3.14
3.18
2.29
3.07
3.61
2.83
3.04
3.08
2.27
3.45
2.82
2.96
2.59
3.64
3.03
3.02
3.57
7.97
3.03
2.64
1.19

1.12
1.71
1.41
1.52
1.47
2.65
2.45
1.70
1.64
1.90
1.47
1.27
0.99
1.05
1.06
1.09
1.24
1.61
1.69
1.88
2.05
1.85
1.41
1.82
1.74
1.55
1.48
1.61
1.19
1.50
1.72
1.82
1.82
2.02
2.09
2.22
2.17
3.41
1.69
1.69
0.47

22.9
19.4
20.1
8.8
0.2
-23.5
-31.7
-10.4
3.1
10.3
9.4
3.2
2.0
-2.5
-4.2
-10.7
-22.1
-43.2
-61.9
-48.2
-50.1
-49.3
-31.7
-33.2
-39.7
-32.4
-27.2
-24.9
-23.5
-37.8
-31.1
-33.1
-27.6
-44.7
-35.5
-22.9
-21.8
-74.9
-31.5
-21.1
23.7

34.9
32.9
35.6
22.6
5.4
-17.2
-18.8
-3.8
16.0
18.2
26.6
25.9
13.2
15.6
15.6
4.6
-5.0
-14.3
-22.1
-24.9
-16.9
-26.2
-12.5
-11.0
-7.3
-7.8
-7.8
-8.7
-1.0
-4.6
-5.3
-11.5
-7.5
-15.1
-9.4
-4.8
1.4
-33.2
-20.6
-0.7
18.0

18.6
-9.7
35.6
-8.5
-14.3
-38.0
-34.4
-3.4
-15.6
-4.0
-8.3
-14.1
3.1
-44.6
-20.5
-6.3
-36.5
-71.6
-72.5
-61.2
-82.6
-59.1
-28.6
-62.8
-63.0
-42.4
-72.8
-71.2
-23.5
-96.8
-32.8
-53.2
-55.7
-68.6
-39.0
-50.1
-59.0
-173.6
-33.1
-40.4
36.7

19.8
-13.8
40.0
-3.1
-20.2
-36.8
16.8
-2.1
1.4
5.6
17.0
-0.7
-7.6
-19.9
4.2
12.0
17.6
-55.6
-34.2
-53.3
-44.1
-42.9
3.5
-68.6
-18.5
-1.4
-7.1
-25.3
41.4
-19.4
-25.1
-27.4
-21.7
-8.0
-10.7
-38.0
1.9
-93.0
-13.3
-13.6
27.8

Table 3. The Citizens Utilities dividend premium and market reactions to dividend initiations, 1962-2000. The
Citizens Utilities (CU) price ratio is the log of the ratio of the annual average cash dividend class share price to the
annual average stock dividend class share price. The 1962 through 1972 data are from Long (1978) and the 1973
through 1989 data are from CRSP. A firm is defined as a new dividend payer at time t if it has positive dividends per
share by the ex date (Item 26) at time t and zero dividends per share by the ex date at time t -1. We take the first
dividend declaration date (DCLRDT) from CRSP in the twelve month period prior to the fiscal year ending in t. We
calculate the sum of the differences between the firm return (RET) and the CRSP value-weighted market return
(VWRETD) for a three-day window [-1, +1] around the declaration date. The announcement effect A scales this
return by the standard deviation of the excess returns between 120 calendar days and five trading days before the
declaration date. The test statistic from Campbell, Lo, and Mackinlay (1997, equation 4.4.24) is shown in braces and
tests the null hypothesis of zero average price reaction in year t.
CU Dividend
Premium
Year
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Mean
SD

PCU
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.95
0.97
0.97
1.00
0.96
0.93
0.96
0.99
0.96
0.93
0.91
0.90
0.89
0.87
0.92
0.93
0.81
0.89
0.93
1.00
0.92
0.86
0.84
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
0.94
0.05

Initiation Announcement Effect
N
1
17
21
21
10
10
7
10
8
19
39
112
94
128
128
114
68
43
35
33
22
25
47
34
31
50
65
50
46
31
46
42
51
44
18
20
19
17
10
41
33

Excess Return
5.40
1.94
1.70
1.43
-0.84
0.18
2.20
1.82
5.46
2.08
2.17
3.45
5.92
5.21
4.97
4.28
4.02
3.62
3.50
3.57
3.93
3.49
2.13
1.25
3.17
1.38
2.11
3.68
5.85
5.20
2.53
0.55
0.94
1.81
6.24
2.35
0.93
2.38
4.78
2.99
1.75

A
1.75
0.47
0.41
0.40
-0.23
0.06
0.54
0.37
0.85
0.37
0.51
0.70
0.87
0.77
1.05
1.12
0.79
0.70
0.58
0.89
0.62
0.85
0.42
0.35
0.51
0.16
0.48
0.78
0.74
0.63
0.50
0.06
0.21
0.39
0.86
0.52
0.20
0.28
0.81
0.57
0.35

[t-stat]
[1.73]
[1.92]
[1.85]
[1.81]
[-0.73]
[0.19]
[1.40]
[1.16]
[2.37]
[1.60]
[3.14]
[7.33]
[8.34]
[8.59]
[11.75]
[11.82]
[6.43]
[4.53]
[3.38]
[5.08]
[2.89]
[4.24]
[2.85]
[2.04]
[2.80]
[1.15]
[3.86]
[5.50]
[4.96]
[3.50]
[3.39]
[0.41]
[1.50]
[2.58]
[3.61]
[2.33]
[0.87]
[1.15]
[2.54]
[3.48]
[2.87]

Table 4. Statistics for demand for dividend measures, 1962-2000. The first column shows the autocorrelation
coefficient, the second column shows a Dickey-Fuller test, and the remaining columns show the correlations among
the variables. The dividend premium PD-ND is the difference between the logs of the EW and VW market-to-book
ratios for dividend payers and nonpayers. The Citizens Utilities dividend premium PCU is the log of the ratio of the
annual average cash dividend class share price to the annual average stock dividend class share price. The initiation
announcement effect A is the average standardized excess return in a three-day window [-1, +1] around the first
declaration dates by new dividend payers. Future relative returns rDt+1 – rNDt+1 is the difference in real returns for
value-weighted indexes of dividend payers and nonpayers in year t+1. Future relative returns RDt+3 – RNDt+3 is the
cumulative difference in future returns from year t+1 through t+3. P-values are in brackets.
Dividend premium

VW Pt

EW Pt

Pt

Future returns

ρ

Unit
Root

VW

0.82

-1.98

1.00

[0.00]

[0.29]

0.82

-1.58

0.95

[0.00]

[0.49]

[0.00]

0.61

-2.00

0.60

0.63

[0.00]

[0.28]

[0.00]

[0.00]

0.40

-5.18

0.25

0.18

-0.20

[0.02]

[0.00]

[0.13]

[0.27]

[0.31]

0.10

-5.31

-0.21

-0.24

-0.28

0.16

[0.54]

[0.00]

[0.20]

[0.15]

[0.14]

[0.35]

0.70

-2.52

-0.54

-0.47

-0.28

-0.19

0.63

[0.00]

[0.11]

[0.00]

[0.00]

[0.15]

[0.27]

[0.00]

EW

Pt

CU

At

rDt+1 –
rNDt+1

RDt+3 –
RNDt+3

D − ND

D − ND

1.00

CU

At
rDt+1 – rNDt+1
RDt+3 – RNDt+3

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

Table 5. Dividend payment and demand for dividends: Basic relationships, 1962-2000. Regressions of initiation
and omission rates on measures of the dividend premium. For example, the initiation rate is modeled in Panel A as:

Initiatet = a + bPt D−1− ND + cAt −1 + dPt CU
−1 + ut
The initiation rate Initiate expresses payers as a percentage of surviving nonpayers from t-1. The continuation rate
Continue expresses payers as a percentage of surviving payers from t-1. The rate at which listing firms pay Listpay
expresses payers as a percentage of new lists at t. The dividend premium PD-ND is the difference between the logs of
the EW and VW market-to-book ratios for dividend payers and nonpayers. The announcement effects A are the
average standardized excess returns in a three-day window [-1, +1] around the declaration dates of new dividend
payers. The Citizens Utilities dividend premium PCU is the log of the ratio of the annual average cash dividend class
share price to the annual average stock dividend class share price. The independent variables are standardized to
have unit variance. T-statistics use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation up to
four lags.
(1)

(2)

(3)
Panel A: Initiatet

(4)

(5)

D − ND

VW Pt −1

3.90
[6.56]

3.80
[10.74]

D − ND

EW Pt −1

3.63
[5.10]

CU

Pt − 1

1.70
[2.21]

At-1
N
R2

38
0.60

38
0.52

28
0.11
Panel B: Continuet

2.15
[2.51]
38
0.18

-0.52
[-0.82]
1.06
[1.52]
28
0.70

D − ND

VW Pt −1

0.85
[2.83]

1.00
[2.59]

D − ND

EW Pt −1

0.93
[2.96]

CU

Pt − 1

0.44
[1.02]

At-1
N
R2

38
0.26

38
0.30

28
0.06
Panel C: Listpayt

0.03
[0.09]
38
0.00

-0.25
[-0.61]
-0.24
[-0.87]
28
0.25

D − ND

VW Pt −1

16.08
[6.29]

10.11
[2.12]

D − ND

EW Pt −1

18.15
[7.12]

CU

Pt − 1

14.74
[4.68]

At-1
N
R2

38
0.51

38
0.65

28
0.47

2.98
[0.58]
38
0.02

8.16
[1.64]
-0.28
[-0.11]
28
0.63

Table 6. Dividend payment and demand for dividends: Predicting returns, 1962-2000. Univariate regressions of future excess returns of dividend payers
over nonpayers on the initiation rate, the continuation rate, and the rate at which listing firms pay. The dependent variable in Panel A is the difference in real
returns between dividend payers rD and nonpayers rND . The dependent variable in Panel B is real return of dividend payers rD . The dependent variable in Panel C
is the real return of nonpayers rND . Rt+k denotes cumulative returns from t+1 through t+k. The initiation rate Initiate expresses new payers as a percentage of
surviving nonpayers from t-1. The continuation rate Continue expresses continuing payers as a percentage of surviving payers from t-1. The rate at which listing
firms pay Listpay expresses new Compustat lists who are payers as a percentage of new Compustat lists. In the Listpay specification, a year trend is included in
the regression. The independent variables are standardized to have unit variance. We report OLS coefficients and bias-adjusted (BA) coefficients. Bootstrap pvalues represent a two-tailed test of the null hypothesis of no predictability.
Initiatet
N

OLS

BA

Continuet

[p-val]

2

R

OLS

BA

[p-val]

Listpayt (detrended)
2

R

OLS

BA

[p-val]

R2

Panel A: Relative returns
rDt+1 – rNDt+1

37

-7.68

-6.54

[0.15]

0.10

-7.68

-7.97

[0.06]

0.10

-6.13

-6.87

[0.16]

0.07

rDt+2 – rNDt+2

36

-13.27

-12.63

[0.01]

0.31

-7.90

-8.20

[0.07]

0.11

-9.47

-9.49

[0.03]

0.15

rDt+3 – rNDt+3

35

-8.81

-8.79

[0.06]

0.14

-5.90

-6.13

[0.17]

0.07

-7.08

-7.49

[0.09]

0.08

RDt+3 – RNDt+3

35

-30.54

-28.23

[0.06]

0.47

-21.62

-23.63

[0.13]

0.25

-24.88

-23.91

[0.10]

0.28

Panel B: Payer returns
rDt+1

37

-4.06

-4.39

[0.29]

0.06

-2.14

-2.41

[0.46]

0.02

-3.11

-2.15

[0.36]

0.03

rDt+2

36

-0.95

-1.67

[0.79]

0.00

0.70

0.54

[0.85]

0.00

-3.00

-2.51

[0.31]

0.03

rDt+3

35

-1.87

-2.28

[0.60]

0.01

1.12

0.92

[0.73]

0.00

-2.88

-2.85

[0.34]

0.02

RDt+3

35

-8.08

-10.71

[0.39]

0.10

-0.16

-0.23

[0.99]

0.00

-8.19

-4.83

[0.37]

0.09

Panel C: Nonpayer returns
rNDt+1

37

3.62

2.26

[0.64]

0.01

5.54

5.76

[0.38]

0.03

3.01

4.93

[0.62]

0.01

rNDt+2

36

12.32

11.02

[0.07]

0.13

8.60

8.73

[0.16]

0.07

6.47

6.83

[0.26]

0.03

rNDt+3

35

6.94

6.54

[0.31]

0.04

7.02

7.27

[0.28]

0.04

4.20

4.80

[0.47]

0.01

RNDt+3

35

22.46

17.45

[0.23]

0.18

21.47

24.81

[0.21]

0.17

16.70

19.88

[0.36]

0.09

Table 7. Dividend payment and the dividend premium: Other controls, 1962-2000. Regressions of dividend
payment rates on measures of the dividend premium, growth opportunities, the personal tax advantage of dividends
versus capital gains, and a time trend. For example, the initiation rate is modeled in Panel A as:

Initiatet = a + bPt D−1− ND + c

M
B

t −1

+d

D
+ eTaxt −1 + fYeart −1 + u t
P t −1

The initiation rate Initiate expresses payers as a percentage of surviving nonpayers from t-1. The continuation rate
Continue expresses payers as a percentage of surviving payers from t-1. The rate at which listing firms pay Listpay
expresses payers as a percentage of new lists at t. The dividend premium PD-ND is the difference between the logs of
the VW market-to-book ratios for dividend payers and nonpayers. The VW market-to-book ratio M/B is averaged
across nonpayers in Panels A, payers in Panel B, and new lists in Panel C. The VW dividend yield D/P is from
CRSP. Tax is the ratio of after-tax income from a dollar in dividends to a dollar in long-term capital gains. All
independent variables but Year are standardized to unit variance. T-statistics use standard errors that are robust to
heteroskedasticity and serial correlation up to four lags.
(1)

(2)

2.83
[5.39]
-1.92
[-2.43]

2.71
[5.42]
-1.34
[-2.54]

(3)
Panel A: Initiatet

(4)

(5)

(6)

4.19
[6.53]

3.66
[7.65]

3.90
[4.56]

1.63
[3.05]

0.95
[1.90]
1.37
[2.64]

38
0.75

0.96
[2.13]
1.74
[2.02]
0.05
[0.52]
38
0.76

0.83
[2.64]

0.56
[2.19]

0.40
[1.56]

-0.16
[-0.82]

-0.50
[-1.85]
0.68
[2.47]

38
0.38

-0.50
[-2.43]
0.43
[2.05]
-0.04
[-0.95]
38
0.39

16.35
[5.67]

10.92
[5.39]

2.60
[2.62]

1.54
[0.47]

-5.34
[-2.51]
13.99
[6.36]

38
0.52

38
0.78

-5.54
[-5.57]
1.05
[0.97]
-1.79
[-15.74]
38
0.96

D − ND

VW Pt −1

VW Nonpayer M/Bt-1

2.87
[5.42]
-1.32
[-2.32]

VW D/Pt-1
Taxt-1

1.48
[3.22]

Yeart-1
N
R2

38
0.70

38
0.77

0.79
[2.64]
0.30
[1.05]

0.57
[2.30]
0.50
[2.02]

1.72
[2.28]
0.03
[0.40]
38
38
0.77
0.70
Panel B: Continuet

D − ND

VW Pt −1

VW Payer M/Bt-1

0.45
[1.75]
0.48
[2.28]

VW D/Pt-1
Taxt-1

0.60
[2.37]

Yeart-1
N
R2

38
0.29

38
0.39

16.88
[7.75]
2.89
[0.76]

13.86
[7.31]
5.36
[2.85]

0.39
[1.62]
-0.03
[-0.78]
38
38
0.40
0.27
Panel C: Listpayt

D − ND

VW Pt −1

VW List M/Bt-1

5.85
[3.55]
3.93
[3.13]

VW D/Pt-1
Taxt-1

12.29
[6.50]

Yeart-1
N
R2

38
0.53

38
0.79

-0.19
[-0.11]
-1.67
[-7.37]
38
0.95

Table 8. Dividend payment and the dividend premium: Firm characteristics controls, 1963-2000. Two-stage regressions of dividend payment on firm
characteristics and the dividend premium. The first stage performs a set of Fama-MacBeth logit regressions of dividend payment on firm characteristics for each
of three samples: surviving payers, surviving nonpayers, and new lists.

M
dA
E 

Pr(Payerit = 1) = logit  a + bNYPit + c
+d
+ e  + uit
B it
A it
A it 

The second stage regresses the average annual prediction errors (actual policy minus predicted policy) from the logit regressions on the dividend premium. For
example, for the sample of surviving nonpayers we estimate the residual rate of initiation, or the “propensity to initiate dividends” PTI, and model it as:

~
~
D− ND
PT I t = f + gPt−1
+ v t , where PT I t ≡

1
N

∑u

i it

.

The first two rows examine the propensity to initiate PTI and so restrict the sample to surviving nonpayers. The next two rows examine the propensity to
continue PTC and so restrict the sample to surviving payers. The last two rows examine the propensity to list as a payer PTL and so restrict the sample to new
lists. The firm characteristics are the NYSE percentile NYP, the market-to-book ratio M/B (which is excluded in some specifications), asset growth dA/A, and
profitability E/A. The NYSE percentile is the percentage of firms listed on the NYSE that are equal to or smaller in terms of market capitalization
(PRC*SHROUT). The market-to-book ratio is the ratio of the market value of the firm to its book value. Market value is equal to market equity at calendar year
end (Item 24 times Item 25) plus book debt (Item 6 minus book equity). Book equity is defined as stockholders’ equity (generally Item 216) minus preferred
stock (generally Item 10) plus deferred taxes and investment tax credits (Item 35) and post retirement assets (Item 330). Asset growth is the change in assets
(Item 6) over assets. Profitability is earnings before extraordinary items (Item 18) plus interest expense (Item 15) plus income statement deferred taxes (50) over
assets. The dividend premium PD-ND is the difference between the logs of the VW market-to-book ratios for dividend payers and nonpayers. T-statistics in the
second stage regression use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation up to four lags.
D − ND

NYPt

M/Bt

dA/At

VW Pt −1

E/At

b

[t-stat]

c

[t-stat]

d

[t-stat]

e

[t-stat]

g

[t-stat]

PTI

1.54

[10.65]

-0.85

[-6.62]

0.21

[1.13]

9.60

[10.00]

3.35

[6.66]

PTI

0.90

[6.13]

-0.23

[-1.48]

6.47

[12.42]

3.76

[6.71]

PTC

4.57

[10.09]

1.50

[5.15]

15.06

[5.87]

0.34

[1.73]

PTC

4.61

[10.63]

1.37

[4.96]

14.20

[6.01]

0.32

[1.56]

PTL

4.56

[40.95]

-0.84

[-6.44]

10.76

[11.67]

11.20

[5.51]

PTL

3.88

[37.16]

-1.19

[-8.64]

7.80

[13.06]

12.78

[6.99]

0.33
-0.78

[1.31]
[-15.86]

Table 9. Dividend payment and the dividend premium: Instrumental variables, 1962-2000. Instrumental
variables estimates of the effect of the dividend premium on dividend payment rates. For example, the initiation rate
is modeled in Panel A as:

Initiatet = a + bPˆt D−1− ND + u t

Pt−D1− ND = c + dCEFt−1 + e1 rCGt−1 + e 2 rCGt −2 + e3 rCGt −3 + f ( RDt+ 3 − RNDt + 3 ) + vt −1
The initiation rate Initiate expresses payers as a percentage of surviving nonpayers from t-1. The continuation rate
Continue expresses payers as a percentage of surviving payers from t-1. The rate at which listing firms pay Listpay
expresses payers as a percentage of new lists at t. The dividend premium VW PD-ND is the difference between the
logs of the value-weighted average market-to-book ratios of dividend payers and nonpayers. We instrument for the
dividend premium with the value-weighted closed-end fund discount, past nominal capital gains on the valueweighted CRSP index, and future cumulative relative returns of payers over nonpayers. The value-weighted closedend fund discount uses data on net asset values and market prices for general equity and convertible funds from
Simon and Wheatley (1997) for 1962 to 1993, from CDA/Wiesenberger for 1994 to 1998, and from the Wall Street
Journal for 1999 to 2000. rCGt-k denotes capital gains in year t-k. Rt+k denotes cumulative future returns from t+1
through t+k. The OLS t-statistics use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and serial correlation up to
four lags. The 2SLS t-statistics use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity.
OLS

2SLS
CEF Discount

Past Capital
Gains

Future
Returns

All

Panel A: Initiatet
D − ND
t −1

VW P

N
2

R

3.90

8.31

6.25

5.51

5.42

[6.56]

[3.86]

[3.85]

[4.71]

[6.60]

38

38

38

36

36

0.60

-

-

-

-

Panel B: Continuet
D − ND

VW Pt −1

N
2

R

0.85

1.63

0.65

1.60

1.15

[2.83]

[1.82]

[1.25]

[2.71]

[3.52]

38

38

38

36

36

0.26

-

-

-

-

Panel C: Listpayt
D − ND
t −1

VW P

N
2

R

16.08

8.72

26.99

11.47

17.69

[6.29]

[1.10]

[4.28]

[1.97]

[5.34]

38

38

38

36

36

0.51

-

-

-

-

