                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EXPLORING THE HEALTH-WEALTH NEXUS

                                            Jonathan Meer
                                           Douglas L. Miller
                                           Harvey S. Rosen

                                          Working Paper 9554
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9554


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2003




We are grateful to Princeton’s Center for Economic Policy Studies for support. Doug Miller acknowledges
financial support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. We thank Bo Honoré, Erica Field, Adriana
Lleras-Muney, and participants in Princeton’s Public Finance Working Group for useful comments, and
Cynthia Cohen for assistance in the preparation of the manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Jonathan Meer, Douglas L. Miller, and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus
Jonathan Meer, Douglas L. Miller, and Harvey S. Rosen
NBER Working Paper No. 9554
March 2003
JEL No. I12

                                             ABSTRACT

The casual links between health and economic resources have long concerned social scientists. We
use four waves of data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to analyze the impact of wealth
upon an individual’s health status. The difficulty in approaching this task that has bedeviled previous
studies is that wealth may be endogenous; a priori, it is just as likely that changes in health affect

wealth as vice versa. We argue that inheritance is a suitable instrument for the change in wealth, and

implement a straightforward instrumental variables strategy to deal with this problem. Our results

suggest that the causal relationship running from wealth to health may not be as strong as first

appears. In the data, wealth exerts a positive and statistically significant effect on health status, but
it is very small in magnitude. Instrumental variables estimation leaves the point estimate

approximately the same, but renders it insignificantly different from zero. And even when the point
estimate is increased by twice its standard error, the quantitative effect is small. We conclude that
the wealth-health connection is not driven by short run changes in wealth.



Jonathan Meer                           Douglas L. Miller               Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics                 Department of Economics         Department of Economics
Stanford University                     UC Davis                        Princeton University
Stanford, CA 94305                      Davis, CA 95616-8578            Princeton, NJ 08544
jmeer@stanford.edu                      dlmiller@ucdavis.edu            and NBER
                                                                        hsr@princeton.edu
1. INTRODUCTION
       The existence of a strong positive correlation between health and economic re-

sources is well documented. However, the direction of causation remains an open issue.

One possibility is that economic resources affect health (Ettner [1996], Smith [1999]);

individuals with more wealth can afford better medical care, live in healthier environ-

ments, and so on. Another is that health affects economic resources. Healthier individu-

als may be able to work more than those who are ill, enabling them to accumulate more

wealth (McClellan [1998], Levy [2000], Wu [2003]). Finally, third factors may deter-

mine both health and economic resources. For example, individuals with a low rate of

time preference may undertake investments in human capital that enhance future earnings

as well as engage in behaviors that improve future health (Barsky et al. [1997]).

       As Attanasio and Hoynes [2000] note, the nature of this relationship is central to

economists’ understanding of life cycle wealth accumulation, and to the interpretation of

cohort based age-wealth profiles. Further, it is directly relevant to the public policy de-

bate over health care. In particular, it is widely assumed that there is a causal link run-

ning from wealth to health, and that, as a consequence, the key to improving health status

is to transfer income to the poor. For example, in a report on a conference on income

inequality and health entitled “Dollars Count More Than Doctors,” Lefkowitz [2000] ar-

gues that “[s]mall differences in socioeconomic status matter to health. In other words,

there are significant gains to be made with relatively moderate spending.”

       However, in light of the possible endogeneity of wealth, such inferences based on

the correlation between changes in wealth and changes in health are not compelling. Es-

tablishing a causal link requires an appropriate instrumental variables strategy and, to our
                                                                                         2


knowledge, this has not been done. We propose to deal with endogeneity by using in-

heritance as an instrumental variable for changes in wealth. Receipt of an inheritance is

clearly correlated with the change in an individual’s wealth, but is plausibly unrelated to

changes in his or her health, conditional on initial health status.

       Section 2 examines some of the previous literature on the subject of the connec-

tion between economic resources and health status, with a focus on the problem of causal

inference. Section 3 describes the data, which are drawn from four waves of the Panel

Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) spanning the years 1984 to 1999. In Section 4, we

specify the econometric model and present the results. To begin, we estimate the rela-

tionship between changes in health and changes in wealth without taking endogeneity

into account, and replicate the previous findings that changes in wealth have a positive

and statistically significant effect on changes in health. The point estimate, however, is

minuscule. We next re-estimate the model using inheritance as an instrument, and no

longer obtain a statistically significant result. Further, even when the point estimate is

increased by twice its standard error, the implied quantitative effect is very small. Thus,

to the extent there is a causal link running from short-term changes in wealth to changes

in health, it essentially disappears once endogeneity is taken into account. Section 5 con-

cludes the paper and provides suggestions for future research.



2. PREVIOUS LITERATURE
       A critical issue in examining the relationship between economic resources and

health status is how to measure economic resources. A number of studies have used in-

come, and virtually all find that health improves with income, ceteris paribus. (See, for
                                                                                          3


example, Ettner [1996], McDonough, et al. [1997], Meara [2001]). Income data have the

advantage of being relatively easy to obtain, but for some purposes, wealth is a superior

measure of economic resources. As Smith and Kington [1997] note, “[i]ncome in a sin-

gle year may not adequately measure the financial resources available to an individual

over the lifetime in which decisions affecting health are made.” McDonough et al.

[1997], Feinstein [1993], and Smith [1999] similarly argue for the superiority of a wealth

measure of economic capacity. Feinstein [1993] suggests that “the problem of reverse

causality is less likely to afflict household wealth than household income measures, pri-

marily because wealth accumulates over time and hence is less affected by a single epi-

sode of sickness.” Two caveats apply to this comment. First, as noted by Feinstein, very

serious negative health shocks could result in a decline in wealth. Indeed, Levy [2000]

finds that the number of nights spent in a hospital is negatively correlated with changes in

wealth for those individuals who do not have health insurance. Second, the relationship

between wealth and health could still be driven by third factors, such as childhood envi-

ronment, genetics, or the like.

       As noted above, researchers in this area are well aware of the possibility that eco-

nomic resources and health status may be simultaneously determined. However, not

much has been done to deal with this problem econometrically. One careful attempt, by

Ettner [1996], examines the relationship between health and income in an ordered probit

instrumental variables framework. Among the instruments she uses for an individual’s

income are the state unemployment rate, work experience, parental education, and

spousal characteristics. She finds that the effect of income on health remains significant

and even increases after instrumenting. Of course, the instrumental variables results are
                                                                                                       4


dependent on the assumption that the instruments can be excluded from the main regres-

sion, and as Ettner notes, there may be some problems in this regard. The state unem-

ployment rate is driven by regional variation, and so is a valid instrument only if the well-

known regional variations in health are due solely to differences in income. Parental

education is plausibly related to early human capital investments in health. Spousal char-

acteristics may reflect assortative mating, and so may be directly related to health. And

work experience is generally a function of age and education, each of which arguably

may directly influence health.

        Hurd, McFadden, and Merrill [1997] also analyze the causal relationship between

health and wealth. They use data from the Asset and Health Dynamics among the Old-

est-Old (AHEAD) study, and focus on Granger-causality between measures of socioeco-

nomic status and health.1 They find that self reported health status (SRHS) in 1993 is

correlated with changes in wealth between 1993 and 1995, but that changes in health

conditions, conditional on SRHS, are not correlated with changes in wealth. They also

find that measures of socioeconomic status in 1993 are correlated with mortality rates

between 1993 and 1995. In this paper we pursue an alternative strategy for determining

the causal influence of wealth on health, namely using inheritance as an instrument.



3. DATA
        Our estimation framework, which is described in detail in the next section, models

the short-term change in health status of a household head over a five year period as a

function of the contemporaneous change in household wealth, initial wealth, and other


1
 A similar approach is employed by Attanasio and Emmerson [2001] using the British Retirement Survey
data set.
                                                                                          5


covariates. This strategy motivates our selection of data, which are drawn from the 1984,

1989, 1994, and 1999 waves of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID

is a longitudinal survey of a representative sample of the U.S. population. Data exist for

individuals as well as for the family units in which they reside. We focus on these four

waves, as they contain detailed information about household wealth as well as inheri-

tance.

         Our basic unit of observation is the household head. We form our dataset from

individuals who are heads for three consecutive waves; either 1984, 1989, and 1994, or

1989, 1994, and 1999. For those individuals who were heads for all 4 waves, we disre-

gard information from 1999 so as to maintain a 3-year balanced nature to our panel. We

drop observations that indicate a change in age (over a 5-year period) of less than 4 or

more than 6 years, or if the PSID indicated that the family moved or changed household

heads. We also drop those observations with missing information on inheritance, re-

gional location, health, and wealth, and those observations with zero individual-level

weights. We dropped the observations on one individual with extreme outliers in the

"change in wealth" variable (losses greater than $5 million or gains greater than $10 mil-

lion).2 We use the first wave of each individual to obtain lagged health and wealth in-

formation, and so each individual's 3-wave panel contributes 2 observations to our data-

set. Our final dataset contains 3302 individuals and 6604 person-year observations.

         Our measure of the individual’s health status is based on the answer to the follow-

ing question: “Would you say your health in general is excellent, very good, good, fair,

or poor?” The answer to this question is coded on a 1 to 5 scale, with 1 being excellent, 2

as very good, 3 as good, 4 as fair, and 5 as poor. We create a dichotomous variable
                                                                                                       6


HEALTHY, which takes a value of one if the individual rates his or her health as “excel-

lent,” “very good,” or “good,” and zero otherwise. Out of a total of 6604 person-year ob-

servations, there are 433 positive transitions in health (that is, movements from NOT

HEALTHY to HEALTHY), and 643 have negative transitions. Of the 3302 individuals

in our sample, 411 experience a decline in their health status (and no increase), 201 ex-

perience an improvement (and no decline), 232 experience a decline in one period and an

improvement in the other period, and 2458 have no change in their health.

           An important question is whether these self-reported measures provide meaning-

ful indicators of health status. In a review of more than two dozen studies, Idler and Ben-

jamini [1997] document that poor SRHS is strongly correlated with mortality. This is

true across many populations, and after controlling for a variety of socio-demographic

variables, the presence of health conditions, and even medical doctors’ objective health

assessments. Additional evidence along these lines is provided by Hurd et al. [1997],

who find correlations in the AHEAD data between SRHS and both mortality and the on-

set of several serious health conditions, again controlling for socio-demographic condi-

tions.3 While the consensus thus appears to be that SRHS is a meaningful indicator of

health, we also experimented with a more “objective” measure reported in the PSID,

whether the individual reports having a physical or nervous disability. As noted below,

this had no effect on our substantive results.

           The PSID wealth variable is computed as the sum of main home value, net value

of other real estate, net value of vehicles, net value of any farms or businesses, net value

of stocks and other financial instruments, cash accounts, and the net value of other assets

2
    However, our substantive results were unchanged when we included the outlier back in the sample.
                                                                                                            7


less outstanding mortgage principal and other debts.4 We convert the wealth variable to

thousands of 1999 dollars using the CPI deflator. Table 1 provides the definition and

summary statistics for wealth as well as for the other key variables used in our analysis.

All of the variables other than the change in wealth, initial wealth, and age are dichoto-

mous.

         The figures in Table 2 show how the change in wealth varies with initial health

status and with the kind of health transition over the five-year periods.                   From the first

column of figures, we see that those who are initially ill have lower increases in their

wealth than those who are initially healthy. Further, from the second and third columns,

those whose health improves during the sample period experience higher increases in

wealth than those who remain ill, and those who become ill accumulate less wealth than

those who stay healthy. These patterns are consistent with previous findings (see, for ex-

ample, Smith [1999]).


4. ANALYSIS
         4.1 Preliminary Issues

         Our basic equation models the impact of changes in wealth on changes in health

as follows:

         Pr(Ht =1) = F[β0+β1(∆W) + β2Ht-5) + β3Xt]                                (1)



3
  For a discussion of the reliability of the PSID self-reported health status variable, see Gouskova and
Schoeni [2002].
4
  As is well-known, wealth data in surveys are subject to substantial measurement error. The standard er-
rors-in-variables argument suggests that non-instrumental variables estimates should be attenuated. We
find below that the IV estimates of the coefficient on the change in wealth are in fact larger than their non-
IV counterparts. Our data contain no information on pension wealth. In their analysis of British data, At-
tanasio and Emmerson [2001] show that the inclusion of pension wealth has no material effect on the esti-
mate of the impact of wealth rank on health status. While encouraging, of course one cannot know whether
this result would hold in US data.
                                                                                                          8


where Ht is an indicator for whether the individual is healthy (HEALTHY = 1) in year t;

∆W is the change in wealth from year (t-5) to year t; and F[●] is the cumulative normal

distribution. We augment this basic regression with a set of covariates Xt, which includes

the individual’s current age, household wealth at the beginning of the 5-year period, and

time invariant indicators for education, sex, race and region.5

        Throughout the paper, we present results for three specifications for Xt. The first

includes only age (as well as change in wealth and initial health). The second adds the

initial level of wealth (wealth in year (t-5)) as a control variable. While we are concerned

about the possible endogeneity of this variable, it may be informative to determine

whether the impact of the change in wealth is sensitive to its initial level. The third speci-

fication has initial health, the two wealth variables, as well as the remaining covariates

discussed above. In all the specifications we include time effects. In computing confi-

dence intervals for our parameter estimates, we wish to account for possible within-

individual correlation of the errors and right hand side variables. To do this, we estimate

robust standard errors within a clustered framework, with all years of an individual serv-

ing as the cluster.

        4.2 Basic Probit Results

        To begin, we estimate the model without correcting for the endogeneity of the

change in wealth. The results are reported in Table 3. In the basic specification in the

first column, the coefficient on the change in wealth is positive, and exceeds its standard

error by more than a factor of two. This finding demonstrates that we can reproduce the

standard result in the literature – there is a positive and statistically significant relation-

5
 We enter the values of education, sex, race and region as of 1984. It is well documented that education is
an important correlate of health (Ross and Mirowsky [2000]), as are race (Smith and Kington [1997]), re-
                                                                                         9


ship in the data between changes in health status and changes in economic resources.

Quantitatively, the coefficient indicates that increasing the change in wealth over a five-

year period by a million dollars increases the probability of being in good health at the

end of the period by 4.8 percentage points. We return below to the issue of how to assess

whether this is a “large” or “small” magnitude. As we move across the columns in Table

3, we see that augmenting the equation with initial wealth increases the magnitude of the

coefficient on change in wealth, but adding in the other covariates brings it back to the

same level as in the basic equation. Note also that including additional covariates in-

creases the relative size of the coefficient’s standard error so that one cannot reject the

hypothesis that it is zero.

        4.3 Accounting for Endogeneity of the Change in Wealth

        As emphasized above, a major concern in the estimation of this model is the pos-

sible endogeneity of change in wealth. Our instrument for the change in wealth between

year (t-5) and year t is the amount of gifts and inheritances received during that time in-

terval, as reported in the answer to the following question:

        “Some people’s assets come from gifts and inheritances. During the last
        five years, have you (or anyone in your family living there) received any
        large gifts or inheritances of money or property worth $10,000 or more?”

Those who answered “yes” were then asked to specify the amount; this is our Total In-

heritance variable. Its summary statistics for the entire sample and stratified by initial

health are in Tables 1 and 2, and respectively. On average, the 297 nonzero responses in

the sample received $92,149 in inheritances over an average 5-year period. The 273 re-

cipients who were healthy at the beginning of the period received $91,014 on average,



gion (Preston and Taubman, [1994]), and sex (Verbrugge, [1985]).
                                                                                                       10


and the 24 who were not healthy received $104,888 (the difference is not statistically sig-

nificant).

        We first test for the predictive power of our instrument in the first stage.6 To do

so we estimate a series of ordinary least squares regressions of change in wealth on in-

heritance. The results, reported in Table 4, show that inheritances are strongly correlated

with changes in wealth for all three models. These results suggest that we have suitable

first-stage power in our instruments.

        We next estimate a reduced form regression, substituting inheritance received for

change in wealth. The motivation for this exercise is very simple: if change in wealth is

correlated with inheritance, then if we substitute inheritance into the health status equa-

tion, the significance and magnitude of its coefficient indicate the potential role for the

causal impact of changes in wealth on health. The results are in Table 5. The inheritance

variable is insignificant, both with and without other covariates. We take this as evidence

that the change in wealth is not a significant determinant of health when endogeneity is

taken into account.

        While informative, this result does not tell us about the size of the coefficient on

change in wealth. We are interested in inference about the possible magnitudes of the

impact of wealth on health, and so require information on the distribution of this coeffi-

cient. To obtain such information, we estimate equation (1) with a two-stage probit.

Specifically, we first regress our endogenous variable (change in wealth) on our instru-

ment (inheritance) and the other exogenous variables, and generate the predicted values

and residuals from this first stage regression. We next estimate a probit equation for the


6
 For discussions of IV problems in the presence of weak instruments, see Bound et al. [1993] and Staiger
and Stock [1997].
                                                                                                           11


probability of being in good health, including on the right hand side the predicted values

and residuals from the first stage, as well as the other exogenous variables. 7 Our focus

is on the coefficient on predicted change in wealth. We use the bootstrap with 1000 repe-

titions to compute consistent standard errors.

         Table 6 reports the marginal effects for the bootstrapped two-stage probit model.8

The figures in column 3 of the table indicate that the marginal effect of a $1,000,000

change in the change in wealth is 0.09505, with a standard error of 0.1460. The coeffi-

cient on initial wealth remains significant, both with and without the other covariates.

         Roughly speaking, taking Tables 3 and 6 together suggests that within each

model, taking into account endogeneity increases the coefficient on the change in wealth,

but increases its standard error by an even greater proportion. A natural question is

whether the point estimate is in some sense large. To be specific, consider the coefficient

of 0.09505 in the third column of Table 6, which is our preferred specification. It tells us

that for each $1,000,000 wealth increase over a five-year period, the probability of being

healthy (ceteris paribus) increases by 9.5 percentage points. Is this a “large” or “small”

effect? A natural way to approach this question is to compute the elasticity of the prob-

ability of being healthy with respect to changes in wealth. But in our context, this is not a

viable strategy because the median value of the change in wealth is near zero, and com-

puting percentage changes around a value of zero can lead to meaningless results.

         Instead, we take a different tack. We begin by using our IV estimate of the coef-

ficient on the change in wealth to simulate the impact on health status of an enormous

7
 For further details, see Rivers and Vuong [1988]. .
8
 Two-stage probit coefficients were calculated using a Stata module developed by Jonah Gelbach of the
University of Maryland. As noted above, we perform a clustered procedure to allow for the possibility of
within-individual correlation of the errors. To implement this in a bootstrapping context, we first create a
                                                                                                              12


difference in the change in wealth--from the 10th percentile (-$81,454) to the 90th per-

centile ($176,422). Our preferred IV specification in the third column of Table 6 implies

that this roughly quarter of a million dollar increase in the change in wealth leads to only

a 2.2 percentage point increase in the probability of being healthy (off a baseline prob-

ability of about 0.81). When we increase the coefficient by 1.96 times its standard error,

the analogous figure is about 6.7 percentage points.

         Given the huge difference in the change in wealth needed to generate a 6.7 per-

centage point increase in the probability of being healthy even at the upper end of the 95-

percent confidence interval, we feel quite comfortable in characterizing the effect as

small. To gain further perspective on this issue, we compute the cross-sectional effects of

a number of variables (race, education, and age) that previous literature has shown to ex-

ert large effects on health status. Specifically, we consider the impact on the probability

of being healthy (conditional on age only) of being white rather than black, of completing

high school rather than not completing high school, and of being 20 years younger. We

find that these increase the probability of being in good health by 16, 18, and 12 percent-

age points, respectively. All of these effects substantially exceed the effect of a quarter

million dollar increase in the change in wealth, evaluated with a coefficient at the upper

end of the 95-percent interval. In short, the wealth effect is not in the same league as

other effects that have previously been viewed as large.

         4.4 Evaluating the IV Strategy

         In this section, we discuss several possible concerns with our instrumentation

strategy. These concerns fall into two classes. The first is potential violations of the IV


list of individuals. For each bootstrap iteration, we then draw a set of individuals from this list, and use all
years of data from the selected individuals to construct that iteration’s dataset.
                                                                                         13


exclusion restrictions. The second relates to the possibility that the use of inheritance as

an instrumental variable results in coefficients that do not measure the true wealth effect

of health. We now discuss each set of concerns in turn.

       4.4.1 Does inheritance fail the exclusion restrictions?

       Two reasons that inheritance might violate the exclusion restrictions are that in-

heritances give a signal about one's health, or that there are third variables driving both

inheritances and health:

       A family member dying might signal something about one’s own health. This

could induce a correlation between the inheritance variable and the error term in the

health status equation. One way to investigate this possibility would be to augment the

equation with an interaction between the inheritance and the age of the donor. If there is

anything to the story that inheritance is a signal about health, then individuals who re-

ceive inheritances from younger donors should have higher probabilities of being in poor

health, ceteris paribus. Unfortunately, the PSID reports no information about the donor.

However, we note in passing some other research that may cast some light on this issue.

Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen [2001] studied the impact of inheritance on retirement

decisions using a data set that did include age of donor. They found that it had no effect

on the probability of a donee retiring from the labor force. We know that retirement de-

cisions are strongly affected by health (McClellan [1998]). Therefore, the fact that do-

nor’s age had no impact on retirement in Holtz-Eakin et al.’s study does not lend support

to the idea that receiving inheritance is a signal that an individual is in poor health. We
                                                                                                          14


interpret this as rough evidence that the signal of one’s health associated with inheritance

is of secondary importance to the direct wealth impact.9

         Some unobserved variable might drive both inheritance and health status. Sup-

pose, for example, that individuals with “privileged” backgrounds are particularly likely

to receive inheritances, and are also likely to have benefited from the childhood care that

leads to good health as adults. In effect, then, the coefficient on inheritance in the first

stage regression partly reflects the impact of “privilege,” biasing its coefficient upward.

This in turn leads to an upward bias in the coefficient on the fitted value of change in

wealth in the second stage equation. For example, wealthier individuals tend to have

healthier children. Therefore, one might expect children who receive inheritances to be

on a better lifetime health trajectory, possibly even conditional on initial health. Such a

mechanism would tend to render inheritance a poor instrument for examining the causal

impact of wealth on health. However, three considerations suggest that this is not an im-

portant problem in our context.

         First, as noted above, the coefficient on the change in wealth in the second stage

is close to zero. Hence, to the extent that such bias is present, it does not seem very pow-

erful. Second, observable variables like wealth and education might be serving the same

role as “privilege,” yet when they are included, there is very little impact on the results.

Third, the PSID contains retrospective information about the economic status of the par-

ents of the respondents, enabling us to examine this issue directly. Respondents are

asked the following question: Were your parents poor when you were growing up, pretty

9
 A related possibility is that when someone dies, it produces stress and illness for the relatives. We would
expect this effect to be greatest for close relatives of the deceased. However, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and
Rosen [1993] found that the effect of inheritance on the probability that an individual left the labor force
was independent of whether or not he or she was a close relative of the deceased. It appears, then, that
                                                                                                           15


well off, or what? Based on the response, we create the dichotomous variables Parents-

Poor (equals one if the parents were poor); Parents-Average (equals one if the parents

were average), and Parents-Well (equals one if the parents were well-off). We then aug-

ment the basic model from the third columns of Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 with these variables

(the omitted category being those who did not grow up with their parents). The basic

finding is that the parental background variables are statistically insignificant, and their

inclusion leaves the coefficient on the change in wealth small and statistically insignifi-

cant. For example, the coefficient from the specification of the third column of Table 6 is

0.08762 with a standard error of 0.1356. In short, to the extent that the data allow us to

investigate this issue, our results do not appear to be driven by the joint impact of family

background on both health and inheritance.

         It is still possible that there is some combination of a true wealth effect and unob-

served bias that exactly cancel in our data to produce a coefficient of zero. Suppose, for

instance, that wealth from inheritances leads to improved health, but that inheritances

also signal poor health in the family. If these two effects were equal in magnitude, we

might find a zero result. While we cannot rule this story out entirely, we believe that the

robustness of our results to a number of alternative specifications as well as the evidence

in Holtz-Eakin et al. reduce the likelihood that this is what is going on.

         4.4.2 Is inheritance related to the relevant wealth effect?

         The interpretation of our estimates becomes less clear if inheritances are antici-

pated. To the extent this is true, forward looking people may base consumption and sav-

ing decisions on anticipated receipts rather than actual dollars in hand (provided that they


whatever health effects might accompany receipt of an inheritance, they are not sufficient to generate a
change in labor force behavior.
                                                                                                           16


can dissave based on the expected inheritance). If so, then a reduced form regression of

health status on inheritance produces a small and imprecisely estimated coefficient on

inheritance, but it tells us nothing about the underlying relationship between health and

wealth. The PSID provides information that is of substantial interest in this context. In

the 1984 wave of our sample, the head of household was asked,

         “What about future inheritances--are you fairly sure that you (or someone
         in your family living there) will inherit some money or property in the
         next ten years?”

         Summary statistics for this anticipated inheritance variable are reported toward

the bottom of Table 1. When we augment the first stage equation with this variable, we

find it is miniscule and insignificant (-0.05477 with a standard error of 0.07126), while

the actual inheritance coefficient remains unchanged. That is to say, the expectation of

inheritance does not affect wealth accumulation behavior when inheritances actually re-

ceived are taken into account. In short, perhaps because of capital market constraints,

individuals do not appear to change their wealth accumulation patterns in anticipation of

receiving inheritances. This conclusion is consistent with the work of Holtz-Eakin, Joul-

faian, and Rosen [1993], who analyzed the labor force behavior of individuals before and

after the receipt of inheritances. If individuals fully anticipated inheritances and could

borrow on them, then we would expect the receipt of an inheritance per se to have no ef-

fect on their labor supply. However, in contrast, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian and Rosen found

that there were substantial effects on labor force participation rates.10




10
   It is possible that the children of a decedent are more likely to anticipate their inheritances than other
relations. Hence, comparing the labor supply response of children with other recipients provides an addi-
tional way to shed some light on this issue. Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen find that there are no statis-
tically significant differences in the responses between the children of decedents and other donees.
                                                                                          17


       Another possible problem is that a concave relationship between economic re-

sources and health builds in a bias against finding a relationship between inheritance and

health status. The argument here is that individuals who receive inheritances tend to be

wealthier to start with and already in the flat region of the health status-wealth curve.

Therefore, the fact that their health status does not change when they receive an inheri-

tance is uninteresting. It is indeed true that individuals who receive inheritances have

higher average wealth than those who do not. Mean initial wealth for the sample of those

who do not receive an inheritance is $167,766, while initial wealth for those who did re-

ceive an inheritance was $277,652. A test for equality of means is rejected, with a t-

statistic of 3.75. We note, however, that inheritances do not go only to individuals at the

top of the wealth distribution: 76 individuals with below-median wealth received inheri-

tances, representing about a quarter of all those who received inheritances.

       4.5 Alternative specifications

       We estimate a number of variations on our basic model in order to assess the ro-

bustness of the results.

       Alternative measures of health status. As noted above, our self-reported health

status variable is one if the individual reports himself to be in “good,” “very good,” or

“excellent” health, and a zero if his health is “fair” or “poor.” There is clearly some arbi-

trariness to this procedure; to see if it made a substantive difference, we grouped “good”

with “fair” and “poor,” and re-estimated the model with the new left-hand side variable.

There was essentially no change in our results. For example, in the version of the model

with all covariates (i.e., column (3) of Table 6), the coefficient on change in wealth is

0.07521 with a standard error of 0.2324. An alternative approach is to eschew any ag-
                                                                                                          18


gregation of the health categories at all, and use an ordered probit statistical model to es-

timate the probability that the individual is in any given category. This exercise also

leads to an imprecisely estimated impact of the change in wealth on health status.11

         A related question is whether the results would change if an alternative health

measure was used. The PSID asks respondents if they had a physical or nervous disabil-

ity that limits their ability to work. We create a dichotomous variable based on the an-

swer to this question, and use it on the left hand side in our basic model. Again, we find

a statistically insignificant coefficient on the change in wealth (-0.3229 with a standard

error of 0.2233).

         Alternative samples. As noted above, we chose our sample having in mind the

two goals of maintaining a balanced panel and maximizing the number of observations.

One alternative strategy is to use a four-year balanced panel. This gives us more observa-

tions per person but at the cost of a smaller number of people (for a total number of per-

son-year observations of 4452). Another possibility is to treat the data set as a series of

two-year panels: 1984-89 (N = 3527), 1989-94 (N = 3886), and 1994-99 (N = 3057).

This maintains a balanced panel for each pair of years, and uses (between the three pan-

els) all of the data possible. Finally, a strategy that maximizes the number of observa-

tions in a single regression without regard to whether the panel is balanced is simply to

include all the observations in adjacent years (N = 10470). We tried all three of these

strategies to see if our substantive results were sensitive to the way our sample was con-

structed. As one might expect, there is some movement in the estimated coefficient on

11
  In the ordered probit model, we include on the right hand side a series of dichotomous variables for
health status in the previous period. Some caution must be exercised in interpreting our result because the
mechanics for computing correct standard errors in an IV ordered probit model are not well understood.
                                                                                                             19


the change in wealth depending on the sample used. For example, using the largest sam-

ple we found a larger coefficient (0.18 with a standard error of 0.154), while using the

four-year balanced panel yields a smaller coefficient (-0.012 with a standard error of

0.070). In all cases, though, the coefficient is small and imprecisely estimated. Our find-

ings are robust to the way in which the sample is put together.

         Attrition. The manner in which our sample is constructed gives rise to another is-

sue:    some people disappear from the sample due to death (and other nonrandom rea-

sons). There is no straightforward way to deal with this problem because, by definition,

one cannot compute the change in wealth from one period to the next for people who are

not present in the latter period. To get some sense of whether or not nonrandom attrition

would be a problem, we began by taking the sample of people who were present in 1984

and 1989, and dividing them into two groups, those who remain in the sample until 1999

and those who disappear. We then estimate our canonical specification for each subsam-

ple.

         In the specification without instrumental variables, we find that the coefficients on

the change in wealth in the two subsamples were very close to one another, small and

positive (.070 in the main sample, .045 in the "selected out" sample), and statistically

indistinguishable. In the IV specification, while we could not reject the hypothesis that

the coefficients are the same, the point estimate for the "selected out" sample was rather

large (2.3), with an extremely large standard error (4.1). We believe that this is due to the

weak power in this sample: there are only 867 observations, with 31 inheritances, in this

sample. Note that the results from the “selected out” sample do not drive the 1984-89


Our estimates are generated simply by taking the fitted value of the change in wealth from the first stage
regression and substituting them for the actual value, without any correction of the standard errors.
                                                                                          20


data as a whole. When we estimate the IV specification using the pooled sample, the re-

sults are very similar to those found in the main sample (the coefficient is 0.040, with a t-

statistic of 0.17). Hence, to the extent that we can examine the issue, we find no evidence

that accounting for attrition changes our conclusions, although admittedly this is not a

definitive conclusion.

       Spouses. The PSID also asks about the health status of the head of household’s

spouse. As a check on our main results, we re-estimated our model with the health of the

spouse on the left-hand-side, and the spouse- and household-specific variables on the

right-hand-side. Since not every household has a spouse, our sample is smaller, with

3424 observations. The results for spouses indicate an even smaller effect of changes in

wealth on health status. For example, in the specification with the full set of covariates,

the coefficient on (instrumented) change in wealth is -.003429 (s.e. = 0.1069). While the

spousal estimates are not statistically independent of the main results (the observations

come from the same set of households, and have some identical household-level covari-

ates), we view this as supportive evidence for our main findings.

       Interactions with change in wealth. We augment our model with an interaction

between wealth and the change in wealth and find that the interaction was statistically

insignificant (-0.09201with a standard error of 0.1149). Hence, our results are not an arti-

fact of underlying interactions between the level of wealth and the change in wealth.

We also examine whether statistically significant interactions between age and change in

wealth are present, and do not find any.

       Timing of inheritance. Our instrument for the change in wealth over a five-year

period is the value of inheritances received over that period. One can imagine that the
                                                                                        21


timing of inheritance may matter, with inheritances received early in the 5-year period

influencing health more than those received later in the period. The PSID asks people

when they received their inheritances, so we were able to investigate this possibility. To

do so, we created a variable, TIME, which equals the number of years since the inheri-

tance was received, and interacted TIME with the inheritance variable. We include the

interaction term in the reduced form equation for health status (as in Table 5). In this

specification, the interaction term has the expected (positive) sign, but both the interac-

tion term and the inheritance terms are small and insignificant. Examining the point es-

timates, we find that an inheritance received four years prior has the approximate impact

of the coefficients reported in Table 5. Second, we incorporate the interaction term into

the IV probit estimates by including it as an instrument in the first stage. The second

stage estimates of the coefficient on the change in wealth are uniformly statistically in-

significant, and smaller than their Table 6 counterparts. Again, the timing of the inheri-

tance within the five-year window does not affect our results.

         Econometric specification. A possible problem with our results is that they rely

on the normality assumptions underlying the two-stage probit model. We re-estimate our

models using a linear probability model as a robustness check. The results, available

upon request, are very similar to those obtained using the probit. In particular, the mar-

ginal effect of the change in wealth remains statistically insignificant and small - a mil-

lion dollar increase in wealth changes the probability by a mere 6.4 percentage points.

This suggests that our results are not an artifact of the assumptions behind the probit

model.
                                                                                                         22



5. CONCLUSION
          We have used the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to examine the relationship

between health and wealth. We confirmed the result from earlier studies that changes in

wealth have a statistically strong correlation with changes in health. However, the use of

an instrumental variables procedure to take into account the endogeneity of the change in

wealth rendered the effect statistically insignificant. Further, both the uncorrected and

instrumental variables point estimates suggested that changes in wealth have a minuscule

impact on health status. We conclude that one of the three possible pathways in the

health-wealth nexus, namely that wealth affects health in the short-run, is in fact illu-

sory.12

          This finding does not rule out the possibility of a long-term impact of wealth on

health. Because we analyze changes in health and wealth only over 5-year intervals, we

are unable to assess the long-term causal impact.13 That said, we should again note that

the strong (non-instrumented) short-term correlation between wealth and health is typical

of the type of evidence that many have adduced for the existence of a causal impact of

economic resources on health. In our setting, a reasonable instrumentation strategy

makes the correlation disappear. We therefore believe that a stronger burden of proof

must be met in claiming causal relationships between these variables.




12
   For research that examines the causal link from health to wealth, see Hurd et al. [1998], Levy [2000] and
Wu [2003].
13
   Note, however, that in their study of the relationship between income and mortality in the United States
and Britain from the 1950s through the 1990s, Deaton and Paxson [2001] find that income trends do not do
a good job of explaining mortality trends. That is, over a decades long time period, the link between eco-
nomic resources and health status appears to be weak.
                                                                                        23




                                      References

Adler, Nancy, et. al. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: The Challenge of the Gradient.”
American Psychologist, January 1994. 15-24.

Amemiya, Takeshi. “The Estimation of a Simultaneous Equation Generalized Probit
Model.” Econometrica. Vol. 46, No. 5 September 1978. 1193-1205.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Hilary Williamson Hoynes. “Differential Mortality and Wealth
Accumulation,” Journal of Human Resources. Vol. 35, No. 1, Winter 2000. 1-29.

Attanasio, Orazio P. and Carl Emmerson, “Differential Mortality in the UK,” NBER
Working Paper No. 8241, April 2001.

Barsky, Robert B., F Thomas Juster, Miles S Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro. “Prefer-
ence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 2, May
1997. 537-579.

Bound, John, David A. Jaeger and Regina M. Baker. “The Cure Can Be Worse than the
Disease: A Cautionary Tale Regarding Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the Ameri-
can Statistical Association, Vol. 90, Issue 430, June 1995. 443-450.

Cawley, John. “Body Weight and Women’s Labor Market Outcomes.” NBER Working
Paper No. 7841. August 2000.

Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. "Mortality, Income, and Income Inequality Over
Time in Britain and the United States.” NBER Working Paper No. 8354, 2001.

Efron, Bradley. “Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife.” Annals of Statis-
tics. Vol. 7, No. 1. January 1979. 1-26.

Efron, Bradley, and Robert J. Tibshirani. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. Chapman &
Hall, 1993: London.

Ettner, Susan. “New Evidence on the Relationship between Income and Health.” Journal
of Health Economics. No. 15 1996. 67-85.

Feinstein, Jonathan. “The Relationship Between SES and Health: A Review of the Lit-
erature.” Milbank Quarterly. Vol 71, No. 2 1993. 279-322.

Gelbach, Jonah. “Probitiv: Stata Module to Perform Instrumental Variables Probit.”
[http://www.glue.umd.edu/~gelbach/ado/]
                                                                                        24


Gouskova, Elena and Robert F. Schoeni. "Analysis of the Quality of Health Data in the
PSID" [http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/psid/q_inc_data/report_on_health_qsv2.pdf]
downloaded August 19, 2002.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. “The Carnegie Conjecture:
Some Empirical Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1993, pp. 413-435.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. “Estimating the Income
Effect on Retirement,” Working Paper, Princeton University, December 2000.

Hurd, Michael D., Daniel McFadden, and Angela Merrill. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise?
Socioeconomic Status, Morbidity, and Mortality among the Elderly,” April 1998, manu-
script, UC Berkeley.

Idler, Ellen and Yael Benyamini, “Self-Related Health and Mortality: A Review of
Twenty-Seven Community Studies,” Journal of Health and Social Behavior, Vol. 38,
March 1997, pp. 21-37

Lefkowitz, Bonnie. “Dollars Count More Than Doctors,”
[http://www.inequality.org/healthdc2.html], 2000.

Levy, Helen, “The Financial Impact of Health Insurance.” Harris Graduate School of
Public Policy Studies, University of Chicago. Manuscript. April 2000.

Meara, Ellen. “Why is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Pregnancy
and Low Birth Weight.” NBER Working Paper No. 8231. April 2001.

McClellan, Mark. “Health Events, Health Insurance, and Labor Supply: Evidence from
the Health and Retirement Survey.” In David A. Wise (ed.) Frontiers in the Economics
of Aging. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1998. 301-346.

McDonough, Peggy, Greg J. Duncan, David Williams, and James House. “Income Dy-
namics and Adult Mortality in the United States, 1972 through 1989.” American Journal
of Public Health. Vol. 87, No. 9 September 1997. 1476-1483.

Preston, S.E. and Paul Taubman. “Socioeconomic Differences in Adult Mortality and
Health Status.” Demography of Aging. Washington DC: National Academy Press, 1994.

Rivers, Douglas and Quang H. Vuong. “Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity
Tests for Simultaneous Probit Models.” Journal of Econometrics. 39 (1988): 347-366.

Ross, Catherine E. and John Mirowsky, “Does Medical Insurance Contribute to Socio-
economic Differentials in Health?” The Milbank Quarterly 78, no. 2, 2000, pp. 291-321.
                                                                                       25


Smith, James P. and Raynard S. Kington. “Race, Socioeconomic Status, and Health in
Late Life.” in Linda G. Martin and Beth J. Soldo (eds.). Racial and Ethnic Differences in
the Health of Older Americans. National Academy Press: Washington, DC, 1997.

Smith, James P. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation Between Health
and Economic Status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Vol. 13 No. 2 Spring 1999.
145-166.

Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak In-
struments.” Econometrica. Vol 65, No 3. May 1997. 556-586.

White, Halbert, “A Heteroscedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Di-
rect Test for Heteroscedasticity.” Econometrica. Vol. 48, No. 4 May 1980. 817-830.

Wu, Stephen, "The Effects of Health Events on the Economic Status of Married
Couples", Journal of Human Resources, Winter 2003 (forthcoming)

Verbrugge, Lois M., “Gender and Health: An Update on Hypothesis and Evidence.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior. Vol. 26, No. 3. September 1985. 156-182.
                                                                                                        26
                                              Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics

                                                                                              Standard
     Variable                                Description                            Mean
                                                                                              Deviation

      Health               Self-rated health: 1 if healthy and 0 otherwise.         0.8094     0.3928

                       Difference between household wealth in year t and t-5
     ∆Wealth                                                                        0.04286    0.3330
                                    in millions of 1999 dollars.

                       Sum of main home value, net value of other real estate,
                        net value of vehicles, net value of any farms or busi-
   Initial Wealth       nesses, net value of stocks and other financial instru-
                                                                                    0.1744     0.4347
                       ments, cash accounts, and the net value of other assets
                       less outstanding mortgage principal and other debts in
                                       millions of 1999 dollars.

                       Dollar amount of all inheritances received between year
 Total Inheritance     t and t-5 in millions of 1999 dollars. Mean and standard     0.09214    0.2180
                         deviation are reported for the 297 nonzero responses.

                        Dollar amount of the inheritances the head expects to
Expected Inheritance   receive between year t and t-5, in millions of 1999 dol-
                       lars. Mean and standard deviation are reported for 225       0.1276     0.3922
                        nonzero responses. This variable is only available in
                                               1984.

        Age                                  Head’s age.                             49.16      15.82

                       Head does not have a high school degree during the first
    No Degree                                                                       0.2358     0.4245
                                  year head is present in the panel.

                       Head has a high school degree and possibly some fur-
    HS Degree          ther technical training during the first year head is pre-   0.3487     0.4766
                                           sent in the panel.

                        Head attended but did not complete college during the
   Some College                                                                     0.1933     0.3949
                                first year head is present in the panel.

                        Head has a college degree during the first year head is
  College Degree                                                                    0.1565     0.3634
                                        present in the panel.

       Male                                 Head is male.                           0.7438     0.4366

       Black                                Head is black.                          0.1157     0.3199

       White                                Head is white.                          0.8582     0.3488

                        Head lives in the north-central region during the first
   North-Central                                                                    0.2867     0.4523
                                 year head is present in the panel.

                       Head lives in the north-east region during the first year
    North-East                                                                      0.2092     0.4068
                                     head is present in the panel.

                        Head lives in the southern region during the first year
       South                                                                        0.3141     0.4642
                                     head is present in the panel.

                       Head is married during the first year head is present in
      Married                                                                       0.5988     0.4902
                                            the panel.
                                                                                                   27
                       Head is widowed during the first year head is present in
     Widowed                                                                        0.1026    0.3034
                                            the panel.

                        Head is divorced during the first year head is present in
      Divorced                                                                      0.1328    0.3394
                                              the panel.

                        Head has at least one child during the first year head is
 Whether Children                                                                   0.4140    0.4926
                                          present in the panel.



Means are computed using PSID sample weights, and taken over 6604 person-year observations.
                                                                                                28
                                               Table 2
                              Health Transitions and Change in Wealth


                                             Whole Sample        Sick in Year T   Healthy in Year T

                       Mean of ∆Wealth           0.008847          0.007255           0.01187

  Sick in Year T-5     Standard Deviation         0.2950            0.3419             0.1741

                          Sample Size             1274                  841             433

                       Mean of ∆Wealth           0.04923           0.001815           0.05471

Healthy in Year T-5    Standard Deviation         0.3393            0.1725             0.3531

                          Sample Size             5330                  643             4687




Means are computed using PSID sample weights..
                                                                                                                29
                                                  Table 3
                            Probit Estimates of Health Status (Marginal Effects)

                                     ∆Wealth                 Wealth Variables          With Other Covariates
                                     0.04840                      0.07986                      0.04918
        ∆Wealth
                                    (0.01932)                    (0.05066)                    (0.03969)
                                                                  0.1647                       0.08370
     Initial Wealth                      -
                                                                 (0.03961)                    (0.03435)
                                     0.4781                       0.4498                       0.4043
      Initial Health
                                    (0.02152)                    (0.02334)                    (0.02420)
                                    -0.004555                    -0.005025                   -0.004809
          Age
                                   (0.0003304)                  (0.0003383)                 (0.0004615)
                                                                                               -0.1149
       No Degree                         -                            -
                                                                                              (0.03371)
                                                                                              -0.05531
       HS Degree                         -                            -
                                                                                              (0.02773)
                                                                                              -0.01549
     Some College                        -                            -
                                                                                              (0.02918)
                                                                                               0.01864
    College Degree                       -                            -
                                                                                              (0.02831)
                                                                                              -0.02831
          Male                           -                            -
                                                                                              (0.01720)
                                                                                              -0.07396
         Black                           -                            -
                                                                                              (0.04527)
                                                                                              -0.02906
         White                           -                            -
                                                                                              (0.03049)
                                                                                              -0.01603
     North-Central                       -                            -
                                                                                              (0.01662)
                                                                                             0.0001899
       North-East                        -                            -
                                                                                             (0.01786)
                                                                                              -0.03329
         South                           -                            -
                                                                                              (0.01688)
                                                                                               0.03691
        Married                          -                            -
                                                                                              (0.02243)
                                                                                              -0.01999
        Divorced                         -                            -
                                                                                              (0.02132)
                                                                                             -0.008474
       Widowed                           -                            -
                                                                                             (0.02606)
                                                                                              -0.02741
   Whether Children                      -                            -
                                                                                              (0.01356)
                                     -0.01988                     0.01812                     -0.01719
   1989 Time Effect
                                    (0.02194)                    (0.02133)                    (0.02188)
                                     -0.03931                     -0.03908                    -0.03862
   1994 Time Effect
                                    (0.02135)                    (0.02063)                    (0.02099)

The left hand side variable is one if an individual is healthy in year t and zero otherwise. Coefficients are
marginal probability effects of the respective variables, which are defined in Table 1. For dichotomous
variables, the coefficient is the effect of a discrete change from 0 to 1. The sample size in all models is
6604 person-year observations. Standard errors are in parentheses. Those significant at the 5% level are
italicized.
                                                                                                          30
                                                   Table 4
                             First Stage of Instrumental Variables Regressions

                                    ∆Wealth                Wealth Variables         With Other Covariates
                                     0.9946                      0.9910                     0.9425
   Total Inheritance
                                    (0.4493)                    (0.4411)                   (0.4374)
                                                               0.008299                     -0.01710
     Initial Wealth                     -
                                                               (0.08638)                   (0.08871)
                                    0.03032                     0.02912                    0.004821
     Initial Health
                                   (0.01153)                   (0.01458)                   (0.01318)
                                  -0.0005182                   -0.0005612                -0.0004685
          Age
                                  (0.0003296)                 (0.0004792)                (0.0005538)
                                                                                            -0.1244
       No Degree                        -                          -
                                                                                           (0.03378)
                                                                                            -0.1211
       HS Degree                        -                          -
                                                                                           (0.03163)
                                                                                            -0.1115
     Some College                       -                          -
                                                                                           (0.03314)
                                                                                            -0.03052
    College Degree                      -                          -
                                                                                           (0.04003)
                                                                                            0.01101
         Male                           -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01366)
                                                                                            0.02043
         Black                          -                          -
                                                                                           (0.04983)
                                                                                            0.01899
         White                          -                          -
                                                                                           (0.05096)
                                                                                            -0.02362
     North-Central                      -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01518)
                                                                                           -0.009385
       North-East                       -                          -
                                                                                           (0.02136)
                                                                                           -0.03719
         South                          -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01472)
                                                                                            0.02739
        Married                         -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01663)
                                                                                           0.007210
       Divorced                         -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01124)
                                                                                            0.01331
       Widowed                          -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01903)
                                                                                           -0.006870
   Whether Children                     -                          -
                                                                                           (0.01242)
                                    -0.01015                    -0.01024                    -0.01384
    1984-1989 Panel
                                   (0.02636)                   (0.02639)                   (0.02671)
                                    -0.03955                    -0.03983                    -0.04243
    1989-1994 Panel
                                   (0.02632)                   (0.02633)                   (0.02617)
       F-statistic                    6.62                        5.52                       6.07
Number of Observations               6604                        6604                        6604
       R-squared                     0.0350                     0.0352                      0.0533

The left hand side variable is ∆Wealth. Estimation is by ordinary least squares. Standard errors in paren-
theses. Those significant at the 5% level are italicized. The sample size in all models is 6604 person-year
observations.
                                                                                                            31
                                                   Table 5
                       Reduced Form Probit Estimates of Health Status (Marginal Effects)

                                No Wealth Variables          Wealth Variables         With Other Covariates
                                       0.2405                     0.1482                      0.07243
    Total Inheritance
                                      (0.1426)                   (0.1405)                     (0.1037)
                                                                  0.1549                      0.07405
     Initial Wealth                      -
                                                                 (0.04079)                   (0.03330)
                                      0.4792                      0.4539                       0.4055
      Initial Health
                                     (0.02148)                   (0.02293)                    (0.4056)
                                     -0.004582                  -0.005037                    -0.004796
          Age
                                    (0.0003275)                (0.0003366)                  (0.0004658)
                                                                                              -0.1196
       No Degree                         -                           -
                                                                                             (0.03323)
                                                                                             -0.05845
       HS Degree                         -                           -
                                                                                             (0.02740)
                                                                                              -0.01739
     Some College                        -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01739)
                                                                                              0.02115
    College Degree                       -                           -
                                                                                             (0.02835)
                                                                                              -0.02740
          Male                           -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01752)
                                                                                              -0.07622
         Black                           -                           -
                                                                                             (0.04530)
                                                                                              -0.03068
         White                           -                           -
                                                                                             (0.03015)
                                                                                              0.01621
     North-Central                       -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01672)
                                                                                             0.001159
       North-East                        -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01793)
                                                                                              -0.03399
         South                           -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01699)
                                                                                              0.03824
        Married                          -                           -
                                                                                             (0.02263)
                                                                                             -0.01959
        Divorced                         -                           -
                                                                                             (0.02142)
                                                                                             -0.007623
       Widowed                           -                           -
                                                                                             (0.02617)
                                                                                             -0.02795
   Whether Children                      -                           -
                                                                                             (0.01367)
                                      -0.02107                    0.02203                     0.01924
    1984-1989 Panel
                                     (0.02202)                   (0.02149)                   (0.02202)
                                      -0.04173                   -0.04430                    -0.04142
    1989-1994 Panel
                                     (0.02140)                   (0.02078)                   (0.02110)

The left hand side variable is one if an individual is healthy in year t and zero otherwise. Coefficients are
marginal probability effects of the respective variables, which are defined in Table 1. For dichotomous
variables, the coefficient is the effect of a discrete change from 0 to 1. The sample size in all models is
6604 person-year observations. Standard errors are in parentheses. Those significant at the 5% level are
italicized.
                                                                                                           32
                                                 Table 6
                      Two Stage Probit Estimates of Health Status (Marginal Effects)

                                    ∆Wealth                 Wealth Variables         With Other Covariates
                                     0.2404                      0.1704                      0.09505
        ∆Wealth
                                    (0.1764)                    (0.1568)                     (0.1460)
                                                                 0.1625                      0.08395
     Initial Wealth                     -
                                                                (0.04476)                   (0.03915)
                                     0.4684                      0.4454                      0.4039
     Initial Health
                                    (0.02316)                   (0.02473)                   (0.02515)
                                   -0.004452                    -0.004967                   -0.004783
          Age
                                  (0.0003509)                  (0.0003626)                 (0.0004771)
                                                                                             -0.1069
       No Degree                        -                           -
                                                                                            (0.04468)
                                                                                             -0.04877
       HS Degree                        -                           -
                                                                                            (0.03588)
                                                                                            -0.009578
     Some College                       -                           -
                                                                                            (0.03550)
                                                                                             0.02041
    College Degree                      -                           -
                                                                                            (0.03006)
                                                                                             -0.02850
          Male                          -                           -
                                                                                            (0.01661)
                                                                                             -0.07522
         Black                          -                           -
                                                                                            (0.04853)
                                                                                             -0.03001
         White                          -                           -
                                                                                            (0.03119)
                                                                                             -0.01474
     North-Central                      -                           -
                                                                                            (0.01700)
                                                                                            0.0007501
       North-East                       -                           -
                                                                                            (0.01776)
                                                                                             -0.03139
         South                          -                           -
                                                                                            (0.01756)
                                                                                             0.03530
        Married                         -                           -
                                                                                            (0.02286)
                                                                                            -0.02038
        Divorced                        -                           -
                                                                                            (0.02133)
                                                                                            -0.008980
       Widowed                          -                           -
                                                                                            (0.02583)
                                                                                            -0.02696
   Whether Children                     -                           -
                                                                                            (0.01401)
                                     -0.01796                    -0.01720                   -0.01646
    1984-1989 Panel
                                    (0.02247)                   (0.02158)                   (0.02255)
                                     -0.03170                    -0.03545                   -0.03658
    1989-1994 Panel
                                    (0.02355)                   (0.02189)                   (0.02208)

The left hand side variable is one if an individual is healthy in year t and zero otherwise. Coefficients are
marginal probability effects of the respective variables, which are defined in Table 1. For dichotomous
variables, the coefficient is the effect of a discrete change from 0 to 1. The sample size in all models is
6604 person-year observations. Standard errors, which are obtained from a bootstrap procedure with 1000
replicatons, are in parentheses. Those significant at the 5% level are italicized.
