NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A DECOMPOSITION OF GLOBAL LINKAGES
IN FINANCIAL MARKETS OVER TIME
Kristin J. Forbes
Menzie D. Chinn
Working Paper 9555
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9555
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

Thanks to Robin Brooks, Ashoka Mody, Andy Rose, Beatrice Weder and participants at the Global Linkages
conference held at the IMF on January 30-31, 2003 for helpful comments and suggestions. We are also
grateful to Andy Rose, Sergio Schmukler, and Frank Warnock for kindly sharing their data sets. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Kristin J. Forbes and Menzie D. Chinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

A Decomposition of Global Linkages in Financial Markets Over Time
Kristin J. Forbes and Menzie D. Chinn
NBER Working Paper No. 9555
March 2003
JEL No. F36, G15, F15, F21
ABSTRACT
This paper tests if real and financial linkages between countries can explain why movements in the
world's largest markets often have such large effects on other financial markets, and how these
cross-market linkages have changed over time. It estimates a factor model in which a country's
market returns are determined by: global, sectoral, and cross-country factors (returns in large
financial markets), and country-specific effects. Then it uses a new data set on bilateral linkages
between the world's 5 largest economies and about 40 other markets to decompose the cross-country
factor loadings into: direct trade flows, competition in third markets, bank lending, and foreign direct
investment. Estimates suggest that both cross-country and sectoral factors are important
determinants of stock and bond returns, and that the U.S. factor has recently gained importance,
while the Japanese and U.K. factors have lost importance. From 1996-2000, real and financial
linkages became more important determinants of how shocks are transmitted from large economies
to other markets. In particular, bilateral trade flows are large and significant determinants of crosscountry linkages in both stock and bond markets. Bilateral foreign investment is usually
insignificant. Therefore, despite the recent growth in global financial flows, direct trade still appears
to be the most important determinant of how movements in the world's largest markets affect
financial markets around the globe.
Kristin J. Forbes
MIT-Sloan School of Management

Menzie D. Chinn
National Bureau of Economic Research

50 Memorial Drive, Room E52-455

1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02142

Cambridge, MA 02138

and NBER

and NBER

kjforbes@mit.edu

chinn@cats.ucsc.edu

I.

Introduction

In the first half of 2002, the U.S. was buffeted by a series of negative shocks — from
disappointing economic growth, to terrorist threats and uncertainty about a potential war with
Iraq, to continued fallout from a series of financial scandals that raised broader concerns about
corporate governance. As a result, the U.S. stock market fell by about 17 percent over the first 6
months of the year.1 Many other markets around the world declined in harmony; over the same 6month period, Finland’s stock market fell by 30 percent, Ireland’s by 14 percent, Mexico’s by 11
percent, and Hong Kong’s by 6 percent. Other stock markets, however, performed relatively well
and appeared to be isolated from the series of negative news in the U.S. For example, over the
same period Iceland’s stock market experienced positive returns of 26 percent, South Africa’s of
21 percent, South Korea’s of 12 percent, and Colombia’s of 11 percent. Shocks to the world’s
largest economies and their financial markets often spread to some markets, while markets in
other countries are relatively isolated.
This paper examines if real and financial linkages between countries can explain why the
world’s largest financial markets often appear to have such large, yet diverse, effects on other
financial markets, and how these cross-market linkages have changed over time. More
specifically, the paper attempts to answer four questions. First, how important are cross-country
linkages with large financial markets, as compared to global and sectoral factors, in explaining
financial market returns in countries around the world? Second, how important are bilateral trade
flows, trade competition in third markets, bank lending, and investment exposure in explaining
these cross-country linkages? Third, how has the relative importance of these various global
linkages changed over time? Finally, how does the relative importance of these global linkages
differ across stock markets and bond markets?
In order to answer these questions, this paper begins by developing a factor model of
market returns in different countries. It assumes that a country’s market returns are a function of:
global factors (global interest rates, oil prices, gold prices, and commodity prices), sectoral
factors (stock returns for 14 sectoral indices), cross-country factors (returns in other large
financial markets), and country-specific effects. After estimating the importance of these factors
for different countries and regions, the paper then focuses on the estimated cross-country linkages
between the five largest economies (France, Germany, Japan, the U.K. and U.S) and about 40
developed countries and emerging markets around the world. It decomposes these cross-country
linkages into four specific bilateral linkages: two real linkages (direct trade flows and competition
in third markets) and two financial linkages (bank lending and foreign direct investment). After

1

measuring the importance of each of these factors and bilateral linkages in stock markets between
1986 and 2000, the paper than examines how their relative importance has changed over time and
differs in bond markets.
The paper finds that both cross-country factors and sectoral factors are important
determinants of stock and bond returns in countries around the world (although it is often difficult
to differentiate between these two sets of factors). Not surprisingly, movements in the largest
regional economy tend be the most important cross-country factor for nearby countries (such as
the U.S. market for the Americas), although movements in the U.S. market are also important for
most regions. In the later half of the 1990’s, the U.S. factor and sectoral factors gained
importance in most regions, while the Japanese and U.K. factors lost importance.
Results from the second-stage regressions that decompose the cross-country factor
loadings into different real and financial linkages find that between 1986-90 and 1991-95,
bilateral linkages are fairly unimportant and estimation results are highly sensitive to model
specification. From 1996-2000, however, bilateral linkages through trade and finance become
more significant determinants of how shocks are transmitted from large economies to markets
around the world. More specifically, direct trade flows appear to be the strongest and most
important determinant of cross-country linkages in both stock and bond markets. Bilateral bank
lending and trade competition in third markets can also be significant determinants of crosscountry linkages, although the importance of these bilateral linkages fluctuates across asset
markets and model specifications. Bilateral foreign investment, however, is generally not a
significant determinant of cross-country linkages. These results establish a connection between
high-frequency movements in financial markets and lower-frequency real variables. These results
also suggest that despite the recent growth in capital flows across countries, direct trade linkages
are still more important than financial linkages in determining how shocks to the world’s largest
economies affect markets around the globe.
One of the contributions of this paper is a new data set on bilateral trade and financial
linkages between the world’s largest economies and about 40 developed countries and emerging
markets. Although information on bilateral trade flows has been widely available for years, other
variables are fairly new to this literature, such as the statistics measuring bilateral investment
positions and trade competition in third markets based on 4-digit SITC industry information.2
Perhaps most important, this is the first study to simultaneously control for direct trade flows,

1

Aggregate stock market indices reported by Datastream. See Section IV for additional data information.
Forbes (2002) also constructs this trade competition variable for a series of “crisis countries” between
1997 and 2000. Mody et al. (2002) is one of the few papers to use the same foreign investment database.
2

2

trade competition in third markets, bank lending, and foreign direct investment, when attempting
to explain cross-country linkages. Other papers have controlled for one or two of these linkages to
examine a range of questions, but since the four bilateral linkage variables could be highly
correlated, omitting a subset of these variables could severely bias coefficient estimates.
Therefore, by simultaneously controlling for all four types of bilateral linkages, this paper should
provide more accurate estimates of the relative importance of different types of trade and
financial channels in explaining cross-country comovement in financial markets.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section II briefly reviews related literature.
Section III develops the models and estimation framework. Section IV describes the data set and
construction of several new variables. It also examines trends in various bilateral linkages for
different sets of countries. Section V provides initial results for stock markets over the full sample
period from 1986 to 2000, and Section VI examines how the importance of various global
linkages has evolved over time. Section VII performs a similar analysis for bond markets and
compares results to those for stock markets. Section VIII summarizes an extensive series of
sensitivity tests. Section IX concludes by summarizing how this paper’s new dataset and the
corresponding results provide insights on the changing nature of integration between the world’s
largest economies and financial markets around the world.

II.

Related Literature

This paper builds on an extensive literature that can be roughly grouped into four categories: asset
market comovement and financial integration, business cycle synchronization and real
integration, firm-level exposure to real and financial shocks, and the international transmission of
crises.3 The literature on cross-country correlations in asset returns can be traced back to Sharpe’s
(1964) and Lintner’s (1965) contributions to the international capital asset pricing model. This
framework posits that in completely segmented markets, local asset returns will be based on local
factors. With integrated capital markets, however, expected asset returns are determined by the
asset’s covariance with the world market portfolio. A large body of research has therefore
attempted to identify how the integration of previously segmented markets has changed patterns
of cross-country equity correlations. Increased integration with global markets, however, does not
necessarily generate increased correlations between domestic and global asset returns.

3

See Karolyi and Stulz (2002) for an excellent survey of related literature. Also see Bekaert and Harvey
(2002) for a detailed survey focusing on emerging markets.

3

One reason why integration may not generate increased correlations is differences in
industrial structures between individual countries and the world average. Roll (1992) argues that
industry structure and concentration are important determinants of a country’s stock market
behavior, and that countries with more similar industrial compositions tend to have more highly
correlated stock market returns. In subsequent work, there has been an active debate on the
relative importance of industry effects versus country-specific effects in explaining cross-country
correlations and volatility. Heston and Rouwenhorst (1994) argue that industrial structure
explains very little of the cross-sectional differences in country return volatility in Europe, and
that the low correlation between country indices is almost completely due to country-specific
sources of return variation. Griffin and Karolyi (1998) find that although industry effects are
significant determinants of international stock returns, country-specific effects are the dominant
factor. Cavaglia et al. (2000) argue that the importance of industry factors has recently grown, so
that by the late 1990’s they dominated country factors. Brooks and Del Negro (2002a), however,
argue that this recent increase is largely driven by cyclical effects from the bubble in
telecommunications, media, biotechnology and information technology (TMBT) in the U.S.
Moreover, Brooks and del Negro (2002b) control for global shocks and use a more flexible
modeling strategy to find that country-specific shocks are currently more important than industry
shocks in explaining the international variation in returns.
In addition to the literature discussed above that focuses on stock market returns and
financial market comovement, there is also an extensive literature examining “synchronization”
and the cross-country comovement in business cycles and real variables.4 Some of these papers,
such as Kose et al. (2003), examine how global integration has affected cross-country correlations
in output, consumption and investment. Other papers attempt to explain correlations between
business cycles based on country characteristics and specific measures of integration. For
example, Frankel and Rose (1998) focus on the role of trade, Heathcote and Perri (2002) on asset
diversification, and Imbs (2003) simultaneously examines the role of output compositions, trade
patterns, and capital account fluctuations. A priori, it is unclear if greater integration would
increase or decrease business cycle correlations. For example, greater integration could lead to
greater industrial specialization, so that countries are more vulnerable to industry-specific shocks
than common shocks. Most of the empirical work on this subject, however, has found that greater
integration through trade and/or finance increases business cycle correlations.
Connecting this branch of literature on real integration and business cycles with the
former literature on asset market comovement is a related literature on firm-level exposure to

4

exchange rate movements and real variables.5 Most of this work finds that only a small percent of
firms are significantly exposed to exchange-rate movements, and that the relationship between
exchange rate exposure and real linkages with other countries is either weak or nonexistent. For
example, Dominguez and Tesar (2001b) argue that firms which engage in cross-country trade are
not significantly more exposed to exchange rate movements. On the other hand, Brooks and Del
Negro (2003) show that firms which operate internationally are more exposed to global market
movements and less to country-specific factors. This is one of the few papers to document a
significant relationship between trade exposure and firm-level stock returns over annual periods
or longer, a connection that is also documented at the country level in this paper.
While most of the literature discussed above has focused on the determinants of crosscountry correlations (in either financial markets or real variables) over long periods or around
financial integration, another related literature has focused on asset market comovement during
financial crises. Much of this work has focused on “contagion” and the international transmission
of crises.6 Initially, papers attempted to simply document whether a crisis generated a significant
increase in cross-market correlations between the crisis country and other countries—with a
significant increase interpreted as evidence of contagion.7 More recent work has attempted to
document the specific channels by which a crisis in one country spreads to other countries, with
certain transmission mechanisms defined as “contagion” (such as investor herding) and other
mechanisms (such as trade flows) defined as “fundamentals” or interdependence”.
This body of literature attempting to measure the different channels by which a shock to
one country spreads to other countries is most closely related to the decomposition of bilateral
linkages performed in this paper (although this paper focuses on the transmission of shocks from
the world’s largest economies during longer periods of time, instead of from smaller crisis
economies during periods of financial market turmoil).8 Eichengreen and Rose (1999) and Glick
and Rose (1999) were the earliest papers to focus on the role of trade, versus a country’s
macroeconomic characteristics, in explaining a country’s vulnerability to a crisis that originated
elsewhere. Forbes (2002) builds on this work by decomposing trade into distinct channels, such
as direct trade flows and industry-level competition in third markets, both of which affect the
transmission of recent crises. Van Rijckeghem and Weder (2001) and (2002) were two of the first
4

See Imbs (2003) for a more thorough review of this literature.
See Dominguez and Tesar (2001a) for a detailed review of this literature.
6
See Claessens and Forbes (2001) for a series of papers on this subject. In particular, see Claessens et al.
(2001) for a detailed review of the literature on contagion.
7
See Forbes and Rigobon (2002) for a review of this literature and critical assessment of tests for contagion
based on correlation coefficients.
8
See Forbes (2002) for a much more detailed review of the literature discussed in this paragraph.
5

5

papers to examine the role of bank lending, as well as trade, in explaining contagion.9 Forbes
(2003) is one of the only papers to attempt to measure the importance of these trade and financial
channels in the transmission of crises at the firm level.
Many of these papers find that trade linkages between countries—whether direct trade
flows or competition in third markets—were important determinants of how crises affected other
countries. Some of the literature which has also included measures of bank lending between
countries, however, has argued that bilateral financial flows may be even more important than
trade flows, although it can be difficult to isolate their independent effects. One limitation of all
of these studies (which most authors candidly admit) is that since many different bilateral
linkages are highly correlated and difficult to measure, studies that only include a subset of these
linkages could have problems with omitted-variable bias. For example, studies that control for
trade linkages between countries, but not bank lending or investment, are likely to overstate the
importance of trade linkages.
This paper is the first study, to the best of our knowledge, to simultaneously control for
direct trade flows, competition in third markets, bank lending, and foreign direct investment when
measuring asset market comovements and the international transmission of shocks. This approach
should therefore reduce any omitted-variable bias in the estimated importance of each of these
bilateral linkages. Even this more comprehensive analysis, however, is incomplete, since there are
numerous other cross-country linkages that are not included in this study due to limited bilateral
data availability. For example, Kaminsky et al. (2001) show that mutual fund investments can be
important mechanisms for the cross-country transmission of crises. Karolyi (2003) shows that
cross-listing through American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) can affect stock market integration.
Multinational exposure across borders or trade credit could also be important transmission
mechanisms. All of these variables are likely to be correlated with bilateral foreign investment or
trade flows, potentially biasing the relevant coefficient estimates. Therefore, although this paper’s
analysis of bilateral linkages is more complete than previous work, additional bilateral linkages
that are not included in this analysis could still affect estimates.

III.

Model and Estimation Framework

This section describes the two-stage modeling framework used to estimate the importance of
different cross-country linkages over long periods, as well as how their importance has changed
9

Other papers which simultaneously control for cross-country linkages through trade as well as bank
lending are: Caramazza et al. (2000) and Gelos and Sahay (2001).

6

over time. In the first stage, we estimate a factor model of returns, controlling for global, sectoral,
and cross-country factors. In the second stage, we decompose the estimated cross-country factor
loadings into four types of bilateral linkages: import demand, trade competition, bank lending,
and foreign investment.
Returns in two countries could commove due to a number of factors. First, returns in both
countries could be affected by global shocks, such as changes in: the world interest rate, oil
prices, other commodity prices, or global risk aversion. Second, returns in both countries could be
affected by sectoral shocks that simultaneously affect all countries that produce in or have
exposure to the given sector. As discussed in Section II, one sectoral shock that has recently
received substantial attention is the “bubble” in technology, media, and telecommunications in
the late 1990’s. Third, returns in two countries could co-move because shocks to one country are
transmitted to other countries through cross-country linkages, such as bilateral trade, export
competition in third markets, bilateral bank lending, or bilateral investment flows. Although these
cross-country linkages are the focus of this paper, it is important to control for any global or
sectoral shocks in order to accurately estimate the magnitude of these linkages and avoid
spuriously capturing changes in other factors that affect country comovement.
In order to isolate the importance of cross-country linkages, this paper uses a factor
model of returns that controls for three sets of factors: global, sectoral, and cross-country. It also
allows market returns in each country to be determined by a country-specific effect. For each
country i, asset returns (Rit) at each time t can be expressed as:
G

S

C

g =1

s =1

c =1

Rit = α i + ∑ φig ft g + ∑ γ is fts + ∑ β ic ftc +ε it ,

[ ]

[

(1)

]

with E [ε it ] = 0, E ε it2 = σ i2 , and E ε it ε jt = σ ij2 for each 2 countries i and j with i≠j. The ft g are

the G global factors; the fts are the S sectoral factors; the ftc are the C cross-country factors,
corresponding to each large country c; φig , γ is , and β ic are the country-specific factor loadings
for the global, sectoral and cross-country factors, respectively; αi is a country-specific effect; and

εit is a normally-distributed error term, with errors not necessarily independent across countries.
Factor loadings are therefore assumed to be constant across the given period for each country, but
allowed to vary across countries.

7

The model in equation (1) is assumed to hold for each of the smaller countries i in the
world, with i=1,2,…I. The C countries that are defined as the cross-country factors are large
countries in which shocks are expected to have the greatest spillover effects in countries around
the world. These C larger countries are then excluded from the set of countries included as i. For
example, Chile and the Philippines could be two countries included as countries i, and the U.S.
and Japan could be two countries included as countries c but not included as i. Estimates of

β ic should therefore capture the effect of movements in the U.S. and Japanese markets on the
Chilean and Philippine markets, with minimal feedback effect from Rit to ftc .10 The model
focuses on the effect of shocks to larger countries on smaller countries, rather than estimating
simultaneous equations between all countries in the world, due to limited data availability for
bilateral linkages between most smaller countries in the world.
One potential problem with equation (1), however, is that the global, sectoral, and crosscountry factors can be highly correlated, making it difficult to isolate the individual impact of
each set of factors. More specifically, if a large country c that is a major producer (or purchaser)
in a given industrial sector experiences a significant shock, the country-specific shock could not
only affect other countries through cross-country linkages, but also simultaneously affect certain
sectors on a global basis. For example, the U.S. produces a major share of global production and
is a major consumer in the electronics industry. The impact of a shock to the U.S. economy on
other countries could therefore be largely captured in the sectoral factor for electronics, reducing
estimates of any direct cross-country effects of the U.S. on other economies. Similarly, if a shock
to a major economy (such as the U.S.) spreads to most other countries in the world, this could
appear to be a “global” shock, even though it is technically just a country-specific shock in a
major economy. In order to control for this potential multicollinearity when estimating the factor
loadings, we examine the correlation structure between each of the factors, as well as estimate
equation (1) without the sectoral and/or global factors.
After obtaining estimates of the cross-country loadings β ic (either with or without controls
for the full set of global and sectoral factors) for each pair of small countries i and large countries
c (an I x C matrix of β’s), we decompose these cross-country loadings into different types of
bilateral linkages. We focus on four different channels through which shocks to a large country c
could affect a smaller country i. First, shocks to country c could affect country c’s demand for
10

There are, however, unusual occasions when shocks to smaller countries affect larger countries—such as
c

when the 1998 Russian crisis affected bond spreads in the U.S. In these cases, estimates of β i should be
interpreted as correlations between two countries c and i, instead of direct effects of country c on country i.

8

imports from country i. Second, shocks to country c, and especially shocks to country c that affect
country c’s exchange rate, could affect the relative price of country c’s exports and therefore
affect country i through trade competition in third markets. Third, shocks to country c could
affect bank lending from country c into smaller countries i. Finally, shocks to country c could
affect flows of foreign investment from country c into country i. There are obviously other
channels that could link large and small countries, such as portfolio investment, trade credit, or
multinational exposure. We focus on these four channels, however, not only because they have
been highlighted in previous literature (as discussed in Section II), but also because these are
bilateral linkages for which data is available.11
In order to estimate the importance of these four different bilateral linkages in explaining
the cross-country factor loadings, we use the following model:
β ic = α 0 + α1Import Demandic + α 2Trade Competitionic + α 3 Bank Lending ic
+ α 4 Foreign Investmentic + α 5 Χic + ηic

(2)

where β ic are the cross-country factor loadings (estimated in equation (1)) that measure the effect
of asset returns in country c on country i after controlling for global and/or sectoral shocks; α0 is
a constant term; Import Demandci measures the importance to country i of imports from country i
into country c; Trade Competitionci measure the importance to country i of export competition in
3rd markets between country i and country c; Bank Lendingci measures the importance to country i
of bank loans from country c; Foreign Investmentci measures the importance to country i of total
investment from country c; Xci is a matrix including any country-specific factors in countries i
and/or c that could affect linkages with other countries (such as capital controls); and ηic is a
normally-distributed error term.
This model developed in equations (1) and (2) can easily be extended to measure not only
the average role of different global linkages over the full period, but also how their importance
has changed over time. More specifically, the model can be estimated for different time periods to
see if there is a significant change in coefficient estimates across periods. Or, instead of focusing
on average values for each of the variables over a given period of time, it is possible to use annual
data over the same period to estimate a panel model. More specifically, assume that equation (1)

11

To the best of our knowledge, bilateral data on variables such as portfolio investment, trade credit, and
multinational exposure is not available for the majority of countries in our dataset.

9

is estimated using annual data, yielding annual estimates of the β izc ’s for each pair of countries i
and c in each year z. Then equation (2) can be estimated as an annual panel:

β izc = α 0 + α1Import Demand izc + α 2Trade Competitionizc + α 3 Bank Lending izc
c
+ α 4 Foreign Investmentizc + α 5 Χ iz
+ α 6 Tz + ηicz

(2′)

where Tz is a vector of annual dummy variables and all other variables are defined above, except
each now represents the relevant variable over the year z instead of averaged over the full period.
Both equations (2) and (2′) will be estimated for each of the model variations below.
Although, at first glance, one might expect that positive (negative) movements in large
countries’ asset markets would have positive (negative) effects on other countries’ asset markets
through each of the four bilateral linkage variables (so that α1, α2, α3, α4>0), theory suggests that
the signs of these coefficients are a priori indeterminate and can only be ascertained empirically.
For example, negative news about a large economy’s growth prospects could cause negative
returns in the large country’s asset market. This could generate a contraction in lending and
investment by banks and firms based in the large country as they strengthen balance sheets and
build reserves for the expected slowdown.12 The resulting contraction in lending and investment
in other countries would be expected to have a negative affect on asset returns in other countries,
so that α3, α4>0. On the other hand, if the negative economic news on the large country caused
banks and investors to keep their total volume of lending/investment fairly constant, but shift
exposure away from the large economy to other countries, then they could increase
lending/investment in other markets so that α3, α4<0.
The sign of the coefficient on Trade Competition is also difficult to predict. If the
negative economic news in the large country corresponded to a depreciation of the large country’s
exchange rate, this could give its exports a competitive advantage, and therefore have a negative
effect on expected asset returns in countries that are important trade competitors (so that α2>0). If
the exchange rate movement is not fully passed through into export prices (possibly due to
pricing-to-market effects), or the exchange-rate movement is only expected to be short lived,
however, any effect on competitors could be minimal. Moreover, if the negative news in the large
economy is any factor potentially hurting firm competitiveness—such as disappointing

12

Peek and Rosengreen (1997) provide evidence of this and show that after the 1990 Japanese stock market
crash, Japanese banks reduced lending in the U.S. Goldfajn and Valdés (1997) develop a formal model of
how a shock to one country can cause financial intermediaries to liquidate loans to other countries.

10

productivity growth, legislation increasing labor market rigidities, higher corporate taxes, or
higher interest rates—this could improve the relative competitiveness of other countries’ exports
and generate a positive shock to other countries’ asset markets, so that α2<0.
Even the sign of the coefficient on Import Demand is not clear-cut. In many cases,
negative asset market returns in the large country reflect negative news about earnings prospects
for domestic firms and reduced expectations for economic growth. This could indicate decreased
demand for imports and therefore cause negative returns in other countries that export to the large
country, so that α1>0. There is news, however, that could generate negative market movements in
the large country, but not signify any changes in expectations about real variables such as growth
or import demand. There is also news that would cause negative returns in the large economy, but
simultaneously increase the country’s demand for imports. For example, tariff reductions in the
large economy might hurt earnings prospects of domestic firms (causing negative asset market
returns in the large economy), but increase the ability of other countries to import into the large
economy (causing positive returns in other countries), so that α1<0. Therefore, the signs of each
of the coefficient estimates for the bilateral linkage variables in equations (2) and (2′) are a priori
indeterminate, and only empirical analysis will be able to establish the importance and direction
of these bilateral linkages in the international transmission of asset market movements.
A final issue with the estimates of equations (1) and (2) or (2′) is that when coefficients
are compared across different periods, changes in market volatility across periods will bias
estimates of cross-country comovement.13 For example, if stock market volatility in countries i
and c is higher in period z than period y, than holding all else equal, β izc > β iyc , even if the crossmarket relation between i and c is constant in the two periods. To test if this is a problem, we
calculate the average volatility in each market over each period. Volatility fluctuates across
individual years, especially in stock markets. For example, the average variance of local currency
stock market returns reaches a peak of 0.25 in 1998, and a low of 0.13 in 1996. Average market
volatility across longer periods, however, is fairly constant. For example, the average variance in
local currency stock market returns between 1991-1995 is 0.12, and between 1996-2000 is 0.14.
The average variance in local currency bond market returns is 0.01 between 1994-97 as well in
1998-2000. Therefore, in the following analysis when we compare coefficient estimates across
periods, we focus on comparisons across longer periods of 3-5 years (based on data availability)
instead of across individual years, although we continue to report both sets of estimates.

13

See Forbes and Rigobon (2002) for a more detailed discussion of this issue.

11

IV.

Data

In order to estimate the role of different global and bilateral linkages, we compile data from a
number of sources. The data used to estimate the factor model of returns in equation (1) was
compiled from DataStream, although many of the individual data series were based on different
original sources that are incorporated into DataStream. Asset returns (Rit) are measured by weekly
stock returns or weekly bond returns, both measured in either U.S. dollars or local currency.14
Stock returns are based on stock indices compiled by DataStream, which are weighted to be
representative of all major markets in the given country. The bond data for developed countries is
based on the total country return indices compiled by Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI) for 7-10 year bonds. The bond data for emerging markets is based on the EMBI Global
total country return indices compiled by JPMorgan.15
The global, sectoral, and cross-country factors in the factor model of returns are also
based on data series reported in DataStream.16 In our base estimates, we include four global
factors: global interest rates, oil prices, gold prices, and commodity prices. All factors are
calculated as changes or returns for the relevant price. Global interest rates are calculated as the
principal component from overnight discount rates in the U.S., U.K., and Japan.17 Oil prices are
the current dollar prices per barrel for Brent oil, calculated as freight-on-board. Gold prices are
the prices of gold bullion in $/oz on the London Bullion Market. Gold prices are included as a
global factor in order to capture any changes in global risk aversion. Commodity prices are an
index calculated by the Economist based on U.S. dollar prices of a large basket of commodities.
The sectoral factors are weekly returns based on the Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI) Industrial Sector Indices. These indices are calculated based on U.S. dollar stock returns
in 45 countries, with country weights based on country production in the given industrial sector.
Appendix A describes the creation of 14 sectoral factors from the original 36 MSCI indices

14

Returns are calculated as logarithmic differences.
To the best of our knowledge, identical data for bond returns in emerging markets and developed
countries is not available. The sample of emerging market bonds is: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China,
Colombia, Hungary, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Philippines, Poland, Turkey, and Venezuela.
16
Certain factors, such as oil or gold prices, could be included as either global or sectoral factors. The
sensitivity analysis examines using different definitions and finds that it has no impact on the key results.
17
Overnight rates for other large European countries, such as Germany or France, are not included in the
calculation of the principal component due to the break in their series in January 1999 with the adoption of
the euro. The principal component of the U.S., U.K. and Japanese interest rates accounts for about 75
percent of the variance of the three series, and a regression of this series on the simple average yields an
adjusted R2 of 0.99. Moreover, repeating the calculation with the German interest rate (for the time period
available), yields a principal component that is extremely close to that with just the U.S., U.K., and Japan.
15

12

available for the relevant period.18 The resulting 14 sectoral factors used to estimate equation (1)
are: automobiles, chemicals, consumer goods, electronics, energy, forest products and paper,
industrial components, financial, leisure and tourism, merchandising, metals,
telecommunications, textiles and apparel, and transportation.
The final set of factors, the cross-country factors, is returns for the large countries c in the
asset market corresponding to the left-hand side variable. In other words, if Rit is U.S. dollar stock
returns for country i, then ftc is U.S. dollar stock returns for country c. For the countries indexed
by c, we include the five largest countries in the world as ranked by GDP measured in U.S.
dollars at either the start or end of the sample period (1985 or 2000).19 These 5 large countries c
are: France, Germany, Japan, the U.K., and U.S.
For the second-stage regressions, when we estimate the cross-country factor loadings as a
function of specific bilateral linkages in equations (2) or (2′), we construct a dataset from several
sources. The GDP data used as a denominator for many of these statistics is taken from the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators (and reported in U.S. dollars). The trade data used to
calculate Import Demandci and Trade Competitionci is from the Statistics’ Canada database,
accessed through the Worldview Trade Analyzer service. This database reports bilateral trade
flows between most countries in the world by 4-digit SITC codes.20 More specifically, Import
Demandci is measured as imports into country c from country i as a share of country i GDP:

Import Demandic =

Ιmpic
,
GDPi

(3)

where Impci is total imports into large-country c from country i, and GDPi is GDP for country i.
All variables are measured in U.S. dollars.
The second cross-country linkage variable included in equations (2) and (2′), Trade
Competitionci, is a weighted product of two terms. The first term is exports from country c in a
given industry as a share of world exports in that industry. This term captures how important
exports from country c are to the industry, and therefore the potential impact of shocks to country
18

As discussed in the sensitivity analysis, we also include each of the 36 MSCI sectoral indices as
independent sectoral factors. Including such a large number of factors, however, severally limits the
degrees of freedom for the analysis. Moreover, some of these more disaggregated factors are even more
highly correlated with the global factors and/or individual country factors.
19
We only include 5 countries due to data limitations. More specifically, the direct investment data is not
available for other large economies, such as Spain or Italy (after 1994).

13

c on the industry as a whole. The second term is total exports from country i in the same industry,
as a share of country i's GDP. This term captures the importance of each industry to country i.
Finally, the products of these two terms are summed across all four-digit industries for each pair
of countries i and c, and then weighted by the maximum calculated value (and multiplied by 100).
This creates an index that can take values from 0 to 100. In other words, Trade Competitionci is
calculated as:

Trade Competitio nic =

i
c
 ExpW

, k ExpW , k 

*
∑
W
MaxTradeCompetition k  ExpW
GDPi 
,k



100

(4)

where ExpcW,k is exports from large-country c to every other country in the world (W) in industry
k; ExpWW,k is exports from every country in the world to every other country in the world (i.e. total
global exports) in industry k; ExpiW,k is exports from country i to every other country in the world
in industry k; GDPi is GDP for country i; and MaxTradeCompetition is the maximum value of the
product in parentheses for every country pair in the sample. All variables continue to be measured
in U.S. dollars. The k industries are about 1000 4-digit SITC groups.
It is worth noting that this trade competition variable in equation (4) is a substantial
improvement from that used in earlier work.21 Previous studies generally attempted to measure
trade competition by examining aggregate trade flows to common markets. This measure often
misclassified countries as direct competitors if the two countries were highly dependent on a
common market, even if the two countries did not directly compete in any specific industries. For
example, if a high proportion of Saudi Arabia's oil and of Brazil's coffee goes to the same third
market, Saudi Arabia and Brazil would have been classified as direct competitors. By focusing on
trade in specific industries, instead of aggregate trade flows to common countries, this paper's
statistics should provide more accurate measures of trade competition.
The data used to calculate the third cross-country linkage variable included in equations
(2) and (2′), Bank Lendingci is based on lending data reported by the Bank of International
Settlements (BIS). Bank Lendingci is measured as the total stock of bank lending from country c
in country i as a share of country i GDP.22 The data used to calculate the final global linkage
20

The Worldview online database has the advantage of reporting more up-to-date information and longer
time series. See http://www.trademeasures.com/MSIEIndex.html for more information.
21
Forbes (2002) is the only other paper (to the best of our knowledge) to calculate a trade competition
variable based on 4-digit SITC information.
22
More specifically, the total stock of bank lending is the consolidated international claims of BIS
reporting banks within country c into country i.

14

variable, Foreign Investmentci, is based on the OECD’s International Direct Investment Statistics
Yearbook.23 Foreign Investmentci is measured as the total stock of foreign investment from
country c in country i as a share of country i GDP. These two global linkage variables can be
written as:

Bank Lendingic =

Lendingic
,
GDPi

Foreign Investmentic =

Investmentic
,
GDPi

(5)

(6)

where Lendingci is total bank lending from large-country c to country i; Investmentci is total
foreign direct investment from large-country c to country i; and GDPi is GDP for country i. All
variables are measured in U.S. dollars.24 It is worth noting that Foreign Investment does not
include “portfolio investment” and smaller investment flows across countries.25
Combining the information for these four bilateral linkage variables defined in equations
(3) through (6) with the weekly stock and bond return information yields a data set with
information for 38 countries i and 5 large countries c from 1985 through 2000. Information is not
available for the full period for many countries—often because stock or bond markets did not
exist at the start of the period. Table 1 reports the full sample of countries, by region, as well as
the years for which data is available for the factor model regressions for different asset markets.
Appendix B reports the correlation matrix for each of the 23 factors included in the factor model
of stock returns.26 As expected, there is a high correlation between several of the sectoral indices
and the Japanese and U.S. cross-country factors, suggesting that it may be difficult to isolate the
direct impact of shocks to the U.S. and Japan on other countries from the impact of shocks to the
U.S. and Japan working through these sectors. On a more positive note, the correlations between
23

More specifically, we use the 2001 CD-ROM. The data series is the total outward direct investment
position reported by each OECD country into other countries in the world.
24
Direct investment data is reported in local currency values, which are then converted to U.S. dollar
values using end-of-period U.S. dollar exchange rates, as also reported in the International Direct
Investment Statistics Yearbook CD-ROM.
25
More specifically, direct investment is the “lasting interest of a resident entity in one economy (direct
investor) in an entity resident in another economy (direct investment enterprise).” Direct investment is
generally defined as when a direct investor, who is resident in another economy, owns 10 percent or more
of the ordinary shares, voting power, or equivalent, of a direct investment enterprise. Bank lending is
generally classified as portfolio investment and not as direct investment. Also, the foreign investment data
is based on statistics reported by each national government. Therefore, although the OECD attempts to
ensure the same definitions and standards across countries, different reporting standards persist.

15

the 4 global factors and the cross-country factors are extremely low, suggesting that
multicollinearity between the global and cross-country factors should not affect estimates of the
cross-country factor loadings.
As discussed in Sections I and II, many of the bilateral linkage variables used in the
second-stage regressions and defined in equations (3) through (6) have not been widely used (and
never used simultaneously) in previous work. Therefore, Tables 2 and 3 provide additional
information on these four variables. The top panel of Table 2 reports means and standard
deviations for the full period of time, as well as for several different sub-periods. Most of the
trade and foreign investment linkages increased over the three periods from 1986 through 2000.
Bank lending, however, fell substantially between 1986-90 and 1991-95. This undoubtedly
reflects the decreased bank lending to emerging markets after the 1980’s debt crisis. Despite this
decline, average bank lending from the 5 larger countries to smaller countries (as a share of
smaller country GDP) is still greater than direct investment between the same sets of countries,
although this gap has been closing over time.
The bottom panels of Table 2 report correlations between the 4 bilateral linkage
variables, for the full period as well as different sub-periods (based on annual values). The two
trade variables (Import Demand and Trade Competition) are the most highly correlated—with an
average correlation of 66% over the full period from 1986-2000. Foreign Investment also tends to
be highly correlated with the trade variables. Bank Lending tends to be the least correlated with
the other variables—with a correlation of only 22% with Import Demand in the full period. Most
of the correlations between the different cross-country linkage variables are fairly stable across
the different sub-periods. The only exception is Bank Lending, whose correlation with the other
three variables falls over time. For example, the correlation between Bank Lending and Foreign
Investment falls from 67% in 1986-90, to 57% in 1991-95, to 26% in 1996-2000.
To better understand how these bilateral linkages fluctuate across different countries and
periods, Table 3 reports a selection of values for the U.S. and Japan (two of the larger countries
indexed by c) and a selection of 10 smaller countries indexed by i in 1985 and 2000. Most of the
patterns are not surprising. For example, all four of the bilateral linkage variables are substantially
lower for economies traditionally considered to be less integrated with the global economy, such
as China and India. Import Demand for the U.S. and Mexico and Canada is very large and
increased substantially between 1985 and 2000. Import Demand for many smaller Asian
countries is fairly large for both Japan and the U.S. For some of these economies, such as
26

The table reports correlations for the full period when the cross-country factors are expressed in local
currency, weekly stock returns. Correlations are extremely similar for stock returns in U.S. dollars.

16

Malaysia and Thailand, reliance on imports into the U.S. increased substantially between 1985
and 2000, so that the U.S. is currently a more important export market than nearby Japan.
Countries that produce more high-tech goods, such as Korea and Malaysia, tend to have higher
values of Trade Competition with the U.S. and Japan. Bank Lending from both Japan and the U.S.
has decreased between 1985 and 2000, as has Foreign Investment from Japan. In sharp contrast,
many countries’ reliance on Foreign Investment from the U.S. has increased over time.

V.

Estimation Results: Average Stock Market Linkages from 1986-2000

A. Factor Model of Stock Returns

To estimate the relative importance of different global linkages, we begin by using the data set
described in Section IV to estimate equation (1) over the full sample from 1986-2000.27 We begin
by including the full set of 4 global factors, 14 sectoral factors, and 5 cross-country factors. We
also begin by focusing on returns (Rit) in stock markets, due to greater data availability (as shown
in Table 1). Results based on bond returns are discussed in Section VII. Figure 1 shows results
from F-tests of the joint significance of the global, sectoral, and cross-country factors when the
model is estimated using local currency stock returns. Results for U.S. dollar stock returns are
similar. Colored bars indicate that the relevant group of factors are jointly significant for each
country i. Table 4 reports the corresponding R2’s for the full regressions, and the coefficient
estimates and standard errors for each of the 5 cross-country factor loadings (the β ic ’s).
The results in Figure 1 and Table 4 show a number of patterns. First, the global, sectoral
and cross-country factors are each often jointly significant, although the global factors are less
often significant than the other two sets of factors. For example, out of the 37 regressions, the
global factors are jointly significant at the 10 percent level in 16 cases, and the sectoral and crosscountry factors are each significant in 30 cases. Second, the relative importance of the three
different sets of factors fluctuates across regions. For example, the global factors are more often
significant in the Americas, but rarely in Asia. The sectoral factors are most consistently
significant in Asia (although still important in all regions). The cross-country factors are most
consistently significant in Europe (although also still important in all regions).
Third, estimates of the individual cross-country factor loadings also tend to vary by
region, with the major economy (or economies) in each region tending to be the most important
for nearby markets. For example, the U.S. factor is most often positive and significant in the

17

Americas, and the French, German and U.K. factors are most often positive and significant in
Europe. Fourth, many of the cross-country factors follow intuitive patterns based on cultural
similarities or colonial origin. For example, the U.K. factor is large and significant in Australia,
Canada, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Singapore, and South Africa, and the U.S. factor is large and
significant in Israel. Fifth, the magnitude of the estimates suggests that the impact of stock market
movements in large economies on small economies can be large. For example, the 0.87
coefficient on the U.S. factor for Argentina suggests that a 10% return in the U.S. stock market is
correlated with an 8.7% return in the Argentine market.
A final pattern that emerges from Table 4 is the relative unimportance of the U.S. and
Japanese factors for many countries. More specifically, the U.S. factor is never positive and
significant (even at the 10% level) in the Asian markets, and only occasionally significant in
markets outside of the Americas. The Japanese factor is also rarely significant, and Singapore is
the only country in all of Asia for which the Japanese factor is significant. These counterintuitive
results suggest that the concerns raised in Sections III and IV and supported by the correlation
matrix in Appendix B may be valid. The high correlation between the Japanese/U.S. factors and
the sectoral factors could cause imprecise estimates of the cross-country factor loadings. In other
words, the sectoral factors may be capturing much of the direct cross-country effect of shocks to
the Japanese and U.S. markets on other countries.
In order to test for this effect, we reestimate equation (1) but exclude the sectoral factors
(while continuing to include the global factors). Resulting estimates of the cross-country factor
loadings (continuing to focus on local currency returns) are reported in Table 5. Although many
of the estimates and patterns are similar to those in Table 4, the estimated cross-country factor
loadings for Japan and the U.S. change as predicted. More specifically, the estimated Japanese
and U.S. factor loadings are now not only consistently positive, but often highly significant. The
Japanese factor loading is now significant (at the 10% level) for 9 of the 11 Asian countries. The
U.S. factor loading is also now more frequently significant in Asia, as well as in Europe. This
change is even more striking for the estimates based on U.S. dollars (not reported), in which the
U.S. factor is now significant for 7 of the 11 Asian countries. In fact, the cross-country factor
loadings for all five large countries are now jointly significant (at the 10% level) for all of the
countries in the sample except China and Colombia.
This comparison between Tables 4 and 5 of estimates of the factor model in equation (1)
suggest that there are advantages and disadvantages to including the sectoral factors when
27

We focus on the period 1986-2000 instead of 1985-2000 since some of the explanatory variables in the
second-stage regressions are lagged by 1 period and are only available starting in 1985.

18

estimating cross-country linkages. On one hand, theory suggests that in order to obtain unbiased
estimates of cross-country factor loadings, it is necessary to control for both global and sectoral
shocks. On the other hand, the high correlation between the sectoral factors and cross-country
factors could cause much of the direct impact of shocks to large countries on other countries to be
captured in estimates of the sectoral loadings. Therefore, in the discussion and estimates in the
remainder of this paper, we estimate the factor model both with and without the sectoral factors.
We have also estimated each of the specifications with and without the global factors, but since
this has no significant impact on the key results, we leave these results for the sensitivity tests.
As an extension to Tables 4 and 5 we re-estimate the factor model, both with and without
the sectoral factors, but instead of estimating a cross-section for the full period, we estimate the
model separately for each year between 1986-2000. More specifically, we estimate equation (1)
separately for each one-year period for each country i. The estimated global, sectoral, and crosscountry factor loadings fluctuate across individual years, although they follow the general
patterns discussed above. These extensive coefficient estimates are not reported due to space
constraints, but are used in the later part of Section B to estimate the panel model of how different
bilateral trade and financial linkages affect the estimated cross-country factor loadings.
B. Decomposition of Cross-country Linkages

Before decomposing the estimated cross-country factor loadings into specific bilateral linkages,
we examine the time-series characteristics of the variables to test for nonstationarity. There is a
strong likelihood that some of the variables may drift upwards over time as global integration has
increased. The short time series and wide panel nature of the dataset described in Section IV,
however, complicate the standard unit root tests. Therefore, we use two different approaches to
examine the time-series characteristics of the data: conduct unit root tests series-by-series using
the univariate test of Elliott et al. (1996), and use the panel unit root test of Breitung and Meyer
(1994), which can easily be applied to panels with a large cross-section and short time dimension.
These tests and their outcomes are discussed in detail in Appendix C. The results suggest
that all of the variables are stationary except Foreign Investment. The evidence of nonstationarity
in Foreign Investment is not surprising given the increase in foreign direct investment
documented in the top panel of Table 2. Consequently, the subsequent analysis uses the first
difference (instead of the level) of foreign direct investment in order to estimate equations (2) and
(2′).28 This series of results also suggests that inference based on OLS estimates is accurate and it
28

The sensitivity analysis also examines the impact of using levels instead of first differences for Foreign
Investment. The key results do not change.

19

is not necessary to use panel-cointegration methods.29 To be conservative, however, we report
heteroscedasticity and serial-correlation robust standard errors for each of the estimates.
Next, we use the estimated cross-country factor loadings to estimate equation (2) and
decompose these cross-country linkages into specific bilateral linkages. The top of Table 6
reports coefficient estimates when the dependent variables are the factor loadings from equation
(1) based on local currency stock returns averaged over the full period, and Table 7 reports
corresponding estimates based on U.S. dollar returns.30 The left side of each table shows results
when the factor model is estimated with the sectoral factors (as in Table 4), while the right side of
the table excludes the sectoral factors (as in Table 5). As discussed in Section II, however, there is
an extensive literature examining how integration with the global economy and capital controls
can affect stock market returns and cross-market comovement. Therefore, we also estimate each
specification including the Chinn and Ito (2002) measure of capital account openness in each
country i.31 This statistic is calculated as a standardized principal component of four IMF dummy
variables measuring different types of external account restrictions, with an adjustment for the
length of time that the capital controls were in place.32 This statistic is described in more detail in
Appendix D, and a higher value indicates greater capital account openness.
Although the results at the top of Tables 6 and 7 vary across specifications, the most
consistent finding is that the coefficient on Import Demand is positive and highly significant (at
the 5% level) in 6 of the 8 models. This suggests that on average between 1986 and 2000, direct
trade may have been the most important bilateral linkage determining how shocks to the world’s
largest economies affected other stock markets. The estimated coefficients on Bank Lending are
positive, although usually insignificant, and on Trade Competition are negative, with fluctuating
significance. The coefficients on Foreign Investment fluctuate in sign and are never significant at
the 5% level. The explanatory power of these regressions is fairly low, with only 3-7% of the
variance explained in the models including the sectoral factors, and a slightly better 10-14% of
the variance explained in the models excluding the sectoral factors.33

29

See for instance Pedroni (1999), or Mark and Sul (2001).
The explanatory variables are each also averaged across the full period from 1986 to 2000. More
specifically, the flow variables (Import Demand and Trade Competition) are measured for each year from
1986 through 2000, while the stock variables (Bank Lending and Foreign Investment) are measured at the
start of each year (or end of the previous year). Averages are then calculated based on these annual values.
31
We assume that financial markets in each of the large countries c have limited capital account restrictions
and are fairly well integrated with global financial markets.
32
The sensitivity analysis reports results using other measures of capital controls. These other measures,
however, are only available for a much more limited selection of countries.
33
Many models attempting to explain stock market movements have a low degree of explanatory power
since financial market prices are affected by a wide variety of hard-to-measure influences.
30

20

As an extension to these results, instead of using variables averaged over the entire 15year period from 1986-2000, we use the estimates of the annual cross-country factor loadings
discussed at the end of Section IV.A to estimate the panel regression in equation (2′). We also
include period dummy variables for each year (excluding the year 2000). Estimates are reported
in Panel B of Tables 6 and 7. Despite the substantial increase in the number of observations, the
regressions have an even lower degree of explanatory power than those based on the averaged
data in Panel A. Estimates also continue to reflect a general lack of consistency across
specifications, with not only fluctuating significance, but also fluctuating signs.

VI. Estimation Results: Changes in Global Linkages in Stock Markets Over Time

One problem with the results reported in Section V, and which could explain the low explanatory
power of the models, is that the specification imposes the constraint that each of the coefficients
and their underlying relationships are constant between 1986 and 2000. Global linkages and the
determinants of stock market returns, however, may have changed over this sample period. As
discussed in Section II, trends in the TMT sector could have changed the importance of sectoral
factors relative to other factors in the late 1990’s. Or, as also discussed in Section II, many
emerging markets have only recently become integrated with global financial markets, causing
significant changes in their relationships with other countries. Therefore, this section examines if
the average results for the full sample period reported above mask important changes over time.
A. Factor Model of Stock Returns

To test if the importance of the global, sectoral, and cross-country factors has changed between
1986 and 2000, we divide the full sample period into 3 sub-periods of equal length: 1986-1990,
1991-1995, and 1996-2000. Then we estimate equation (1), for each five-year period. Figure 2
summarizes the key results by reporting the percent of countries within each region and for the
full sample for which the relevant factor(s) are significant (at the 5% level). More specifically, the
left of the figure reports the percent of countries for which the full set of global, sectoral, or crosscountry factors are jointly significant, and the right side of the figure reports the percent of
countries for which the 5 cross-country betas are individually significant.34
Figure 2 shows a number of results. First, the cross-country factors continue to be highly
significant. Moreover, their importance appears to have fallen from 1986-1990 to 1991-95, and
34

Results when the model is estimated without sectoral factors, or using U.S. dollar stock returns (instead
of local currency returns), are similar.

21

then increased substantially from 1991-1995 to 1996-2000.35 This pattern is especially strong in
the Americas. Second, the sectoral factors appear to be more important in the later period from
1996-2000 than in early periods, especially in Asia. This could partially reflect the technology,
media and telecommunications bubble discussed in Section II.
Third, the relative importance of the individual cross-country factors has changed across
time. For example, the U.S. factor is significant more than twice as often in the latest period from
1996-2000 than in the earliest period from 1986-1990. In sharp contrast, the cases in which the
Japanese factor is significant fell by more than half in the same period, with a particularly
dramatic decline for Europe and the Americas. The importance of the U.K. factor also fell
between 1986-1990 and 1996-2000 in most regions. These changes in the relative importance of
the largest economies, and especially the U.S. versus Japan, undoubtedly reflect the stronger
growth in the U.S. economy over the later half of the 1990’s and its increased importance as an
export market for countries around the world.
B. Decomposition of Cross-Country Linkages

Next, we use the estimated cross-country factor loadings from Section A to estimate the
importance of the four real and financial linkage variables during the different five-year periods
between 1986 and 2000. Results based on local currency estimates are reported in the middle and
bottom of Table 6, and results based on U.S. dollar estimates are reported in Table 7. For each
table, Panel C reports results based on average values during each of the five-year periods (i.e.,
equation (2)), and Panel D reports panel results using annual data for each of the five-year periods
(i.e., equation (2′)), which include annual period dummy variables.
The coefficient estimates indicate that there were substantial changes in the importance of
the bilateral linkage variables in the different sub-periods. In the earlier two periods (from 198690 and 1991-95), most of the coefficient estimates are insignificant, and of those that are
significant, none are robust across even half the specifications. Not only does the coefficient
significance vary across specifications, but even the estimated signs show a remarkable lack of
stability. Not surprisingly, the proportion of the variance explained by the models in both of these
periods is very low.
Estimates during the later period from 1996-2000, however, reflect very different
patterns. There is a dramatic increase in the model’s explanatory power, with the proportion of

35

This pattern agrees with the results in Brooks and Del Negro (2002a) and (2003), which examine firmlevel stock returns and find that the importance of global effects (which include what we call cross-country
effects) falls from the late 1980’s to early 1990’s, and then increases in the late 1990’s.

22

the variance explained by the period-averaged models now increasing to 12-21%. There is also a
substantial increase in the consistency of some of the estimates across the different specifications.
The most noteworthy change is that the coefficient on Import Demand is always positive and
significant (usually at the 5% level). The coefficients on Bank Lending are also usually positive
and significant, and the coefficients on Trade Competition are negative and usually significant.
The estimates for Foreign Investment are the only ones that continue to be generally insignificant
with fluctuating signs.
These results indicate that in the later half of the 1990’s bilateral linkages became more
important determinants of how shocks to large financial markets are transmitted to smaller
countries around the world. In particular, direct trade appears to be the most consistently
significant bilateral linkage. One surprising result is that foreign investment, despite its rapid
growth in recent years, does not appear to be a significant determinant of bilateral linkages in
financial markets. This could partially be caused by noise in the bilateral data on foreign
investment (as discussed in Section IV). If Foreign Investment is less accurately measured than
the other bilateral linkage variables and any measurement error is not systematic, this could
increase standard errors and make it more difficult for foreign investment to appear as a
significant determinant of cross-country linkages.
The coefficient estimates also suggest that not only are bilateral linkages other than
foreign direct investment significant determinants of stock market comovements, but that the
magnitude of this impact can be large. For example, consider Chile, which is in the process of
finalizing a free-trade agreement with the U.S. From 1996-2000, Import Demand for Chile with
the U.S. was 4.0%, and the estimated U.S. cross-country factor loading was 0.26.36 Then assume
that Chile’s Import Demand variable increased to 25.1%, which is the value for Mexico with the
U.S. from 1996-2000. Holding everything else constant, the U.S. factor loading for Chile would
be predicted to increase to 0.62.37 A 10% return in the U.S. stock market, which previously would
have been correlated with a 2.6% return in the Chilean market, would now be correlated with a
6.2% return in the Chilean market. These calculations are obviously only a rough approximation,
but they do suggest that changes in bilateral linkages, and especially bilateral trade flows, can
have large effects on how asset market movements are transmitted internationally.

36

Based on local currency stock market returns when equation (1) controls for global and cross-country
factors, but not sectoral factors.
37
This uses the estimated coefficient of 1.699 in Panel C of Table 6 (which is the specification including
the capital control variable). As shown in the sensitivity analysis, this is close to the average coefficient
estimate for this variable, using a wide variety of model specifications.

23

VII. Estimation Results: Global Linkages in Bond Markets

Next, we repeat the analysis performed in Sections V and VI, except focus on global linkages in
bond markets instead of stock markets. As shown in Table 1 and discussed in Section IV, data
availability for bond markets (especially for local currency bonds) is much more limited.
Therefore, in this section we focus on estimates from 1994-2000, as well as the 2 sub-periods
from 1994-1997 and 1998-2000. The global factors and sectoral factors are the same as used
above, but the dependent variable (Rit) and each of the five cross-country factors are measured as
returns for the relevant bond index (instead of stock index) as discussed in Section IV. Summary
results from estimates of the factor model of returns in equation (1), based on U.S. dollars, are
reported in Figure 3.38 Results are similar when the sectoral factors are excluded from the model.
The patterns in Figure 3 are similar to those for the factor model of stock returns
(summarized in Figure 2), although the comparisons across periods are obviously different due to
the more limited time series. Sectoral factors and cross-country factors continue to be highly
significant and more important than global factors in determining market returns. There is also
some evidence that the cross-country factors may be even more important than the sectoral
factors for the whole sample. Of the individual cross-country factors, the U.S. factor is most often
significant, for most of the individual regions as well as the entire sample. The largest economy
(or economies) in each region also continues to be important to neighboring economies, although
in most specifications the U.S. factor is more often significant in Asia than the Japanese factor.
One difference between the results for bond returns and the corresponding estimates for stock
returns is that excluding the sectoral factors does not have as large an impact on the estimated
cross-country factor loadings, especially for the U.S. and Japan. This difference undoubtedly
reflects that fact that the sectoral factors are stock indices, and therefore more highly correlated
with stock returns than bond returns in the major economies.
Next, we decompose these estimated cross-country factor loadings into the four different
bilateral linkages as specified in equations (2) and (2′). Table 8 reports results for U.S. dollar
bond returns, and Table 9 for local currency bond returns, with both tables reporting
specifications based on period averages and annual data, as well as with and without controls for
capital account restrictions. Many coefficient estimates continue to fluctuate across specifications
and are often insignificant. The coefficient on Foreign Investment is never significant. The one
fairly robust finding, however, is the importance of Import Demand in explaining cross-country

38

In this section, we focus on results based on U.S. dollar returns, instead of local currency, since
information for local currency bond prices is unavailable for many emerging markets. This also provides a
contrast to the focus on local currency estimates in Sections V and VI.

24

linkages in bond markets. The estimated coefficient on Import Demand is positive in 47 of the 48
specifications, and is significant (at the 10% level) in 34 of these specifications. Estimates are
particularly large and significant for the regressions based on the larger sample of U.S. dollar
bond returns. This supports one of the key results from the decomposition of bilateral linkages in
stock markets: that one of the primary mechanisms by which movements in large financial
markets are transmitted to other markets is through direct trade flows.

VIII. Sensitivity Analysis

This section summarizes an extensive series of sensitivity tests examining if the key conclusions
reported above are robust to using different variable definitions, altering the model specification,
including additional control variables, and modifying sample selection. It focuses on results from
bilateral linkage regressions in equation (2), since these results are the key focus of the paper.
(The results from the first-stage regressions are also highly robust.) Since most of the bilaterallinkage coefficient estimates for the longer sample period (1986-2000) and earlier periods for
stock markets (1986-1990 and 1991-1995) continue to fluctuate across specifications, we also
focus on the robustness of the key results during the later period for stock markets (1996-2000)
and full period for bond markets (1994-2000). Table 10 reports a selection of these results
(discussed in detail below) for our preferred specification –based on the factor model without
sectoral factors, using average values over the given period.39 For comparison, base estimates
from Tables 6 and 8 are reported in column (1).
As an initial series of sensitivity tests, we examine the impact of modifying variable
definitions. First, we use two different measures of capital controls: a statistic developed in
Edison and Warnock (2002), which is based on restrictions on the foreign ownership of equities,
and a statistic developed in Kaminsky and Schmukler (2002), which focuses on capital account
regulations.40 Results are reported in columns (2) and (3) of Table 10. In each case, the sample
size shrinks substantially (by close to one-half in some specifications), and the capital control
coefficient continues to have fluctuating significance. Second, we use moving-average two-week
returns, instead of weekly returns, to partially adjust for differences in market hours in different
39

Complete results from the full series of sensitivity tests are available from the authors. We prefer
estimates based on a model without sectoral factors, due to the multicollinearity between the sectoral and
cross-country factors (as discussed in Sections III and V). We prefer estimates based on period averages,
instead of the annual cross-sections, due to changes in market volatility across shorter periods that could
bias estimates (as discussed in Section III).
40
This measure evaluates regulations on offshore borrowing by domestic financial institutions, offshore
borrowing by non-financial corporations, multiple exchange rate markets, and controls on capital outflows.

25

countries. Results are virtually unchanged. Third, we redefine the sectoral factors in equation (1)
using different sets of sectors, such as the larger set of 36 MSCI sectoral indices. We also include
some of the global factors, such as gold and oil, as sectoral factors. Some of these changes affect
the relative importance of sets of factors for different countries, and the global factors become
even less consistently significant, but the key results discussed above are unchanged.41
As a next series of sensitivity tests, we estimate a variety of different model
specifications. First, we exclude the global factors from equation (1). Column 4 in Table 10
reports the resulting estimates for the second-stage regressions. Second, we focus on a smaller set
of cross-country factors and only include one major market from each region. More specifically,
we continue to include the U.S., Japan, and France as cross-country factors, but exclude the U.K.
and Germany.42 Results are reported in column 5. Third, we include Foreign Investment in levels
(instead of differences), as reported in column 6. We also estimate specifications with the other
bilateral linkage variables in differences.
For the next set of sensitivity tests, we add a number of additional control variables. First,
we include squared and/or cubed terms for each of the bilateral linkage variables as a rough test
for any non-linearities. These additional terms are generally insignificant, and most of the other
coefficient estimates become even more fragile and dependent on model specification (which is
not surprising given the increased multicollinearity in the regressors). Column 7 reports results
when the model includes squared terms for each of the 4 bilateral linkage variables. Second, we
add a number of variables typically included in gravity-equation models (which tend to be highly
correlated with bilateral trade).43 Many of these variables are individually significant, and
including them often reduces the magnitude of the estimated coefficient on Import Demand. As
shown in column 8, however, which reports results when 5 gravity variables are added to the
model, the coefficient on Import Demand still remains positive and highly significant. Finally,
Column 9 adds regional dummy variables to the model, based on the definitions in Table 1.
As a final series of sensitivity tests, we examine the impact of sample selection and
outliers. First, we exclude countries defined as having a banking crisis and/or a currency crisis.
41

For example, when oil is defined as a sectoral instead of global factor, the set of global factors become
jointly insignificant for Venezuela, while the set of sectoral factors becomes jointly significant.
42
We include France instead of Germany for the European cross-country factor since German reunification
during the sample period could affect estimates.
43
More specifically, we add combinations of the following 5 variables: whether the 2 countries share a
common border; whether the 2 countries have a common language; whether 1 of the countries was ever
colonized by the other country; the natural log of distance between the 2 countries; and the natural log of
the product of the two countries real GDPs. The geography data is taken from Rose (2002) and is available
on Rose’s website at: http://faculty/haas.berkely.edu/arose/. The GDP data is taken from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators. See Rose (2002) for further information on gravity-equation models.

26

Banking crises are defined based on the Caprio and Klingebiel (2001) classification of countries
with “systemic banking crises”. Currency crises are defined as countries experiencing a 25% or
greater depreciation of their U.S. dollar exchange rate within any 4-week period. Column 10 of
Table 10 reports results when countries with either type of crisis are excluded from the sample.44
The Bank Lending variable is usually insignificant when countries with a banking crisis are
excluded from the sample. Second, we exclude oil exporters from the sample, with oil exporters
defined as having a ratio of oil and gas exports to GDP of over 5% in the given year.45 Third, we
only include high-income countries or low/middle income countries, with income groups based
on the definition in World Bank (2001). As shown in columns 11 and 12, none of the financial
linkage variables are significant for the high-income countries, but for the low/middle income
countries, Bank Lending is highly significant for stock markets and Foreign Investment for bond
markets. Finally, we use a number of different measures to exclude outliers. For example, we
define outliers as having a value for any of the four bilateral linkage variables greater or less than
the mean plus/minus three or five standard deviations.
This series of sensitivity tests confirms the central results discussed in Sections V through
VII. In the bilateral linkage regressions for stock markets in the earlier periods from 1985-90 or
1991-95, the signs and significance of coefficient estimates fluctuate across specifications. For
stock markets in the later period from 1996-2000, and bond markets from 1994-2000, however,
the coefficient on Import Demand is consistently positive and highly significantly. The
coefficient on Bank Lending is positive and significant in about half of the specifications, and is
more often significant for stock than bond markets. The coefficient on Trade Competition is
negative and significant in about half the specifications, and is more often significant in bond than
stock markets. The coefficient on Foreign Investment is rarely significant. Therefore, in the later
half of the 1990’s, direct trade between countries appears to be the most important determinant of
how movements in large financial markets affected stock and bond markets around the globe.

IX. Conclusions

In an effort to better understand why shocks to the world’s largest financial markets often spread
to some markets, while other countries remain relatively isolated, this paper attempts to answer
four questions.

44

A country is excluded if it had either type of crisis in any 1 year in the given period.
More specifically, oil and gas exports are defined as SITC codes 33 (petroleum, petroleum products, and
related materials) and 34 (gas-natural and manufactured).
45

27

First, how important are cross-country linkages with large financial markets, as compared
to global and sectoral factors, in explaining financial market returns in countries around the
world? To answer this question, we estimated a factor model in which a country’s market returns
are a function of: global factors (global interest rates, oil prices, gold prices, and commodity
prices), sectoral factors (stock returns for 14 sectoral indices), cross-country factors (market
returns in France, Germany, Japan, the U.K. and U.S.), and country-specific effects. We find that
both cross-country and sectoral factors are important determinants of stock returns in countries
around the world (although it is often difficult to differentiate between these two sets of factors).
Not surprisingly, movements in the largest regional economy tend to be the most important crosscountry factor for nearby countries, although movements in the U.S. market are also important for
most regions. During 1996-2000, the U.S. factor and sectoral factors gained importance in most
regions, while the Japanese and U.K. factors lost importance.
Second, how important are bilateral trade flows, trade competition in third markets, bank
lending, and investment exposure in explaining these cross-country linkages? To answer this
question, we decomposed the cross-country linkages estimated in the factor models into these
four specific real and financial linkages. Estimates for the full period from 1986-2000 had a low
degree of explanatory power and most coefficient estimates were not robust, even after
controlling for capital account openness and using several different model specifications. One of
the relatively stronger results was that direct trade (measured by a country’s reliance on imports
into the largest economies) appears to be one of the most important determinants of cross-country
linkages between large economies and markets around the world.
Third, how has the relative importance of these various global linkages changed over
time? In order to answer this question, we repeated the above series of estimates for different time
periods. In the earlier periods, from 1986-90 and from 1991-95, bilateral linkages continue to
have a low degree of explanatory power and estimates are highly sensitive to model specification.
From 1996-2000, however, bilateral linkages through trade and finance become substantially
more important determinants of how shocks are transmitted from large economies to markets
around the world. More specifically, direct trade flows appear to be the strongest and most
important determinant of cross-country linkages. Rough estimates suggest that the magnitude of
these effects can be large. Bilateral bank lending and trade competition in third markets can also
be significant, although these results fluctuate across specifications. Bilateral foreign investment,
however, does not appear to be a significant determinant of cross-country linkages in any period.
Fourth and finally, how does the relative importance of these global linkages vary across
stock markets and bond markets? In order to answer this question, we repeat the same series of

28

estimates discussed above, except focus on linkages in bond markets instead of stock markets.
We find that most of the key results are unchanged. For example sectoral and cross-country
factors continue to be highly significant and more important than global factors in determining
market returns. There is some evidence that the cross-country factors may be even more
important than the sectoral factors in bond markets. Of the individual cross-country factors, the
U.S. factor is most often significant for the sample as a whole, as well as for most of the
individual regions. When the cross-country linkages are decomposed into real and financial
linkages, foreign direct investment continues to be insignificant. Bank lending is sometimes
significant, but this result is even less robust than in the stock market regressions. Trade
competition in third markets is more often significant than in stock markets, but its importance
still fluctuates across model specifications. Bilateral trade flows, however, continue to be
consistently positive and significant, and appear to be the most important determinant of crosscountry linkages in bond markets as well as stock markets.
Although this paper has addressed a range of questions, this analysis is only a start. Many
of these questions could be extended in a number of different directions. For example, does the
importance of different types of global linkages vary between crisis periods and the longer time
periods investigated in this paper? Does the importance of different global linkages vary based on
the type of shocks affecting large economies? Do these results on the relationships between large
and small economies also apply to pairs of smaller economies (such as Argentina and Brazil)?
And last, but certainly not least, what is the importance of other types of bilateral linkages (such
as portfolio investment, trade credit, and multinational exposure) that are not included in this
paper’s analysis?
Despite these remaining questions, the paper has documented a number of factors
determining why movements in large financial markets can have substantial effects on countries
around the world. The decomposition of bilateral linkages in both stock and bond markets reach
the same conclusion: that the primary mechanism by which shocks to the largest financial
markets were transmitted internationally in the later part of the 1990’s was through direct trade
flows. These results suggest that despite the recent growth in capital flows across countries, direct
trade linkages are still more important than financial linkages in determining how shocks to the
world’s largest economies affect a variety of markets around the globe. Finally, these results
document that real linkages between countries, even when measured at an annual frequency, can
be large and important determinants of higher frequency movements in financial markets.

29

References
Bekaert, Geert and Campbell R. Harvey (2002). “Research in Emerging Markets Finance:
Looking to the Future.” Paper presented at conference “Valuation in Emerging Markets” (U.V.A,
May 28-30).
Breitung, Jorg and Wolfgang Meyer (1994). "Testing for Unit Roots in Panel Data: Are Wages on
Different Bargaining Levels Cointegrated? Applied Economics 26: 353-361.
Brooks, Robin and Marco del Negro (2003). “Firm-level Evidence on Globalization.” IMF
mimeo.
Brooks, Robin and Marco del Negro (2002a). “The Rise in Comovement Across National Stock
Markets: Market Integration or Global Bubble?” IMF Working Paper #WP/02/147.
Brooks, Robin and Marco del Negro (2002b). “International Diversification Strategies.” Mimeo.
Caramazza, Francesco, Luca Ricci, and Ranil Salgado (2000). "Trade and Financial Contagion in
Currency Crises." IMF Working Paper # WP/00/55.
Caprio, Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (2001). “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial
Crises.” World Bank mimeo.
Cavaglia, Stefano, Christopher Brightman, and Michael Aked (2000). “The Increasing
Importance of Industry Factors.” Financial Analysts Journal 56(September/October): 41-54.
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2002). “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial
Development: Cross Country Evidence.” NBER Working Paper #8967.
Claessens, Stijn, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Yung Chul Park (2001). "Contagion: Why Crises
Spread and How This Can be Stopped." In Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds., International
Financial Contagion. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 19-41.
Claessens, Stijn and Kristin J. Forbes, eds. (2001). International Financial Contagion. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Dominguez, Kathyrn and Linda Tesar (2001a). “Exchange Rate Exposure.” NBER Working
Paper #8453.
Dominguez, Kathyrn and Linda Tesar (2001b). “Trade and Exposure.” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 91(2): 367-70.
Edison, Hali J. and Francis E. Warnock (2002). “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital
Controls.” Journal of Empirical Finance, forthcoming.
Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew Rose (1999). "Contagious Currency Crises: Channels of
Conveyance." In Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, eds., Changes in Exchange Rates in Rapidly
Developing Countries: Theory, Practice, and Policy Issues. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, pp. 29-50.

30

Elliott, G., T. J. Rothenberg, and J. H. Stock (1996). “Efficient Tests for an Autoregressive Unit
Root.” Econometrica 64: 813-836.
Forbes, Kristin J. (2003). "The Asian Flu and Russian Virus: Firm-Level Evidence on How Crises
are Transmitted Internationally." Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Forbes, Kristin J. (2002). “Are Trade Linkages Important Determinants of Country Vulnerability
to Crises?” In Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in
Emerging Markets. Chicago: National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 77-124.
Forbes, Kristin J. and Roberto Rigobon (2002). “No Contagion, Only Interdependence:
Measuring Stock Market Co-Movements.” The Journal of Finance LVII (5, October): 2223-2261.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew Rose (1998). “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area
Criteria. The Economic Journal 108(449): 1009-1025.
Gelos, Gaston and Ratna Sahay (2001). "Financial Market Spillovers: How Different are the
Transition Economies?" In Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds., International Financial
Contagion. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 329-366.
Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose (1999). "Contagion and Trade: Why Are Currency Crises
Regional?" Journal of International Money and Finance 18: 603-617.
Goldfajn, Ilan and Rodrigo Valdés (1997). “Capital Flows and Twin Crises: The Role of
Liquidity.” IMF Working Paper #WP/97/87.
Griffin, J.M. and G. Andrew Karolyi (1998). “Another Look at the Role of the Industrial
Structure of Markets for International Diversification Strategies.” Journal of Financial
Economics 50: 351-373.
Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2002). “Financial Globalization and Real
Regionalization.” NBER Working Paper #9292.
Heston, Steven L. and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (1994). “Does Industrial Structure Explain the
Benefits of International Diversification?” The Journal of Finance 36:3-27.
Imbs, Jean. (2003). “Synchronization and Structural Convergence.” London Business School
mimeo.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler (2001). “Mutual Fund Investment in
Emerging Markets: An Overview.” In Stijn Claessens and Kristin Forbes, eds., International
Financial Contagion. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 158-185.
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Sergio L. Schmukler (2002). “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The
Effects of Financial Liberalization.” Mimeo-George Washington University and World Bank.
Karolyi, G. Andrew (2003). “The Role of ADRs in the Development and Integration of Emerging
Equity Markets.” Ohio State mimeo.

31

Karolyi, G. Andrew and René M. Stulz (2002). “Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or
Globally?” Forthcoming in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz, eds.,
Handbook of the Economics of Finance. North Holland.
Kose, M. Ahyan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles Whiteman. (2003). “Understanding the
Evolution of World Business Cycles.” IMF mimeo.
Lintner, John (1965). “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in
Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets.” Review of Economics and Statistics 47: 13-37.
Mark, Nelson and Donggyu Sul (2001). “Panel Dynamic OLS Cointegration Vector Estimation
and Long-Run Money Demand.” Ohio State University, mimeo.
Mody, Ashoka, Assaf Razin, and Efraim Sadka (2002). “The Role of Information in Driving FDI:
Theory and Evidence.” NBER Working Paper #9255.
Pantula, S. G., G. Gonzalez-Farias, and W. A. Fuller (1994). “A Comparison of Unit-root Test
Criteria.” Journal of Business and Economics Statistics 12: 449-459.
Pedroni, Peter (1999). “Critical Values for Cointegration Tests in Heterogeneous Panels with
Multiple Regressors.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, special issue: 653-670.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks:
The Case of Japan.” American Economic Review 87(4): 495-505.
Roll, Richard (1992). “Industrial Structure and the Comparative Behavior of International Stock
Market Indices.” The Journal of Finance 47(1, March):3-41.
Rose, Andrew (2002). “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” NBER Working
Paper No. 9273.
Sharpe, William (1964). “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under
Conditions of Risk.” The Journal of Finance 19: 425-442.
Stock, James H. (1994). “Unit Roots, Structural Breaks, and Trends.” In R. F. Engle and D. I.
McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder (2001). “Sources of Contagion: Is it Finance or
Trade?” Journal of International Economics 54(2, August): 293-308.
Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder (2002). “Spillovers Through Banking Centers: A
Panel Data Analysis.” Journal of International Money and Finance. Forthcoming.
World Bank (2001). World Development Report 2000/2001. Washington, DC: Oxford University
Press.

32

Appendix A: Creation of Sectoral Indices
To create the sectoral indices, we began with weekly returns for the 36 Morgan Stanley Capital
International (MSCI) industrial sector indices for which data is available from 1986-2000. These
indices are calculated based on U.S. dollar stock returns in 45 countries, with country weights
based on country production in the given industrial sector.
Then we estimate the base regression specified in equation (1) for stock returns over the
entire sample period from 1986-2000, including all 36 sectors as sectoral factors. Six of the
sectors are insignificant in none or one of the regressions. These 6 sectors are: aerospace and
military technology; business and public services; data processing and reproduction; health and
personal care; machinery and engineering; and multi-industry. Each of these 6 sectors is dropped.
We also drop 2 sectors (gold mines, and miscellaneous materials and commodities) that should be
captured in the global factors, as well as 4 sectors that consist largely of non-traded goods
(construction, real estate, electrical and gas utilities, and publishing and broadcasting), which
should be more affected by domestic than global sectoral trends.46 Next, we combine several
sectors that represent similar industries into single sectoral factors. The merged sectors are:
•

Construction: merge construction and housing with building materials.

•

Consumer goods: merge appliances and household durables with recreation
and other consumer goods, as well as with food and household products;

•

Electronics: merge electrical and electronics with electric components;

•

Energy: merge energy equipment and services with energy sources;

•

Financial: merge banking with financial services with insurance;

•

Metals: merge nonferrous metals with steel; and

•

Transportation: merge transportation-airlines with transportation-road and
rail, as well as with transportation-shipping.

The resulting 14 sectors are included as the sectoral factors to estimate equation (1): automobiles,
chemicals, consumer goods, electronics, energy, forest products and paper, industrial
components, financial, leisure and tourism, merchandising, metals, telecommunications, textiles
and apparel, transportation.

33

Appendix B: Correlation Matrix for Factor Model Variables
Global Factors
Oil
Gold

Comm

Auto

Chem

Cons

Elect

Ener

For

Sectoral Factors1
Ind
Fin
Leis

Merch

Met

Tele

Text

Trans

Cross-Country Factors2
France
Germ
Japan
U.K.

Global factors
Interest rates

Int.
1.00

Oil

-0.03

1.00

Gold

0.00

0.15

1.00

Commodities
Sectoral factors1
Auto

-0.07

0.08

0.17

1.00

-0.04

-0.04

-0.01

-0.01

1.00

Chemicals

-0.01

-0.09

-0.01

0.00

0.61

1.00

Consumer

-0.01

-0.05

-0.05

-0.02

0.72

0.70

1.00

Electronics

-0.06

0.03

-0.04

0.00

0.52

0.48

0.67

1.00

Energy

-0.01

0.22

0.00

0.03

0.34

0.49

0.41

0.40

1.00

Forest

0.00

-0.04

-0.02

0.02

0.52

0.77

0.58

0.47

0.49

1.00

Industrial

-0.02

-0.06

-0.04

0.01

0.76

0.78

0.81

0.59

0.45

0.68

1.00

Financial

-0.02

-0.07

0.01

-0.01

0.60

0.71

0.67

0.53

0.39

0.56

0.69

1.00

Leisure

0.00

-0.10

-0.08

-0.05

0.49

0.60

0.62

0.59

0.44

0.55

0.60

0.64

1.00

Merchandise

0.02

-0.08

-0.06

-0.02

0.49

0.66

0.66

0.61

0.39

0.56

0.61

0.69

0.69

1.00

Metals

-0.02

-0.01

0.09

0.11

0.55

0.76

0.56

0.44

0.48

0.70

0.68

0.58

0.48

0.50

1.00

Telecom

-0.01

0.00

-0.04

-0.05

0.35

0.39

0.51

0.60

0.32

0.33

0.42

0.49

0.55

0.54

0.26

1.00

Textiles

0.03

-0.08

-0.05

0.01

0.58

0.73

0.70

0.45

0.40

0.60

0.76

0.66

0.56

0.63

0.62

0.37

1.00

Transport
-0.01
Cross-country factors2
France
-0.02

-0.08

-0.07

0.01

0.60

0.74

0.64

0.48

0.38

0.61

0.75

0.75

0.58

0.61

0.67

0.41

0.73

1.00

-0.01

-0.11

0.00

0.44

0.41

0.45

0.52

0.33

0.34

0.45

0.46

0.47

0.43

0.38

0.44

0.36

0.39

1.00

Germany

-0.04

-0.02

-0.07

-0.02

0.51

0.45

0.46

0.53

0.31

0.40

0.43

0.48

0.46

0.42

0.38

0.46

0.34

0.41

0.64

1.00

Japan

-0.03

-0.03

0.02

0.03

0.56

0.56

0.65

0.44

0.25

0.41

0.67

0.67

0.41

0.43

0.60

0.34

0.65

0.68

0.33

0.32

1.00

U.K.

0.00

-0.01

-0.08

-0.03

0.41

0.50

0.51

0.53

0.42

0.46

0.49

0.50

0.55

0.53

0.46

0.55

0.44

0.47

0.55

0.55

0.35

1.00

U.S.

0.00

-0.02

-0.10

-0.04

0.39

0.56

0.57

0.76

0.54

0.53

0.51

0.58

0.72

0.73

0.43

0.69

0.47

0.48

0.48

0.47

0.32

0.53

Notes: Correlation matrix for variables included in the factor model in equation (1) averaged for the full period from 1986-2000. Correlations greater than or equal to 60% are in bold.
(1) Sectoral factors described in detail in Appendix A.
(2) Cross-country factors are stock returns in local currency.

34

Appendix C: Unit Root Testing
In order to conduct inference using standard panel regression techniques, it is important to
determine whether the variables are stationary. There are two standard approaches: conduct unit
root tests series-by-series, or employ recently developed panel unit-root tests.
Each of these approaches encounters difficulties when applied to our dataset. The series-by-series
approach is hampered by the extremely short time span of the data (16 observations at most). The
panel approach is complicated by the fact that the panels are much wider than long (i.e., the number
of observations, N, is much larger than the number of periods, T). Hence, we examine results from
both sets of tests to decide the appropriate form of the panel regression.
The Series-by-Series Analysis

First, we use a modified Dickey-Fuller test known as the ADF-GLS test to test for stationarity.47
While the standard Dickey-Fuller procedure is notorious for its low power, the ADF-GLS test is
shown to be approximately uniformly most powerful invariant.48 Consider a series { qt }. The ADFGLSτ test that allows for a linear time trend is based on the following regression:

(1 − L)qtτ = α 0 qtτ−1 + ∑k =1α k (1 − L)qtτ−k + ε t ,
p

where qtτ is the locally detrended process under the local alternative of α and is given by
qtτ = qt − γ~ ′zt ,

~ on ~
with zt = (1, t)′. γ~ is the least-squares regression coefficient of q
z t , where (q~1 , q~2......q~T ) =
t
(q1 , (1 - α L) q2 ,..., (1 - α L) qT ) , ( ~
z1 ,~
z 2......~
z T ) = ( z1 , (1 - α L) z 2 ,..., (1 - α L) zT ) , and L is the lag

operator. The local alternative α is defined by α =1 + c / T, for which c is set to -13.5. In
implementing the test, the lag parameter p is chosen to minimize the Schwartz-Bayesian
information criterion.49 The unit root hypothesis is rejected when the ADF-GLS test statistic, which
is given by the usual t-statistic for a0 = 0 against the alternative of a0 < 0, is significant.
Using this test, we find that the cross-country factor loadings reject the unit root null with the
greatest frequency. For instance, 50% of the factor loadings (i.e., the β’s) estimated using sectoral
indices and US dollar stock returns reject the null hypothesis (using a 10% significance threshold).
47

See Elliott et al. (1996) for a more detailed description of this testing procedure.
For example, see Pantula et al. (1994) and Stock (1994).
49
The maximum number of lags is set to four. An alternative procedure would be to select the optimal lag length
using a sequential t-test on each successive lag as the lag length is reduced from a specified maximum lag. In most
48

35

In other words, the unit root null is rejected at rates much higher than would be expected to occur
randomly. Turing to the bilateral linkage variables, 34% and 30% of the Import Demand and Trade
Competition series reject the unit root null. The Bank Lending and Foreign Investment series exhibit
lower rejection rates of 26% and 27%, respectively. These tests suggest that all of the variables are
stationary, although the results for the financial variables are weakest.
The Panel Unit Root Test

There are a number of different panel unit root tests. We focus on a test advanced by Breitung and
Meyer (1994), mainly because this is the most appropriate test for panel data sets where the time
dimension (T) is much smaller than the cross-sectional dimension (N).
This test involves conducting a likelihood ratio test comparing

(1 − L)qit = α 0 qit −1 + α 1 (1 − L)qit −1 + u it against (1 − L)q it = +α 1 (1 − L) q it −1 + u it . The likelihood
ratio for the two regressions is distributed as a χ21. Equivalently, one can inspect the t-statistic on the
reversion coefficient (the α 0 coefficient).
Including individual effects (dummies for each currency) does not complicate inference under the
null hypothesis, since the variables are then assumed to follow correlated random walks and the
individual effects cancel out when modeling the relations in first differences. Under the alternative,
however, the variables may cointegrate upon different levels. Hence, in order to avoid a decrease in
power, we follow Breitung and Meyer’s (1994) suggestion of removing the first observation before
implementing the test.50
The results of applying these tests to the data set described in Section IV are reported in the
table at the end of this appendix.51 The top of the table reports test results for the cross-country
factor loadings, estimated both with and without the sectoral effects (in equation (1)) and for
different combinations of financial markets and currencies. Overall, there is strong evidence of
reversion for almost all of the cross-country factor loadings. Only one of these cases is unable to
reject nonstationarity (when the factor loadings are estimated with sectoral indices for bond markets
in local currency), but the number of observations for this test is substantially smaller, reducing the
test’s power.

cases, the selected lag lengths match. When they do not, the optimal lag length is usually determined to be zero
while the Schwartz Criterion selects one lag.
50
Breitung and Meyer also suggest implementing a GLS procedure to account for cross-sectional dependence.
Since we have unbalanced panels, this procedure is not feasible. Instead, we account for this dependence using
fixed time effects.
51
In order to maximize the power of the test, we utilize all the country pairs available, even though only a subset
of the data is used for many of the regressions in the paper.

36

For the bilateral linkage variables, test results clearly indicate that the Trade Competition
and Bank Lending series are stationary. Although the evidence for the Import Demand series is
somewhat weaker (and the test statistic is insignificant), the reversion coefficient is still negative.
Moreover, results from the series-by-series tests rejected the unit root null for this series, so we treat
Import Demand as stationary in the base regressions. In stark contrast, the positive and statistically
significant coefficient on the Foreign Investment series indicates that this series is nonstationary.
Foreign Investment also had one of the lowest rejection rates of stationarity in the series-by-series
tests. We also examine the first difference of Foreign Investment, and this test strongly rejects the
presence of a unit root. Therefore, in the main regression analysis, we treat all of the variables as
stationary except Foreign Investment.

Appendix Table C1: Panel Unit Root Tests
Variable
α0
Betas - With Sectoral Factors
Stock returns
-0.059**
in US$
(0.013)
Stock returns
-0.014*
in local currency
(0.008)
Bond returns
-0.317**
in US$
(0.040)
Bond returns
-0.010
in local currency
(0.028)
Betas – Without Sectoral Factors
Stock returns
-0.213**
in US$
(0.018)
Stock returns
-0.233**
in local currency
(0.018)
Bond returns
-0.395**
in US$
(0.044)
Bond returns
-0.407**
in local currency
(0.063)
Bilateral Linkage Variables
Import
-0.007
Demand
(0.005)
Trade
-0.021**
Competition
(0.005)
Bank
-0.041**
Lending
(0.005)
Foreign
0.047**
Investment
(0.007)
Differenced
-0.185**
Foreign Investment
(0.016)

N

Adj.-R2

2057

0.28

2057

0.13

675

0.30

405

0.21

2060

0.36

2060

0.30

680

0.39

405

0.23

10,644

0.01

10,644

0.03

5657

0.07

4361

0.05

3804

0.32

Notes: Reversion coefficient from panel regressions using all available data. Standard
errors in parentheses. ** and * denote significance at the 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

37

Appendix D: Capital Control Variable
Chinn and Ito (2002) construct an index measuring a country’s degree of capital controls or capital
account openness. They base their index on the four binary dummy variables constructed by the
IMF in their Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAR) to
measure different types of capital account restrictions. These variables are:
•

k1: variable indicating the presence of multiple exchange rates;

•

k2: variable indicating restrictions on current account transactions;

•

k3: variable indicating restrictions on capital account transactions; and

•

k4: variable indicating the requirement of the surrender of export proceeds.

In order to focus on the effect of financial openness – rather than controls – Chinn and Ito reverse
the values of these binary variables, such that the variables are equal to one when the capital
account restrictions are non-existent. Moreover, for controls on capital transactions (k3), they use the
share of a five-year window that capital controls were not in effect (SHAREk3). More specifically,
this variable is constructed as:

 k + k3,t −1 + k3,t −2 + k3,t −3 + k3,t −4 
 .
SHAREk 3t =  3t
5


Then, Chinn and Ito construct an index for capital “openness” (KAOPENt ), which is the first
standardized principal component of k1t, k2t, SHAREk3t, and k4t. This index takes on higher values
the more open the country is to cross-border capital transactions. By construction, the series has a
mean of zero. The average value of KAOPEN in the full sample of countries in Chinn and Ito is
growing at 3.8% annually.
The incorporation of k1, k2, and k4 in this index, instead of simply focusing on k3, which
emphasizes restrictions on capital account transactions, merits some discussion. Chinn and Ito
incorporate these variables in order to more accurately capture the intensity of the capital controls.
For example, a country with an open capital account (according to k3) may still restrict capital flows
by limiting transactions in the current account or multiple exchange rates. By including this broader
set of possible restrictions, this index should therefore more accurately capture any cross-country or
cross-period variations in capital account openness.

38

Table 1: Sample Coverage1
Stock Market
Regressions2
1989-2000
1995-2000
1985-2000
1990-2000
1993-2000
1989-2000
1991-2000

Bond Market
Regressions
(U.S. Dollars)
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1999-2000
1997-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000

Bond Market
Regressions
(Local Currency)
----1994-2000
---------

Region
Americas

Country i
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

Asia

Australia
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Korea (South)
Malaysia
New Zealand
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

1985-2000
1994-2000
1985-2000
1991-2000
1991-2000
1988-2000
1987-2000
1989-2000
1988-2000
1985-2000
1988-2000

1994-2000
1994-2000
---1994-2000
1996-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
-1997-2000

1994-2000
---------1994-2000
------

Europe

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

1985-2000
1985-2000
1985-2000
1989-2000
1989-2000
1992-2000
1994-2000
1985-2000
1985-2000
1985-2000
1985-2000
1995-2000
1991-2000
1988-2000
1985-2000
1985-2000

1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1997-2000
1999-2000
-1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000

1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1997-2000
---1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
--1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000
1994-2000

Middle East
& Africa

Israel
Morocco
South Africa
Turkey

1994-2000
-1985-2000
1989-2000

-1994-2000
1995-2000
1996-2000

---1995-2000
---

Notes: (1) France, Germany, Japan, U.K. and U.S. are included as “large countries” indexed by c and
therefore excluded from the list of smaller countries indexed by i.
(2) Includes stock returns expressed in both local currency and U.S. dollars.

39

Table 2
Summary Information on Bilateral Linkage Variables

Import demand
Trade competition
Bank lending
Foreign investment

Means and standard deviations1:
Full Period
Sub-periods
1986-2000
1986-1990
1991-1995
2.88
2.78
2.69
(4.35)
(4.18)
(4.00)
13.15
12.38
12.85
(13.12)
(13.52)
(12.91)
5.12
7.03
4.76
(15.98)
(22.99)
(15.79)
2.36
1.96
2.18
(3.78)
(3.04)
(3.33)

Correlations: Full Period (1986-2000)
Import
Trade
Bank
demand
comp.
lending
Import demand
1.00
Trade competition
0.66
1.00
Bank lending
0.22
0.51
1.00
Foreign investment
0.62
0.59
0.41

Import demand
Trade competition
Bank lending
Foreign investment

Correlations: 1986-1990
Import
Trade
Bank
demand
comp.
lending
1.00
0.66
1.00
0.28
0.59
1.00
0.65
0.63
0.67

Import demand
Trade competition
Bank lending
Foreign investment

Correlations: 1991-1995
Import
Trade
Bank
demand
comp.
lending
1.00
0.69
1.00
0.23
0.55
1.00
0.66
0.63
0.57

Import demand
Trade competition
Bank lending
Foreign investment

Correlations: 1996-2000
Import
Trade
Bank
demand
comp.
lending
1.00
0.64
1.00
0.23
0.46
1.00
0.60
0.59
0.26

1996-2000
3.17
(4.82)
14.19
(12.89)
3.91
(6.49)
2.93
(4.68)

Foreign
invest.

1.00

Foreign
invest.

1.00

Foreign
invest.

1.00

Foreign
invest.

1.00

Note: (1) Means are listed with corresponding standard deviations in parentheses.

40

Table 3
Selection of Bilateral Linkage Variables with Japan or the U.S.
1985
Import Trade
Bank Foreign
Country i Demand1 Comp.2 Lending3 Invest.4

2000
Import Trade
Bank Foreign
Demand1 Comp.2 Lending3 Invest.4

Bilateral Linkages with Japan
Australia
3.8
1.8
Brazil
0.7
4.5
Canada
1.3
21.9
China
1.9
1.4
India
0.5
0.8
Indonesia
11.1
1.4
Korea
5.0
18.1
Malaysia
12.0
6.3
Mexico
1.0
3.8
Thailand
2.6
5.7

4.8
4.8
.
1.0
0.4
5.9
10.4
15.4
7.0
7.8

2.1
2.1
0.5
0.1
0.0
9.5
1.8
3.5
0.7
2.0

3.0
0.5
1.0
4.1
0.6
10.5
4.6
14.7
0.2
8.3

3.9
3.1
23.7
8.9
1.7
8.0
17.3
36.4
17.0
20.2

2.4
0.5
1.8
1.0
0.5
6.7
2.2
6.2
0.4
8.0

2.0
0.7
0.9
0.8
0.3
3.1
0.9
4.5
0.4
3.9

Bilateral Linkages with U.S.
Australia
1.3
14.3
Brazil
3.5
8.2
Canada
21.2
21.0
China
0.8
3.3
India
0.9
2.1
Indonesia
5.5
3.5
Korea
12.4
11.0
Malaysia
7.0
11.1
Mexico
9.0
5.0
Thailand
3.9
16.8

3.0
9.6
.
0.2
0.4
3.0
8.8
3.3
12.8
4.3

5.1
4.0
13.4
0.1
0.2
5.1
0.8
3.6
2.8
2.8

1.5
2.5
37.2
5.5
2.5
6.1
8.8
24.4
26.4
12.9

13.5
6.4
30.4
14.7
5.7
16.9
20.0
59.5
21.0
36.6

1.7
2.4
2.0
0.1
0.5
2.1
1.3
1.2
2.6
0.8

9.1
6.0
18.4
0.9
0.3
7.6
2.0
6.7
6.1
5.8

Notes: See Section IV for additional information on variable definitions. All variables expressed as percents.
1) Import Demand is the ratio of imports from country i to country c as a share of country i GDP. See
equation (3).
2) Trade Competition is an index from 1 to 100 capturing the importance of trade competition between
country i and c relative to country i’s GDP, based on 4-digit SITC information. See equation (4).
3) Bank Lending is the total stock of bank lending from country c in country i as a share of country i GDP.
See equation (5).
4) Foreign Investment is the total stock of foreign investment from country c in country i as a share of
country i GDP. See equation (6).

41

Table 4
Estimated Cross-Country Factor Loadings:
Local Currency Stock Returns Using Full Set of Factors
Country i

R2

Americas
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile

0.12
0.38
0.66
0.14

0.31
0.35**
0.06**
0.11

(0.21)
(0.15)
(0.03)
(0.07)

0.01
0.15
0.01
0.00

(0.27)
(0.18)
(0.03)
(0.08)

0.39*
0.29**
-0.01
0.00

(0.21)
(0.13)
(0.03)
(0.08)

-0.05
0.11
0.10**
0.13

(0.28)
(0.16)
(0.03)
(0.09)

0.87**
1.02**
0.43**
0.22*

(0.36)
(0.22)
(0.04)
(0.12)

Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

0.05
0.20
0.07

0.08
0.04
0.05

(0.09)
(0.26)
(0.17)

0.01
0.24
-0.05

(0.10)
(0.19)
(0.19)

0.01
0.08
0.08

(0.09)
(0.10)
(0.16)

-0.02
0.13
0.03

(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.24)

0.05
0.48**
0.00

(0.16)
(0.19)
(0.28)

Asia
Australia
China
Hong Kong
India

0.37
0.20
0.23
0.08

-0.04
-0.40**
0.09
0.09

(0.05)
(0.19)
(0.07)
(0.11)

0.16**
0.27
0.26**
0.29**

(0.04)
(0.22)
(0.11)
(0.14)

-0.03
-0.24
-0.07
-0.07

(0.05)
(0.15)
(0.08)
(0.13)

0.34**
0.06
0.28**
-0.06

(0.12)
(0.25)
(0.10)
(0.13)

-0.02
-0.38
-0.28**
-0.19

(0.09)
(0.33)
(0.12)
(0.20)

Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
N. Zealand

0.13
0.15
0.21
0.21

0.00
0.07
-0.12*
-0.05

(0.20)
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.06)

0.32*
-0.02
0.25**
0.07

(0.19)
(0.12)
(0.08)
(0.06)

0.00
0.17
0.00
-0.03

(0.15)
(0.13)
(0.10)
(0.06)

-0.04
-0.09
0.30**
0.23**

(0.16)
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.07)

-0.38
-0.40**
-0.03
0.10

(0.29)
(0.19)
(0.16)
(0.10)

Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

0.16
0.33
0.20

0.07
-0.05
0.05

(0.09)
(0.06)
(0.11)

0.29**
0.08
0.30**

(0.09)
(0.06)
(0.13)

-0.04
0.12**
0.02

(0.10)
(0.06)
(0.13)

0.10
0.37**
0.17

(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.12)

0.07
-0.20
-0.30

(0.16)
(0.13)
(0.20)

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland

0.30
0.41
0.26
0.49

0.12**
0.20**
0.03
0.16*

(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.09)

0.42**
0.24**
0.28**
0.25**

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.08)

0.03
-0.01
-0.01
0.05

(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.09)

-0.04
0.16**
0.11**
0.31**

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.09)

-0.21**
0.04
0.14*
-0.11

(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.13)

Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

0.14
0.27
0.14
0.42

0.21*
0.22*
-0.01
0.04

(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.05)
(0.04)

0.28*
0.18
0.09
0.11**

(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.06)
(0.05)

0.08
-0.07
0.12**
0.09*

(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.05)

0.00
0.19
-0.02
0.62**

(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.06)
(0.06)

-0.08
0.07
0.21**
0.19**

(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.09)
(0.09)

Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland

0.33
0.69
0.35
0.16

0.27**
0.12**
0.00
0.06

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.23)

0.23**
0.31**
0.31**
0.51**

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.24)

-0.07
0.08**
0.03
0.26

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.07)
(0.19)

0.17**
0.31**
0.38**
0.11

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.07)
(0.23)

-0.08
0.23**
0.05
-0.04

(0.10)
(0.05)
(0.11)
(0.27)

Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

0.36
0.50
0.44
0.61

0.23**
0.25**
0.18**
0.14**

(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.03)

0.22**
0.25**
0.34**
0.35**

(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.03)

-0.12**
0.08*
0.08
-0.02

(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.03)

-0.01
0.23**
0.22**
0.24**

(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.07)
(0.04)

-0.12
0.02
-0.07
0.02

(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.10)
(0.06)

0.31**
0.15**
-0.20

(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.18)

-0.02
0.20**
0.25

(0.13)
(0.06)
(0.20)

-0.06
-0.07
-0.01

(0.11)
(0.06)
(0.20)

-0.05
0.24**
0.30

(0.14)
(0.10)
(0.21)

0.36**
0.03
-0.27

(0.16)
(0.12)
(0.30)

Middle East & Africa
Israel
0.20
S. Africa
0.36
Turkey
0.10

France

Germany

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Notes: Estimates of cross-country betas from equation (1) with robust standard errors in parentheses. Control variables include full set of
global, sectoral and cross-country factors. R2’s are for the full model. ** and * is significant at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.

42

Table 5
Estimated Cross-Country Factor Loadings:
Local Currency Stock Returns with No Sectoral Factors
Country i

R2

Americas
Argentina
Brazil
Canada
Chile

0.08
0.30
0.61
0.11

0.30
0.21
0.07**
0.09

(0.20)
(0.16)
(0.03)
(0.07)

-0.06
0.20
0.01
0.03

(0.23)
(0.18)
(0.03)
(0.08)

0.11
0.27**
0.02
0.01

(0.13)
(0.09)
(0.02)
(0.05)

0.01
0.10
0.12**
0.16*

(0.28)
(0.15)
(0.04)
(0.09)

0.54**
0.41**
0.59**
0.20**

(0.19)
(0.13)
(0.03)
(0.08)

Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

0.03
0.18
0.05

0.05
0.03
-0.01

(0.08)
(0.26)
(0.17)

0.05
0.25
0.08

(0.10)
(0.19)
(0.18)

-0.01
0.15**
0.12

(0.05)
(0.07)
(0.12)

-0.02
0.18
0.14

(0.09)
(0.11)
(0.22)

0.09
0.44**
0.12

(0.08)
(0.10)
(0.16)

Asia
Australia
China
Hong Kong
India

0.31
0.07
0.21
0.03

-0.04
-0.41**
0.09
0.14

(0.05)
(0.18)
(0.07)
(0.12)

0.15**
0.38*
0.31**
0.25**

(0.04)
(0.20)
(0.10)
(0.12)

0.11**
0.18*
0.10**
-0.02

(0.03)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.08)

0.41**
0.31
0.40**
-0.07

(0.15)
(0.23)
(0.08)
(0.12)

0.10**
0.22
0.08
-0.12

(0.04)
(0.20)
(0.10)
(0.12)

Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
N. Zealand

0.08
0.10
0.18
0.17

0.02
0.10
-0.11
-0.05

(0.20)
(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.06)

0.47**
0.08
0.29**
0.11*

(0.18)
(0.12)
(0.07)
(0.06)

0.20**
0.29**
0.19**
0.14**

(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.06)
(0.04)

0.07
0.06
0.39**
0.27**

(0.15)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.07)

-0.13
0.21**
0.10
0.15**

(0.16)
(0.10)
(0.08)
(0.06)

Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

0.13
0.28
0.16

0.04
-0.05
0.04

(0.09)
(0.06)
(0.11)

0.33**
0.15**
0.42**

(0.09)
(0.05)
(0.12)

0.08
0.23**
0.21**

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.08)

0.16
0.48**
0.31**

(0.12)
(0.16)
(0.11)

0.11
0.13*
0.04

(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.12)

Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland

0.26
0.38
0.21
0.35

0.12**
0.20**
0.04
0.22**

(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.09)

0.43**
0.24**
0.26**
0.35**

(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.09)

0.13**
0.04*
0.07**
0.01

(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.06)

0.02
0.16**
0.11**
0.31**

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.09)

-0.06
-0.01
0.04
0.37**

(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.04)
(0.10)

Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland

0.11
0.21
0.04
0.40

0.22**
0.20*
-0.03
0.04

(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.04)

0.32**
0.36**
0.10*
0.13**

(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.05)
(0.05)

0.22**
-0.01
0.05
0.12**

(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.03)
(0.03)

-0.00
0.29**
-0.08
0.61**

(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.06)
(0.05)

0.04
0.21*
0.05
0.05

(0.11)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.05)

Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland

0.28
0.65
0.29
0.14

0.29**
0.11**
0.01
0.05

(0.07)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.21)

0.31**
0.29**
0.31**
0.60**

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.05)
(0.21)

0.04
0.04**
0.07
0.18

(0.04)
(0.02)
(0.05)
(0.12)

0.19**
0.30**
0.40**
0.09

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.07)
(0.22)

0.02
0.13**
0.08
0.21

(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.06)
(0.15)

Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

0.32
0.48
0.39
0.58

0.26**
0.24**
0.19**
0.13**

(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.03)

0.24**
0.29**
0.38**
0.37**

(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.04)

0.01
0.11**
0.08*
0.07**

(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.02)

0.04
0.25**
0.24**
0.26**

(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.04)

0.06
0.10*
0.16**
0.03

(0.06)
(0.05)
(0.06)
(0.04)

0.33**
0.15**
-0.19

(0.11)
(0.06)
(0.18)

-0.03
0.24**
0.45**

(0.12)
(0.06)
(0.20)

0.01
0.05
0.14

(0.06)
(0.04)
(0.12)

-0.00
0.28**
0.32

(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.20)

0.42**
0.09
0.04

(0.10)
(0.07)
(0.17)

Middle East & Africa
Israel
0.18
S. Africa
0.31
Turkey
0.04

France

Germany

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Notes: Estimates of cross-country betas from equation (1) with robust standard errors in parentheses. Control variables include global
and cross-country factors, but not sectoral factors. R2’s are for the full model. ** and * is significant at the 5% and 10% level,
respectively.

43

Table 6: Bilateral Linkage Regressions for Stock Returns in Local Currency
Factor model with global, sectoral & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Years
N
R
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.
Panel A: Full Period − Averages
181
0.03
0.390
-0.221
0.137
8.905*
1986
(0.561)
(0.160)
(0.105)
(4.986)
to
161
0.04
0.729
-0.251
0.174
6.548
2000
(0.561)
(0.188)
(0.128)
(5.122)
Panel B: Full Period − Annual Data
1259
0.01
-0.005
-0.629**
0.208**
2.452
1986
(0.725)
(0.218)
(0.086)
(1.689)
to
943
0.03
-0.021
-0.575
0.273**
5.989*
2000
(1.146)
(0.385)
(0.102)
(3.532)
Panel C: 5-Year Periods − Averages
65
0.01
-0.449
-0.099
0.191
-11.296
1986
(0.542)
(0.325)
(0.157)
(12.078)
to
60
0.01
0.117
-0.316
0.283
-11.640
1990
(0.829)
(0.432)
(0.249)
(19.224)
125
0.04
-1.381
0.005
-0.014
-5.002
1991
(1.113)
(0.259)
(0.152)
(7.898)
to
104
0.04
-1.156
-0.043
0.075
-4.561
1995
(1.333)
(0.322)
(0.157)
(11.020)
167
0.12
1.180*
-0.872**
0.807**
7.988**
1996
(0.640)
(0.212)
(0.299)
(2.951)
to
149
0.14
1.498**
-0.968**
0.799**
7.294**
2000
(0.677)
(0.234)
(0.335)
(3.045)
Panel D: 5-year Periods − Annual Data
198
0.04
0.528
-0.470
0.021
17.055
1986
(1.709)
(0.589)
(0.235)
(15.096)
to
182
0.04
1.227
-0.400
0.073
19.785
1990
(2.672)
(1.091)
(0.306)
(17.344)
485
0.01
-2.745*
-0.243
0.135
-7.557
1991
(1.576)
(0.375)
(0.151)
(7.250)
to
418
0.04
-4.445**
0.436
0.086
-3.228
1995
(1.603)
(0.447)
(0.133)
(7.456)
576
0.03
1.299*
-0.850**
0.307
3.037*
1996
(0.780)
(0.293)
(0.424)
(1.689)
to
343
0.06
2.952**
-1.719**
0.626
8.345**
2000
(1.318)
(0.511)
(0.503)
(4.236)
2

Capital
Controls

-0.003
(0.013)

-0.033*
(0.019)

-0.001
(0.031)
0.001
(0.022)
0.007
(0.015)

-0.033
(0.058)
-0.040
(0.026)
-0.026
(0.021)

2

N

R

181

0.10

161

0.14

1260

0.02

942

0.02

65

0.03

60

0.05

125

0.01

104

0.01

167

0.16

149

0.18

198

0.05

181

0.05

486

0.01

418

0.02

576

0.05

343

0.06

Factor model with global & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.

Capital
Controls

1.282**
(0.395)
1.555**
(0.367)

-0.189
(0.123)
-0.271**
(0.133)

0.090
(0.071)
0.121
(0.082)

0.030
(4.332)
-2.467
(4.527)

0.007
(0.009)

0.408
(0.352)
0.374
(0.561)

0.083
(0.109)
0.010
(0.176)

-0.047
(0.039)
-0.015
(0.045)

0.644
(1.000)
1.342
(1.807)

0.005
(0.010)

-0.664
(0.408)
-0.294
(0.603)
0.116
(0.711)
0.160
(0.862)
1.633**
(0.239)
1.699**
(0.226)

0.203
(0.177)
-0.043
(0.286)
0.195
(0.170)
0.065
(0.198)
-0.387**
(0.116)
-0.383**
(0.121)

0.135
(0.102)
0.169
(0.144)
-0.205*
(0.108)
-0.092
(0.100)
0.429**
(0.199)
0.358**
(0.203)

-11.471
(10.026)
-9.193
(13.880)
-3.187
(6.762)
-1.601
(8.345)
0.421
(1.446)
-0.597
(1.331)

-0.947**
(0.443)
-0.885
(0.607)
-1.043*
(0.579)
-1.737**
(0.690)
1.799**
(0.456)
2.907**
(0.828)

0.364**
(0.166)
0.302
(0.224)
0.436**
(0.182)
0.499**
(0.203)
-0.274
(0.172)
-0.693**
(0.351)

-0.103
(0.069)
-0.093
(0.074)
-0.193**
(0.067)
-0.134**
(0.063)
0.286
(0.262)
0.424
(0.323)

7.021
(4.405)
8.329
(5.081)
-1.249
(3.509)
-0.175
(3.641)
0.217
(1.014)
-0.088
(2.317)

0.034
(0.022)
0.008
(0.016)
0.002
(0.010)

0.018
(0.020)
0.006
(0.015)
-0.005
(0.015)

Notes: Panels A and C report estimates of equation (2). Panels B and D report estimates of equation (2′) and include annual dummy variables. Standard errors in parentheses. ** and * is significant at the 5% & 10% level, respectively.

44

Table 7: Bilateral Linkage Regressions for Stock Returns in U.S. Dollars
Factor model with global, sectoral & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Years
N
R
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.
Panel A: Full Period − Averages
181
0.05
1.370**
-0.439**
0.245*
3.993
1986
(0.528)
(0.170)
(0.148)
(4.510)
to
161
0.07
1.715**
-0.439**
0.282
-0.064
2000
(0.492)
(0.209)
(0.207)
(4.074)
Panel B: Full Period − Annual Data
1257
0.03
-0.036
-0.826**
0.105
4.960
1986
(1.039)
(0.327)
(0.143)
(5.387)
to
941
0.03
0.507
-0.786
0.213
10.119
2000
(1.716)
(0.557)
(0.180)
(12.962)
Panel C: 5-Year Periods − Averages
65
0.03
-1.744**
0.058
-0.173
6.565
1986
(0.825)
(0.331)
(0.264)
(26.522)
to
60
0.06
-2.074*
0.754
-0.075
2.342
1990
(1.193)
(0.564)
(0.390)
(36.788)
125
0.03
-2.667*
0.167
0.049
11.639
1991
(1.509)
(0.381)
(0.227)
(12.437)
to
104
0.03
-2.909
0.413
0.120
8.314
1995
(2.070)
(0.672)
(0.216)
(17.143)
167
0.16
1.738**
-0.940**
1.431**
1.161
1996
(0.598)
(0.195)
(0.325)
(2.488)
to
149
0.18
1.932**
-1.065**
1.418**
0.088
2000
(0.677)
(0.232)
(0.372)
(2.656)
Panel D: 5-year Periods − Annual Data
196
0.06
-2.224
-0.465
-0.238
2.119
1986
(1.831)
(0.520)
(0.239)
(17.219)
to
180
0.06
-1.949
0.581
-0.147
0.984
1990
(1.810)
(0.723)
(0.227)
(17.686)
485
0.03
-2.356
-0.441
0.240
7.922
1991
(2.693)
(0.793)
(0.257)
(11.901)
to
418
0.03
-2.392
-0.053
0.210
3.653
1995
(3.947)
(1.164)
(0.326)
(12.155)
576
0.05
2.206**
-1.684**
2.844**
6.853
1996
(1.070)
(0.455)
(0.645)
(6.259)
to
343
0.05
5.171**
-3.270**
3.562**
18.998
2000
(2.139)
(0.862)
(0.868)
(19.263)
2

Capital
Controls

-0.001
(0.017)

-0.037
(0.043)

-0.102**
(0.047)
-0.036
(0.066)
0.022
(0.017)

-0.187**
(0.071)
-0.031
(0.084)
0.040
(0.045)

2

N

R

181

0.12

161

0.14

1260

0.03

942

0.03

65

0.01

60

0.02

125

0.01

104

0.01

167

0.20

149

0.21

198

0.04

181

0.05

486

0.01

418

0.01

576

0.08

343

0.10

Factor model with global & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.

Capital
Controls

1.705**
(0.418)
1.878**
(0.446)

-0.235*
(0.138)
-0.234
(0.166)

0.059
(0.075)
0.084
(0.099)

0.566
(3.549)
-2.620
(3.720)

-0.001
(0.010)

0.951**
(0.384)
0.790
(0.631)

0.030
(0.117)
0.051
(0.209)

-0.100**
(0.045)
-0.089
(0.054)

-1.537
(1.171)
-3.338
(2.738)

0.002
(0.013)

-0.194
(0.335)
-0.163
(0.524)
0.254
(0.891)
0.070
(1.143)
1.991**
(0.302)
2.036**
(0.311)

0.233
(0.188)
0.195
(0.257)
0.111
(0.230)
0.071
(0.283)
-0.474**
(0.138)
-0.458**
(0.154)

-0.025
(0.085)
-0.016
(0.121)
-0.221*
(0.133)
-0.197
(0.152)
0.605**
(0.234)
0.585**
(0.269)

-6.088
(6.506)
-4.251
(10.330)
-2.987
(9.254)
-8.282
(12.566)
-1.735
(1.672)
-2.700*
(1.634)

-1.437**
(0.644)
-2.143**
(0.911)
0.014
(0.663)
-0.929
(0.890)
2.530**
(0.472)
4.079**
(0.827)

0.538**
(0.195)
0.798**
(0.339)
0.229
(0.204)
0.318
(0.302)
-0.412**
(0.181)
-0.810**
(0.375)

-0.240**
(0.088)
-0.257**
(0.090)
-0.188**
(0.074)
-0.162*
(0.084)
0.677**
(0.288)
0.761**
(0.396)

4.743
(4.863)
5.848
(5.302)
-3.549
(4.046)
-3.753
(4.417)
-1.703
(1.141)
-6.005*
(3.163)

0.019
(0.023)
0.011
(0.026)
-0.003
(0.011)

0.005
(0.025)
0.015
(0.023)
-0.015
(0.018)

Notes: Panels A and C report estimates of equation (2). Panels B and D report estimates of equation (2′) and include annual dummy variables. Standard errors in parentheses. ** and * is significant at the 5% & 10% level, respectively.

45

Table 8: Bilateral Linkage Regressions for Bond Returns in U.S. Dollars
Factor model with global, sectoral & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Years
N
R
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.
Panel A: Full Period − Averages
157
0.09
2.398**
-0.540*
1.440*
6.104
1994
(0.476)
(0.300)
(0.826)
(4.590)
to
142
0.11
2.646**
-0.959**
1.468*
6.800
2000
(0.516)
(0.392)
(0.809)
(5.214)
Panel B: Full Period − Annual Data
550
0.01
4.688**
-1.901**
-1.985
3.615
1994
(1.466)
(0.866)
(4.863)
(4.334)
to
350
0.02
5.068**
-4.104**
5.550
12.222
2000
(2.155)
(1.962)
(5.636)
(16.331)
Panel C: 3-4 Year Periods − Averages
92
0.01
2.990**
-0.392
1.459
14.876
1994
(1.460)
(1.048)
(2.766)
(16.324)
to
82
0.01
3.003**
-0.534
2.110
15.084
1997
(1.500)
(1.241)
(2.606)
(16.511)
144
0.01
3.289*
-1.789
1.011
9.304
1998
(1.842)
(1.497)
(2.778)
(7.294)
to
131
0.02
4.112*
-2.454
0.927
9.271
2000
(2.135)
(1.605)
(3.228)
(9.158)
Panel D: 3-4 Year Periods − Annual Data
237
0.03
2.157
-0.181
6.149
-1.527
1994
(2.074)
(1.492)
(7.490)
(14.499)
to
203
0.03
1.868
-0.569
7.624
-3.154
1997
(2.216)
(1.739)
(8.150)
(14.967)
313
0.01
5.033**
-2.146**
-2.601
3.718
1998
(1.886)
(1.037)
(5.119)
(4.495)
to
147
0.03
9.200*
-7.000**
6.550
21.871
2000
(4.886)
(3.377)
(7.571)
(25.378)
2

Capital
Controls

0.054*
(0.031)

0.057
(0.078)

0.018
(0.060)
0.096
(0.158)

0.022
(0.044)
0.075
(0.187)

2

N

R

157

0.13

142

0.16

554

0.01

354

0.02

92

0.02

82

0.02

144

0.01

131

0.02

241

0.04

207

0.04

313

0.01

147

0.02

Factor model with global & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.

Capital
Controls

2.839**
(0.436)
3.082**
(0.471)

-0.522*
(0.274)
-0.905**
(0.331)

1.291
(0.833)
1.364
(0.828)

5.376
(4.556)
6.428
(5.255)

0.046*
(0.027)

4.787**
(1.498)
5.647**
(2.379)

-1.493
(0.923)
-3.193
(2.109)

-0.854
(4.608)
5.545
(6.254)

2.337
(4.073)
4.974
(18.427)

0.040
(0.086)

4.556**
(2.246)
4.693**
(2.325)
3.036*
(1.603)
3.683**
(1.817)

-0.076
(1.203)
-0.165
(1.436)
-1.355
(1.278)
-1.927
(1.395)

-0.738
(3.635)
0.036
(3.276)
1.136
(2.933)
1.093
(3.298)

18.145
(18.921)
18.270
(19.060)
8.224
(6.679)
8.245
(8.172)

3.920
(2.559)
3.801
(2.757)
4.535**
(1.930)
8.329
(5.224)

0.682
(1.475)
0.380
(1.697)
-1.829
(1.126)
-6.127
(3.856)

4.308
(8.483)
5.951
(9.247)
-1.050
(4.890)
6.848
(8.477)

-4.734
(17.216)
-5.492
(17.834)
2.651
(4.238)
13.882
(28.947)

0.006
(0.080)
0.082
(0.133)

-0.003
(0.043)
0.065
(0.204)

Notes: Panels A and C report estimates of equation (2). Panels B and D report estimates of equation (2′) and include annual dummy variables. Standard errors in parentheses. ** and * is significant at the 5% & 10% level, respectively.

46

Table 9: Bilateral Linkage Regressions for Bond Returns in Local Currency
Factor model with global, sectoral & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Years
N
R
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.
Panel A: Full Period − Averages
85
0.13
2.847**
-0.457
0.678
-1.382
1994
(0.506)
(0.340)
(0.814)
(2.968)
to
85
0.15
2.811**
-0.595**
0.669
-1.563
2000
(0.509)
(0.282)
(0.802)
(3.121)
Panel B: Full Period − Annual Data
191
0.01
1.627*
-0.034
0.987
1.726
1994
(0.949)
(0.725)
(2.072)
(1.486)
to
113
0.03
0.596
4.760
11.937
5.308
2000
(11.563)
(3.395)
(11.482)
(17.585)
Panel C: 3-4 Year Periods − Averages
30
0.01
5.066*
-0.674
2.591
-7.566
1994
(2.994)
(2.199)
(24.986)
(19.898)
to
30
0.01
5.190
-0.613
1.852
-8.194
1997
(3.792)
(1.475)
(16.383)
(26.451)
78
0.10
1.957**
-0.304
1.811
-1.086
1998
(0.616)
(0.444)
(1.141)
(1.866)
to
78
0.12
1.910**
-0.407
1.765
-1.293
2000
(0.617)
(0.413)
(1.139)
(1.964)
Panel D: 3-4 Year Periods − Annual Data
67
0.01
6.893
2.485
0.144
3.425
1994
(22.761)
(4.831)
(27.894)
(28.873)
to
67
0.01
7.999
2.961
-0.094
4.414
1997
(22.136)
(4.673)
(27.866)
(29.108)
124
0.03
1.553**
-0.252
1.105
1.736
1998
(0.786)
(0.379)
(1.535)
(1.332)
to
46
0.19
-1.846
6.477*
18.073*
0.707
2000
(15.995)
(3.905)
(10.040)
(19.721)
2

Capital
Controls

0.055
(0.064)

-0.026
(0.101)

-0.036
(0.479)
0.059
(0.070)

-0.118
(0.170)
0.062
(0.107)

2

N

R

85

0.16

85

0.18

191

0.02

113

0.06

30

0.07

30

0.10

78

0.16

78

0.18

67

0.05

67

0.05

124

0.03

46

0.19

Factor model with global & cross-country factors
Import
Trade
Bank
Foreign
Demand
Comp.
Lending
Invest.

Capital
Controls

2.902**
(0.513)
2.868**
(0.515)

-0.466*
(0.277)
-0.595**
(0.255)

0.795
(0.809)
0.786
(0.797)

-1.242
(2.990)
-1.410
(3.115)

0.052
(0.065)

1.965**
(0.803)
1.219
(5.837)

-0.155
(0.373)
2.058
(1.503)

0.445
(1.671)
6.772
(4.854)

1.551
(1.565)
7.375
(9.839)

0.045
(0.069)

2.625**
(0.952)
2.216**
(0.801)
1.780**
(0.642)
1.738**
(0.649)

-0.002
(0.709)
-0.205
(0.614)
-0.236
(0.349)
-0.328
(0.343)

-9.612
(8.567)
-7.165
(6.158)
2.224*
(1.272)
2.183*
(1.264)

13.070
(10.598)
15.149
(9.444)
-0.917
(1.970)
-1.102
(2.013)

9.283
(7.277)
9.076
(7.146)
1.968**
(0.814)
3.687
(10.410)

-0.093
(1.604)
-0.183
(1.597)
-0.299
(0.364)
4.027
(2.977)

-10.596
(6.919)
-10.551
(6.972)
1.003
(1.938)
16.493*
(8.479)

12.460
(13.212)
12.275
(13.149)
1.367
(1.495)
-6.646
(16.973)

0.119
(0.143)
0.053
(0.036)

0.022
(0.072)
0.051
(0.119)

Notes: Panels A and C report estimates of equation (2). Panels B and D report estimates of equation (2′) and include annual dummy variables. Standard errors in parentheses. ** and * is significant at the 5% & 10% level, respectively.

47

Table 10: Sensitivity Analysis: Bilateral Linkage Regressions
E-W
K-S
No
Capital
Capital
global
Controls1
Controls1
factors2
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Stock Returns in Local Currency: Averages for 1996-2000
Import
1.699**
1.206**
1.353**
1.649**
Demand
(0.226)
(0.488)
(0.308)
(0.223)

Exclude
Germ.
& UK3
(5)

Foreign
Inv. in
levels
(6)

Include
squared
terms4
(7)

Add
gravity
variables5
(8)

Add
regional
dummies6
(9)

1.619**
(0.267)

1.665**
(0.260)

1.499**
(0.720)

1.192**
(0.234)

Trade
Comp.

Base
Case

Exclude
crises7

High
Income8

(10)

(11)

Low &
Middle
Income8
(12)

1.753**
(0.221)

1.910**
(0.239)

1.936**
(0.234)

1.128**
(0.512)

-0.383**
(0.121)

-0.197
(0.200)

-0.393
(0.225)

-0.380**
(0.121)

-0.612**
(0.186)

-0.337**
(0.128)

-0.025
(0.300)

-0.309**
(0.131)

-0.380**
(0.114)

-0.423**
(0.131)

-0.425**
(0.133)

-0.298
(0.284)

Bank
Lending

0.358*
(0.203)

1.407**
(0.523)

0.683
(0.448)

0.424**
(0.198)

0.244
(0.217)

0.394**
(0.190)

1.184**
(0.566)

0.272
(0.185)

0.368**
(0.185)

0.342
(0.219)

0.304
(0.209)

1.961**
(0.923)

Foreign
Invest.

-0.597
(1.331)

7.307*
(4.320)

2.612
(3.380)

-0.912
(1.276)

2.201
(2.519)

-0.095
(0.336)

-0.036
(2.023)

-1.942
(1.430)

-1.246
(1.408)

-0.993
(1.393)

-1.430
(1.412)

10.819
(7.359)

Capital
Controls
N
R2

0.002
(0.010)
149
0.18

-0.093
(0.092)
86
0.17

-0.026
(0.036)
91
0.16

0.000
(0.009)
149
0.19

0.013
(0.016)
84
0.17

0.000
(0.010)
151
0.17

-0.005
(0.010)
149
0.21

-0.009
(0.010)
149
0.26

-0.004
(0.012)
149
0.20

0.010
(0.011)
110
0.22

0.004
(0.032)
84
0.27

0.004
(0.020)
65
0.13

Bond Returns in U.S. Dollars: Averages for 1994-2000
Import
3.082**
2.315**
3.002**
2.975**
Demand
(0.471)
(1.222)
(0.557)
(0.459)

3.054**
(0.478)

3.166**
(0.518)

3.096*
(1.840)

1.593**
(0.740)

3.147**
(0.533)

3.244**
(0.603)

3.540**
(0.721)

2.625**
(1.206)

Trade
Comp.

-0.905**
(0.331)

-0.907
(0.669)

-1.151**
(0.483)

-0.954**
(0.331)

-1.303**
(0.360)

-0.814**
(0.346)

-1.759*
(0.956)

-0.638**
(0.315)

-0.900**
(0.318)

-0.595*
(0.306)

-0.644**
(0.299)

-1.554*
(0.801)

Bank
Lending

1.364
(0.828)

1.167
(1.373)

0.947
(0.842)

1.449*
(0.825)

2.891**
(1.398)

1.100
(0.917)

3.237*
(1.795)

0.334
(0.608)

1.262
(0.842)

1.101
(1.028)

1.064
(1.087)

2.276
(1.717)

Foreign
Invest.

6.428
(5.255)

28.796**
(10.346)

14.417
(9.679)

6.289
(5.215)

12.538
(9.396)

0.181
(0.993)

20.588**
(9.495)

3.214
(4.874)

5.735
(5.314)

1.422
(4.811)

-1.226
(4.074)

41.164**
(10.762)

Capital
Controls
N
R2

0.046*
(0.027)
142
0.16

0.097
(0.217)
87
0.10

-0.182*
(0.106)
92
0.15

0.048*
(0.028)
142
0.15

0.103**
(0.027)
84
0.31

0.048*
(0.026)
145
0.16

0.050
(0.030)
142
0.19

0.028
(0.025)
142
0.22

0.040
(0.037)
142
0.16

0.034
(0.036)
93
0.18

0.042
(0.103)
80
0.24

0.041
(0.046)
62
0.14

Notes: Based on estimates of equation (1) with global factors and cross-country factors, but no sectoral factors. Standard errors in parentheses. ** and * is significant at the 5% & 10% level, respectively.
(1)
Capital controls measured by E-W (Edison and Warnock, 2002) unsmoothed measure of capital controls or K-S (Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2002) measure of capital account liberalization.
(2)
Underlying factor model estimates from equation (1) exclude the set of global factors.
(3)
Underlying factor model estimates from equation (1) exclude the cross-country factors for Germany and the U.K.
(4)
Include squared terms for each of the 4 bilateral linkage variables.
(5)
Includes 5 gravity equation variables: common borders, common language, former colony, log of distance between countries, and log of the product of real GDPs.
(6)
Includes regional dummy variables for each region as specified in Table 1.
(7)
Exclude countries defined as having a banking crisis or currency crisis in the given year. See text for definitions.
(8)
Includes only high income or low/middle income countries. Definitions based on World Bank (2001).

48

Figure 1: Joint Significance of Different Factor Groups
Global

Sectoral

Cross-Country

Argentina
Brazil

Americas

Canada
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Venezuela

Australia
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia

Asia

Korea
Malaysia
New Zealand
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Greece
Hungary

Europe

Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Swizterland

Middle East
and Africa

Israel
South Africa
Turkey

Note: Colored bars show that an F-test indicates that the relevant set of factors is jointly significant at the
10% level. White bars indicate jointly insignificant.

49

Figure 2: Summary Results for Factor Model in Different Periods – Stock Markets
100%

80%

60%

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

1986-1990

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

100%

France

Germany

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

1991-1995

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

100%

France

Germany

1996-2000

80%

60%

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

France

Germany

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Notes: Reports percent of coefficient estimates that are significant at the 5% level. Results based on estimates of equation (1) for
local currency stock returns with sectoral factors. Results for global, sectoral and cross-country factors are F-tests of the joint
significance of factors. Results for France, Germany, Japan, the U.K. and U.S. are from a t-test of the significance of the
estimated cross-country beta. Regional divisions listed in Table 1. “Total” is for the full sample of countries.

50

Figure 3: Summary Results for Factor Model in Different Periods – Bond Markets
100%

1994-2000

80%

60%

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

100%

France

Germany

1994-1997

80%

60%

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

100%

France

Germany

Japan

1998-2000

U.K.

U.S.

Americas
Asia
Europe
ME & Africa
Total

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
Global

Sector

X-country

France

Germany

Japan

U.K.

U.S.

Notes: Reports percent of coefficient estimates that are significant at the 5% level. Results based on estimates of equation (1) for
U.S. dollar bond returns with sectoral factors. Results for global, sectoral and cross-country factors are F-tests of the joint
significance of factors. Results for France, Germany, Japan, the U.K. and U.S. are from a t-test of the significance of the
estimated cross-country beta. Regional divisions listed in Table 1. “Total” is for the full sample of countries.

51

