NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PENSION REFORM AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
IN BRITAIN IN THE 1980s AND 1990s
Richard Disney
Carl Emmerson
Sarah Smith
Working Paper 9556
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9556
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

We are grateful to participants at the pre-conference, the editors, and Alissa Goodman for comments on an
earlier draft. Colleagues at the Institute for Fiscal Studies offered useful advice. The views expressed here
are those of the authors and not their employers. Any errors are the responsibility of the authors alone. The
background work was funded by the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic Analysis of Fiscal Policy at IFS.
The Family Resources Survey is Crown Copyright and the Data Archive is thanked for access to the British
Household Panel Survey. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Richard Disney, Carl Emmerson, and Sarah Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Pension Reform and Economic Performance in Britain in the 1980s and 1990s
Richard Disney, Carl Emmerson, and Sarah Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 9556
March 2003
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
The late 1980s saw a major shift in pension provision in the United Kingdom, when for the first time
individuals were permitted to opt out of part of the social security program into individual retirement
saving accounts (Personal Pensions). At the same time, membership of company-provided pension
plans (occupational schemes) was made voluntary. The paper explores the possible impact of these,
and other related changes in social security in the 1980s and 1990s in the UK, on household saving
rates, on current and future public finances, on retirement, and on the job mobility of individuals
covered by company pension plans.
Richard Disney

Carl Emmerson

School of Economics

Institute for Fiscal Studies

University of Nottingham

7 Ridgmount Street

University Park

London WC1E 7AE UK

Nottingham NG7 2RD UK

carl.emmerson@ifs.org.uk

richard.disney@nottingham.ac.uk
Sarah Smith
The Financial Services Authority,
25 The North Colonnade,
Canary Wharf,
London E14 5HS UK
sarah.smith@fsa.gov.uk

2
PENSION REFORM AND ECONOMIC
PERFORMANCE IN THE UK IN THE 1980S AND 1990s1
1. Introduction
1.1

Overview of reform process
Over the last fifteen years, successive United Kingdom governments have

embarked on a series of reforms of the pension programme designed both to reduce
the prospective costs of social security, and also to permit more flexibility and
individual choice in secondary pension provision.2 Central to this strategy has been an
evolution of the mechanism of ‘contracting-out’, introduced originally in 1978 as a
means of integrating existing occupational pension schemes into the new State
Earnings-Related Pension Scheme, SERPS. In essence, contracting-out means that
employers and employees obtain part of their social security pension through a private
pension fund instead of the state. In compensation for establishing a private
arrangement, employers and employees pay a lower payroll tax rate (known as the
National Insurance contribution). An important consequence arises because the social
security programme is purely pay-as-you-go (PAYG) financed, whereas most pension
schemes, at least in the private sector, are fully-funded. Thus greater contracting-out
implies greater pre-funding of pension commitments.
Under the 1978 arrangements, individuals could only opt out of part of the
social security pension, SERPS, if they worked for an employer who provided an
approved defined benefit (DB) occupational pension scheme. The approved scheme
guaranteed to pay the employee a pension approximately equal to what they would
have received from the state, known as the Guaranteed Minimum Pension.3 In return,

1

There are some important differences in nomenclature between the US and Europe. In Europe, the
term ‘pension’ tends to refer to all pensions, whether provided publicly (by the state) or privately.
‘Social security’, the term used for state-provided pensions in the US, has a different connotation in
Europe, generally referring to the whole social insurance scheme. ‘Occupational pension’ is a specific
term in the UK referring to an employer-provided (group) pension scheme. Finally, the basic state
retirement pension in the UK, which pays (broadly) the same weekly amount to all pensioners and
pensioner couples, is often referred to as a ‘flat rate’ pension – although in the US, ‘flat rate’ is
sometimes used as a term for a proportional tax system.
2

The structure of the first tier of coverage (the basic state pension) was unchanged by these reforms,
though its generosity was reduced. See Dilnot et al (1994), Disney, Emmerson and Tanner (1999) and
Banks and Emmerson (2000).
3

There were however some important differences – for example indexation post-retirement of the
GMP was in part subsidised by the government, see Dilnot et al (1994) for further details.

3
the employer would pay a lower combined rate of employee and employer National
Insurance contributions to the government.4
However, a major innovation in pension policy occurred in 1988, as a result of
the 1986 Social Security Act. The government was worried by the projected cost of
SERPS once the baby boom generation began to retire in the first quarter of the
twenty first century (Hemming and Kay, 1982; Department of Health and Social
Security, 1984), and sought to cut projected public pension expenditure. To do this, it
needed ways to encourage a greater number of individuals to contract-out of SERPS.
The government adopted a ‘stick’ and ‘carrot’ strategy to this problem. The ‘stick’
was to reduce the generosity of SERPS considerably, so giving a greater incentive to
opt out. But coverage by existing defined benefit (DB) occupational pensions was
stagnating. Therefore a ‘carrot’ was needed. This took the form of giving individuals
and employers new incentives to contract out, by permitting defined contribution
pension plans also to opt out of SERPS, on what turned out be extremely favourable
terms. 5 The government perhaps expected this extra ‘wave’ of opting out to occur
through employer-based defined contribution (DC) plans, but in fact the dominant
new form of arrangement became the individually-purchased retirement saving
account known as a personal pension.6
Contracting out works in a somewhat different manner in an individually
purchased personal pension. Here the individual makes a contract with an approved
private insurance company. The Department of Social Security (DSS) acts as the
‘clearing house’, so that the full National Insurance contribution is paid by the
employer to the Inland Revenue, and the contracted-out rebate component is then

4

The difference between the ‘contracted in’ and ‘contracted out’ National Insurance rates is known as
the contracted out rebate. Note that, in the UK, most income tax and National Insurance contributions,
whether notionally levied on the employee or employer, are collected at source from the employer by
the Inland Revenue.
5

See discussion below, and National Audit Office (1991). Of course employers offering DC plans
could not guarantee a target benefit, so the employer was instead required to make a guaranteed
minimum contribution in such schemes.
6

DB plans are plans that guarantee a nominal benefit, typically related to a measure of salary. DC
plans simply promise to pay an (unknown) annuity based on the accumulated fund of contributions plus
investment returns. A reason for the popularity of personal pensions was that they were heavily
advertised and sold. They offered greater flexibility and very generous tax reliefs, but a contributing
factor arose because the government had just eliminated tax relief on life insurance. Many insurance
companies therefore switched their salesforces to the pension market, and this decision contributed a
good deal to the subsequent controversy concerning the ‘mis-selling’ of personal pensions.

4
transferred and paid directly by the DSS to the individual’s approved personal pension
provider.7
Personal pensions were also encouraged by the fact that the 1988 legislation
made membership of a pension scheme, whether state-provided or employerprovided, entirely a matter of choice: that is, an individual had to belong to an
approved contracted out scheme or SERPS, but could not be forced by their employer
to join a company scheme.8 Roughly 25% of the workforce (over 6 million
employees) opted to purchase personal pensions over the period 1988–92, including
some one million who opted to leave or not to join an existing employer’s pension
plan. By the middle of the 1990s, roughly three quarters of the workforce had
contracted-out of SERPS into some form of private plan, whether DB or DC, or
employer-provided or individually purchased.9
It should be noted, finally, that individuals are also free to switch in their
working life between different types of pension plans. Crucially, and unlike some
other countries that have gone down this road, contracting out of the social security
programme need not be permanent.10 Indeed, between 1988 and 1995, there were
incentives for individuals who contracted out of SERPS to contract back in to the
social security programme at a later age (Disney and Whitehouse, 1992a).
These reforms, augmented by further substantial measures in 1995, are far
from the end of the pension reform programme in the UK. Indeed in 1998 and 1999
the new Labour government proposed a number of further reforms, including yet
another ‘route’ for contracted out private provision (alongside occupational and
personal pensions) known as ‘stakeholder pensions’ (Department of Social Security,
1998). These will basically be benchmarked personal pensions, which all employers
employing 5 or more people will be required to make available to their employees at

7

Thus the contracted out rebate can be varied across individuals, which is not possible in a group
scheme where the same percentage rebate is paid for all scheme members.
8

At the same time, an employer could not refuse to let an employee join a scheme on the grounds of,
say, being part-time as this constituted a form of indirect discrimination (against women). For the same
reason, differential vesting on grounds of gender is not permitted, and indeed vesting periods in
employer-provided plans are not a big issue in the UK, being very much shorter than, say, the US.
9

Somewhat surprisingly, it is impossible to find any official data that provides the proportions of
workers contracted in or contracted out to different types of pension plans, over time.
10

For an analysis of opting out arrangements in a number of countries, see Disney, Palacios and
Whitehouse (1999).

5
the workplace (although they will not be directly provided by employers). The idea of
this reform is to provide a low cost pension for those not covered by traditional
employer plans, thereby reducing administrative charges relative to individual plans
and making pension arrangements more transparent. While this in some ways a
positive step, given some of the difficulties with the other pension ‘routes’, there must
be some concern as to whether further augmenting choice of individual pension
arrangement assists in clarifying or simplifying the UK pension system. At the same
time, over a long transition period, SERPS will be replaced by a more explicitly
redistributive public pension benefit known as the State Second Pension (or, in some
quarters, as S2P). 11
The main thrust of this paper, however, is not to go through the intricacies of
the UK pension reform process in the 1980s and 1990s, which would require a whole
volume. We do indeed sketch out the UK pension scheme in Section 2, mentioning
some other important facets to the reform process, such as cutbacks in the flat basic
state pension, and greater targeting on poor pensioners. The primary purpose,
however, is to ask what impact these reforms might have on the UK’s economy. 12 The
shift to a greater share of private pension provision, and to greater choice of pension
provision, reflect the central tenets of the Conservative administrations of the 1980s
and the first half of the 1990s. However, the Labour administration that came to
power in 1997 showed no inclination to reverse this process of opting out of state
provision, preferring instead further to focus public resources available on poorer
pensioners by increasing the generosity of the main means-tested benefit, through the
Minimum Income Guarantee. While 60 per cent of pensioner income is currently
provided by the state the current government has stated that it expects this to fall to 40
per cent by the middle of this century (Department of Social Security, 1998).

1.2

Pension reform in the UK: The issues and summary of our main findings
This chapter therefore examines some of the implications of the sequence of

pension reforms for the UK economy. Given space constraints, we focus on impacts
on the real economy, leaving aside developments in the financial economy, such as
11

For further discussion of all these issues, see Disney, Emmerson and Tanner (1999).

12

For some interesting details on the political process, see Lawson (1992) and Peacock (1992).

6
the consequences of greater private pension provision for the UK’s capital market. In
particular, we examine five aspects of the economy where pension schemes, and
pension reform, might be expected to have some effects. These areas, with a summary
of the main findings are:
•

Pension reform affects macroeconomic performance through its impact on

household savings rates. Contributions to occupational pension funds have
significantly contributed to household saving for many years in the UK. The
introduction of personal pensions in 1988 had both a positive substitution effect
increasing household saving rates and also a positive effect on wealth which will have
reduced household saving rates. Our tentative conclusion is that personal pensions
contributed a negligible net amount to household saving at the end of the 1980s,
despite massive take-up. But a decade later, due to the fact that contributions direct
from individuals and their employers had become more important than those from the
DSS paid contracted-out rebate, personal pensions are likely to have contributed more
substantially to household saving.
•

The public finances, and especially the government’s intertemporal budget

constraint are affected by pension reform. Permitting individuals to opt out of part of
the state pension programme has both intertemporal effects (current versus future tax
rates) and intragenerational effects (the relative tax rates paid by opted (contracted)
out and contracted in individuals). These effects arise from the PAYG nature of the
financing of the state pension scheme. Our conclusion is that the contracting out
arrangements have raised payroll tax rates by around 2½ to 3 percentage points,
relative to the status quo. It will reduce payroll tax rates by somewhat less as opted
out pensioners retire later in this century. Note that it is inherent in rational voluntary
switching that the government never recoups fully its initial payroll tax reductions
designed to encourage opting out.
•

The impact on the distribution of incomes. Ideally, we need a lifetime perspective

to trace the impact of greater contracting out on lifetime incomes. In static
comparisons, for example of pensioner inequality, we might expect greater
contracting out to lead to greater inequality for two reasons. First, private pension
incomes may be more volatile. Second, in the 1980s and 1990s, average private
pensions grew much faster than the contracting-out arrangements had assumed. This
made them worth more than state pensions and better off earners tend to contract out.

7
The future impact of personal pensions on income inequality will depend not just on
future investment returns but also on the retirement behaviour of optants.
•

Labour supply (and especially retirement behaviour). Different types of pension

schemes have different effects on retirement behaviour. There has been a trend to
earlier retirement, especially among men, in the UK in the 1980s and 1990s. This has
been encouraged by the use of existing occupational pension schemes and by the
relative generosity of the public disability system – since somewhat reduced (Blundell
and Johnson, 1999; Disney, 1999). The majority of optants to personal pensions are
somewhat younger than the average workforce and the effect on retirement behaviour
cannot yet be seen. It is clear that defined benefit schemes will discourage early
retirement relative to defined contribution schemes, due to the fact that the former are
back-loaded while the latter are front-loaded (Blundell, Meghir and Smith, 2001).
However contracting out of state pensions into a personal pension has both a wealth
effect and a substitution effect which work in opposite directions for the labour supply
of older workers. The net impact on labour supply could go either way.
•

The general operation of the labour market – in particular, how pension reforms

might have affected labour market ‘flexibility’. Here we focus on job mobility and
take-up of personal pensions, the hypothesis being that individualised personal
pensions encourage more mobility, or at least, are taken up by more mobile workers.
Given the inherent simultaneity of this issue, it is hard to identify causation.
Nevertheless the introduction of personal pensions offers an unusual ‘natural
experiment’, arising from the ability of individuals to choose a personal pension in
preference to a company pension plan, if offered. We show that individuals that chose
to opt out of a company pension plan did indeed exhibit significantly higher
subsequent job mobility. In principle further analysis of this experiment will offer a
more precise ‘test’ than the existing (largely inconclusive) literature on pension
scheme tenure and job mobility.

2. Overview of reforms in the UK
2.1

Broad framework of UK pension provision
The section briefly outlines the current UK pension system, and the reforms

made over the last twenty years. A more detailed description can be found in, among

8
others, Budd and Campbell (1998); Dilnot, Disney, Johnson and Whitehouse (1994);
Banks and Emmerson (2000), and Emmerson and Johnson (2001). Figure 2.1
provides a diagrammatic representation of the current UK pension system.
The UK pension system is split into three tiers. The first is provided by the
state, and consists of the basic state pension and a significant means-tested (noncontributory) benefits sector. The basic state pension is a flat contributory benefit
which is financed on a pay-as-you-go basis. The basic state pension in 2001–02 will
be worth £72.50 a week for a single pensioner13, which is about fifteen per cent of
average male earnings. This is down from around twenty per cent of average earnings
in the early 1980s which is as a result of the basic state pension having been increased
broadly in line with price inflation since 1981 while average earnings have grown in
real terms.

Figure 2.1
Schema of UK pension scheme, 2001

Third tier
(voluntary)

Additional
Voluntary
Contributions
(AVCs)

Approved
occupational
pensions
(DB & DC form)

‘Free standing’
AVCs

Personal
Pensions
(Individual)

Second tier
(mandatory)

Contracted out

First tier
(mandatory)

Basic State
(flat) Pension

‘Stakeholder’
Pension

SERPS (to be
the State
Second
Pension (SSP))
Contracted in

Source: Disney, Emmerson and Tanner (1999).

13

Other private
insurance (annuities,
life insurance, etc.)

Couples will receive £115.90. Source: HM Treasury (2000a).

Minimum Income
Guarantee

9
Those on low-incomes are eligible for the Minimum Income Guarantee (MIG)
which in 2001–02 will be worth £92.15 a week for a single pensioner, nearly £20
more than the basic state pension. 14 In addition pensioners on low-incomes may be
eligible for housing benefit and council tax benefit, which are means-tested benefits
designed to provide assistance towards housing costs and local taxes respectively. In
1998–99 some 21 per cent of pensioner couples and 47 per cent of single pensioners
were in receipt of means-tested benefits.15 Government policy is, in the medium term
at least, to continue increasing the basic state pension in line with prices while
increasing the MIG in line with average earnings. Since the MIG is withdrawn at a
rate of 100 per cent those with small amounts of income are left no better off than
those with small amounts of income from savings. In response the government has
proposed the introduction of a new ‘pension credit’ from April 2003 which will also
be targeted at those with relatively low incomes.16
The social security system is financed on a Pay-as-You-Go (PAYG) basis.
There is no equivalent of the US social security Trust Fund, although the National
Insurance Fund has accrued surpluses over recent years (House of Commons, 2000).
There are no plans to pre-fund social security, other than through the indirect route of
contracting-out. The basic state pension and SERPS are financed from an earmarked
payroll tax, the National Insurance contribution, notionally levied on employees up to
an earnings ceiling and on employers with no earnings ceiling. Income-tested benefits
are funded out of general taxation.
As described in the introduction, the second tier of mandatory pension
provision is split between both state provision in the form of the State EarningsRelated Pension Scheme (SERPS) and private pension provision in the form of
occupational pensions and personal pensions. The original SERPS scheme was
introduced in 1978. This paid an individual one quarter of their earnings between a
lower and an upper limit from the best twenty years of their lifetime. Earnings were to
be uprated to retirement age by growth in average earnings, with payments in
retirement then being indexed to prices. The Social Security Act of 1986 reduced the

14

Source: HM Treasury (2000a).

15

Source: Department of Social Security (2000a).

16

For more information see Department of Social Security (2000b) and Clark (2001).

10
generosity of SERPS by lowering the payments to twenty per cent of an individuals
average earnings, with the average now to be calculated over their entire lifetime,
rather than their best twenty years.17
Individuals were able to contract out of SERPS into an employers
occupational pension scheme as long as it guaranteed a retirement income at least as
high as SERPS – hence these schemes had to operate on a defined benefit basis. In
return for ‘opting-out’, both they and their employer paid a lower rate of National
Insurance Contribution. The 1986 Social Security Act took the principle of ‘optingout’ further by allowing individuals to choose to contract out of SERPS into a defined
contribution pension scheme. In return for ‘opting out’ of SERPS in this way the
government paid part of an individual’s National Insurance Contribution into their
pension fund. Since this payment was relatively generous this led to an enormous
growth in personal pension take-up. More controversially the 1986 Social Security
Act also allowed individuals the right to ‘opt out’ of an occupational pension scheme
and into a personal pension scheme. This underlay the ‘mis-selling’ scandal of the late
1980s / early 1990s. This involved cases of people who were badly advised to take out
personal pensions when they would have been better off staying in – or joining – their
employers’ occupational pension scheme. A large number of people were affected. By
August 1999, some 400,000 people had been offered more than £2.6 billion
compensation for having been mis-sold a personal pension.18
Further reform is also underway. SERPS is set to be replaced by the State
Second Pension – which will be a flat rate top up to the basic state pension and hence
more redistributive towards lower earners.19 In addition the government is introducing
a ‘stakeholder pension’ which is essentially a personal pension with a heavily
regulated charging structure, including an overall cap on charges. All employers will
have to designate a scheme to their employees and allow individuals to make
17

For more details see, for example, Emmerson and Johnson (2001). The original SERPS scheme
could also be inherited in full by a surviving spouse. The 1986 Social Security Act reduced this to 50
per cent for those widowed after April 2000. However this change is now being phased in over a longer
period as a result of government documentation failing to inform individuals of this change. See
National Audit Office (2000) for more details.
18
19

See Financial Services Authority (2000) for more details.

Under current policies while the State Second Pension will be a flat rate pension the rebates paid to
those opting out of this scheme will remain related to earnings. This will provide greater incentives for
lower earners to stay in, or return to, the state scheme and for middle and higher earners to opt out of
the state scheme. In future the rebate structure could be changed to mitigate these effects.

11
contributions direct from their wages. They will not, however, have to make any
contribution on their employees’ behalf. 20
Finally, there is a third tier of voluntary private retirement saving. This can
involve making additional contributions into occupational pension plans (AVCs),
additional saving through personal pensions, or in close substitutes among other
financial assets (see Emmerson and Tanner, 2000).
2.2

Demographic trends and projections of pension costs
As in most developed countries, the ratio of those over pension age to those in

work is set to rise in the UK over the next 30 years. However, ageing of the
population is set to be less severe than in many OECD countries (Bos, Vu, Massiah
and Bulatao, 1994). Moreover, due to the reforms made to the UK pension system
over the last 20 years, the cost of the current system is not projected to require higher
rates of National Insurance, as shown in table 2.1. This is a result of reforms such as
the change to price indexation of the basic state pension in 1981, the substantial
reduction in SERPS generosity in the Social Security Acts 1986 and 1995 and the
increase in the state retirement age for women from 60 to 65 which is being phased in
by 2020. The reforms to SERPS reduce expenditure on SERPS in 2030–31 to around
just 30 per cent of the level implied by the original scheme (Banks and Emmerson,
2000). While the replacement of SERPS with the State Second Pension will lead to an
increase in state expenditure, the required National Insurance Contribution rate is still
projected to fall by 2030.

20

For a more detailed description of the government’s proposed pension reforms see, for example,
Disney, Emmerson and Tanner (1999), Emmerson and Tanner (1999) and Agulnik, Barr, Falkingham
and Rake (1999).

12
Table 2.1. Long-term projections for the National Insurance fund (July 1999).
2000-01 2010-11 2020-21 2030-31 2050-51
Demographic forecasts (millions)
Contributors
Pensioners
Support Ratio

20.2
11.0
1.8

21.6
12.3
1.7

22.2
12.6
1.8

21.5
15.2
1.4

21.3
15.8
1.4

State expenditures (£bn, 1999–00 prices)
Basic State Pension
SERPS
Total Expenditurea

34.4
5.2
48.6

38.0
9.9
57.7

41.3
12.6
65.9

49.4
14.9
76.2

51.2
15.8
79.0

Total Expenditure as a share of GDP (%)
Joint employee and employer
contribution ratesb

5.4
19.9

5.6
18.9

5.5
18.1

5.5
18.6

4.2
15.2

GDP per pensioner spending,
(1999–2000 = 100)

99.5

93.0

87.8

75.4

56.2

aIncludes incapacity benefit, jobseeker’s
bContribution rates exclude the 1.95 per

allowance, some other more minor benefits and expenses;
cent currently payable to the National Health Service, and are
based
on
the
rate
structure
introduced
in
the
Social
Security
Act
1998.
Source: Government Actuary’s Department (1999). These costings do not include the recent government
announcement that the basic state pension is set to rise by more than inflation in April 2001 and April
2002. These increases will not stop National Insurance Contribution rates being able to fall in future.

2.3

The ‘pension burden’: comparison with other countries
The reforms to the UK pension system have ensured that future liabilities will,

at the very least, not require substantial rises in tax rates. This is in contrast with many
other developed countries, as shown in table 2.2. The UK is the only country in which
state pension expenditures are forecast to fall. The table also shows that only the
United States, of the countries considered, spends a smaller proportion of GDP on
public pension benefits.

13
Table 2.2. Projected future state spending on pensions as a percentage of GDP

Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
New Zealand
UK
US

2000

2010

2020

2030

2040

2050

5.0
9.8
11.5
12.6
7.5
4.8
4.5
4.2

5.3
9.7
11.8
13.2
9.6
5.2
5.2
4.5

6.9
11.6
12.3
15.3
12.4
6.7
5.1
5.2

9.0
13.5
16.5
20.3
13.4
8.3
5.5
6.6

9.1
14.3
18.4
21.4
14.9
9.4
4.0
7.1

8.7
14.4
17.5
20.3
16.5
9.8
4.1
7.0

Net liability,
1995–2050a
67.8
113.6
110.7
75.5
106.8
20.4
4.6
25.7

aThe

sum of projected future deficits, each expressed as percentage of projected future GDP.
Sources: Roseveare, Leibfritz, Fore and Wurzel (1996); Chand and Jaeger (1996) for net pension liabilities.

While these reforms have led the UK pension system to sustainability in terms
of costs it remains to be seen whether it is sustainable in terms of fairness, with the
proportion of national income given in public pensions to each pensioner falling to 75
per cent of the current level by 2030 and 56 per cent by 2050. It should also be
remembered that these costings do not include the cost of means-tested benefits to
pensioners, which in 1998–99 was some 1.0 per cent of GDP (Banks and Emmerson,
2000). The governments long term aim to increase the Minimum Income Guarantee in
line with average earnings, and the introduction of the pension credit in April 2003
will add to these future liabilities. Also previous forecasts of demographics have
tended to underestimate improvements in longevity and hence underestimate
liabilities (Disney, 2000).
2.4

Economics of the choice of private pension provider
The decision to opt out of the social security scheme involves assessing the

present value of the alternatives (Disney and Whitehouse, 1992a,b, Disney, Palacios
and Whitehouse, 1999). For an individual offered the chance of joining an
occupational pension scheme, the decision will depend on the likely time path of
salary and, more crucially, expected job tenure. For an individual choosing between a
personal pension and some form of defined benefit plan – whether publicly or
employer-provided, age is a key determinant. Simply put, contributions put into a
defined contribution plan such as a personal pension earlier in the working life
compound over a longer period, while the fund will cumulate over both negative and
positive investment shocks the longer the period to retirement.
In contrast, in any defined benefit scheme where there are penalties to early
leaving and where pension benefit are in some way related to final salary, later

14
contributions ‘earn’ a greater prospective pension (for illustrations, see Bodie et al,
1988, and, in the UK context, Disney and Whitehouse, 1996). Consequently we
should expect to see optants for personal pensions to be relatively young, in contrast
to, say, the age structure of purchasers of Individual Retirement Accounts in the
United States, where there is no similar choice-based structure of second tier pension
provision.
This finding is confirmed in figure 2.2: the median age of personal pension
optants is the early thirties. This is important if we are to understand where personal
pensions might have had an impact (for example on job mobility) and where they
might not (for example, on observed retirement behaviour).
Figure 2.2. Personal pension coverage, by age, gender and employment status,
1998.
40

Women (full-time)
Women (part-time)
Men (full-time)

per cent

30

20

10

0
18 to 24

25 to 34

35 to 44

45 to 54

55 and over

age
Note: Employees in Great Britain aged 18 and over, excluding those in youth training and employment
training. Part-time male employees not shown due to small sample sizes.
Source: Office for National Statistics (2000).

Private pension coverage also varies by earnings. Those in more highly paid
jobs are more likely to be members of an occupational pension scheme. As shown in
figure 2.3, coverage of personal pensions is distributed more widely across the
earnings distribution. Only among those not in paid employment and those in the

15
lowest ten percent of the earnings distribution does personal pension coverage fall
below twenty per cent.21
Figure 2.3. Private pension coverage, by earnings decile, 1992
1.0
Occupational pension

Both

Personal pension

Proportion

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Ze
ro

st
ric

he

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

ea
rn
in
gs
po
or
es
t

0.0

Earnings decile

Note: Includes only individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in the first eight waves
of the BHPS. Those reporting to be self-employed in any of waves 1 to 8 have been excluded
from the analysis.
Source: Adapted from Disney, Emmerson and Wakefield (2001), using data from the British
Household Panel Survey.

3. Pension reform and macroeconomic performance
3.1

Impact on saving of the demographic transition and pension reform
At the macroeconomic level, the simplest view of contracting out sees it as

shifting pension provision from a tax-financed basis to one in which pensions are
increasingly funded through private saving. With greater inducements to contract out,
as were put in place in the late 1980s, measured personal saving rates should therefore
21

Before April 2001, people with no earnings couldn't contribute to a personal pension since
contributions were earnings related. The fact that personal pension coverage among non-earners is nonzero reflects the fact that the question on personal pensions asks about the previous twelve months.
From April 2001 the annual contribution limit is a flat £3,600 per year or an earnings-related amount,
whichever is greater. This means that non-earners will be able to contribute to a personal (or
stakeholder) pension for the first time. There is also no age limit, so some babies will find themselves
with a pension taken out on their behalf.

16
rise simply because of the way that national accounts data treat individual saving
relative to payroll tax contributions. Leaving aside accounting conventions, however,
it is still generally accepted in the literature that the national saving rate and capital
stock will be higher in an economy where pension provision is funded rather than tax
financed, although the rate of return on capital will be lower.22 Whether, in turn, an
economy with a funded pension scheme grows faster depends on the exact growth
mechanism postulated – in the basic Swan-Solow model, for example, the long run
growth rate is independent of the saving rate, whereas in many endogenous growth
‘stories’, the growth rate depends positively on the saving rate.
This speculation on the likely behaviour of household saving rates should also
take account of the demographic transition. The future UK economy will be one with
a lower support ratio of those of working age to pensioners (see 2.2 above) – indeed
this was one motivation for the shift to funded provision. What is the effect on saving
of this declining support ratio? On the one hand, if individuals live longer with a
constant retirement age and a continued replenishment of the labour force (as seems
to be the UK scenario), a simple life cycle hypothesis (LCH) model would suggest
that the average saving rate should be higher (Modigliani, 1986). On the other hand, if
the size of the workforce is actually declining, capital requirements are less and the
saving rate need no longer be so high to maintain the workforce’s capital stock (Cutler
et al, 1990). Hence we also need to take account of the fact that the baby boom
generation is currently middle-aged, and, in a standard LCH model of saving, are
strong net savers. As they retire, however, they should become net dissavers, even if
the way that savings rates are measured often conceals this fact (Miles, 1999). On
balance, therefore, this combination of demographic trends and pension reform
suggests that the underlying saving rate in the UK economy should be increasing.
Figure 3.1 charts the annual average household saving rate against net
accumulation in private pension schemes over the period 1970–96.23 This latter series,
which is the difference between inflows of accumulated contributions and investment
22

This is in general the case so long as Ricardian equivalence does not hold – that is, individuals do not
adjust their saving behaviour fully to offset changes in future tax liabilities, and abstracting from
international capital flows.
23

As a result of the UK introducing the European System of Accounts 1995 the methodology for
calculating the savings rate has changed and it is no longer possible to get a consistent series for saving
in private pensions. Between 1996 and 2000 the savings rate fell sharply. For more details see Disney,
Emmerson and Wakefield (2001).

17
returns, and outflows of pension lump sums and disbursements of annuities, is much
more stable than the household saving rate, which exhibits some countercyclical
volatility. Since aggregate household saving rates are net flows, typically calculated
as residuals, it is hard exactly to measure the contribution of pension contributions in
total saving. Disney (1997) suggests that of around £65 billion net saving in non-fixed
assets in the UK in 1996, roughly £21 billion was through employer-provided pension
plans and £3.7 billion through personal pensions.
There is no obvious trend in retirement saving despite the introduction of new
retirement saving instruments, notably personal pensions. But as can be seen from the
cited statistics, saving in personal pensions is still relatively low. An important related
issue, however, is how much saving through personal pensions is net new saving,
rather than just saving that would have been held in other forms? To examine this, we
have to consider some further extensions of our model. Implicit in our stylised
discussion is a LCH model of a representative individual, with identical rates of return
between all forms of pension ‘saving’, no precautionary saving, and no differences in
the risk attached to contributions to the social security programme and to private
pension schemes. The pension reform process in the UK does not warrant such
assumptions, and some further analysis is required.
Figure 3.1:
Savings rate and rate of saving in funded pensions, 1970 to 1996.

Savings rate

Pension saving as proportion of personal disposable income

Percentage of personal disposable income

14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996

Note: Uses figures calculated before ESA standards had been introduced.
Source: ONS: The Blue Book.

18

3.1.1 Differential rates of return
When considering whether the introduction of personal pensions would be
expected to have led to an increase in saving it is important to consider both wealth
and substitution effects arising from the policy change. A basic issue is whether
‘saving’ in the form of contributions to a private pension plan rather than through the
social security system has a zero impact on private sector wealth, when discounted at
the risk adjusted rate of return (Engen and Gale, 1997). The answer depends on the
implicit internal rate of return on social security contributions relative to the return on
saving in a private pension scheme. It also depends on the return on savings in new
pension instruments (such as personal pensions) relative to the return on similar
financial assets (if any) that were previously available. If the discounted return on net
social security wealth is negative (as has clearly been the case in the UK)24, then
permitting individuals to ‘invest’ part of their National Insurance contribution in a
contracted out scheme generates a positive retirement wealth effect. This might
induce an increase in consumption and therefore a reduction in other personal saving.
On the other hand, to the extent that personal pensions, for example, are ‘new’ assets ,
for example if they are able to offer higher returns (at least, in their tax relieved
treatment), the reforms may have created new saving and as well as diverting saving.
There are two types of contributions to personal pensions. First, there are
payments of contracted-out rebates (CORs) via the Department of Social Security
(DSS). Assuming these would otherwise have been contributed to the social security
programme (SERPS) and earned low returns, these transfers induce a positive lifetime
wealth effect that should increase consumption and reduce other saving. On the other
hand, payments of discretionary contributions into plans, on top of CORs, should
represent some new net saving, depending on how substitutable personal pensions are
with existing financial assets that are not retirement saving vehicles.
Figure 3.2 charts both payments of contracted-out rebates by DSS into
personal pension accounts and discretionary contributions by employees and by
employers on their behalf over the period 1988–89 to 1998–99. Note the reversal of
the relative magnitude of these inflows over the period, largely arising from effective
24

Disney and Whitehouse, 1993a,b, found negative returns on social security contributions for men
born after 1955 even before the cutbacks in provision in the 1990s.

19
cutbacks in the value of CORs in the 1995 Act. Given the wealth and substitution
effects, one might reasonably conclude that there was little or no net saving through
personal pensions at the start of the period but a more significant amount by the late
1990s. 25
Figure 3.2:
Contributions to personal pensions, by type of contribution
(1998-99 prices)

DSS

Employee

Employer

Employees free standing AVCs

4,000

1998-99 £, million

3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1989- 1990- 1991- 1992- 1993- 1994- 1995- 1996- 1997- 199890
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
Year

Source: HMSO Inland Revenue Statistics, (tables 7.1 and 7.2), deflated by authors.

3.1.2 Pension reform, income distribution and saving
Section 4 focuses on the distributional impact of the pension reforms.
Nevertheless some preliminary remarks are useful in the context of saving. First,
social security provision is likely to be more redistributive than private provision.

25

Disney et al (2001) use the following benchmarks. Suppose the marginal propensity to consume out
of wealth is 0.07 and 70% of payment of CORs into personal pensions are treated as ‘new’ pension
wealth by households. Then other saving will be reduced by 4.9% of contracted-out rebates paid into
personal pensions – this is a pure wealth effect. The net saving effect is the total amount paid in
discretionary contributions into personal pensions, less the ‘offset’ impact on other saving and the tax
subsidy. Assume this offset coefficient rose from 0.3 to 0.4 over the period as closer substitutes became
available, and that the tax relief on discretionary contributions averaged 0.23. These figures are
comparable with averages from other studies of saving effects, as discussed in that paper. Then simple
arithmetic suggests that personal pensions contributed less than an additional £0.5 billion to household
saving in 1988-89 but close to £2 billion in 1998-99. The latter is around 0.2% of GDP.

20
This factor is likely to be enhanced where contracting out is voluntary, which permits
richer households to opt out of redistribution. The fact that the majority of the
workforce have contracted out of SERPS limits the potential for redistribution in both
political and economic terms.
At first sight, a redistribution from high to low income households should
reduce aggregate saving when saving is disproportionately carried out by richer
households. 26 But, as Gale (1998) points out, the ultimate outcome may be reduced if
low and high income households have differing substitution elasticities between social
security, private pensions and other assets. High income households may alter their
saving patterns (for example, changing their asset portfolio) to offset the redistributive
impact of social security, while, if low households do not save at all, the degree of
redistribution has little impact on those households’ behaviour.
In addition, the redistribution inherent in pension schemes is more complex
than simply from ‘rich’ to ‘poor’ people. In the first place, we have to look at lifetime
incomes, and take differential longevity into account. Secondly there are also issues to
do with gender, such as how spouses are treated (Disney and Johnson, 2001,
Introduction). In fact the UK social security pension scheme, pre-reform, was not
particularly redistributive in terms of lifetime incomes across the male income
distribution (Creedy, Disney and Whitehouse, 1993). The main beneficiaries of
redistribution were women, who reached state pension age earlier (60 rather than 65),
lived longer, and disproportionately benefited from spouses’ benefits. So how reform
affects household saving rates is unclear a priori, depending on, for example, whether
couples take account of each other’s survival probabilities (or any other joint aspects
for that matter) in their individual saving decisions.
3.1.3 Risks attached to alternative pensions
A standard argument is that DB schemes involve risk-sharing, whether
between generations and individuals (in a public scheme), or between employers and
employees (in occupational pension schemes). If individual employees are risk averse,
then contracting out into a DC scheme (such as a personal pension) changes the risk
environment facing individuals (Bohn, 1997) and should affect the amount of
precautionary saving. Of course, social security is not devoid of risk (political risk)
26

For empirical evidence for the UK, see Banks and Tanner (1999).

21
for example the substantial reductions in the generosity of state pensions in the UK
that have occurred over the last twenty years. It is also true that occupational pension
plans have not always been divorced from individual risk in the UK, as the Maxwell
scandal indicated.27 Nevertheless, this issue is an important one in a mandatory
transition strategy, particularly where individuals perceive the change as implying a
change in the risk environment. However, the voluntary nature of contracting out in
the UK presumably permits those with different risk-return trade-offs to choose
alternative strategies. The issue therefore is one of whether people fully understand
the risks involved in alternative pension choices in the UK (Banks and Emmerson,
2000). But, whether they understand them or not, this risk issue should not affect the
saving rate a good deal.28

3.2

The public finances and the ‘transition burden’
Our analysis of saving behaviour examines the implications of the shift from

tax-financed social security to funded provision. But this transition comes at a price; a
price which has been a pertinent consideration for the UK economy in the past two
decades, and for the foreseeable future. A consequence of a transition towards a larger
funded component of the pension programme is a higher current average payroll tax
rate than would otherwise be the case. Current social security liabilities have to be
financed from a smaller tax base, given that contracting out reduces tax receipts from
National Insurance contributions.
Table 3.1 provides some official evidence on the impact on contracting-out on
the average payroll tax burden. It shows that National Insurance contribution rates are
some 2½ to 3 percentage points higher than they would otherwise be as a result of
contracting-out, with around 1 percentage point arising from the introduction of
27

There is no equivalent of the pension fund guarantee that exists in the US to provide some insurance
across plans. Instead, occupational pension funds are required to satisfy certain investment
requirements that are monitored by the plan trustees. It is these arrangements that broke down in the
Maxwell case when auditors discovered that the pension funds of the Robert Maxwell Group had been
lent, with no collateral, to private companies within the group, leaving no funds available to satisfy the
pension liabilities. For a lucid description of this event, and the aftermath, see Blake (1995). The 1995
legislation has tightened up the supervisory mechanisms. Bear in mind also that the component of the
pension benefit that is supposed to substitute for the state benefit, SERPS, was guaranteed.
28

In other words, if individuals choose personal pensions because they are less risk averse, they should
not engage in (greater) precautionary saving. If they do not perceive the potential change in their risk
environment, it should not affect their other saving either.

22
personal pensions alone. Note from Figure 3.2 that this percentage attributable to
personal pensions was even higher in the late 1980s, at a time when the government
was attempting to reduce ‘headline’ direct tax rates.
Table 3.1
Cost to National Insurance Fund of contracting out arrangements, 1999–2000
Type of contribution

Cost

Occupational schemes deducted from NICs received
DC Occupational schemes paid direct to scheme
Personal pensions paid direct to insurer
Total

£bn
6.0
0.1
2.7
8.8

% GDP
0.7
0.0
0.3
1.0

Increase in NI contribution rate implied by CORs:
If employer rate increased
If employee rate increased

2½ percentage points
3 percentage points

Note: A larger increase in the employee rate is required to raise the £8.8bn since it is levied on a
smaller range of earnings.
Source: HM Treasury (2000b; 2000c).

Moreover, in two further respects, this understates the impact on underlying
tax rates of contracting-out. First private pension plans are tax-relieved relative to
other saving instruments in other respects, but most notably in that they permit
members to take a quarter of the accrued fund in a DC plan, or 1½ times final salary
in a DB plan, as a tax-free lump sum. Emmerson and Johnson (2001) estimate that, on
an expenditure tax basis, this is equivalent to around £2 billion in lost revenue, in
1998–99 prices. Second, employer contributions to pension schemes are exempt from
National Insurance contributions. Therefore, as policy induced greater contractingout, it also raised payroll tax rates at the time that employers and individuals chose to
contract out.
Of course, the rationale for pre-funding is that future tax rates will be lower
because accrued social security pension rights are reduced. But note that, in a
voluntary system of contracting-out, so long as private agents are rational, a
government can never fully recoup the tax ‘cost’ arising in the first instance, because
only individuals who gain from the switch should do so and this switching will be at
the expense of government revenues in the long run. In practical terms, this implies
that, in setting the contracted-out rebates (CORs), the government has had to make
assumptions concerning prospective future rates of return on funded contributions
such as to ensure that the private funder can pay a benefit at least as high as the social

23
security benefit foregone. If the rebate is too high, some opting agents will be
compensated excessively (this is the source of the retirement wealth effect described
previously). Set the rebate too low, and no agent will contract out. There is plenty of
evidence that the government has systematically erred on the side of generosity in
order to maximise contracting out.29
However the current higher payroll tax rate is offset, and the future cost
reduction enhanced, insofar as social security liabilities have been reduced over time
by measures such as the decision to link pensions in payment to the growth of prices
rather than the higher of prices or earnings growth, since 1981. With sustained real
earnings growth over much of the period since 1981, this has reduced the value of the
basic flat pension from 1981 to the present time. On current trends, the basic pension
is expected to be worth less than 7% of earnings in 2050.30
The ‘burden’ of the transition to greater funding of pensions in the UK is
therefore shared across generations and within generations. Current pensioners bear
the cost in part because state pension benefits have been cut. While current workers
who remain contracted-in may well expect lower state pensions in retirement they still
bear it in part because the National Insurance contribution rate is higher than it would
otherwise be, and contracted-out workers in occupational pension schemes because
they are generally making direct contributions to their own pension on top of their
residual National Insurance contribution.31 The only group for which incidence is
unclear in principal are rebate-only optants for personal pensions – that is, individuals
who make no contributions other than the contracted out rebate to their personal
pension. Clearly their current burden within the scheme is zero, and whether they
ultimately ‘pay’ for the transition depends on whether their final pension is higher or
lower than it would have been had they remained contracted-in to the social security
system. Since it is likely to be higher, as suggested, this retirement wealth effect may
have led to a reduction in their overall saving.

29
30

See Disney and Whitehouse (1992a,b, 1993b) for details.

This became a political ‘hot potato’ for the Labour government in 1999-2000, ironically as a result of
the success of its anti-inflation strategy. After an increase in the basic state pension of only 75 pence
per week was announced in 1999, pressure from a number of groups induced an announcement of
increases in 2000 well above the rate of inflation.

24

4. Pension reform: distributional outcomes in the UK
The presence of greater contracting out might be expected to lead to greater
inequality for two reasons. First, private pension incomes may be more volatile than
state incomes. Second because, in the 1980s and 1990s, average private pensions
grew much faster than state pensions and, as we have seen, higher earners are more
likely to have contracted out. Despite cutbacks in the basic pension since 1981,
pensioners’ incomes over the last twenty years have, on average, grown more quickly
than that of the population as a whole. The net income, before housing costs, of both
pensioner couples and single pensioners was some 60 per cent higher in real terms in
1996–97 than in 1979, compared to real average earnings growth over the period of
38 per cent (Department of Social Security, 2000a). This has been due to real
increases in incomes from state pensions (as SERPS gradually matured after its
introduction in 1978), means-tested benefits, occupational pensions and investments
(Department of Social Security, 2000c).
This real increase in pensioner incomes has led to pensioners now being under
represented in the poorest ten per cent of the population, which since the start of the
1970s has tended to be occupied by other unwaged groups such as the unemployed
and single parents (Goodman and Webb, 1994). They are still over represented in the
bottom half of the income distribution.32 These real increases in incomes have not
however been evenly spread across the pensioner distribution. Johnson and Stears
(1995) show that while income inequality among pensioners fell from the early 1960s
to the late 1970s, it rose sharply during the 1980s. This was caused by a combination
of an increase in the inequality of income from investments and private pensions.
Growing inequality alongside growing average real incomes is shown in figure 4.1
which gives gross incomes for pensioner couples in 1979 and 1998–99, by income
quintile, at July 1998 prices.

31

Some public sector occupational schemes have not levied employee contributions to cover
prospective liabilities, but there is a trend towards more transparent contribution arrangements in such
schemes (Cabinet Office, 2000).
32

Of course it could be the case that due to dissaving consumption by the retired was actually much
higher then their current incomes. However, as discussed in Banks, Blundell, and Tanner (1998), upon
retirement consumption actually tends to fall faster then income.

25
How do these levels and trends in pensioner inequality compare to other
countries? A number of country-specific studies in Disney and Johnson (2001) yield
three broad conclusions. First, as in the UK, pensioners are typically overrepresented
in the lower half of the equivalised income distribution, but underrepresented in the
lowest quintile of the income distribution. Second, income inequality among
pensioners is typically greater in countries that offer comprehensive earnings
replacement (the ‘Bismarck’ system) than in countries where the state focuses on
providing a benefit ‘floor’ (the ‘Beveridge’ system). This is true even when private
sources of income are included. Third, there are no common trends in inequality of
pensioner incomes across countries.

Figure 4.1. Components of gross weekly income of each quintile of the pensioner
couples income distribution, 1979 and 1998–99, July 1998 prices
800

Other income
Earnings

700
£ per week, July 1998 prices

Investment income
600

Occupational pension
Benefit income

500
400
300
200
100
0
Poorest

2

3
1979

4

Richest

Poorest

Income quintile

2

3

4

Richest

1998–99

Source: Department of Social Security (2000a) using data from the 1998–99 Family Resources Survey
and the 1979 Family Expenditure Survey. Clark and Taylor (2000) show that valid comparisons can be
made between the two surveys.

5. Labour supply and retirement: impact of pension reform
Research into labour supply of the elderly, and the role of tax and pension
reforms in the 1980s and 1990s, has been fairly limited in the UK, unlike the US. In
any event, a number of retirement issues lie outside the scope of the present paper. A

26
comprehensive survey of data and sources on retirement is contained in Blundell and
Johnson (1999); more specific accounts of and possible explanations for the decline in
labour force participation over the period of the 1980s and 1990s are contained in
Dilnot et al (1994) and Disney (1999). Again, three salient conclusions emerge from
these discussions.
First, there has been a steady decline in the labour force participation of older
men, punctuated by more rapid falls in the recessions that characterised the beginning
and end of the 1980s. On the demand side, the massive restructuring of the economy
and the lack of appropriate skills of older workers probably contributed to this
decline. On the supply side, the decline in participation was facilitated by the early
retirement provisions of occupational pension schemes and by the operation of the
public scheme of disability benefits. 33 The decline in the percentage of older men who
are full-time employees is shown in figure 5.1. As shown in Disney (1996) this is not
due to individuals reducing their hours but instead due to falling employment among
older age groups. Indeed final salary occupational pension schemes encourage
individuals to remain full time until they retire.34 A fuller discussion of these issues is
contained in Blundell, Meghir and Smith (2001).

33
34

Invalidity Benefit, subsequently renamed Incapacity Benefit.

Although self-employment may be another ‘route’ out of employment (Disney, Meghir and
Whitehouse, 1994).

27
Figure 5.1. Percentage of older men and women who are full-time employees, by
age group, 1968 to 1999.
Men, 55–59

Men, 60–64

Women, 55–59

Women, 60–64

100

Activity rate (%)

80
60
40
20
0
1968

1971

1974

1977

1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

Year
Source: Family Expenditure Survey Data from 1968 to 1999.

Second, there is no explicit early retirement provision within the public
pension scheme. Nevertheless, efforts have been made to tighten other ‘routes’ into
retirement before state pensionable age (65 for men and, from 2020, for women).
Eligibility for disability benefits was tightened in the late 1990s, and the benefit made
taxable, cutting its value to that of the basic state pension. Also, in an attempt to
encourage employment among older workers, in 1989 the earnings test condition for
receipt of the basic state pension, for earners above state pensionable age, known as
the ‘earnings rule’, was abolished. Disney and Smith (2000) estimate that this change
significantly raised the hours of working men aged 65 and above, but not participation
rates nor the hours of women. Moreover, the government has become increasingly
concerned as to the early retirement practices of occupational pension schemes,
especially those covering public sector workers such as local and central government
workers, police, firecrews etc. 35 It seems likely that further limits will be placed on
early retirement on actuarial favourable terms and on grounds of ill health in these
schemes.

35

See Audit Commission (1997) and HM Treasury (2000d) for more details.

28
Finally, however, the most pertinent issue for this paper concerns the impact
on retirement behaviour of the introduction of personal pensions and other new
contracting out arrangements. Since the majority of personal pension optants are
young (Figure 2.2) and are still some way away from their likely retirement date,
there is no evidence on the effects in practice. Basic economic principles suggest that
there are both wealth and substitution effects here that rule out a definitive outcome a
priori. The picture is further complicated by the fact that these incentive effects are
likely to differ for someone moving from SERPS to a personal pension and someone
moving from DB scheme to a personal pension (or DC occupational scheme).
To the extent that personal pensions provide a positive retirement wealth
effect relative to remaining in the public scheme (SERPS), then this might induce
individuals to retire earlier than they would otherwise have done (although they could
not draw SERPS until reaching state pensionable age). On the other hand, the
incentive of a higher return on contributions to personal pensions than the implicit
return on contributions to a social security scheme (or, with actuarially favourable
early retirement, in an occupational pension scheme) might induce personal pension
optants to defer retirement. Of course, contributions made to a personal pension close
to retirement are not as valuable as those made at the start, but since people with
personal pensions must annuitise between the ages of 50 and 75, they can continue to
build up their fund (through increased contributions or capital gains) past the state
pensionable ages. For someone in SERPS, years worked past 65 for men (and 60 for
women) do not yield further pension benefits. Compared to someone in a DB
occupational scheme where the last years of work are fairly crucial in determining
subsequent pension entitlement, the option value of delaying retirement and
contributing to a personal pension for another year be quite a lot lower - the first
years' contributions matter much more. This effect would tend to encourage people to
retire earlier, but could be mitigated to the extent that people in DB schemes are
encouraged to leave when their salary is at its highest point and to the extent that
personal pensions allow individuals much greater flexibility.
However, as the next section will show, there is a good deal of mobility
between pension scheme types, and it is very likely that those currently contributing
to a personal pension may, later in life, be in an occupational pension scheme or even

29
revert to the social security scheme. Thus no firm conclusions can yet be drawn on
this important issue.

6. Labour market flexibility
6.1

Pensions and labour mobility
One of the implicit motivations for introducing more flexible contracting out

arrangements was that personal pensions, in particular, would be attractive to young,
mobile, workers. Greater mobility between jobs and occupations would, it was hoped,
enhance the restructuring of the UK economy that was needed after the meltdown of
many traditional sectors, especially in manufacturing industry, in the early 1980s. At
the same time, insofar as contributions to defined benefit occupational pensions
represented a burden on business, the relative flexibility of defined contribution
arrangements with, for example, no requirement that the employer need contribute to
plans, might permit current wages more fully to reflect differences in current
productivity and provide greater incentives on the margin for workers and employers
to find productive ‘matches’. Much of this reasoning was never made explicit. Nor
was the more general perspective that individualised pensions, along with
privatisations financed by public share issues, would generate a culture of individual
share ownership and individual risk-taking which would move the UK away from the
‘Eurosclerotic’ model towards the entrepreneurial model associated, rightly or
wrongly, with the United States and some Asian economies.
This issue of pension arrangements and labour mobility has not received so
much attention in the UK debate concerning personal pensions, and we focus on it in
this section of the paper. We examine the theory and existing empirical evidence on
how different types of pension scheme affect labour mobility. Then we look at some
of the empirical evidence – not so much as a test of whether pension type affects
labour mobility (where we infer that the existing literature is fairly inconclusive), but
rather as to who took out a personal pension and whether opting into a personal
pension (especially where the employee was also offered membership of a defined
benefit occupational pension plans) was associated with subsequent job mobility.
6.2

Theory on pension schemes and labour mobility

30
In looking at the impact of (private) pension arrangements on job mobility, it
is important to differentiate between mobility in and out of pensioned jobs, in contrast
to mobility between pensioned jobs that involve a change of pension plan. There are
very good reasons why mobility out of jobs covered by pension plans may be a good
deal lower than mobility of uncovered workers. The issue is examined in the United
States by Gustman and Steinmeier (1993) who use the Survey of Income and Program
participation (SIPP) to show that pension mobility is much lower for people in jobs
with private pensions. In a three-year period (1984–86) they found that 6% of those
initially in pensioned jobs moved jobs compared to 20% in non-pensioned jobs. Of
those who moved out of a pensioned job, 64% moved to a job without a pension and,
furthermore, they incurred an average loss of wages of 6% by moving. In contrast,
14% of movers out of uncovered jobs gained pension coverage by moving and all
movers previously in uncovered jobs gained on average 7% wages by moving. This
highlights the fact that there are strong deterrents to moving out of a pensioned job
per se, which should be separated from the ‘costs’ arising from moving between
pensionable jobs associated with non-portability of pensions.
The fact that people in the UK can opt not just out of social security but also
out of an existing occupational pension plan potentially allows us to separate mobility
that is associated with choice of pension arrangements from mobility associated with
the nature of pensioned jobs. But it also raises very clearly the more general problem
with studies of pension coverage and labour mobility: that of self-selection. There
may be large costs, as in the SIPP example above, to moving in and out of the
pension-covered sector, and between pensioned jobs, so pension arrangements affect
the mobility incentives of employees. But it is also likely that employers who offer
pensions will select employees on the basis of their assessed propensity to move
between jobs and that employees will also select jobs on the basis of job-specific costs
of mobility. Indeed, non-random selection of employees is central to any
rationalisation of why employers provide pensions at all (Lazear, 1979; Ippolito,
1997).
This caveat applies particularly to the UK, where moving pension plan need
not involve changing job at all. The individual ‘opting out’ strategy is likely to be
followed by those most inclined to move between jobs, who thereby require a more
‘portable’ pension arrangement. So while it is possible, by comparisons across

31
countries and over time, to ask whether more ‘flexible’ pension arrangements are
associated with greater labour mobility, 36 at the microeconomic level we may be
observing pure selection in the UK, rather than the impact of institutional
arrangements on behaviour.
The basic theory on pension schemes and the costs of job mobility is
summarised in Bodie, Marcus and Merton (1988), Lazear and Moore (1988) and
Ippolito (1997). We focus here in particular on the incentives associated with job
mobility between pension covered jobs (not for example, those incentives associated
with retirement). As illustrated by Gustman and Steinmeier (1993), the costs of
moving from a covered to an uncovered job are both larger and more transparent. As
we shall see, in essence, portability costs in DB plans basically depend on how
benefits in past plans are treated whereas portability costs in DC plans are largely (but
not exclusively) start-up costs.
For individuals moving between jobs within the sector covered by defined
benefit pension plans, the loss from job mobility arises from the loss of additional
years of service and final salary in the original plan. It depends on the loss at the time
of moving in the original pension scheme from the lower final salary value, which
depends on prospective job tenure.37 For a person shifting to, say, a personal pension,
the loss function is more complex. It requires comparing subsequent loss of coverage
by a DB plan (although this may be reversible later), offset by the pension obtained
from the contributions to the DC plan after that time. It is often argued that the costs
of leaving a DB plan are high because an employer typically contributes to a DB plan
and, by leaving the plan, the employee loses these additional contributions. An
individual simply leaving a DB plan to buy a personal pension is presumably unable
to compensate for this loss of contributions but, for job movers, the absence of
employer pension contributions (deferred pay) ought to be compensated by higher
current pay. On the other hand, if, ceteris paribus, DB plan providers actually also

36

And even this cross-country or temporal ‘experiment’ may be problematic – the reforms which
permitted greater ‘flexibility’ in pension arrangements in the UK in the 1980s may have themselves
been stimulated by the greater flexibility of the UK labour market in other dimensions, such as the
decline of trade unions, shift towards private services and away from manufacturing and the public
sector, and so on.
37

Most literature overstates this loss by assuming that the individual would otherwise have remained in
the DB plan until retirement. The implausibility of this assumption in valuing DB pension plan rights in
the UK is demonstrated by Disney and Whitehouse (1996).

32
pay higher wages (as suggested by Gustman and Steinmeier, 1993) then the costs of
leaving the covered sector – both in lost pension and wages would be considerable.
In principle, as suggested above, defined contribution plans such as personal
pensions are fully and costlessly transferable. In practice, the issue is a little more
complex. Where the existing personal pension (PP) plan ‘lapses’ because the
individual starts another PP plan, joins an occupation pension scheme or indeed
reverts to SERPS, the social security benefit a costs will typically arise because
personal pensions often have an up-front commission charge which is deducted from
early contributions. For example, if the personal pension is only held for a short
duration, then insufficient funds may have been invested in the plan, net of
commission, to recoup the gross cost of contributions in the early stages. This is
clearly one of the reasons why the government has decided that stakeholder pensions
will only be able to charge a percentage of the fund, rather than having up-front or
exit charges. In addition individuals with a personal pension who move job will lose
out if the previous employer was contributing to the personal pension and the new
employer is not prepared to, or to compensate in any other way.
There has been a certain amount of controversy in the UK on this issue, since
the initial regulator (the Personal Investment Authority, now subsumed into the
Financial Services Authority) has produced evidence both of high rates of lapse (since
most individuals opting for personal pensions are young – see section 2.3 above) and
of high administrative costs. Murthi, Orszag and Orszag (1999) therefore argue that,
under certain circumstances, the ‘mobility costs’ associated with personal pensions
may be higher than for ‘traditional’ defined benefit plans. Since personal pensions
were introduced precisely to enhance labour mobility, this is a worrying conclusion.
However, Whitehouse (2000) takes issue with the conclusion, arguing (i) that the
extrapolation of lapse rates by Murthi et al (1999) from published data overstates the
likely rate of lapsing,38 and (ii) that the ‘costs of mobility’ in such plans are highly
sensitive both to measures of administrative costs and of the subsequent labour market
trajectory and contribution behaviour of personal pension optants. Many individuals,
for example, fail to contribute to a personal pension for a year or more, only to

38

Essentially, the authors adopt a parametric specification of the implicit hazard which overstates the
rate at which individuals exit personal pension plans relative to, say, a non-parametric specification
such as the Kaplan-Meier.

33
contribute later. This can of course be explored using panel data such as the British
Household Panel Study.
6.3

Past empirical evidence on labour mobility and pension schemes in the UK
McCormick and Hughes (1984) see the problem as one of estimating firm

specific pension capital as % of pension capital. They study the loss of pension
capital from moving between (DB plan) pensionable jobs. At the time that they wrote,
there were three options concerning moves between covered jobs: benefits could be
deferred (preserved), a cash refund of contributions could be obtained, or there could
be a transfer value into the new scheme. McCormick and Hughes work out the
relative costs neatly and show that these alternative options are optimal at different
points in the working life and that the ‘envelope’ loss-minimising function is nonlinear with pension scheme tenure.
To implement the model empirically, they use a General Household Study
(GHS)-based measure of job turnover. They also have measures of job satisfaction
and a GHS question ‘are you (the worker) seriously considering changing employer’?
Note that we do not observe which option the worker chooses, and that the authors are
essentially trying to model the non-linearity of mobility with tenure, assuming that
this reflects the ‘envelope’ constructed above. Furthermore, McCormick and Hughes
largely use the attitudinal question as their dependent variable. They assume that the
‘opportunity’ job also has a pension scheme so the costs are pure scheme-specific
rights, not loss of pension rights per se, and abstract from any questions of
compensating changes in wages.
The explanatory variables in their modelling strategy for ‘are you seriously
considering changing job’ are personal characteristics, job satisfaction and
interactions of pension status, job tenure and age which are supposed to capture the
non-linearity of the loss function (a simple dummy for pension scheme membership is
insignificant). The results all hinge on the coefficient on years of job tenure*pension
status, with job tenure not included as an independent regressor. Since we know from
other studies that search is (negatively) affected by tenure, this can be interpreted as
suggesting that tenure matters only in pensionable jobs and the coefficient is indeed
significant.

34
Criticisms of the modelling procedure include that the paper is largely about
intent to move, not actual turnover. The rationale for this is somewhat tortuous and
perhaps the model does not work for actual job exits. The authors point to the selfselecting nature of job exits but it is not clear that the attitudinal variable avoids this
problem. In addition, they know nothing about the type of pension scheme. Finally, it
seems as if the predicted theoretical shape of the loss function (the envelope) is not
that estimated by the econometrics – they are both quadratic in tenure but the
curvature seems to be the ‘wrong way’ in the results.
Henley, Disney and Carruth (1994) adopt a different approach. The object is to
see whether assets holdings affect job tenure, such as owning a house, belonging to a
pension scheme, and so on. The authors argue that a better identifier of the impact of
pensions on job mobility, given self-selection, is whether the particular characteristics
of a pension scheme have an impact on the propensity to move. Of course, it is still
possible that individuals self-select into the type of pension scheme according to their
implicit moving probabilities, but this may require a more sophisticated calculus than
a simple membership decision.39
The empirical strategy involves using reported job tenure intervals to construct
the hazard rather than a binary variable approach, using the 1985 General Household
Survey. The truncation of the duration intervals and the measures of housing equity
(observed only for house movers) involves some standard econometric procedures for
handling censored data. A key finding is that occupational pension scheme
membership significantly decreases the exit hazard from jobs, but reported
transferability of pension rights increases it (on the basis of observed completed
spells) relative to simple pension scheme membership. Moreover the effect on the
hazard rate of membership interacted with time (duration) and time squared is
superior to a simple dummy, confirming the McCormick-Hughes proposition that the
loss function is time dependent and possibly non-linear. In fact (for men) Henley et al
get a result that approximates the curvature of the McCormick-Hughes theoretical loss
function in contrast to the latter’s empirical results.

39

But since the characteristics are self-reported, a natural criticism is that these characteristics are
known, even if not understood.

35
Mealli and Pudney (1996) is the only UK paper that attempts to look at the
endogeneity of pension status, but it does so indirectly. It uses the job histories and
pension scheme tenures in the Retirement Survey to model transitions. Obviously the
permutations of possible multiple state transitions are large over the lifetime, so their
paper essentially uses a competing risks model to examine transitions between various
states (e.g. a pensioned job, non-pensioned job, unemployment etc.) conditional on
treating the initial state as exogenous (but see below). Note that transitions between
pensioned jobs but with different pension schemes (which is the basis of the
McCormick-Hughes model of job-specific pension capital) are ignored. So this is not
a test of job-specific pension capital impact but of the impact of pension coverage on
tenure, like Gustman and Steinmeier (1993). Their finding is that job durations are
systematically longer for pensioned jobs.
The question, however, is whether this is unobserved heterogeneity of
participants or a consequence of pension status. Essentially their ‘technical’ solution
is not to find some ‘instruments’ for individual fixed effects (even if any could be
found that were plausible) but to add state specific random effects into the competing
risks model. By specifying various forms of heterogeneity (individual effects, random
effects, random effects*sectoral status, etc.) the object is to see whether the
differences in duration between pensioned and non-pensioned jobs are eliminated, and
their overall answer appears to be that the differences are not wholly eliminated
(Table VIII, ibid). So there may be a ‘pension coverage effect’ after all.
Overall, the findings of the UK studies are:
i)

that the theoretical relationship between job-specific pension capital and
tenure is non-linear;

ii)

that (DB) pensionable jobs have longer durations;

iii)

this is not wholly due to heterogeneity (self-selection);

iv)

transferable pension rights are associated with more job mobility;

v)

that there appears to be a non-linear relationship between duration and the
‘pension effect’ in DB plans.

6.4

Evidence on personal pensions and job mobility

36
Our aim in this section of the paper is to provide a preliminary empirical
analysis of the link between individuals’ pension arrangements and their labour
market mobility. We will exploit the feature of the UK institutional arrangements that
allows individuals who are offered an occupational pension to opt out of the scheme
and choose their own personal pension. Our strategy is to compare the job mobility of
people who are offered a DB occupational scheme and choose not to be in it with the
job mobility of people who do belong to the DB occupational pension scheme offered.
Clearly there will be a degree of self-selection by individuals into the two groups
according to their future job mobility. At this stage, therefore, our analysis is not
intended to provide an estimate of the impact of the introduction of personal pensions
on job mobility. Rather, it will shed light on two issues. Firstly, it will allow us to
examine the extent to which individual pension choices appear to be motivated by job
mobility. Secondly, it will allow us to address the arguments of Gustman and
Steinmeier (1993) and separate the potential effects of the pension arrangements on
job mobility from other aspects of the job.
To examine these issues we use data from the British Household Panel
Survey. This is a panel survey that has been following the same individuals over time
since 1991. We use data from waves two through eight (1992 – 98 inclusive). The
BHPS collects detailed information on individuals’ employment and their socioeconomic characteristics. It also contains a number of questions about their pension
arrangements. The survey asks,
Does your present employer run a pension scheme or superannuation scheme
for which you are eligible?
If the answer is yes, respondents are then asked
Do you belong to your employer's pension scheme?
In addition, from the second wave onwards all respondents are asked questions
about their personal pension arrangements.
In the past year, that is since September 1st 1991 have you paid any
contributions or premiums for a private personal pension, or had such contributions
paid on your behalf by the Department of Social Security?
If the answer to this is yes, they are asked to say whether they took out the
pension before or after June 1988 and the year they first took out the pension. They

37
are also asked whether they have made any additional contributions, over and above
the contracted out rebate and how much the last contribution was.
The advantage of the BHPS data is that it allows us to identify those people
who were offered a pension scheme by their employer but chose instead to have their
own personal pension. Also, it allows us to identify those people who were offered a
pension by their employer and chose to participate in the scheme. The main part of
our analysis will focus on differences in the labour market mobility between these two
groups. However, there are a number of respects in which the definition of these
groups is not as clean as we would like.
In particular, individuals are not asked whether their employer offers them an
occupational pension scheme. Rather, they are asked about any pension scheme
offered by their employer. This might include people who are offered group personal
pension schemes. We should be able to identify these people since they are likely to
report that they are offered a pension scheme to which they belong and that they have
a personal pension. We might therefore want to classify anyone who reports having a
personal pension as not having an occupational pensions. However, adopting this
strategy might lead to us wrongly excluding some people who are in their employers’
DB occupational pensions, but also say yes to the personal pension question because
they are making additional contributions in the form of Free Standing Additional
Voluntary Contributions.
Also, we cannot distinguish between DB occupational pension plans and DC
occupational pension plans. In total, nearly 15 per cent of all occupational pension
schemes, and a higher proportion in the private sector, are DC schemes, as shown in
table 6.1. Incorrectly including people who actually belong to DC occupational
pension schemes with people who belong to DB occupational schemes is likely to
underestimate the effect to which people opt out of occupational pension schemes
with a view to future labour market mobility. 40

40

But note that Gustman and Steinmeier find no evidence that mobility is affected by whether the
employer’s plan is of the DB or DC form.

38
Table 6.1. Occupational pension schemes, by type
% private sector
% public sector
% all schemes
schemes
schemes
Defined benefit plans
78
98
80
Defined contribution plans
16
2
14
Hybrid
6
—
6
Source: National Association of Pension Funds Annual Survey of Occupational Schemes, 1997

A final issue concerns the ‘mis-selling’ of personal pensions that took place in
the late 1980s. This suggests that a substantial number of people chose to leave their
employers’ occupational scheme due to bad financial advice. This will tend to reduce
any observed correlation between the decision to have a personal pension instead of
an occupational pensions and future employment mobility.
Bearing these factors in mind, we now turn to our analysis of the data in the
BHPS. Our analysis is based on the sample of individuals who are aged between 20
and 59 in the first wave of the BHPS and who are present in all eight waves. Table 6.2
compares the pension status of employees in the BHPS in 1992 with that of those in
the General Household Survey (GHS) which is a larger annual cross-sectional sample
containing just under 9,000 employees in 1992.
Looking first at whether an employer offers a pension scheme, around seventy
per cent of individuals are able to join an employers pension scheme in each of the
two surveys. The BHPS has slightly larger levels of membership of these schemes
with seventy six per cent of those eligible joining their employers scheme compared
to sixty nine per cent in the GHS. The table shows that pension coverage appears to
be greater in the GHS than in the BHPS. This points to some potential selection
caused by non-random attrition over the eight waves of the BHPS. Finally, individuals
in the BHPS who claim to be both a member of their employers pension scheme and a
member of a personal pension could either be individuals who have a group personal
pension or those who have an occupational pension and are making additional
voluntary contributions to that pension.

39
Table 6.2. Pension status of employees in 1992
% of employees offered an employers pension
% of those offered that joined an employers pension

BHPS
69
75

GHS
72
69

Men full time
% without a private pension
% in an employers pension scheme
% in a personal pension scheme
% in both an employers pension scheme and a personal pension
Observations

17
55
17
11
1,252

11
62
27
–
4,311

Women full time
% without a private pension
% in an employers pension scheme
% in a personal pension scheme
% in both an employers pension scheme and a personal pension
Observations

29
47
16
8
907

25
54
21
–
2,396

Women part time
% without a private pension
71
68
% in an employers pension scheme
17
19
% in a personal pension scheme
9
12
% in both an employers pension scheme and a personal pension
3
–
Observations
559
2,067
Note: BHPS data includes individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in all eight waves only
and not self-employed in any wave; GHS data includes all employees aged 16 and over apart from
those in Youth Training or Employment Training schemes.
Source: British Household Panel Survey, 1992 to 1998 inclusive; authors’ calculations; HMSO (1994).

Table 6.3 considers how pension coverage has changed over the seven waves
of the BHPS. Interestingly the proportion of individuals choosing to join their
employers pension scheme rose from around three-quarters in waves 2,3 and 4 to over
four-fifths of those offered schemes in the eighth wave. As a result of this, and a slight
increase in the number of employers offering pension schemes there is an increase in
membership of employer schemes over the period.
The proportion who were able to join an employers pension scheme but
instead choose to join a personal pension fell from around ten per cent between 1992–
94 to just over five per cent in 1998. This is possibly evidence of individuals learning
from the ‘mis-selling’ experience outlined above. Of those who declined to join their
employers pension scheme just over seventy per cent had no pension arrangement
(and by default those with earnings above the Lower Earnings Limit (LEL) would be
in SERPS) with the remaining thirty per cent in a personal pension. These percentages
remained very stable over the eight waves of the BHPS used for this study.

40
Table 6.3. Pension status of employees only, by wave
Wave (1992 to 1998)
4
5
6

2

3

7

8

% of individuals offered an OP
% of those offered that joined an OP

69.4
75.5

66.7
75.9

66.0
75.2

69.6
78.9

71.5
80.3

72.7
81.4

72.6
83.1

All individuals
% without a private pension
% with occupational pension
% with personal pension
% with both OP and PP
Observations

32.7
44.4
14.9
8.0
2,778

33.5
41.8
16.0
8.7
2,765

34.3
41.4
16.0
8.3
2,750

30.5
46.7
14.6
8.2
2,732

29.5
49.4
13.0
8.1
2,713

28.2
50.1
12.7
9.1
2,693

27.8
51.2
11.9
9.1
2,650

All individuals offered an OP
% without a private pension
% with occupational pension
% with personal pension
% with both OP and PP
Observations

15.0
63.9
9.5
11.6
1,928

13.8
62.8
10.3
13.1
1,843

15.2
62.7
9.6
12.6
1,816

12.8
67.1
8.3
11.8
1,902

13.2
69.0
6.5
11.3
1,941

12.4
68.9
6.2
12.5
1,958

11.7
70.5
5.2
12.6
1,923

All individuals not offered an OP
% without a private pension
72.8
72.8
71.4
71.0
70.6
70.2
70.3
% with occupational pension
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
% with personal pension
27.2
27.2
28.6
29.0
29.4
29.8
29.7
% with both OP and PP
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Observations
850
922
934
831
772
735
727
Note: Includes individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in all eight waves only and not selfemployed in any wave.
Source: British Household Panel Survey, 1992 to 1998 inclusive; authors’ calculations.

Also of interest is the frequency of individual pension membership changes
over the period of the study. Changes in pension status are in fact extremely common,
as shown in table 6.4. This adds complexity to our study since individuals cannot be
easily identified as someone who has a certain pension type. Of those with no pension
arrangement in 1992 only sixty per cent were not in a pension scheme in 1998. Of
those who were contributors to personal pensions in wave 2, only 42% were
contributors in 1998. But membership of occupational pensions is relatively more
stable. Some 79 per cent of those in an occupational pension scheme in 1992 were a
member of an occupational pension scheme in 1998.
This is a striking finding for policy. Some official publications (such as
Department of Social Security, 1998) have suggested that certain types of pension
scheme should be matched to certain types of individuals – in particular, by income
level. While pension scheme mobility may therefore also reflect income volatility and
income mobility, excessive multiplicity of individual pension scheme membership
within the working lifetime probably results in reduced pension benefits due to start-

41
up costs (in personal pensions prior to the introduction of stakeholder pensions in
2001) and capital losses (from moving out of DB plans). Offsetting this is the
possibility that multiple pension holding may have some positive insurance
characteristics if the risk properties of different pension types vary (Brugiavini and
Disney, 1993).

Table 6.4. Pension transitions, by wave, (employees in wave 2 only)

Has no pension in wave 2
% without a private pension
% with occupational pension
% with personal pension
% with both OP and PP
Has occupational pension in wave 2
% without a private pension
% with occupational pension
% with personal pension
% with both OP and PP

Wave (1992 to 1998)
4
5
6

2

3

100.0

84.8
3.4
11.5
0.3

80.7
4.6
13.8
0.9

68.1
17.0
12.7
2.3

3.5
86.2
0.5
9.8

6.3
84.0
0.6
9.2

9.2
81.7
0.8
8.4

100.0

7

8

65.3
20.3
12.6
1.9

61.0
25.6
11.7
2.8

59.5
26.4
10.7
3.4

8.5
82.6
1.2
7.7

9.3
80.1
1.7
8.9

10.8
79.4
2.0
7.9

Has personal pension in wave 2
% without a private pension
16.4
19.5
17.4
21.9
20.0
19.5
% with occupational pension
0.7
3.6
11.8
16.9
23.4
25.8
% with personal pension
100.0 81.2
74.5
62.2
50.6
45.8
41.9
% with both OP and PP
1.7
2.4
8.7
10.6
10.8
12.8
Note: Includes individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in all eight waves only and not selfemployed in any wave.
Source: British Household Panel Survey, 1992 to 1998 inclusive; authors’ calculations.

Finally, we turn to a provisional assessment of the impact of labour market
status on job mobility. Table 6.5 shows the percentage of individuals who move jobs
between each wave of the BHPS by their pension status in the previous wave. In total
just over one third (36.6 per cent) of employees in wave 2 move job at least once over
the period of interest. The first part of table 6.5 shows that it is those individuals
without a pension and those with a personal pension in the previous wave who are
more likely to have moved employer, rather than those who are members of their
employers pension scheme. However this could simply reflect the fact that
occupational pensions may be offered in the types of industries or to types of people
who have lower rates of job mobility. A better indicator of whether individuals with
personal pensions are more likely to move jobs is shown in the next part of table 6.5
which looks at just those individuals who were offered occupational pension schemes.

42
Over the period of this study between 7.6 and 13.0 per cent of those who chose to take
out a personal pension rather than join their employer’s occupational pension moved
job in the subsequent year. Of those who chose to ‘default’ to SERPS, the fractions
moving, ranging from 9.3% to 17.9%, are even higher. This contrasts with between
3.6 and 6.7 per cent mobility for individuals who joined the occupational pension
scheme. Looking at those who move employer at any point over the period 42.9 per
cent of those who choose not to join their employers pension scheme in favour of a
personal pension moved job compared to 27.4 per cent among those who did join
their employers scheme. This 15.5 percentage point difference has a standard error of
3.6 and hence is highly significant. This clearly suggests that those individuals who
chose to ‘opt-out’ of their employers pension scheme for a personal pension or
SERPS were indeed more likely to move employer subsequently.

43
Table 6.5. Percentage of people changing employer, by pension status in previous
wave, (employees in wave 2 only)
Pension status in previous wave

Wave
3

4

5

6

7

8

12.4

15.3

15.9

17.6

16.4

17.6

% with occupational pension

3.6

6.7

5.8

6.6

5.7

6.1

% with personal pension

10.6

15.6

12.0

14.9

16.8

13.1

% with both OP and PP

4.9

8.1

3.9

5.3

6.7

8.0

All

7.6

11.0

10.2

10.9

10.3

10.3

9.3

9.0

10.1

13.6

12.8

17.9

% with occupational pension

3.6

6.7

5.8

6.6

5.7

6.1

% with personal pension

7.6

12.5

12.0

12.8

13.0

9.5

% with both OP and PP

4.9

8.1

3.9

5.3

6.7

8.0

All

5.0

7.8

6.8

7.7

7.1

7.9

13.9

17.8

18.4

19.3

17.9

17.5

All individuals
% without a private pension

Individuals offered an occ. pen.
% without a private pension

Individuals not offered an occ. pen.
% without a private pension

Any
move
46.9
(1.7)
27.4
(1.3)
46.5
(2.5)
26.5
(3.0)
36.6
(0.9)

39.4
(2.9)
27.4
(1.3)
42.9
(3.7)
26.5
(3.0)
30.6
(1.0)

50.4
(2.0)
% with occupational pension
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
% with personal pension
13.0
17.8
15.5
16.2
18.8
15.2
49.4
(3.3)
% with both OP and PP
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
All
13.6
17.8
17.5
18.4
18.2
16.8
50.1
(1.7)
Note: Includes individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in all eight waves only and not selfemployed in any wave. Any move shows the proportion changing employer in any wave by pension
status in wave 2. Standard errors for the proportion moving in any wave shown in parenthesis.
Source: British Household Panel Survey, 1992 to 1998 inclusive; authors’ calculations.

Of course there may be other correlates with occupational pension scheme
take-up that are associated with lower mobility. We know, for example, that
occupational pension scheme members tend to be older than personal pension optants,
and concentrated in certain industries and occupations (Barrientos, 1998). So we can
redo the analysis for more homogeneous groups of workers, or conditioned on other
variables. Here we adopt the former strategy, selecting individuals in their 30s, who
had the highest take-up rate of personal pensions (Figure 2.2). Table 6.6 therefore
examines mobility rates, both year-on-year and cumulative, for this age group, in total
and disaggregated by gender. We observe a similar finding to Table 6.5 on average

44
and for men: subsequent mobility rates are higher for those who opted to take a
personal pension although offered an occupational pension. This difference is
significant at 5% on a one tailed t-test (10% on a two-tailed test). However the
difference is not significant for women. These results are suggestive, but a
multivariate analysis with some explicit structuring of the decision framework is
desirable before we can conclude that rates of mobility between occupational pension
scheme members and those who declined the occupational pension offer are
significantly different.

Table 6.6. Percentage of 30 to 39 year olds who could have joined an occupational
pension changing employer, by gender and pension status in previous wave,
(employees in wave 2 only)
Pension status in previous wave

Wave
3

4

5

6

7

8

All individuals offered an occ. pen.
% with occupational pension

3.2

8.8

5.0

5.4

5.2

6.1

% with personal pension

11.1

11.9

5.2

8.5

10.5

15.9

Men offered an occ. pen.
% with occupational pension

3.5

6.8

4.8

4.5

4.3

7.8

% with personal pension

6.5

15.2

6.9

10.0

7.1

6.3

Women offered an occ. pen.
% with occupational pension

2.6

12.2

5.4

6.7

6.5

3.9

Any
move
29.2
(2.2)
39.7
(6.2)

24.8
(2.7)
38.7
(8.9)

36.6
(3.9)
% with personal pension
15.6
8.8
3.4
7.4
12.5
21.4
40.6
(8.8)
Note: Includes individuals aged 20 to 59 in 1991 who are present in all eight waves only and not selfemployed in any wave. Any move shows the proportion changing employer in any wave by pension
status in wave 2. Standard errors for the proportion moving in any wave shown in parenthesis.
Source: British Household Panel Survey, 1992 to 1998 inclusive; authors’ calculations.

7. Conclusion
This paper has examined a number of consequences of the UK pension reform
strategy of the 1980s and 1990s, focussing in particular on the introduction of
personal pensions as an additional opting out strategy. We show that, by the end of
the 1990s, there was likely to have been some net new household saving through
personal pensions, but that the contracting-out structure generates retirement wealth
effects that offset the impact on total saving rates. Moreover, the intertemporal public

45
budget constraint is affected, with higher current tax rates only partially offset by
lower tax rates in the future, when social security payments are lower than they would
otherwise have been.
Other, related, policies affected retirement behaviour in the 1980s and 1990s.
However it is too early to say whether personal pensions will affect the timing of
retirement given the age structure of optants. In any event there are also both wealth
and substitution effects that are pertinent in analysing the impact of personal pensions
on retirement, and these may go either way.
One facet of personal pensions which has not been explored in the UK
literature is their impact on labour mobility. Given selection of workers by employers
into occupational pension-covered jobs, and self-selection by workers by type of
pension, there is no straightforward answer. However, our prior is that individuals in
occupational pensions should exhibit less job mobility than either workers in SERPS
or in a personal pension scheme. This is indeed the case. However, we also test a
nuance of this, thereby by-passing one of the selection ‘routes’ described above, by
examining whether individuals who were offered occupational pension scheme
coverage, but nevertheless chose to buy a personal pension instead, also exhibit higher
job mobility. This is also confirmed, although the result is only significant for men.
We conclude that personal pensions and greater ‘labour market flexibility’ are indeed
related, but that further analysis is needed if we to test explicit structural models.
8. Bibliography
Audit Commission (1997) Retiring Nature: Early Retirement in Local Government, London:
Audit Commission.
Agulnik, P., Barr, N., Falkingham, J. and Rake, J. (1999), Partnership in Pensions?
Responses to the Pensions Green Paper, CASEpaper no. 24, London: Centre for
Analysis of Social Exclusion, London School of Economics.
Banks, J. and Emmerson, C. (2000), ‘Public and Private Pension Spending: Principles,
Practice and the Need for Reform’, Fiscal Studies, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1–63.
Banks, J. and Tanner, S. (1999), Household saving in the UK , Report No. 62, London:
Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Banks, J., Blundell, R. and Tanner, S. (1998), ‘Is There a Retirement-Savings Puzzle?’,
American Economic Review, vol. 88, no. 4, pp. 769–788.
Barrientos, A. (1998) “Supplementary pension coverage in Britain”, Fiscal Studies, 19,
November, 429–446.

46
Blake, D. (1995) Pension schemes and pension funds in the United Kingdom, Clarendon
Press: Oxford.
Blundell, R., Meghir, C. and Smith, S. (2001), Pension incentives and the pattern of
retirement in the UK, IFS mimeo.
Blundell, R. and Johnson, P. (1999) ‘Pensions and retirement in the United Kingdom’, 403435 in Gruber, J. and D. Wise (eds) Social Security and Retirement around the
World, Chicago University Press for NBER.
Bodie, Z., Marcus, A.J. and Merton, R. C. (1988) Defined benefit versus defined contribution
pension plans: what are the real trade-offs? 139–162 in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven and D.
Wise (eds) Pensions in the US Economy, Chicago University Press for NBER.
Bohn, H. (1997) “Social security reform and financial markets”, 193–227 in S. Sass and R.
Triest (eds) Social Security Reform: Links to saving, investment and growth,
Conference Series No. 41, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Bos, E., Vu, M. T., Massiah, E. and Bulatao, R. A. (1994), World Population Projections,
1994–95 edition: Estimates and Projections with Related Demographic Statistics,
Washington DC: World Bank / Baltimore, Md: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Brugiavini, A. and Disney, R. (1993) “The choice of private pension plans under uncertainty
in the UK” Mimeo, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Budd, A. and Campbell, N. (1998), ‘The roles of the Public and Private Sectors in the UK
Pension System’, in Feldstein, M. (ed), Privatizing Social Security, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Cabinet Office (2000), Performance and Innovation Unit, Winning the Generation Game,
London HMSO.
Chand, S. and Jaeger, A. 1996, Ageing Populations and Public Pension Scheme, Occasional
Paper No. 147, Washington DC: International Monetary Fund.
Clark, T. and Taylor, J. (2000), ‘Income inequality: A tale of two cycles?’, Fiscal Studies,
vol. 20, no. 4.
Clark, T. (2001), Recent Pensions Policy and the Pension Credit, Briefing Note No. 17,
London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Creedy, J., Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1993) ‘The earnings-related state pension,
indexation and lifetime redistribution in the UK’, Review of Income and Wealth, 39,
September, 257-278.
Cutler, D., M. Poterba, J.M., Sheiner, L.M. and Summers, L. (1990) “An aging society:
opportunity or challenge?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1–73.
Department of Health and Social Security (1984) Population, Pension Costs and Pensioners’
Incomes, London.
Department of Social Security (1998) A New Contract for Welfare: Partnership in Pensions,
Cm. 4179, London: HMSO.
Department of Social Security (2000a), The Pensioners’ Income Series 1998/99, London:
DSS.
Department of Social Security (2000b), The Pension Credit: A Consultation Paper, Cm 4900,
London: The Stationary Office.
Department of Social Security (2000c), The Changing Welfare State: Pensioner Incomes,
Department of Social Security Paper No. 2, London: DSS.
Dilnot, A., Disney, R. Johnson, P. and Whitehouse, E. (1994) Pensions Policy in Britain: An
Economic Analysis, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

47
Disney, R. (1996), Can we afford to grow older? A perspective on the economics of ageing,
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Disney, R. (1997), ‘The United Kingdom’s pension program’. 157-167 in S. Sass and R.
Triest (eds) Social Security Reform: Links to saving, investment and growth,
Conference Series No. 41, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Disney, R. (1999), ‘Why have older men stopped working in Britain?’ 24-43 in Gregg, P. and
Wadsworth, J. (eds) The State of Working Britain, Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Disney, R. (2000) “Crises in OECD public pension programmes: What are the reform
alternatives?” Economic Journal Features, 110, February, F1–F23.
Disney, R., Meghir, C. and Whitehouse, E. (1994), ‘Retirement behaviour in Britain’, Fiscal
Studies, vol. 15, no. 1., pp. 24–43.
Disney, R. and Johnson, P. (2001) (eds) Pension systems and retirement incomes across
OECD countries, forthcoming, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Disney, R. and Smith, S. (2000) ‘The abolition of the earnings rule for UK pensioners’ ,
mimeo , Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1992a) The Personal Pension stampede, London: Institute for
Fiscal Studies.
Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1992b) “Personal Pensions and the review of the contractingout terms”, Fiscal Studies, 13, February, 38–53.
Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1993a) “Will younger cohorts obtain a worse deal from the
UK state pension scheme?” 85–106 in M. Casson and J. Creedy (eds) Industrial
Concentration and Economic Inequality, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1993b) “Contracting out and lifetime redistribution in the UK
state pension system”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 55, February, 25–
42.
Disney, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1996) What are occupational pension plan entitlements worth
in Britain? Economica, 63, May, 213–238.
Disney, R., Emmerson, C. and Tanner, S., (1999) Partnership in Pensions: An Assessment,
Commentary No. 78, London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Disney, R., Emmerson, C. and Wakefield, M. (2001) ‘Pension reform and saving in Britain’
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17, 1 (Spring).
Disney, R., Palacios, R. and Whitehouse, E. (1999) ‘Individual choice of pension arrangement
as a pension reform strategy’, Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper W99/18,
London.
Emmerson, C. and Johnson, P. (2001) ‘Pension provision in the United Kingdom’, in Disney,
R. and Johnson, P. (2001) (eds) Pension systems and retirement incomes across
OECD countries, forthcoming, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Emmerson, C. and Tanner, S. (1999), The Government’s Proposals for Stakeholder Pensions,
Briefing Note no. 1, London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Emmerson, C. and Tanner, S. (2000) “A note on the tax treatment of private pensions and
Individual Savings Accounts”, Fiscal Studies, 21, March, 65–74.
Engen, E.M. and Gale, W.G. (1997) ‘Effects of social security reform on private and national
saving’, 103-142 in S. Sass and R. Triest (eds) Social Security Reform: Links to
saving, investment and growth, Conference Series No. 41, Boston: Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston.

48
Financial Services Authority (2000), Personal Pensions mis-selling: the facts, London: FSA.
Gale, W.G. (1998) “The effects of pensions on household wealth: A re-evaluation of the
theory and evidence”, Journal of Political Economy, 104, 4, 706–723.
Goodman, A. and Webb, S. (1994), For Richer for Poorer: The Changing Distribution of
Income in the United Kingdom, 1961–94, Commentary no. 42, London: Institute for
Fiscal Studies.
Government Actuary’s Department (1999), National Insurance Fund Long Term Financial
Estimates, London: The Stationary Office Limited.
Gustman, A. and Steinmeier, T. (1993) Pension portability and labour mobility: Evidence
from the Survey of Income and Program Participation, Journal of Public Economics,
50, 299–323.
Hemming, R. and Kay, J.A. (1982) ‘The costs of the state earnings-related pension scheme’,
Economic Journal, 92, June, 300-319.
Henley, A., Disney, R. and Carruth, A. (1994) Job tenure and asset holdings, Economic
Journal, 104, March, 338–349.
HM Treasury (2000a), Pre-Budget Report, November 2000, Cm4917, London: The Stationary
Office.
HM Treasury (2000b) Financial Statement and Budget Report, March 2000, London: HM
Treasury
HM Treasury (2000c) Tax Ready Reckoner and Tax Reliefs: November 2000, London: HM
Treasury.
HM Treasury (2000d) Review of Ill Health Retirement in the Public Sector, London: HM
Treasury.
HMSO Inland Revenue Statistics, various issues.
House of Commons (2000) The contributory principle: Firth Report of the Social Security
Committee, HC–56, Volume II, Appendix 25, London: HMSO.
Ippolito, R.A. (1997) Pension Plans and Employee Performance, Chicago University Press.
Johnson, P. and Stears, G. (1995), ‘Pensioner income inequality’, Fiscal Studies, vol. 16, no.
4, pp. 69–93.
Lawson, N. (1992) The View from No. 11: Memoirs of a Tory Radical, Corgi Books: London.
Lazear, E. and Moore, R. (1988) Pensions and turnover, 163–190 in Z. Bodie, J. Shoven and
D. Wise (eds) Pensions in the US Economy, Chicago University Press for NBER.
Lazear, E.P. (1979) Why is there mandatory retirement? Journal of Political Economy 87, 6,
1261–1284.
McCormick, B. and Hughes, G. (1984) The influence of pensions on job mobility, Journal of
Public Economics, 23, 183–206.
Mealli, F. and Pudney, S. (1996) Occupational pensions and job mobility in Britain:
Estimation of a random-effects competing risks model, Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 11, 293–320.
Miles, D. (1999) “Modelling the impact of demographic change on the economy”, Economic
Journal, 109, January, 1–36.
Modigliani, F. (1986) ‘Life cycle, individual thrift and the wealth of nations’ American
Economic Review, 76, June, 297-313.

49
Murthi, M., Orszag, J.M. and Orszag, P.R. (1999) Administrative costs under a decentralised
approach to individual accounts: lessons from the United Kingdom, Discussion paper,
Birkbeck College, London.
National Audit Office (1991) The Elderly: Informational Requirements for Supporting the
Elderly and Implications of Personal Pensions for the National Insurance Fund,
London: HMSO.
National Audit Office (2000), State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme: The failure to inform
the public of reduced rights for widows and widowers, Hc320, London: The
Stationary Office.
Office for National Statistics (2000), Living in Britain: Results from the 1998 General
Household Survey. London: The Stationary Office Limited.
Peacock, A. (1992) ‘The credibility of economic advice to government’, Economic Journal,
102, September, 1213-1222.
Roseveare, D., Leibfritz, W., Fore, D., and Wurzel, E., (1996), ‘Ageing populations, pension
system and government budgets: Simulations for 20 OECD countries’, Working
Paper No 168, Paris: OECD.
Whitehouse, E. (2000) Administrative charges for funded pension systems: an international
comparison and assessment, Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 0016,
Washington: World Bank.

