                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO WAGES
                               IN MEXICO SINCE NAFTA?
                      IMPLICATIONS FOR HEMISPHERIC FREE TRADE

                                           Gordon H. Hanson

                                          Working Paper 9563
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9563


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2003




I thank Daniel Chiquiar, Toni Estevadeordal Bill Maloney, Pablo Sanguinetti, Alan Taylor, and participants
at the “FTAA and Beyond” conferences at Harvard and Punta del Este, Uruguay for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


©2003 by Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
What Has Happened to Wages in Mexico since NAFTA?
Implications for Hemispheric Free Trade
Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 9563
March 2003
JEL No. F1, J3

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, I examine the impacts of trade and investment liberalization on the wage structure of
Mexico. Part one of the paper surveys recent literature on the labor-market consequences of
Mexico’s economic reforms in the 1980?s. Mexico’s policy reforms appear to have raised the

demand for skill in the country, reduced rents in industries that prior to reform paid their workers
high wages, and raised the premium paid to workers in states along the U.S. border. These changes

have resulted in an increase in wage dispersion in the country. Part two of the paper examines
changes in Mexico’s wage structure during the 1990's. In the last decade, Mexico has experienced
rising returns to skill, which mirror closely wage movements in the United States. There is, however,
little evidence of wage convergence between the two countries. Regional wage differentials in

Mexico have widened and appear to be explained largely by variation in regional access to foreign
trade and investment and in regional opportunities for migration to the United States. I discuss
implications of Mexico’s experience for the rest of Latin America in the event a Free Trade

Agreement of the Americas is enacted.



Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
                                    INTRODUCTION

       The proposed Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA) would alter

dramatically trading relationships in the Western Hemisphere. Eliminating trade barriers

within the region would, among other effects, induce economies to specialize more in

export production. Such specialization would enable countries in Latin America to

realize gains from trade, but these income gains would likely not be shared equally by all

individuals in society. In Brazil, for instance, farmers growing oranges or workers

producing shoes would likely benefit more from an FTAA than would capital-intensive

manufacturers. As a result, an FTAA would be likely to redistribute national incomes in

the region. Latin America’s long history of income inequality makes the impact of an

FTAA on the distribution of earnings an important issue for policymakers.

       In this paper, I use Mexico as a test case for how regional free trade affects labor

earnings. I examine how trade reform in Mexico, and the North American Free Trade

Agreement (NAFTA) in particular, has altered the country’s wage structure. Mexico is a

useful case to study because it has opened itself to trade aggressively. It unilaterally

liberalized foreign trade and investment policies in the 1980’s and then enacted NAFTA

in 1994, which further reduced trade barriers and helped lock in reform by enshrining it

in a multilateral treaty. Mexico is now as closely tied to the North American economy as

at any point in its history. In 2000, it sent 88.7% of its exports to and bought 73.1% of its

imports from the United States. Greater openness has helped increase the share of trade

in Mexico’s GDP from 11.2% in 1980 to 32.2% in 2000.

       There are several channels through which North American economic integration

impacts Mexico’s labor market. One is by equalizing the price of traded goods between




                                                                                           1
economies. Trade theory predicts that convergence in goods’ prices between countries

creates pressure for convergence in factor prices. In Mexico, this would affect both wage

levels and the relative wages of low- and high-skilled labor. An additional channel

through which trade reform may shock labor demand is through its impact on capital

flows. Given that capital appears to complement skilled labor, capital inflows may

increase the demand for skill. In Mexico, NAFTA appears to have raised capital inflows

in part by raising investor confidence in the country’s commitment to free trade. From

1980 to 1994, foreign direct investment (FDI) average 1.3% of Mexico’s GDP, while

from 1995 to 2000, it averaged 2.8% of GDP (Chiquiar 2001). About two-thirds of this

FDI comes from the United States. In Mexico’s export assembly sector, capital inflows

expand trade directly. The creation of export assembly plants, or maquiladoras, by U.S.

firms in Mexico has increased trade in intermediate inputs. In 2000, maquiladoras

accounted for 47.7% of Mexico’s exports and 35.4% of Mexico’s imports.

       In using Mexico to preview the effects of an FTAA, it is important to recognize

that it differs from the rest of Latin America in some important respects. In particular,

Mexico shares a land border with the United States that creates opportunities for

migration abroad that other countries do not enjoy. During the 1990’s, net immigration

from Mexico in the United States was about 400,000 individuals per year. In the absence

of migration flows, trade reform in Mexico might have generated even more trade and

FDI than has occurred. Any estimate of the impact of regional free trade on Mexico,

then, may understate the impact an FTAA would have on the rest of the region.

       The body of the paper has two parts. In part one, I examine changes in Mexico’s

wage structure following reforms in the 1980’s. Here, I rely on a substantial body of




                                                                                       2
research that examines the impact of specific policy changes on labor earnings. This

work finds that lower barriers to foreign trade and investment have changed Mexico’s

wage structure. The evidence suggests that tariff reductions have increased relative

wages for skilled workers, increased foreign investment has raised the relative demand

for skilled labor, and tariff and quota reductions have altered inter-industry wage

differentials. Mexico’s economic opening thus appears to have raised the skill premium

and reduced industry rents going to labor. It also appears to have increased wages in

states along the U.S. border relative to the rest of the country.

          In part two of the paper, I use data from the 1990 and 2000 Mexico population

census to examine changes in Mexican wages over the period during which NAFTA was

implemented. During the 1990’s in Mexico, the returns to skill continued to rise and

regional differences in wages continued to widen. Wage gains were largest in regions

most exposed to international trade, FDI, and/or opportunities for migration to the United

States.     After controlling for regional exposure to globalization, other regional

characteristics appear to be unimportant in explaining wage changes. Overall, wage

gains were largest for more-educated workers living close to the United States and

smallest for less-educated workers living in the country’s south. There is little evidence

of convergence in wages between Mexico and the United States. I conclude the paper by

discussing the implications of these results for an FTAA.



 POLICY CHANGE AND WAGES IN MEXICO: THE FIRST REFORM WAVE

          The last two decades in Mexico have not been a quiet period. Since 1980, the

country has had three currency crises, bouts of high inflation, and severe macroeconomic




                                                                                        3
contractions. The reform of the country’s trade and investment policies has been, in part,

a response to this turmoil. Following a balance of payments crisis in 1982, the country

eased restrictions on maquiladoras. In 1985, Mexico joined the General Agreement on

Trade and Tariffs (GATT), which entailed cutting tariffs and eliminating many non-tariff

barriers. In 1989, Mexico eased restrictions on the rights of foreigners to own assets in

the country. In 1994, NAFTA consolidated and extended these reforms and tied them to

reciprocal access to the U.S. and Canadian markets. Concomitant with its economic

opening, Mexico privatized state-owned enterprises, deregulated entry restrictions in

many industries, and used wage and price restraints to combat inflation.

       The policy shocks to Mexico’s labor markets have attracted much academic

attention. A large body of work examines the impact that these policy changes have had

on wages in the country. In this section, I briefly survey the literature. I organize the

discussion around three questions: (i) Why have skill premia in Mexico risen? (ii) Has

greater economic openness affected regional wage differences in Mexico? And, (iii) is

there evidence of labor-market integration between Mexico and the United States?



Rising Skill Premia in Mexico

       Relative to the United States, Mexico has abundant supplies of less-skilled labor

and scarce supplies of human and physical capital. Trade and investment reforms would

be likely to alter the relative demand for labor of different types, producing changes in

the premium for skill.    Recent research shows that Mexico has indeed experienced

changes in the relative wages of skilled workers, but ones that are quite different from

what many would have expected given Mexico’s relative factor supplies.




                                                                                        4
           Since the mid 1980’s, Mexico has experienced widening wage inequality

associated with rising returns to skill. Cragg and Epelbaum (1996) show that between

1987 and 1993, though average real wages rose by 30%, the wages of urban workers with

a primary education (grade six completed) fell relative to the wages of urban workers

with secondary education (completed grade nine) by 15% and relative to the wages of

urban workers with post-secondary education by 60%. The returns to labor-market

experience also rose markedly over this time period. Skill premia continued to rise in the

1990’s. Robertson (2001) finds that the annual return to schooling for urban workers

rose from 0.035 in 1987 to 0.05 in 1994 and to 0.07 in 1998. Consistent with evidence

that skill premia and average educational attainment among workers have increased

simultaneously, Cragg and Epelbaum (1995) suggest that Mexico’s rising skill premium

is due mostly to increases in the relative demand for skill.

           Why has the relative demand for skilled labor in Mexico risen? The literature

proposes a several answers to this question. The one that has attracted the most attention

is that rising skill premia are due to trade and investment liberalization. Attributing rising

skill premia to trade reform may seem counterintuitive, given Mexico’s presumed

comparative advantage in low-skill activities (Leamer, 1993). The natural expectation

might be that skill premia in Mexico would fall, not rise, after liberalization.1

           This line of reasoning, however, does not accord with the pattern of trade

protection in Mexico before reform. At the time Mexico began to lower its trade barriers,

labor-intensive sectors had the highest tariff barriers. Hanson and Harrison (1999) find

that 1984 industry tariffs are negatively correlated with the 1984 industry ratio of white-



1
    See Robbins (1995) for a cross-country comparison of changes in wage inequality following trade reform.


                                                                                                         5
collar to blue-collar employment and that the 1984-1990 change in industry tariffs is

positively correlated with this employment ratio. This suggests that trade protection was

initially higher in less-skill intensive sectors and was reduced by more in these sectors

during reform. If these tariff changes were passed through to changes in goods’ prices,

then the logic of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem (1941) would imply that the relative

wage of skilled labor would have risen. Robertson (2001) suggests that this is exactly

what happened. He finds that over the period 1987-1993 the relative price of skill-

intensive goods in Mexico rose and that the tariff-induced change in relative prices had

the effect of raising the relative wage for white-collar labor.         Interestingly, tariff

reductions in Mexico due to NAFTA have been larger in more-skill intensive sectors,

suggesting that the final stage of trade reform may halt the increase in skill premia.

       In related work, Feliciano (2001) finds that between 1986 and 1990 wage

dispersion in Mexico rose more in tradables than in non-tradables. She also finds that

trade reform altered inter-interindustry wage differentials. Industry wage premia fell

more in industries with larger reductions in import-license requirements, but not in

industries with larger reductions in tariffs. Consistent with these results, Revenga (1997)

finds that over the period 1984-1990 manufacturing plants in industries with larger

reductions in tariffs and non-tariff barriers had higher reductions in employment. These

findings suggest that industries that enjoyed high rents before trade reform, as indicated

by high average wages after controlling for observable worker characteristics,

experienced relatively large reductions in wages and employment after trade reform.

       Another mechanism through which trade and investment reform may have

increased the demand for skilled labor in Mexico is outsourcing to the country by foreign




                                                                                           6
firms. A large fraction of U.S.-Mexico trade in manufactured products is the result of

U.S. firms establishing maquiladoras in Mexico. These plants import nearly all parts and

components from the United States, assemble final goods in Mexico, and export most

output back to the United States. In 1995, exports by maquiladoras accounted for 40.2%

of all Mexican exports to the United States.2 From 1980 to 1997, the maquiladora share

of national manufacturing employment in Mexico rose from 5.6% to 25.1%. The plants

are concentrated in Mexican states on the U.S. border.3

         How has the growth of maquiladoras affected labor demand in Mexico? Feenstra

and Hanson (1997) show that in theory if policy reform allows U.S. firms to outsource

more production to Mexico, these firms will choose to move the least skill-intensive

activities that they perform. By moving low-skill activities to Mexico, the average skill

intensity of production would rise in both the United States and Mexico. This would

raise the relative demand and earnings of high-skilled workers in both countries,

contributing to a binational increase in wage inequality.

         To test these predictions, Feenstra and Hanson (1997) examine whether the

relative demand for skilled workers in Mexico has risen more in regions where foreign

investment has been concentrated. They use regional data on maquiladoras to measure

the spatial distribution of foreign direct investment in Mexico. Consistent with their

2
  Most maquiladoras assemble one of three types of goods, apparel, electronics, or auto parts. In 1995,
these three industries accounted for 80.5% of total exports by maquiladoras to the United States.
3
   It is often asserted that the growth of maquiladoras was the result of special trade advantages afforded to
goods produced by these plants on their entry into the United States. Tariffs are levied only on the value
added abroad (i.e., in Mexico) and not on the value of the U.S. inputs used in the assembly of the goods.
Mexican firms that use domestically-produced inputs enjoy no such advantage. An alternative view is that
maquiladoras have expanded in part because Mexico, given its relative abundance of low-wage labor, has a
comparative advantage in assembly-type activities (rather than in entire industries). Since NAFTA was
implemented in 1994, maquiladoras have lost their special trade advantages in most industries. Yet, until
2000 maquiladoras continued to grow faster than any other sector in the economy. This suggests that their
initial trade advantages relative to other firms in Mexico cannot fully account for their growth.



                                                                                                            7
theory, during the 1980’s the relative demand for high-skilled workers was higher in

regions where maquiladoras expanded most rapidly. Maquiladora growth can account for

over 50% of the increase in the skilled labor wage share that occurred during the late

1980's. These results suggest that U.S. outsourcing to Mexico, in the form of creating

maquiladoras, has contributed to rising in wage inequality in the country.

       Beyond the specific activity of outsourcing, FDI in general is likely to affect the

level and structure of wages in Mexico. Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1996) find that,

controlling for plant, industry, and region characteristics, manufacturing plants that are

foreign owned pay their skilled workers 21.5% more and their unskilled workers 3.3%

more than plants that are domestically owned. Similar results hold for Venezuela. These

results are consistent with several interpretations. Workers may be more productive in

multinational firms, multinationals may attract more able workers, or multinationals may

earn rents and share these rents with their workers.



Regional Wage Differences in Mexico

       Mexico's proximity to the United States suggests that trade liberalization for the

country was tantamount to economic integration with its northern neighbor. Given

northern Mexico enjoys relatively low-cost access to the U.S. market, we would expect

that North American economic integration would raise the demand for labor in the region

relative to the rest of the country. Hanson (1996, 1997) examines how trade reform has

affected Mexico’s regional economies. Following trade reform, there has been a decline

in relative industrial activity in central Mexico and an expansion in northern Mexico. In

1980, five years before trade reform began, 46% of the Mexico's manufacturing labor




                                                                                        8
force was located in the Mexico City area and 21% was located in states on the U.S.

border (Hanson 1997). In 1993, after eights years of reform, the share of manufacturing

activity in Mexico City had fallen to 29% and the share at the border had risen to 30%.

By 1998, four years after NAFTA, Mexico City’s employment share had fallen further to

23% and the border’s employment share had risen to 34% (Chiquiar 2001).

       Movements in regional relative wages also suggest North American economic

integration has benefited northern Mexico disproportionately. Hanson (1996) estimates

state manufacturing wages relative to national manufacturing wages as a function of

distance to Mexico City (the largest market in the country prior to trade reform) and

distance to the United States (the largest market for the country’s goods after trade

reform). Regional relative wages are negatively correlated with distance to Mexico City

and with distance to the Mexico-U.S. border. Prior to trade reform, a 10% increase in

distance from Mexico City was associated with a 1.9% decrease in the relative state

nominal wage, and a 10% increase in distance from the Mexico-U.S. border was

associated with a 1.3% decrease in the relative state nominal wage. After trade reform,

the regional wage gradient shifts. The effect of distance from Mexico City on state

wages weakens and the effect of distance from the United States strengthens.

       In related work, Chiquiar (2001) finds that for the period 1970-1985 there was

convergence in per capita GDP levels across Mexican states, but that after 1985 this

process broke down. For the period 1985-1993, there is strong divergence in state per

capita GDP levels and for the period 1993-1998 relative state GDP levels remain roughly

constant. The divergence in regional growth occurs at the time of trade reform.




                                                                                     9
       The experience of Mexico suggests that trade policy plays an important role in

determining regional economic fortunes. While trade reform raises wages in Mexican

border states, it may lower wages in regions of the country that had a privileged role

under the closed economy or that have poor access to the U.S. market.



Convergence in Mexican and U.S. Wages

       Have the flows of goods, capital, and people helped integrate the labor markets of

Mexico and the United States? In one of the few papers to address the topic, Robertson

(2000) examines whether shocks to Mexican wages are correlated with shocks to U.S.

wages. Using household data from the two countries over 1987-1997, Robertson takes

mean wages by age, schooling, region of residence, and time period and constructs a

panel of synthetic cohorts. He then regresses the quarterly change in Mexican wages for

a given age-education-region cell on quarterly changes in U.S. wages for the same age-

education cell and on the lagged difference in U.S. and Mexican wages for the cell. The

first variable captures the strength of labor-market integration between the two countries

and the second captures the rate of wage convergence between the two countries.

       Wage changes in Mexico are positively correlated with wage changes in the

United States. This suggests that there is at least partial labor-market integration between

the two countries. A shock that raises U.S. wages by 10% would raise wages in Mexican

interior cities by 1.8% and wages in Mexican border cities by 2.5%. Wage changes in

Mexico are negatively correlated with the lagged U.S.-Mexico wage difference, which

suggests that over time wages in the two economies tend to converge. The estimated

convergence rates are very rapid, with equilibrium U.S.-Mexico wage differentials being




                                                                                         10
reached within one to two quarters. This finding of rapid convergence seems at odds

with rising levels of trade, investment, and migration between the two countries, which

suggests that integration of U.S. and Mexican markets is incomplete and that wage

convergence between the two countries would be more gradual.

       Revenga and Montenegro (1998) offer a related analysis of U.S.-Mexico wage

differentials. They use data on Mexican manufacturing plants and U.S. manufacturing

industries for 1984-1990 to examine the evolution of average industry wages in Mexico

relative to the United States. They regress the log ratio of average wages in Mexican

plants to average wages in the corresponding U.S. industry on average industry tariffs in

Mexico, average industry import license requirements in Mexico, and other controls. The

analysis is performed separately for less- and more-skilled workers. The Mexico-U.S.

wage is positively correlated with Mexican tariffs and import-license requirements. The

estimated regression coefficients for the sample of production workers and for the sample

of non-production workers are very similar.       A 50% reduction in tariffs would be

associated with a 3.7% reduction in relative Mexico-U.S. wages for less-skilled workers

and a 4.3% reduction in relative Mexico-U.S. wages for more-skilled workers.

       It is tempting to interpret these results to mean that trade liberalization in Mexico

depressed wages for Mexican workers relative to their U.S. counterparts. Were this the

case, one might the effects on more- and less-skilled workers to be asymmetric, but they

are not. An alternative and more plausible interpretation is that trade barriers in Mexico

allowed firms to earn rents, which they shared with workers in the form of higher wages.

Trade reform would have reduced these rents, producing a positive correlation between

trade protection in Mexico and relative Mexico-U.S. wages for all labor types.




                                                                                         11
Summary

         Recent literature suggests that liberalizing barriers to trade and investment have

contributed to changes in Mexico’s wage structure.4 There is evidence consistent with

tariff reductions having increased relative wages for skilled workers, increased foreign

investment having raised the relative demand for skilled labor, and tariff and quota

reductions having altered inter-industry wage differentials. Mexico’s economic opening

thus appears to have raised the demand for skill and reduced industry rents going to labor.

Both changes appear to have had adverse consequences for low-skilled workers.

         Several larger messages also emerge from the literature. One is that Mexico’s

comparative advantage in low-skill activities is not as strong as many had thought.

Mexico’s trade reform entailed larger tariff reductions in less-skill-intensive industries,

reflecting the high levels of protection afforded these industries under import-substitution

industrialization. After trade reform, less-skill-intensive industries ended up taking the

hardest hit in terms of wage and employment declines. This may come as a surprise,

given Mexico’s presumed comparative advantage in labor-intensive activities. While

Mexico may have such a comparative advantage relative to the United States, it is

probably does not relative to China or South Asia. Trade liberalization exposed Mexico’s

vulnerability in very low-end manufacturing, as producers in this segment lost out to

imports. Replacing these producers were export assembly plants in apparel, auto parts,

and electronics.       While Mexico may have a cost disadvantage relative to China in
4
  There is also evidence that other reforms affected Mexico’s labor market. During the 1980’s, real
minimum wages declined substantially. Bell (1997) finds that this didn’t affect formal-sector employment
due to low initial minimum wages and non-compliance with minimum wage laws (see Feliciano, 1998, for
evidence of stronger minimum-wage effects). Woodruff (1998) finds that government encouragement of
wage restraints to combat inflation in the late 1980’s had a larger impact on large firms than on small firms,
leading to a disappearance of the employer-size wage effect. Fairris (2002) finds that during the late
1980’s and early 1990’s the observed increase in wage dispersion in Mexico was larger in the unionized
sector (though lower in this sector to begin with), perhaps indicating a decline in union bargaining power.


                                                                                                          12
finished goods like t-shirts, plastic footwear, and simple consumer electronics, it appears

to have a cost advantage in assembly services for the U.S. economy.               Mexican

manufacturing has, in effect, reoriented itself from producing simple consumer goods to

being a subcontractor for the North American economy.

       A second message to emerge from the literature is that trade and FDI appear to be

complements. Trade reform freed up resources in manufacturing that allowed Mexico to

become more specialized export assembly. But to make this transition, the country

needed FDI. The arrival of foreign firms brought in needed capital and new technology

for managing assembly operations and handling the logistics of importing intermediate

inputs and exporting output. These assembly operations, as it turns out, are intensive in

the use of skilled labor relative to other Mexican manufacturing plants. The combination

of freer trade, which allowed greater specialization, and fewer restrictions on FDI, which

allowed plants in Mexico to become part of North American production networks,

induced in shift from low-end production for the domestic economy to the provision of

input-processing services for the North American economy.



           WAGES AND EMPLOYMENT IN MEXICO, 1990 AND 2000

       Previous literature has focused on how Mexico’s reforms affected wages and

employment in the country during the 1980’s and early 1990’s. There is little work on

the post-NAFTA period or that evaluates the relative impact of Mexico’s economic

reforms on labor-market outcomes in the country. In the next two sections, I attempt to

address these shortcomings. I study changes in Mexico’s wage structure over the period

1990-2000. The goals of this exercise are (a) to examine whether changes in Mexican




                                                                                        13
wages in the 1990’s mirrored those in the 1980’s, (b) to assess whether there has been

convergence between U.S. and Mexican wages, and (c) to evaluate how different forms

of economic openness have impacted Mexico’s wage structure.



Data and Summary Statistics

       The data I use for the analysis are 1% random samples from the 1990 and 2000

Mexico population census.        Much previous research limits the analysis to the

manufacturing sector and/or to workers in large cities and so gives only a partial view of

how Mexico’s wage structure has evolved. The census provides comprehensive data on

earnings and employment in Mexico. By looking over the entire decade of the 1990s, the

analysis spans both the planning and negotiation period for NAFTA and the period

following its enactment. This helps account for the possibility that firms began adjusting

to NAFTA before the treaty was formally approved. It also extends the time period well

beyond the severe recession Mexico suffered in 1995, when real GDP fell by 6.2%,

which was precipitated by a bungled devaluation of the peso.

       Table 1 gives summary statistics on the sample of individuals in 1990 and 2000.

To focus on potential wage earners, I include only individuals 16-65 years old. Over

time, Mexico has experienced increases in educational attainment. From 1990 to 2000,

the share of working-age individuals with 8 years of education or less declined from

59.3% to 47.5% for males and from 63.3% to 51.4% for females. There are marked

increases in the share of individuals completing secondary school (9 years) or preparatory

school (12 years). Despite large wage differences across regions (as discussed in the last

section), there is little interregional migration. The border region, which has the highest




                                                                                        14
wages in the country, had its share of the national population increase by only 1.0% for

males and 0.5% for females. Within regions, there has been rural-to-urban migration.

The share of individuals living in cities with more than 500,000 inhabitants rose by 4.8%

for males and 4.4% for females and the share of individuals living in localities with less

2,500 inhabitants fell by 4.0% for males and 3.2% for females.

       Despite increases in schooling, average hourly earnings fell in the 1990’s. When

deflated by Mexico’s CPI, the average hourly wage in 1990 dollars declined for males

from $1.33 to $1.11 and for females from $1.24 to $1.13. Wage declines are larger when

controls are added for individual characteristics. These wage movements reflect in part

the effects of Mexico’s economic collapse in 1995. Even with falling wages, labor-force

participation rates rose modestly for males and sharply for females over the decade. By

2000, 30.9% of working-age women were wage earners, up from 20.7% in 1990.

       Table 2 shows the distribution of employed individuals across industries in 1990

and 2000. The major change in industrial specialization over the period was a decline in

employment in agriculture and mining. The sector’s share of male employment fell from

28.9% to 20.7%. due in part to the reform of the land tenure system in Mexico and the

breakup of rural cooperatives, or ejidos. Manufacturing’s share of total employment

remained steady over the 1990’s at around 20%.



OLS Wage Regressions, 1990 and 2000

       To summarize changes in Mexico’s wage structure, I present results from OLS

wage regressions. Since most regressors in the estimation are dummy variables, these

results summarize the conditional mean of log wages with respect to education, region,




                                                                                       15
industry, and other characteristics. This is a compact way to characterize the returns to

observable characteristics at different points in time.

        Tables 3a and 3b present the estimation results for males and females. The

dependent variable is log average hourly earnings. The independent variables are dummy

variables for seven categories of education attainment (the excluded category is no

schooling), age and age squared, a dummy variable for whether an individual is married,

dummy variables for four categories of city/locality size (the excluded category is

localities with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants), dummy variables for five regions (the

excluded region is the South), and dummy variables for nine industries (the excluded

sector is agriculture and mining). To reduce the effects of measurement error, I drop

observations with the lowest or highest 0.5% of wage values.5 The sample is wage

earners, 25-65 years old. The tables report results for the full sample and excluding the

self-employed. In unreported regressions I find little impact of excluding those who

work less than 20 hours per week or of further restricting extreme wage values.

        In Table 3a, several changes in earnings for males over 1990-2000 are apparent.

First, there is a sharp increase in the returns to high levels of schooling (but not to low or

moderate schooling). The returns to completing 13-15 years of schooling (the equivalent

of some college) rose by 13.3 log points and the returns to completing 16 or more years

of schooling (the equivalent of at least a college education) rose by 13.1 log points.

Second, there is a decrease in returns to age. A 30 year old received a boost in wages for

an extra year of age of 1.7 log points in 1990 but only 1.2 log points in 2000. Third, there

are changes in regional wage differentials. Between 1990 and 2000, wages in the border

5
  The 1990 sample has a large number of observations with very low hourly wages. To account for what
appears to be more severe measurement error in 1990, I first drop observations (3031 in total) with wages
below $0.006 dollars per hour, for which there is zero mass in the 2000 sample and then trim the 1% tails.


                                                                                                       16
region rose by 8.5 log points relative to south region, while wages in other regions were

stable relative to the south. Fourth, there are changes in inter-industry wage differentials.

Wages in agriculture, the excluded sector, rose relative to all industries except public

administration and social assistance. This may reflect the reform of agriculture. With the

breakup of ejidos, only relatively high-wage workers may have remained in the sector.

       Some results are sensitive to whether or not the self-employed are included in the

sample. Excluding the self-employed, wages in all regions except the Yucatan rose

relative to the south. The border again showed the largest increase in relative wages.

       Table 3b shows wage regressions for females. For women, there were increases

in returns to education at all levels, with the largest increases occurring at the highest

schooling levels. Wages in the south fell relative to wages in all other regions, with the

border having the largest wage increases. In contrast to males, females in manufacturing

earn relatively low wages. The results for women should be interpreted with caution.

The large increase in female labor-force participation in the 1990’s suggests that the

composition of females in the labor force may have changed over time. Self-selection

into work may introduce bias into the estimation for women.



Summary

       Wages changes in the 1990’s mirrored those in the 1980’s. Returns to schooling

appeared to rise, the border wage premium rose, and industry wages shifted in favor of

agriculture. While manufacturing employment became more concentrated in the border

region, the border’s share of the national population increased only slightly.




                                                                                          17
ECONOMIC OPENNESS AND CHANGES IN MEXICO’S WAGE STRUCTURE

       In this section, I examine the role that economic openness has played in Mexico’s

evolving wage structure. To do so, we need measures of shocks to the economy and to

define groups of workers that have similar sensitivities to these shocks. Lacking data on

individuals over time, I construct a panel of synthetic cohorts. For 1990 and 2000, I

calculate average hourly earnings for individuals in the sample and then take mean wages

for cells broken down by sex, age, education, and region. I define cells according to four

1990 age categories (16-25, 26-35, 36-45, and 46-55 years), seven education categories

(0-4, 5-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+ years of schooling), and each of Mexico’s 32 states.

I then track wage changes for the same cohort between 1990 and 2000 (e.g., the change

in wages between 26-35 year-old males with 12 years of education in a given state in

1990 and 36-45 year-old males with 12 years of education in the same state in 2000).



Wages Changes for Mexican and U.S. Cohorts

       The first exercise is to compare wage changes in Mexico and the United States.

Evidence using high-frequency data in Robertson (2001) suggests that Mexico-U.S. wage

convergence is occurring. I revisit the issue using long-period time changes. This

requires constructing a matching panel of U.S. synthetic cohorts. To do so, I use the

1990 and 2000 Current Population Survey (for merged outgoing rotation groups). These

cohorts are defined for the United States as a whole for the same age and education

categories as their Mexican counterparts. One problem with the CPS is that it does not

identify country of birth in 1990. U.S. cohorts thus include both immigrant and native-

born workers.     This is unfortunate because during the 1990’s large numbers of




                                                                                       18
immigrants with low-education levels arrived in the United States. Immigration changes

the underlying population of individuals from which the CPS sample is drawn, with the

change being largest for the cohorts with the lowest education levels.

       Table 4 summarizes changes in Mexican wages relative to changes in U.S. wages

over the 1990’s for the panel of synthetic cohorts. All wage changes are weighted by

average cohort size in 1990 and 2000. In terms of nominal dollar values, Mexican wages

rose relative to U.S. wages by 3.1 log points over 1990-2000. But Mexico’s small

relative nominal gains were swamped higher relative inflation in Mexico. As a result,

Mexico’s average real CPI wage fell by 17.3 log points. For mean wages, there thus

appears to be no evidence of Mexico-U.S. wage convergence.

       The results in Table 4 suggest there has been substantial variation in wage

changes across labor-market groups in Mexico. To see this variation more clearly, Table

5 breaks out changes in real CPI Mexico wages and real relative CPI Mexico-U.S. wages

for the sample of cohorts by age, education, and region. Real Mexico wages and real

Mexico-U.S. wages fall least for younger cohorts. Young women are the only cohort to

experience real wage gains both in absolute terms and relative to the United States. From

Table 3, it is not surprising to see that more educated workers have higher wage growth.

Men with 13 or more years of education have positive real wage gains, but only males in

the 13-15 years of education cohort have real wages gains relative to the United States.

Women with 12 or more years of education have real absolute and relative wage gains,

again with the 13-15 years of education cohort showing the strongest gains.

       Turning to regions, we see that on average all regions show real absolute and

relative wage declines. These declines are smallest in the border region and largest in the




                                                                                        19
south and the Yucatan. In Table 3, more educated workers and workers in the border

region were among those with the highest wages in 1990. The results in Table 5 suggest

that young, highly educated workers living in the border region had the strongest wage

growth during the 1990’s. Together, these two findings suggest there was little wage

convergence across labor market groups during the 1990’s. This lack of convergence is

consistent with Chiquiar’s (2001) results on the late 1980’s and early 1990’s.



Estimation Results on Mexico-U.S. Wage Convergence

       To examine the contribution of economic openness to changes in Mexico’s wage

structure, I estimate regressions of wage changes for the panel of synthetic cohorts. The

dependent variable is the 1990-2000 change in log wages by Mexican cohort. The

independent variables are drawn from the following set: the 1990 log wage for the

Mexican cohort; the 1990 log wage for the same age-education U.S. cohort; the 1990-

2000 change in log wages for the U.S. cohort; dummies variables for age, education

level, and region; and measures of regional exposure to globalization.

       I begin by replicating the specification in Robertson (2000), in which the

independent variables are the log difference in lagged Mexico and U.S. wages and the log

change in U.S. wages. He allows regression coefficients to differ between border and

interior regions, in order to capture possibly stronger links between Mexican and U.S.

labor markets for Mexican regions closer to the United States. Similarly, I interact

regressors with a dummy variable for border states.

       Table 6a reports the regression results for males and Table 6b reports the

regression results for females. In column one of Table 6a, the regressors are the 1990




                                                                                      20
difference in log Mexico and U.S. wages, the 1990-2000 change in log U.S. wages, the

interactions of the wage variables with the border dummy, and region dummy variables.

The coefficient on the 1990 difference in Mexico-U.S. wages indicates whether there is

wage convergence between Mexico and the United States.                In column one, this

coefficient is negative, small in magnitude, and imprecisely estimated. However, the

interaction between this wage variable and the border dummy is negative and precisely

estimated. For border states, but not for interior states, wage growth is higher for cohorts

where initial Mexico wages are lower relative to U.S. wages. This is consistent with

convergence between Mexico and U.S. wages in Mexican border states.

       There is a strong positive correlation between wage growth in Mexico and wage

growth in the United States. The precisely estimated coefficient of 1.3 indicates that

Mexican wages increase more than one for one with increases in U.S. wages. This is

consistent with labor markets in Mexico and the United States being integrated, through

some combination of trade, investment, and migration flows. The border interaction with

this variable is positive, though imprecisely estimated, showing weak evidence that

Mexico-U.S. integration is stronger in border states than in interior states.

       The large coefficient on U.S. wage growth is surprising and invites skepticism.

One concern about the specification in column one is that by forcing the coefficients on

1990 Mexico wages and 1990 U.S. wages to be equal and of opposite sign we are

possibly convoluting Mexico-U.S. wage convergence with convergence or divergence in

wages across Mexican cohorts. To address this issue, in column two I add the 1990 log

Mexico wage, and its interaction with the border dummy, as regressors. It is now the

case that the coefficients on the difference in 1990 Mexico-U.S. wages and the border




                                                                                         21
interaction with this variable are statistically insignificant. This is evidence against

Mexico-U.S. wage convergence. The coefficient on 1990 Mexico wages is positive and

precisely estimated and the border interaction with this variable is negative and precisely

estimated. What this suggests is that during the 1990’s interior regions had higher wage

growth for cohorts with higher initial wages. In other words, there was wage divergence

in interior regions, but not in the border region.      This evidence of growing wage

dispersion is not surprising, given the rising returns to skill evident in Table 3. Overall,

evidence of Mexico-U.S. wage convergence appears to be fragile. This confirms the

impression from mean relative wage changes in Table 4.

       In column three, I examine the sensitivity of changes in Mexico wages to changes

in U.S. wages by adding dummy variables for three age categories (16-24 years of age is

the excluded category) and dummy variables for five education categories (0-4 years of

schooling is the excluded category) to the regression. The dummy variables for age are

individually and jointly statistically insignificant. After controlling for education and

U.S. cohort wage changes, there appear to be no age-specific wage changes in Mexico.

The dummy variables for education are positive and precisely estimated, with larger

magnitudes for higher education levels that suggest rising returns to schooling.

       With controls for age and education included, the coefficient on U.S. wage

changes becomes small and imprecisely estimated. Since U.S. wages vary only by age

and education, the only variation left in U.S. wage changes after including age and

education dummies are age-specific changes in the returns to education. The results

suggest that it is the commonality in overall changes in returns to education that account

for the strong positive correlation between Mexico and U.S. wage changes. These results




                                                                                         22
are not evidence against Mexico-U.S. labor market integration. Instead, they imply that

the mechanisms that link wages in Mexico and the United States (be they trade, FDI,

and/or migration) work through broad changes in the returns to education.



Estimation Results for Regional Exposure to Globalization

       In column four of Table 6a, I add controls for regional exposure to globalization

to the specification. To control for regional variation in business cycles, I also include

the log change in state real GDP as a regressor. I include six measures of regional

exposure to foreign trade and investment. The share of manufacturing in state GDP and

the share of agriculture in state GDP control for variation across regions in industrial

specialization in traded goods. The share of net foreign direct investment flows in state

GDP controls for how attractive the state is to multinational enterprises. The state share

of national maquiladora employment controls for the attractiveness of the state to foreign

firms that specialize in export assembly operations.       Some but not all FDI is in

maquiladoras. Imports as a share of state GDP capture the exposure of the state to

foreign trade (similar measures for exports are unavailable). Distance to the United

States (nearest U.S. border crossing) captures physical proximity to U.S. markets.

       Several estimation issues merit comment. Most globalization variables are in

terms of shares averaged over the 1990’s, rather than as changes in shares, to avoid

introducing simultaneity into the regression.        Average shares of FDI, imports,

manufacturing, or agriculture in GDP capture cross-section differences in regional

exposure to globalization. Changes in shares would capture state specific globalization

shocks that might be correlated with unobserved shocks to wages. By regressing changes




                                                                                       23
in wages on average cross-sectional characteristics, I capture transitional dynamics in

state wages associated with adjustment to NAFTA (and other shocks). Results are

similar results when shares in the initial period are used instead of average shares.

        I include one measure of regional opportunities to migrate to the United States.

Some background is helpful to understand this measure. A large literature documents

that some Mexican states are more likely than others to send migrants to the United

States and have been for many decades (e.g., Woodruff and Zenteno 2002). These states

are mostly in agricultural regions in western Mexico. They are neither the poorest states

in the country nor the states that are closest to the United States. Most research attributes

these migration patterns to longstanding regional networks that help Mexican workers

find jobs in the United States. The persistence of these migration networks suggests that

historical migration flows are a good indicator of current regional opportunities for

migration abroad. The measure I use is the share of the 1960 state population that

migrated to the United States over the period 1955-1959. I obtain similar results for

current migration flows.6 Historical measures reduce concerns about endogeneity.

        Column four of Table 6a reports the results. Wage changes are uncorrelated with

the share of state GDP in manufacturing or in agriculture. It appears that industrial

specialization (at least measured at this aggregate level) is not associated with changes in

regional wage differences. Mexican regions with larger manufacturing sectors do have

higher wage levels but did not enjoy higher wage growth in the 1990’s.

        There are strong positive correlations between wage growth and the share of FDI

and between wage growth the share of imports in state GDP. It appears that states with


6
 As one indication of this, the correlation between the shares of the state population that migrated to the
United States over the period 1995-2000 and over the period 1955-1959 is 0.68.


                                                                                                        24
greater exposure to multinational firms and/or with greater exposure to foreign trade

enjoyed higher wage growth in the 1990’s. This suggests, perhaps not surprisingly, that

regions with better access to global markets for goods and capital had larger increases in

the demand for labor during the 1990’s. The correlation between wage changes and the

state share of national maquiladora employment is positive but statistically insignificant.

What this may suggest is that, controlling for FDI inflows (and for state proximity to the

United States), there is nothing special about a state having a particular concentration in

export assembly operations. What matters is overall access to foreign capital.

       There is a strong positive correlation between wage changes and historical state

migration rates to the United States. States with better opportunities for migration abroad

had higher wage growth during the 1990’s. This suggests that migration abroad puts

upward pressure on wages in the region from which workers were drawn.

       Regional exposure to globalization appears to account for a large portion of

regional wage differentials. To see this clearly, compare results in columns three and

four of Table 6a. The regression in column three includes controls for age, education,

lagged Mexico and U.S. wages, and U.S. wage growth. In this regression coefficients on

regional dummy variables are large and statistically significant. When I introduce the

globalization measures in column four the magnitudes of these coefficients fall

considerably and they become individually and jointly statistically insignificant. The

regional characteristics that matter for wage in Mexico during the 1990’s appear to be

those related to regional exposure to foreign trade, investment, and migration.

       The results for females are shown in Table 6b. With a few exceptions, the results

for males and females are similar. For females, there remains the concern that changes in




                                                                                        25
their labor-force participation may complicate analysis of their wage changes.       For

women, there is stronger evidence of wage convergence between Mexico and the United

States (columns one and two). For women, as for men, there is evidence of wage

divergence in interior regions of the country, a strong positive correlation between

Mexico wage growth and U.S. wage growth, and strong positive correlations between

wage growth and the share of FDI in state GDP and historical state migration rates to the

United States. There is no positive correlation between wage growth and the import

share of GDP, as there is for men. Also distinct from men, the globalization variables do

not render regional dummy variables statistically insignificant.

       For males and females, I have estimated alternative specifications to gauge the

robustness of the findings. The results on the globalization variables are robust to (a)

allowing for interactions between returns to schooling and either border dummies or

distance to the United States, (b) using as the dependent variable changes in Mexico

wages minus changes in U.S. wages, and (c) measuring U.S. wages using data on the four

U.S. border states only rather than data for the U.S. as a whole.



         IMPLICATIONS OF MEXICO’S EXPERIENCE FOR AN FTAA

       In this paper, I have surveyed recent literature on the impact of trade and

investment liberalization in Mexico on wages in the country and examined recent

changes in the country’s wage structure.        Over the last two decades, Mexico has

dramatically opened its economy to the rest of the world. During this period, Mexico has

experienced three significant changes in its wage structure: (a) overall wage levels have

had large temporary declines, usually following a macroeconomic contraction, (b) wages




                                                                                      26
in states on the Mexico-U.S. border have increased relative to wages in the rest of the

country, and (c) there has been a sustained increase in the returns to skill in the country,

leading to an overall increase in wage inequality.

       The breadth of Mexico’s reforms complicates identifying their effects on labor

markets in the country. Compounding these problems are the effects of Mexico’s recent

macroeconomic instability. Nevertheless, a number of important lessons emerge from

Mexico’s experience for how economic integration with other countries, and in particular

with a large, rich neighbor, impacts labor markets in a developing country. These lessons

are useful for gauging how an FTAA might affect other Latin American countries.

       The liberalization of barriers to foreign trade and investment appears to have

contributed to an increase in the relative demand for skill in Mexico. Recent literature

suggests that tariff reductions increased relative wages for skilled workers, increased

foreign investment raised the relative demand for skilled labor, and tariff and quota

reductions altered inter-industry wage differentials. Mexico’s economic opening thus

appears to have raised the premium paid to skilled workers and reduced rents in

industries that prior to reform paid their workers relatively high wages. Both of these

outcomes have increased in wage dispersion in the country.

       One factor that contributed to how trade affected wages in Mexico was that prior

to trade reform, the country had relatively high tariffs on less-skill-intensive industries.

These industries thus bore the brunt of adjustment to Mexico’s economic opening.

Similar tariff adjustments following an FTAA are unlikely to be a common occurrence in

the rest of Latin America. One reason for this is that many countries have already

engaged in some degree of unilateral trade liberalization.        Columbia, for instance,




                                                                                         27
reduced its trade barriers in the early 1990s. As in Mexico, trade reform in Columbia led

to larger tariff reductions in less-skill-intensive industries (Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2001).

Thus, the shock of trade reform related to tariff reductions in low-skill industries may

have already been delivered in many Latin American countries.

       In the 1990’s, Mexico consolidated its economic opening by signing and enacting

NAFTA. The decade saw further increases in the premium paid to workers in Mexican

states on the U.S. border and in the premium paid to more-skilled workers. Following

Mexico’s peso crisis of 1994-1995, real wage levels declined both in absolute terms and

relative to the United States. Increases in the returns to education during the 1990’s in

Mexico were nationwide and appeared to follow closely increases in the returns to

education in the United States. Partial labor-market integration between Mexico and the

United States is a likely explanation for these cross-border wage co-movements.

Changes in regional wage differentials in Mexico appear to be explained almost entirely

by regional variation in exposure to foreign markets. Wage growth has been much

stronger in regions with higher levels of FDI, higher levels of exposure to foreign trade,

and higher rates of migration to the United States.

       Overall, the workers in Mexico that have fared the best in the country’s newly

globalized economy are those with relatively high skill levels living in regions with

relatively good access to foreign markets. Less-skilled workers and workers in regions

with relatively poor access to foreign markets have fared poorly. This aspect of Mexico’s

experience with globalization holds important lessons for an FTAA. Multinational firms

and firms in export-intensive sectors appear to have relatively strong demand for more-

skilled labor and appear to place a premium on locating in regions with relatively high-




                                                                                         28
quality transportation and communication infrastructure. In Mexico, NAFTA appeared to

fortify incentives for FDI. If an FTAA does the same in the rest of Latin America, it is

likely to be skilled workers who benefit first and in particular those living in larger cities,

or near international ports or airports. At least in the initial periods of adjustment to trade

reform, the effects of greater economic openness appear to be greater dispersion in wages

(with unknown effects on average wage levels). This is an unfortunate message for a

region with already high levels of inequality.

       A related lesson from Mexico’s adjustment to NAFTA is that FDI appears to play

an important role in shaping the pattern of specialization that emerges in an economy

following a reduction in trade barriers. Much of Mexico’s export growth has occurred in

maquiladoras, whose expansion was made possible by a combination of lower trade

barriers and relaxed restrictions on FDI in Mexico and tariff breaks on imports with U.S.

content in the United States. If an FTAA does not also address restrictions on FDI in

Latin America, it may not produce the same degree of regional specialization in export

production that NAFTA has generated in Mexico.




                                                                                            29
                                         References

Aitken, Brian, Ann E. Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey. 1996. Wages and Foreign
Ownership: A Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States. Journal of
International Economics 40(3-4): 345-71.

Bell, Linda A. 1997. The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Columbia. Journal of
Labor Economics 15(3): S102-35.

Chiquiar, Daniel 2001. Regional Implications of Mexico’s Trade Liberalization. Mimeo,
UCSD.

Cragg, Michael I. and Mario Epelbaum. 1996. The Premium for Skills in LDCs: Evidence
from Mexico. Journal of Development Economics 51(1): 99-116.

Fairris, David H. 2002. Unions and Wage Inequality in Mexico. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, forthcoming.

Feliciano, Zadia 1998. Does the Minimum Wage Affect Employment in Mexico?
Eastern Economic Journal 24(2): 165-80.

Feliciano, Zadia. 2001. Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms
in Mexico on Wages and Employment. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(1): 95-
115.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. Foreign Direct Investment and Relative
Wages: Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras. Journal of International Economics, 42(3-
4): 371-394.

Goldberg, Penny and Nina Pavcnik. 2001. Trade Protection and Wages: Evidence from
the Colombian Trade Reforms. NBER Working Paper No. 8575.

Hanson, Gordon H. 1996. Localization Economies, Vertical Organization, and Trade.
American Economic Review 86(5): 1266-1278.

Hanson, Gordon H. 1997. Increasing Returns, Trade, and the Regional Structure of
Wages. Economic Journal 107(440): 113-133.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann E. Harrison. 1999. Trade, Technology, and Wage Inequality
in Mexico. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52(2): 271-288.

Leamer, Edward E. 1993. Wage Effects of a U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement. In P.M.
Garber, ed., The Mexico-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, Cambridge: MIT Press.




                                                                                    30
Marcouiller, Douglas, Veronica Ruiz de Castilla, and Christopher Woodruff. 1997.
Formal Measures of the Informal Sector Wage Gap in Mexico, El Salvador and Peru.
Economic Development and Cultural Change 45(2): 367-392.

Revenga, Anna L. 1997. Employment and Wage Effects of Trade Liberalization: The
Case of Mexican Manufacturing. Journal of Labor Economics 15(3): S20-43.

Revenga, Anna L. and Claudia Montenegro. 1998. North American Integration and Factor
Price Equalization: Is There Evidence of Wage Convergence between Mexico and the
United States? In Susan Collins, ed., Imports, Exports, and the American Worker,
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Robertson, Raymond. 2000. Wage Shocks and North American Labor Market
Integration. American Economic Review 90(4): 742-764.

Robertson, Raymond. 2001. Relative Prices and Wage Inequality: Evidence from Mexico.
Mimeo, Macalester College.

Robbins, Donald. 1995. Trade, Trade Liberalization and Inequality in Latin America and
East Asia: Synthesis of Seven Country Studies. Mimeo, HIID.

Stolper, Wolfgang and Paul A. Samuelson. 1941. Protection and Real Wages. Review of
Economic Studies 9(1): 51-68.

Woodruff, Christopher. 1999. Inflation Stabilization and the Vanishing Size-Wage
Effect. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53(1): 103-22.

Woodruff, Christopher and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. Remittances and Microenterprises
in Mexico. Mimeo, UC San Diego.




                                                                                   31
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                               Males        Males       Females      Females
                                               1990         2000         1990         2000
       Age                                     32.7         33.8          32.7         33.7
      Literate                                 91.3         94.5          86.3         91.7
   Highest Grade                0              11.6          5.7          15.6          7.8
   of Schooling               1 to 4           19.1         14.8          19.6         15.9
    Completed                 5 to 8           28.6         27.0          28.1         27.7
        (%)                     9              13.9         20.4          12.3         18.8
                             10 to 11           7.7          7.2           7.4          6.7
                                12              6.5         10.0           7.6         11.3
                             13 to 15           5.2          4.9           5.1          4.6
                               16+              7.2          9.6           4.0          6.8
       Married                                 53.7         51.4          53.9         50.3
       Region               Border             17.6         18.6          16.8         17.3
                             North             10.4         10.0          10.3         10.0
                            Center             33.6         32.7          34.3         34.0
                            Capital            23.7         23.8          24.0         24.1
                            Yucatan             4.7          5.4           4.5          5.1
                             South             10.0          9.5          10.0          9.4
      Size of                500k+             23.9         28.7          24.3         28.7
      Locality            100k-500k            23.5         22.3          24.3         22.7
                           15k-100k            12.9         13.7          13.3         13.9
                           2.5k-15k            13.2         12.8          13.2         13.1
                             <2.5k             26.5         22.5          24.9         21.7
     Migration            Since Birth          22.4         23.5          23.0         23.9
                         Within 5 Years         5.7          5.7           5.7          5.2
  Self-Employed                                22.0         21.3           3.3          7.9
   Wage Earner                                 66.1         68.7          20.7         30.9
   Hourly wage           Current Prices        1.33         1.80          1.24         1.82
       (US$)              1990 Pesos                        1.11                       1.13
                         1990 Dollars                       1.37                       1.38
          N                                   211,133      265,797      228,964      288,228
This table shows summary statistics on a 1% sample of individuals 16-65 years old in the 1990 and 2000
Mexico Censo de Poblacio y Vivienda. Border: Baja California, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Leon,
Sonora, Tamaulipas; North: Aguascalientes, Baja California Sur, Durango, Nayarit, San Luis Potosi,
Sinaloa, Zacatecas; Center: Colima, Guanajuato, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Michoacan, Morelos, Puebla, Queretaro,
Tlaxcala, Veracruz; Capital: Federal District, Mexico; South: Chiapas, Guerrero, Oaxaca; Yucatan:
Campeche, Tabasco, Quintana Roo, Yucatan.



                                                                                                     32
                  Table 2: Distribution of Employment across Industries

                                        Males        Males        Females      Females
                                        1990         2000          1990         2000
     Agriculture, Mining                28.9         20.7           3.5          4.7
       Manufacturing                    20.7         20.0           20.5         19.3
  Trans, Comm, Elec, Water               6.6          7.7            2.2          2.3
         Construction                    9.1         11.8            0.9          0.8
          Commerce                      12.3         14.3           18.9         23.0
    Public Administration                3.8          4.2           5.1          4.5
      General Services                   4.1          6.0            6.5          6.3
     Restaurants, Hotels                 2.6          3.6            6.2          7.8
      Social Assistance                  5.1          5.1           23.1         16.8
  Repair, Domestic Services              6.8          6.6           13.1         14.5

This table shows the allocation of workers across industries. See Table 1 for details on the sample.




                                                                                                       33
  Table 3a: OLS Wage Regressions, Males in 1990 and 2000
                             Full Sample      w/o Self-Employed
   Variable                1990       2000      1990      2000
 Highest Grade     1 to 4 0.112      0.101     0.092     0.084
 of Schooling             (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
  Completed        5 to 8 0.255      0.240     0.218     0.213
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                      9   0.410      0.381     0.373     0.345
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                 10 to 11 0.553      0.557     0.516     0.516
                          (0.01)     (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)
                     12   0.686      0.686     0.643     0.645
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                 13 to 15 0.873      1.006     0.835     0.983
                          (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)
                    16+   1.221      1.352     1.168     1.329
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
      Age                 0.045      0.032     0.042     0.029
                          (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)
Age Squared/100           -0.047     -0.033    -0.045    -0.031
                          (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)
    Married               0.095      0.115     0.090     0.112
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
    Size of       500k+   0.293      0.308     0.238     0.286
    Locality              (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                100k-500k 0.243      0.251     0.190     0.233
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                15k-100k  0.235      0.162     0.159     0.151
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
                 2.5k-15k 0.164      0.110     0.110      0.10
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
    Border                0.375      0.460     0.260     0.418
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
     North                0.281      0.274     0.150     0.229
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
     Center               0.246      0.225     0.130     0.183
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)
    Capital               0.216      0.215     0.114     0.189
                          (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)


                                                                  34
                                   Table 3a Continued


                  Yucatan                        0.084         0.062         -0.028       0.065
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.01)
              Manufacturing                      0.292         0.221         0.220         0.196
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
               Trans, Comm,                      0.328         0.209         0.237         0.172
                Elec, Water                      (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
               Construction                      0.372         0.263         0.277         0.213
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
                 Commerce                        0.286         0.134         0.125         0.057
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
              Public Admin.                      0.063         0.185         0.033         0.174
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
               Gen. Services                     0.397         0.277         0.268         0.204
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.01)
                Restaurants,                     0.215         0.127         0.050         0.012
                  Hotels                         (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)
                Soc. Assist.                     0.274         0.375         0.236         0.375
                                                 (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
                 Repair,                         0.305         0.153         0.144         0.066
              Domestic Serv.                     (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)
                   N                             93,999       121,873        67,409       89,778
               R-Squared                         0.306         0.418         0.295        0.449

Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample for the estimation is a 1% random sample of individuals 25-
65 years old from the 1990 and 2000 Mexico Censo de Poblacio y Vivienda. Individuals with wages in the
highest or lowest 0.5% of wage values have been dropped (see text for details). The first two columns
show results for all wage earners. The second two columns show results excluding the self-employed.
Sampling weights were used in the 2000 census but not in the 1990 census. Accordingly, the 1990
regressions are unweighted while the 2000 regressions are weighted. See Table 1 for other details.




                                                                                                       35
 Table 3b: OLS Wage Regressions, Females in 1990 and 2000
                             Full Sample     w/o Self-Employed
    Variable               1990       2000     1990      2000
 Highest Grade     1 to 4  0.124      0.172   0.092     0.153
  of Schooling            (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
   Completed       5 to 8  0.224      0.351   0.188     0.312
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                      9    0.459      0.542   0.438     0.493
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                 10 to 11  0.592      0.762   0.575     0.726
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.03)
                     12    0.736      0.865   0.718     0.819
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                 13 to 15  0.877      1.201   0.856     1.167
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.03)
                    16+    1.089      1.398   1.055     1.351
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
      Age                  0.048      0.045   0.043     0.040
                          (0.00)     (0.00)   (0.00)    (0.00)
Age Squared/100           -0.051     -0.046   -0.045    -0.039
                          (0.00)     (0.00)   (0.01)    (0.00)
    Married                0.121      0.093   0.108     0.101
                          (0.01)     (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.01)
     Size of      500k+    0.268      0.319   0.184     0.279
    Locality              (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                100k-500k 0.227       0.266   0.143     0.230
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                15k-100k   0.144      0.175   0.052     0.140
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
                 2.5k-15k  0.123      0.131   0.039     0.115
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
     Border                0.277      0.416   0.235     0.347
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
      North                0.145      0.202   0.096     0.133
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
     Center                0.104      0.178   0.066     0.118
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
     Capital               0.179      0.249   0.145     0.199
                          (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)


                                                                 36
                                    Table 3b Continued


                   Yucatan                      0.00      0.160   -0.026   0.102
                                              (0.03)     (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.02)
               Manufacturing                  -0.008      0.003   -0.013    0.01
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
               Trans, Comm,                    0.178      0.227   0.166    0.204
                Elec, Water                   (0.03)     (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)
               Construction                    0.287      0.167   0.229    0.129
                                              (0.05)     (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.04)
                 Commerce                      0.007      -0.10   -0.091   -0.101
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
               Public Admin.                  -0.052      0.171   -0.053   0.162
                                              (0.03)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
               Gen. Services                   0.183      0.154   0.136    0.111
                                              (0.03)     (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.02)
                Restaurants,                   0.003     -0.018   -0.111   -0.118
                  Hotels                      (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.02)
                Soc. Assist.                   0.124      0.310   0.113    0.301
                                              (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
                 Repair,                      -0.174     -0.135   -0.221   -0.162
              Domestic Serv.                  (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
                   N                          26,583     47,008   21,988   37,066
               R-Squared                       0.294      0.475    0.329   0.523

See Table 3a for details on the estimation.




                                                                                    37
               Table 4: Changes in Mexico-U.S. Relative Wages, 1990-2000

                                                      Males                          Females
                                             Mean             St. Dev.          Mean       St. Dev.

Change in Log Wages 1990-2000:
    Nominal Mexico Wages                      0.291            0.205             0.474            0.258
   Real Mexico Wages (CPI)                   -0.190            0.205            -0.006            0.258
     Nominal U.S. Wages                       0.260            0.050             0.300            0.055
    Real U.S. Wages (CPI)                    -0.016            0.050             0.024            0.055

   Change in Log Mexico/U.S.
       Wages 1990-2000:
        Nominal Wages                         0.031            0.192             0.175            0.242
       Real Wages (CPI)                      -0.173            0.192            -0.030            0.242


This table shows changes in wages for a panel of synthetic cohorts in Mexico and the United States for two
years (1990, 2000), four 1990 age categories (16-25, 26-35, 36-45, and 46-55 years), seven education
categories (0-4, 5-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+ years of schooling), and Mexico’s 32 states (U.S. cohorts are
defined for the nation as a whole). Nominal Mexico and U.S. wages are in terms of current U.S. dollars.




                                                                                                        38
                   Table 5: Change in Log Real CPI Wages, 1990-2000

Real CPI Age in                       Years of
 Wages 1990            Males Females Education Males Females Region                        Males Females
Mexico 16-25           -0.125 0.087      4     -0.341 -0.233 Border                        -0.053 0.081
Mex/US                 -0.113 0.020            -0.288 -0.204                               -0.041 0.052

Mexico 26-35           -0.182      -0.031       5-8       -0.225     -0.037      North     -0.187      0.043
Mex/US                 -0.157      -0.029                 -0.204     -0.055                -0.170      0.016

Mexico 36-45           -0.292      -0.150      9-11       -0.141     -0.003     Center     -0.222     -0.042
Mex/US                 -0.282      -0.132                 -0.132     -0.050                -0.202     -0.065

Mexico 46-55           -0.373      -0.303        12       -0.083      0.043     Capital    -0.193     -0.018
Mex/US                 -0.311      -0.308                 -0.076      0.009                -0.183     -0.040

Mexico                                         13-15       0.105      0.258 Yucatan -0.273             0.023
Mex/US                                                     0.118      0.274         -0.252            -0.001

Mexico                                          16+       0.021       0.129      South     -0.312     -0.142
Mex/US                                                    -0.067      0.045                -0.285     -0.156

This table shows the mean change in real CPI wages for Mexico and for Mexico relative to the U.S. by age,
schooling, and region of Mexico. The sample is the panel of synthetic cohorts. See Table 4 for details.




                                                                                                      39
    Table 6a: Change in Log Wages 1990-2000 for Synthetic Cohorts, Males


    W90,MX/W90,US        -0.027     -0.133     -0.015     -0.027
                         (0.06)     (0.07)     (0.22)     (0.17)
    W00,US/W90,US         1.276      1.202     -0.046     -0.132
                         (0.18)     (0.18)     (0.34)     (0.27)
(W90,MX/W90,US)*Border   -0.221     -0.067      0.05       0.008
                         (0.09)     (0.10)     (0.08)     (0.09)
(W00,US/W90,US)*Border    0.446      0.538      0.175      0.186
                         (0.31)     (0.31)     (0.25)     (0.23)
       Border            -0.256      0.033      0.391      0.099
                         (0.21)     (0.23)     (0.18)     (0.19)
        North             0.106      0.106      0.143       0.05
                         (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.03)     (0.04)
       Center             0.071      0.072      0.108      0.052
                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.04)
       Capital            0.105      0.098      0.122     -0.022
                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.04)
       Yucatan            0.006      0.005      0.003     -0.015
                         (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.04)
       W90,MX                        0.096     -0.277     -0.374
                                    (0.03)     (0.22)     (0.18)
   (W90,MX)*Border                  -0.139     -0.148     -0.133
                                    (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.04)
  Age Cohort 26-35                             -0.031     -0.014
                                               (0.06)     (0.05)
  Age Cohort 36-45                             -0.064     -0.032
                                               (0.09)     (0.08)
  Age Cohort 46-55                             -0.099     -0.069
                                               (0.09)     (0.08)
     Grades 5-8                                 0.129      0.143
                                               (0.04)     (0.03)
     Grades 9-11                                0.232      0.264
                                               (0.05)     (0.04)
      Grade 12                                  0.398      0.450
                                               (0.11)     (0.09)
     Grade 13-15                                0.631      0.697
                                               (0.13)     (0.11)


                                                                           40
                                 Table 6a Continued


          Grade 16                                               0.708          0.818
                                                                 (0.23)        (0.18)
    State GDP Growth                                                            0.143
         1993-99                                                               (0.14)
 Mfg. Share of State GDP                                                        0.009
         1993-99                                                               (0.16)
 Agr. Share of State GDP                                                       -0.159
         1993-99                                                               (0.32)
 FDI Share of State GDP                                                         2.821
         1994-99                                                               (1.12)
  State Share of Maquila                                                        0.147
       Employment                                                              (0.16)
Import Share of State GDP                                                       1.506
         1993-99                                                               (0.75)
    Km. to US Border                                                           -0.014
                                                                               (0.01)
 State-US Migration Rate                                                        3.281
         1955-59                                                               (0.46)
            N                       728            728            728            728
        R-Squared                  0.239          0.254          0.595          0.667

This table shows regressions using as the dependent variable the 1990-2000 change in log wages for
synthetic age-education-state cohorts of males in Mexico. Standard errors are in parentheses. All wage
measures are in logs as is GDP used to calculate the 1993-1999 change in the variable. All share measures
are entered in levels. See Table 5 for more details on the age and education definitions for the cohorts.




                                                                                                      41
   Table 6b: Change in Log Wages 1990-2000 for Synthetic Cohorts, Females


    W90,MX/W90,US        -0.452      -0.80     -0.237      -0.23
                         (0.05)     (0.08)     (0.25)     (0.23)
    W00,US/W90,US         1.972      2.046      0.256      0.266
                         (0.24)     (0.23)     (0.30)     (0.28)
(W90,MX/W90,US)*Border   -0.181      0.054      0.216      0.092
                         (0.10)     (0.13)     (0.11)     (0.11)
(W00,US/W90,US)*Border   -0.689     -0.683     -0.547      -0.62
                         (0.41)     (0.40)     (0.35)     (0.32)
       Border             0.234      0.669       0.90      0.611
                         (0.21)     (0.24)     (0.21)     (0.21)
        North             0.190      0.191      0.172      0.097
                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.05)
       Center             0.116      0.124      0.130      0.118
                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.05)
       Capital            0.198      0.199      0.211      0.119
                         (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.03)     (0.06)
       Yucatan            0.154      0.149      0.133      0.163
                         (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.04)     (0.05)
       W90,MX                        0.269     -0.471     -0.516
                                    (0.04)     (0.25)     (0.24)
   (W90,MX)*Border                  -0.167     -0.173     -0.156
                                    (0.07)     (0.05)     (0.05)
  Age Cohort 26-35                              0.011      0.029
                                               (0.06)     (0.06)
  Age Cohort 36-45                              0.023      0.044
                                               (0.08)     (0.07)
  Age Cohort 46-55                             -0.069     -0.048
                                               (0.08)     (0.08)
     Grades 5-8                                 0.209      0.211
                                               (0.03)     (0.03)
     Grades 9-11                                0.361      0.373
                                               (0.04)     (0.04)
      Grade 12                                  0.570      0.590
                                               (0.10)     (0.10)
     Grade 13-15                                0.870      0.897
                                               (0.14)     (0.13)


                                                                            42
                            Table 6b Continued


          Grade 16                               0.893     0.925
                                                 (0.22)   (0.21)
    State GDP Growth                                      -0.069
         1993-99                                          (0.19)
 Mfg. Share of State GDP                                   -0.02
         1993-99                                          (0.20)
 Agr. Share of State GDP                                   0.459
         1993-99                                          (0.40)
 FDI Share of State GDP                                    4.208
         1994-99                                          (1.38)
  State Share of Maquila                                   0.211
       Employment                                         (0.21)
Import Share of State GDP                                 -0.326
         1993-99                                          (0.90)
    Km. to US Border                                       0.011
                                                          (0.02)
 State-US Migration Rate                                   2.287
         1955-59                                          (0.73)
            N                 702       702       702       702
        R-Squared            0.311     0.375     0.624     0.649

See notes to Table 6a.




                                                                   43
