NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND COLLECTIVE AGENTS:
THE ROLE OF OLD AND NEW WORKPLACE INSTITUTIONS
IN THE REGULATION OF LABOR MARKETS?
David Weil
Working Paper 9565
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9565
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by David Weil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Individual Rights and Collective Agents: The Role of Old and New Workplace Institution in the
Regulation of Labor Markets
David Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 9565
March 2003
JEL No. J58, J68, J71, L51, K31
ABSTRACT
Implementation of workplace policies--whether through enforcement of laws or administration of
programs--raises the question of the interaction between institutions created to carry out laws and
the activities of workplace based agents that directly (e.g. unions) or indirectly (e.g. insurance
companies) represent the interests of workers. This paper argues that there are two distinctive roles
required for agents in the implementation of workplace policies. First, the agent must somehow help
solve the public goods problem inherent in workplace regulation. Second, the agent must be able
to reduce the marginal cost of exercising rights conferred to workers that are an important feature
of most regulatory programs. This article examines these issues in regard to implementing
workplace policies in the U.S. and analyzes the comparative effectiveness of different workplace
agents- from labor unions to alternative dispute resolution systems- in fulfilling these roles.

David Weil
Taubman Center T-310
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
David_Weil@ksg.harvard.edu
and
Boston University
School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue, Room 520A
Boston, MA 02215
davweil@bu.edu

I. Labor Market Institutions and the Regulation of Labor Markets
The Committee recognizes that accomplishment of the purposes of this bill cannot be
totally achieved without the fullest cooperation of affected employees.
–Senate Report No. 91-1292, 91st Congress, 2d. Session (October 6, 1970), p. 10.
So concluded members of the Senate in drafting the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970.
Despite the fact that the new Act created an extensive government enforcement system charged
with improving workplace safety and health, the architects of OSHA recognized the centrality of
workers to its implementation. The same might be said for a gamut of federal and state labor
market regulation from the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 to the Family Medical Leave Act
of 1993 to state workers compensation and unemployment benefit systems.
As representatives of individual employees, labor market institutions can affect the
process workplace regulation in two very different ways. First, they can affect the political
process in passing legislation and through executive agencies in promulgating regulations—that
is, the enactment of labor policies. Second, they can affect the way that those laws and
regulations are enforced or administered—that is the implementation of laws.
There is a significant literature on the role of interest groups in political processes that
can inform the specific question of what alternative institutions might play the role of “employee
lobbies” in the enactment of workplace policies. Although the specific constellation of factors
that underlie political coalitions around employment issues differ from those underlying other
public policy issues, the theoretical notions bounding the creation of such coalitions have
parallels with those in surrounding other areas of policy concern. 1 I therefore do not focus on the
role for new labor market intermediaries in the realm of policy enactment here.

4

Implementation of workplace regulations arises either from the enforcement of standards
created by that legislation or through the administration of programs created by legislation. For
example, the federal Davis-Bacon Act that establishes floors for wages in the construction
industry is implemented by enforcement actions that either directly or through deterrence effects
indirectly raise the wages paid by construction companies to the “prevailing wage” set for that
craft in a geographic market. Workers compensation legislation is implemented via
administrative activities in two ways: first through the incentive effect provided by experience
rating of employers covered by the system on safety policies and second by the filing of claims
by workers injured on the job.
Implementation--whether through enforcement or administration--raises the question of
the interaction between institutions created by labor policies to carry out laws and the activities
of workplace based institutions that directly (e.g. unions) or indirectly (e.g. insurance companies)
represent the interests of workers. To examine the need for alternative workplace institutions in
this area of labor market activity requires one to establish what role institutions—regardless of
form—play in the first place. It then requires one to examine the relative abilities of different
types of institutions to play these roles.
This paper argues that there are two distinctive roles required for agents in the
implementation of workplace policies. First, the agent must somehow help solve the public
goods problem inherent in workplace regulation. Second, the agent must be able to reduce the
marginal cost of exercising rights conferred to workers that are an important feature of most
regulatory programs. One of the major costs in this regard is that of employer discrimination
arising from exercise of those rights. Although a variety of institutions may be capable of
stepping into the fray and serving as agents in the enactment of legislation, the roles required for
5

implementation are more difficult to embody in a labor market agent. Laying out the theoretical
requirements for such agents focuses attention on the features of “emerging labor market
institutions” most important to the implementation of workplace policies.
This chapter begins with a discussion of federal labor regulations in the U.S. and the roles
they establish for workers through the provision of individually-based worker rights. It then
presents a model concerning the decision by workers to exercise those rights. Based on insights
from the model, it analyzes the requirements of workplace institutions in fulfilling those roles.
The third section evaluates a variety of labor market institutions--beginning with labor unions as
a benchmark—that potentially serve the role as agents. Based on this evaluation, the paper
concludes with a discussion of how policies might be adapted to foster agents better able to serve
the two central roles of labor market intermediaries in implementing labor regulations.

II. Individual Rights and the Need for Collective Agents
IIA. Federal regulations and worker rights
Federal workplace regulations provide employees with important roles directly affecting
the implementation of those statutes. Much of workplace regulation dating back to Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 and going forward to the Family Medical Leave Act passed
almost sixty years later provides workers with an opportunity to participate in one or more
aspects of the regulatory process. Most important of those rights is that of triggering regulatory
activity itself. Although the right to trigger inspections dates back to some of the earliest statelevel labor legislation (Common and Andrews 1936), regulations promulgated during the two
most recent surges of workplace legislation / executive orders (in 1963-74 and 1986 - 1993) have
increased the number of regulations providing workers with a right to initiate civil actions under

6

such laws as Title VII, ADA, PPA, and WARN. This has resulted in an enormous increase in the
number of cases filed under employment law, relative to other categories of litigation. 2
Table 1 depicts a subset of these roles under Federal workplace regulations: the right to
initiate an agency action and the right to pursue private action in courts either as the first step in
seeking to change employer behavior or after administrative remedies have been exhausted.
Most federal legislation also establishes reporting / disclosure requirements that seek to inform
employees of their rights, employer duties; or employer performance under the statute (these are
depicted in the final two columns of Table 1). In addition to these rights, many workplace
statutes enumerate employee rights regarding participation in various stages of the regulatory
process, such as by providing workers (or their designated representatives) with a right to
accompany government officials during inspections (OSHA, MSHA), and to appeal decisions or
participate in hearings arising from inspections (OSHA, MSHA, CWHSSA).
There is little reason to believe that workers uniformly exercise rights granted them under
labor policies. Studies in several different areas indicate that the propensity to exercise rights
varies along systematic lines across different groups. A number of empirical studies have shown
different propensities for individuals to litigate civil claims (see, for example, Hoyman and
Stallworth 1981, Shavell 1987). Other studies have documented factors affecting workers' use of
grievance procedures in union and nonunion workplaces (Peterson (1992); Feuille and Delaney
(1992 ); Chachere and Feuille (1993)). This literature suggests that factors related to the
individual (sex, education, demographic background), the workplace environment (size, degree
of conflict, management and union policies), and the specific grievance or civil problem
involved affect under what circumstances individuals use their rights. Given the limitations of
government resources towards enforcement, the conditions under which employees exercise their
7

rights either to initiate suits or agency action fundamentally affect achievement of policy goals in
the workplace. In a somewhat different vein, labor market programs like workers compensation
and unemployment insurance require that workers initiate the process leading to the issuance of
benefits provided by those programs.

IIB. A Threshold Model of the Exercise of Individual Rights
The degree to which individual employees exercise rights granted them under labor
regulations can be expected to depend on the perceived benefits versus costs of exercising rights
from the perspective of an individual worker. The benefits of exercising a right are a function of
the impact of labor legislation on the outcome of concern to the worker. For example, initiating
an OSHA inspection potentially improves working conditions for the worker by diminishing or
removing the risk of an injury or illness. The greater the level of perceived risk faced by the
worker, the more likely they are to initiate an inspection or otherwise seek to affect redress of the
problem. Similarly, the greater the divergence between the wages paid to workers and the wages
that they are entitled to under the law (e.g. because of premium pay required for overtime), the
more likely a worker is to exercise rights to initiate actions under the FLSA.
In order to ascertain the magnitude of these benefits, workers must acquire information
on the current and legally permissible level of a regulated outcome. The costs of exercising
rights are primarily a function of the costs of gathering this information. These are composed of
costs associated with: (a) obtaining information regarding the existence of basic rights as well as
the standards to which employers are held accountable 3 ; (b) gathering information on the current
state of workplace conditions—a particular problem if the risks are complex as in the case of
safety and health (Viscusi 1983, Viscusi and O'Connor 1984); and (c) learning about the specific
8

details of how the law is administered (e.g. the procedures to initiate a complaint inspection). In
addition to information-related costs, workers face significant costs arising from potential
employer retaliation (the economic losses associated with retaliatory reassignment or, in the
extreme, being fired 4 ) as well as the potential cost of job loss arising from the chance that
compliance will force a firm to reduce employment in the long run.
The decision facing a worker on whether or not to exercise a right is represented
diagrammatically in Figure 1. The horizontal axis, Xj represents the difference between current
workplace conditions (e.g. exposure to a health risk; actual wage rate for hours of work) and the
regulatory standard fo r that workplace outcome for workplace j. The value of Xj is defined
where:

Xj < 0: If the current workplace provides conditions above permissible levels (i.e.
the firm goes beyond compliance required by the standard);
Xj = 0: If the current workplace provides conditions equal to the required levels
(i.e. the firm is exactly in compliance with the law);
Xj > 0: If the current workplace provides conditions below permissible levels (i.e.
the firm is out compliance).
This means that as Xj increases, a workplace falls further out of compliance with the regulatory
requirement. In the case of health and safety regulations, this means that as Xj increases, worker
exposure to risk increasingly goes beyond the risk levels if workplaces complied with standards;
for regulations related to compensation like FLSA or Davis-Bacon, this means that actual pay
increasingly falls below that required under the statute. For a program like workers
compensation, increases in Xj imply that the earnings received by the injured worker diverge
more and more from those he or she is entitled by the program.

9

Given this definition of Xj, the figure presents two marginal benefit functions. The lower
function (MBi) represents the marginal worker i in a workplace j who has the highest individual
preference for compliance with the regulatory standard. As such, this function represents the
worker who will first exercise his or her statutory right in the workplace. I assume that the
marginal benefit of exercising a right that moves the firm into greater compliance with the
standard is positive and increasing in Xj.
Since a violation of a workplace standard typically affects many workers and is often
associated with violations of other standards that might not directly affect the worker triggering
the inspection, employee exercise of workplace rights displays positive externalities.

Because

of this, the marginal benefit for the workplace as a whole is always higher than that of the
marginal worker for any Xj .The upper marginal benefit function in Figure 1 represents workers
at the workplace as a whole (MBj), and reflects the vertical aggregation of benefits for all
affected workers for any given state Xj. 5
Figure 1 first presents a simple case where the costs of exercising a right are invariant
across the different levels of Xj and the same for an individual worker as they are for the
workplace as a whole (the upper line, where MC i = MC j ). If rights are vested at the individual
level, worker i will choose to exercise the rights at the state of the workplace Xi* where MBi =
MC i. Given that the decision is made by the marginal worker with the greatest preference
workplace conditions consonant with regulatory standards (i.e. the lowest tolerance for current
conditions being out of compliance), Xi* represents the level of non-compliance that will trigger
the exercise of rights for that workplace, when left to the decision of this “threshold” individual
worker.

10

Given the public good character of the benefits ensuing from the exercise of rights, Xi* is
not optimal for the workplace as a whole, because the marginal worker decides only on the basis
of his or her individual preference. Accounting for all workers in the workplace, the optimal
threshold in Figure 1 is Xj* , where Xi* > Xj* . That is, the exercise of right taken at the
individual level leads to a "higher" threshold (i.e. current conditions being more out of
compliance with standards) than the threshold that would prevail if the preferences of all workers
were considered. Workplace rights therefore will be underutilized because the collective
benefits arising from their action are not factored into the individual decision.
If the cost of exercising a right exhibits increasing returns to scale, such as because of
efficiencies gained from collecting information at the workplace, or multi- workplace level, the
divergence between threshold for an individual versus collective group of workers grow even
further. Protections against discrimination for exercise of rights afforded by a method of
collectively exercising rights may represent a second reason that the marginal cost of exercise
may be far lower for a group of workers. In either case, this situation is depicted in Figure 1 as
MC j', the lower dotted horizontal line, which is below the marginal cost function faced by an
individual. The collective threshold for exercise of rights now occurs at Xj**, arising in an even
larger gap from the individual threshold for exercising the right, Xi*.
Thus, the problem arising from the structure of workplace regulations is that if left to the
individual worker, the threshold for exercise of rights lies above the threshold optimal from the
workplace—and societal—level. In order to close this gap, one must surmount the problem of
(1) aggregating preferences across workers and (2) reducing the marginal cost of exercise of
those rights.

11

IIC. Workplace Agents and the Exercise of Rights
A collective workplace agent can potentially solve the problem described above. It can
do so first by internalizing the positive externality to workers arising from a claim as a
representative of all workers in the unit. A workplace agent can also gather and disseminate
information thereby lowering the cost of information acquisition faced by individuals. The
specific elements required of such an agent are straightforward and flows from the threshold
model in Figure 1:
1) Interests allied with workers--specifically an interest in representing the collective
preferences of workers in regard to working conditions;
(2) A means of efficiently gathering and disseminating information on rights,
administrative procedures, and the nature of workplace risks;
(3) A method of providing protection from employer discrimination against individual
workers for their exercise of rights. 6

The need for an agent to play these roles points to a conundrum embedded in many workplace
regulations. Although many of the policies listed in Table 1 create rights focused on the
individual worker, exercise of individually-based rights requires an agent operating in the
collective interest.
The above discussion also raises a related issue often overlooked in examining workplace
regulation. One cannot detach the role of “command and control” regulatory systems from the
operation of labor market institutions, even where labor market intermediaries are not explicitly
set out in the legislation as the explicit agent for implementation. It is often assumed that under
traditional regulatory structures, the government alone acts as the agent of enforcement. Yet as

12

the review of labor regulations and the threshold model indicates, implementing workplace
policies includes a role for workers and in that way for labor market intermediaries. The fact that
an important avenue for enforcement of those laws is the exercise of individual rights belies a
more complex interaction built into the structure of regulatory systems.

III. Alternative Labor Market Institutions
IIIA. Unions and the Enforcement of Labor Policies
While a number of different arrangements can potentially satisfy the conditions for a
workplace agent, labor unions potentially fulfill many of them through their basic agency
functions. 7 Specifically, unions act as purveyors of workplace-based public goods regarding
labor policies both by internalizing the benefits relating to worker exercise of rights across
workers in the unit and by lowering the costs of information acquisition.
As the elected representative of workers, a union has incentives to act on behalf of the
collective interests of members in the bargaining unit. This means that a union will not base
perceptions of the benefit of pursuing a claim under laws based on the preferences of an
individual worker at the margin, but based on infra- marginal evaluations of those benefits. In
facing this allocation problem, a union can vertically aggregate preferences for the "public
goods" represented by workplace regulations, following the model of public goods seminally
described in Samuelson (1955). 8
Unions can efficiently gather and disseminate information on the existence of workplace
laws and rights created by those laws. Unions provide this information formally through
educational programs, in apprenticeship training, or through supplying educational materials.
Informally, union leaders or staff can alert members of their rights where a problem or issue

13

arises. Unions also provide information on the existence of specific underlying problems,
particularly in the area of safety and health (see Viscusi 1983). This information may be
collected and disseminated through formal programs or channels, or informally via the union
structure or fellow workers.
Unions also offer individual workers assistance in the actual exercise of their rights. This
may result from the operation of committees established under collective bargaining, as is
common in safety and health or via the help of union staff who can trigger inspections, oversee
pension fund investments, or assist members file unemployment claims. Most importantly,
unions can substantially reduce the costs associated with potential employer discrimination by
helping affected employees to use anti-discrimination provisions of the labor policies and
providing this protection via collective bargaining agreements regulating dismissals. The formal
protection offered by a collective agreement provides security unavailable in the vast majority of
nonunion workplaces, even where a grievance procedure exists (Feuille and Delaney 1992).
Thus, if unions act on behalf of the collective preferences of the workers in the
bargaining unit, they can be expected to induce greater usage of rights. This sets up a testable
empirical hypothesis: Government labor market policies should be more fully implemented in
unionized workplaces than in otherwise comparable nonunion workplaces.
This hypothesis can be tested by examining empirical studies of labor market regulations
that have measured union / nonunion differences in implementation. Table 2 summarizes
evidence of union impacts on both enforcement and compliance under a wide array of labor
policies. It confirms the predicted presence of systematic differences between union versus
nonunion enforcement and compliance outcomes across diverse labor regulations and workplace
policies. This includes regulations dating back to early labor legislation like the Fair Labor
14

Standards Act, where unions appreciably raise the probability of compliance with premium pay
for overtime. Unions also increase an array of enforcement outcomes and compliance with health
and safety standards under both OSHA and MSHA, as well as provisions of ERISA. Unions also
raise enforcement and compliance under some of the newest labor policies such as the Worker
Adjustment and Retraining Act (WARN), Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the
Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Finally, unions substantially increase the probability that
workers will receive benefits that they are eligible for under the two major workplace programs
administered at the state level: unemployment insurance and workers compensation. 9 Thus, with
the exception of their neutral impact on contract compliance reviews under EO 11246, empirical
studies of labor market enforcement indicate that unions act as agents that assist employee
exercise of rights.
This review suggests that unions seem capable of surmounting the problem of the
divergence between individual and collective exercise of rights under many different regulatory
policies. This provides a useful benchmark to compare other potential agents that might play this
role in the absence of union presence at the workplace.

How do other labor market intermediaries stack up in solving the problem posed by the
individual versus collective exercise of rights? We evaluate six potential intermediaries below,
each evaluated along the same three dimensions developed in Section II. The following sections
do not provide an exhaustive review of these mechanisms, many of which are discussed
elsewhere in this volume. The intention instead is to examine each of the alternatives against the
two dimensions described above and indicate the relative strengths and weaknesses of each.

15

This provides an analytic backdrop for the other papers that look into some of these mechanisms
in greater depth.

IIIB. National issue organizations / Legal service organizations
Christine Jolls (2000) describes the activities of national issue organizations that deal at
least in part with employment law (e.g. ACLU; NAACP Legal Defense Fund; National
Employment Law Project) and legal service organizations (primarily the organizations
administered by the Legal Services Corporation, created by Congress in 1974) as alternative
institutions that assist employees exercise their rights. The role of national issue and legal service
organizations lie either in terms of their impact on the public goods problem or in lowering the
costs of exercise of rights (including the costs arising from employer discrimination).
Both types of organizations can act on the public goods aspect of the problem to the
extent that they can serve as an agent to aggregate preferences for collective actions or lead
workers to do so. One obvious mechanism for legal organizations to do so is by undertaking
class action suits on behalf of groups of workers. Illustrative of this role are several recent cases
of legal organizations doing so on behalf of agricultural workers and apparel workers in regard to
violations arising under the FLSA (citation).
What incentives and capacities do these organizations have to play this role? The
evidence presented in Jolls suggests that the nature of funding for the two organizations creates
incentives that lead both organizations away from the role of solving the workplace public goods
problem. National interest organizations tend to focus on fundraising and involvement in high
profile litigation focused on setting larger legal precedent. Legal service organizations, in
contrast, tend to focus on specific cases that arise from individuals coming to those
16

organizations. Thus, national interest organizations focus on “high profile, publicly-charged
issues…[working on] a few influential cases” while legal service organizations “tend to work on
many routine cases...” (pp. 30-31).
The different character of the subject matter of legal activities suggests a fundamental
agency problem in both organizations that undermine them from playing a role analogous to that
of labor unions in the workplace. National interest organizations act at least in part as agents of
their principal sources of funding—private donors and foundations. Those parties seek to
maximize their investment (donations / grants) in terms of public impact (or at least perceptions
of public impact). This tends to push those organizations away from workplace- level
interventions and towards cases involving major precedent and public controversy.
Legal service organizations, in contrast, are agents of their very different funding source,
the U.S. Congress. Although Congress cannot be considered a principle with a single utility
function, Jolls’ evidence is consistent with a story that the long term coalition necessary to
sustain funding is one where the median Congressional voter seeks to focus those organizations
on the modest goal of lowering the cost faced by low income individuals in pursuing civil
claims. The median Congressional voter however has historically rejected the notion that legal
services should act as an agent for larger groupings of individuals. 10 In this view, legal service
organizations might lower the marginal cost of exercise of rights, but only on an ad hoc basis,
driven by the individual worker decision to approach legal services for assistance in the first
place.

17

IIIC. Other public interest organization
There are many other public interest groups that have been organized to deal with the
workplace issues, with less focus on legal assistance than the organizations studied by Jolls.
These include “COSH” groups (Committees on Safety and Health) organized in a number of
states focused on safety and health; disabled workers groups focused on issues of workers
compensation, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and to a lesser extent OSHA; and groups
focused on workplace regulations affecting low wage workers in specific industries (e.g.
“sweatshop” problems in apparel; child labor problems in agriculture or retail). One activity of
many of these groups is lobbying and participating in legislative and executive forums at the
state- and federal- level. In this capacity, they attempt to affect either the enactment of laws /
regulations or appropriations towards existing programs, as opposed to the implementation issues
of central interest here (see Hersch 2000 for discussion of the role of new labor market
institutions on legislative enactment).
However, a second set of activities pursued by these groups is direct worker assistance.
In the 1970s, for example, many COSH groups formed in states to provide information and
assistance to workers under OSHA. The intention of many of these groups was to provide
workers—in particular nonunion workers—with information regarding their rights under the
newly passed act. A comparable group was formed for nonunion miners to assist them exercise
rights under MSHA (McAteer 1985).
These groups tend to receive their donations from a mix of labor unions (a significant
source of funding for COSH and disabled worker groups in particular), foundations, and small
individual workers / donors. The importance of labor unions as a funding source as well as small
donors (often those with a personal connection to the issue) tends to lessen the agency problem
18

discussed in regard to either national interest or legal service organizations. This potentially
leads to better alignment between the objectives of the groups and those of the workers they
intend to assist. 11
The main difficulty facing these groups is that they operate outside of the workplace,
although one of their intentions is to help solve the public goods problem that exist within it.
This limits their potential impact on the exercise of rights primarily to an informational role—
that is towards reducing the marginal costs of exercise of rights. However, even here their
impact is modest: Their lack of presence at the work site means that they can have limited impact
on the threat of discrimination arising from exercise of rights, perhaps the highest cost facing
workers. It is noteworthy that COSH groups in many states have concentrated much of their
efforts over time in their work in conjunction with unions and unionized workplaces, where they
take advantage of an established agent (comparable to the effects of workplace committees
described below). 12
The threshold problem presented by workers compensation and unemployment insurance
is somewhat different than that posed by OSHA or MSHA. Here, the public goods aspects of
providing information and assistance regarding benefits are somewhat less than in regulatory
programs (that is, the benefits provided by the program look less like public goods). The
threshold problem therefore arises more from the difference between the marginal costs of
disseminating information to workers on a collective versus individual basis. The potential for
employer discrimination is also much less for these benefit programs, in part because the their
financing (and therefo re the potential costs to employers) is disconnected from the provision of
benefits. As a result, the network of disabled worker organizations can potentially play a more
fruitful role —outside of the workplace—in providing information on the availability of benefits
19

and assistance in filing claims. Although alternative institutions potentially could assist workers
in the area of unemployment insurance in a comparable way, there is an absence of a large
network of such organizations in this realm. 13

IIID. Mandated Workplace Committees:
A number of states mandate that employers establish workplace safety and health
committees. Rogers (1995, p. 388) describes the potential role of such mandated committees
succinctly:
In principle, a system that lodges responsibility for monitoring compliance with health
and safety committees, who should be better informed about problems than government
inspectors, and that gives those committees some authority to address problems should
enlist the knowledge of regulated actors in findings ways in particular settings of
satisfying publicly determined standards. That is does so in a context of declared
representation rights, moreover, mitigates use of costly litigation.

As suggested by this quote, workplace committees conceivably fulfill the two roles for a
workplace intermediary for implementing labor policies. First, by being mandated by the
government (rather than voluntarily adopted by employers) the committee can serve as an agent
of employees at the workplace. In this way, it has an intrinsic interest in vertically aggregating
preferences for the public goods created by workplace regulations. Second, a well functioning
committee can provide information on worker rights, workplace conditions, and administrative
procedures, thereby lowering MC j. Finally, a workplace committee might also provide a
protective shield for individual workers who might be more inclined to report problems before,
during, or after inspections than they would in the absence of such committees. As a result,
mandating committee structures potentially fulfill the major roles described above.

20

The primary question in evaluating workplace committees concerns whether mandated
committees function effectively. One major concern comes back to the agency problem: If
workers view the committee primarily as a creature of the employer, the nature of the agency
relation between the committee and workers is weakened, and it will be less effective in its
public goods provision role, as well as in lowering the perceived costs arising from
discrimination. A second question concerns its capacities to undertake activities effectively
(even if it functions independently of the employer). This will affect its ability to appreciably
lower the marginal costs of exercising rights.
The experience of mandated health and safety committee in the state of Oregon provide
one indication of the determinants of their effectiveness. Weil (1999) examines the impact of
committee mandates on the union effect on OSHA enforcement. Comparing OSHA inspection
outcomes for two years preceding and following implementation of committee mandates, he
finds that mandated committees significantly increase the differential between union and
nonunion enforcement, arising from considerable strengthening of enforcement activity in union
workplaces and only modest increases in enforcement in nonunion workplaces. The only
exception to this is in the case of large nonunion establishments where committees have more
appreciable impacts on enforcement activity.
The results suggest that mandated committees do not represent a simple solution to the
problem of finding alternative workplace institutions to help implement labor policies.
Effectiveness in filling the roles laid out in Figure 1 is a function of at least two factors. First,
the regulations mandating committees in the first place must allow the establishment of
independent workplace structures. Safety and health committee mandates vary enormously in
terms of their delegated roles, authority, and the methods in which they are established (see
21

Bernard (1995); Reilly, Paci, and Holl (1995); Rogers (1995); U.S. GAO (1992)). Second,
committee effectiveness is related to antecedent conditions in the workplace itself, in particular
characteristics of workforce that affect committees’ capacity to take on its activities as well as its
ability to function independently. In addition to the size of the workplace, factors might include
worker turnover, skill and education level, and factors affecting informal worker organization.

IIIE. Third Party Monitors
In recent years, the use of third party monitors as regulatory agents has been discussed as
a possible solution to limited government enforcement resources. Proposals for the use of third
party monitors (such as accounting firms) in the area of safety and health gained public attention
and became the subject of criticism when it appeared as part of Vice President Al Gore’s
“Reinventing Government” proposals for the federal sector.
In more recent years, third party monitors have been used as part of innovative efforts for
enforcing the Fair Labor Standards Act provisions on minimum wage and overtime in the U.S.
apparel industry. In particular, the Department of Labor has secured agreement by apparel
manufacturers to use third parties to monitor aspects of compliance with the FLSA as part of
larger settlement agreements with the Department. The role of these monitors is to be able to
conduct surprise inspections on behalf of the manufacturer among subcontractors used by the
manufacturer. The results of the inspections can be used by the manufacturer to monitor cases
where non-compliant contractors are violating the Act, thereby exposing the manufacturer to
civil penalties and more importantly supply disruptions (U.S. Department of Labor 1999).
Monitors can either be drawn from the private sector (accounting firms; for-profit
enterprises specifically created for this function) or the not- for-profit sector (that is, independent
22

organizations that created to act as workplace monitors). In the case of monitors created under
“Compliance Program Agreements” between the U.S. Department of Labor and apparel
manufacturers, their structure, funding, and activities are negotiable, although the Labor
Department has “model provisions” that it encourages manufacturers to adopt (U.S. Department
of Labor 1998).
The agency relations of third party monitors are complex in that—at least on paper--they
act as agents of government. However, in reality they are agents of other private parties who
have an interest in allowing them to take on certain quasi- governmental activity. In the area of
apparel, third party monitors are usually the agents of manufacturers who use them to monitor
their subcontractors in terms of compliance with minimum wage and overtime laws required by
FLSA. Manufacturers have the incentive to agree to use such outside monitors to ensure that
their sewing contractors comply with labor standards because of concern that noncompliance
with laws can lead their goods to be embargoed by the Department of Labor. Resulting delays in
shipments to retailers can have costly consequences to the manufacturer (Weil 2000). As a
result, the interests of third party monitors, though agents of the manufacturer, are also aligned to
some extent with those of the government. 14
Third party monitors, then, may help deal with the threshold gap depicted in Figure 1
more in their capacity to supplement the enforcement activities of the Department of Labor, than
in their potential role as an institutional agent for workers. Although the presence of a third
party monitor raises the probability that a given workplace will be inspected, and that workers
might have an opportunity to report problems, the threshold problem is much the same as under
the traditional regulatory system. Monitors may, however, lower the marginal cost associated
with worker exercise of rights, particularly if they provide a “shield” against discrimination if
23

workers bring labor standards violations to their attention. The degree to which they play this
role has in large part to do with the specific monitoring protocols negotiated between
manufacturers, monitors, and the government. Examining how different types of protocols affect
the exercise of rights and implementation of regulations presents an important area for future
study.

IIIF. Alternative dispute resolution systems
On the surface, alternative dispute resolution (ADR) systems may not seem to fit the
description of an emerging labor market institution, in that ADR describes a process of resolving
disputes arising under workplace regulation rather than being a workplace entity per se. ADR
has been used in a variety of forums, but is discussed here in its specific use as a means for
resolving employment disputes arising under labor statutes through mediation, arbitration, or
some combination of the two (for an overview of the use of ADR in this capacity and others, see
Dunlop and Zack 1997, 2001).
Under ADR, an employee seeks recourse to a problem such as discrimination via an
internal mediation / arbitration procedure rather than through the relevant agency or via the
courts. Because these procedures are administered within the company and rely, at least at initial
stages, on mediation, disputes can in theory be resolved more rapidly.
Two major Supreme Court decisions, the Gilmer decision of 1991 and the Circuit City in
2001 raise the stakes of ADR as a means of resolving such claims. 15 Both Gilmer and Circuit
City extend the Federal Arbitration Act from its historic focus on commercial disputes to those
involving employment contracts. Specifically, they support the right of an employer to require
employees to sign pre-hire agreements compelling them to use company-sponsored dispute
24

resolution (usually arbitration) for statutory disputes rather than using the administrative
channels established in the legislation (as described in Table 1). In effect, employees forgo their
right to pursue such claims through administrative channels as a condition of employment.
Not surprisingly, the Gilmer and Circuit City decisions are controversial, most notably
because of doubts that employees will receive a fair hearing in company-sponsored arbitration
systems. In fact, many companies in the immediate wake of Gilmer adopted arbitration
procedures that were decidedly tilted towards the employer in that companies unilaterally chose
the arbitrator, established rules of the procedure (including barring formal depositions or even
written records of the arbitration), and held the right to unilaterally change those procedures. In
response to the employer bias of many post-Gilmer ADR systems, a number of the institutions
drawn upon by companies to serve in arbitration proceedings (including the American
Association of Arbitrators and the American Bar Associations) created a “Due Process Protocol”
which establishes that signatory associations and their members will only serve as arbitrators in
systems that adhere to basic conditions of procedural fairness. 16
Even assuming that the “Due Process Protocol” assures a modicum of fairness in such
proceedings in nonunion workplaces, does establishing internal procedures for mediation and / or
arbitration of statutory disputes provide a solution to the rights problem portrayed in Figure 1?
On one hand, ADR can be seen as a means of lowering the marginal cost of exercise of rights in
that it makes (potentially) the cost for the disputant lower than under the traditional system
where workers must press their own claims under various federal labor statutes. By lowering the
costs of exercise, the gap depicted in Figure 1 narrows.
On the other hand, the use of ADR by parties in nonunion workplaces still presupposes
that an employee comes forward with a claim. Yet the exis tence of an internal procedure (and
25

the requirement to use that system via pre-hire agreement) does not inherently create an agent for
those employees. 17 The fact that the procedure is governed by the employer rather than a third
party (i.e. the government) may further dampen the extent to which workers collectively might
pursue a claim involving more widespread violations of a statutory right.
As a result, ADR may be most beneficial in those cases where the divergence between
individual and workplace marginal benefits is relatively small, such as in resolving disputes
arising under workers compensation or very specific claims under statutes like FLSA or ERISA.
But in most areas of workplace regulation—particularly regarding workplace discrimination that
has motivated many nonunion companies to adopt internal arbitration systems 18 —ADR does not
provide a solution to the public goods problem. It remains to be seen if the growth of ADR
potentially fueled by the Circuit City decision will induce existing institutions (e.g. labor unions,
workers’ rights groups, law firms) to serve a new role as third party representatives within
nonunion firms.

IV. Concluding Thoughts and Implications
It is easy for politicians, or reformers, or trade union officials to boast of the laws which
they have secured for labor, and it is just as easy to overlook the details, or
appropriations, or competent officials that are needed to make them enforceable.
(Commons and Andrews 1936, p. 448).
Can emerging labor market institutions play the role of collective agent in a workplace
that draws heavily upon the exercise of individual rights for implementation? Are there
emerging labor market institutions that plausibly can take up this role where labor unions are not
present?

26

Table 3 summarizes the analysis of the ability of alternative workplace institutions
surveyed above to do so. An implication of the foregoing analysis is that it may be difficult for a
single institution to play the varied roles required of a collective agent across a range of
workplace regulations. In particular, absent a labor union, it is difficult to devise an institutional
arrangement that effectively aligns its interests with those of the workforce and at the same time
has the kind of access to the workplace necessary to act upon those interests. Nonetheless, Table
3 suggests that a mixed approach, incorporating different institutions for different areas of
regulation might help to close the gap arising in implementation of workplace regulations. Posed
in this way, the policy question shifts from a focus on the agent per se and to the functions that
must be performed to assure that the objectives of workplace regulations are achieved.
For example, one set of policy options revolves around reducing the marginal cost of exercise of
rights. This might include finding new means of making workers aware of their statutory rights
or reducing the perceived cost of exercise by improving protections against employer
discrimination (e.g. administrative procedures that protect employees’ identity in the case of
triggering inspections). Recent efforts by OSHA to create an extensive “workers’ page” on their
web site provides one example of interventions of this type. The page includes instructions on
filing a complaint with OSHA (including downloadable complaint forms), information about
statutory coverage, employee rights, and health and safety standards. 19
Another range of policy options involves creating incentives to foster new workplace
institutions that might provide some of the core functions of a collective agent. One approach
would be to restructure aspects of regulatory systems to create incentives on the regulated parties
themselves to fashion agents (such as private monitors) that provide at least some of the
functions of collective agents. One example of this type of policy described above is the U.S.
27

Department of Labor “No Sweat” enforcement strategy that induces manufacturers to create third
party monitors to oversee the activities of subcontractors.
Alternatively, public policies might assist existing labor market institutions sharpen their
abilities to undertake the central aspects as collective agents. Policy proposals in this vein
include improving the access that public interest groups and other institutions have to employees
at workplaces thereby enhancing their potential role as third party representatives in ADR
systems. By improving employee access to potential outside representation, ADR systems
(which will undoubtedly become even more prevalent in the wake of the Circuit City decision)
will be better prepared to deal with systemic workplace problems. Developing a more robust set
of institutions capable of representing nonunion workers in such company-based mediation and
arbitration procedures may prove an important new means of improving the exercise of
individual rights in nonunion workplaces.
Commons and Andrews recognized at the dawn of the modern era of workplace
regulation that enactment of labor regulations did not assure implementation. Along with
guaranteeing that the agencies vested with enforcement or administrative authority receive
adequate appropriations and are staffed with competent personnel, this essay underscores the
need to develop complementary institutions in the labor market to assure full implementation.
Creating and fostering the institutions capable of taking on these functions may prove to be one
of the most challenging aspects of regulating the labor market in the 21st Century.

28

References
Addison, John and McKinley Blackburn. 1994. "The Worker Adjustment and Retraining
Notification Act: Effects on Notice Provision." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 47,
no.4 (July), pp. 650-662.

Bernard, Elaine. 1995. “Canada: Joint Committees on Occupational Safety and Health.” Works
Councils: Consultation, Representation, and Cooperation in Industrial Relations, eds. Joel
Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck, 351-374, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Blank, Rebecca and David Card. 1991. "Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Employment:
Is There an Explanation?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. , pp. 1157-1189.

Budd, John and Angela Brey. 2000. “Unions and Family Leave: Early Experience under the
Family Medical Leave Act.” Unpublished manuscript. University of Minnesota.

Budd, John and Brian McCall. 1997. "The Effect of Unions on the Receipt of Unemployment
Insurance Benefits." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 50, no.3, pp. 478-492.

Bureau of National Affairs. 1997. Basic Patterns in Union Contracts, 16th edition. Washington
D.C.: Bureau of National Affairs.

Butler, Richard and John Worrall. 1983. “Workers’ Compensation: Benefit and Injury Claims
Rates in the Seventies.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 65, pp. 580-589.
29

Commission on the Future of Worker-Management Relations. 1994. Fact Finding Report.
Washington, D.C.

Commons, John R. and John Andrews. 1936. Principles of Labor Legislation. 4th edition. New
York: Augustus M. Kelley, Reprints of Economic Classics.

Dunlop, John T. and Arnold Zack. 1997. Mediation and Arbitration of Employment Law
Disputes. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

____________. 2001. “Mediation of Statutory Enforcement Disputes.” Manuscript, Harvard
University.

Ehrenberg, Ronald and George Jakubson. 1990. "Why WARN? Plant Closing Legislation." Cato
Review of Business and Government, Summer, pp. 39-42.

Ehrenberg, Ronald, and Paul Schumann. 1982. Longer Hours or More Jobs? An Investigation of
Amending Hours Legislation to Create Employment. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

Elliott, Kimberly and Richard Freeman. 2000. “White Hats or Don Quixotes? Human Rights
Vigilantes in the Global Economy.” Paper presented at the NBER / Conference on Emerging
Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century, Cambridge, MA.

30

Freema n, Richard. 1985. "Unions, Pensions, and Union Pension Funds", in David Wise, ed.,
Pensions, Labor and Individual Choice. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Freeman Richard and James Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books.

Freeman Richard and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

Gleason, Sandra and Karen Roberts. 1993. "Worker Perceptions of Procedural Justice in
Workers' Compensation Claims: Do Unions Make a Difference?" Journal of Labor Studies Vol.
14, no. 1, pp. 45-58.

Hersch, Joni. 2000. “Time for an Employees’ Lobby?” Paper presented at the NBER /
Conference on Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century, Cambridge, MA.

Hirsch, Barry, David Macpherson, and Michael DuMond. 1997. “Workers’ Compensation
Recipiency in Union and Nonunion Workplaces.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol.
50, pp. 213-236.

Hoerr, John. 1988 And the Wolf Finally Came: The Decline of the American Steel Industry.
(Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press).

Hoyman, Michele and Lamont Stallworth. 1981. "Who Files Suits and Why: An Empirical
Portrait of the Litigious Worker." University of Illinois Law Review. Vol. 198, no. 1, pp.115-159.
31

Jolls, Christine. 2000. “The Role and Functioning of Public-Interest Legal Organizations in the
Enforcement of Employment Laws.” Paper presented at the NBER / Conference on Emerging
Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century, Cambridge, MA.

Langbert, Mitchell. 1995. “Voice Asymmetries in ERISA Litigation.” Journal of Labor
Research, Vol. 16, pp. 145-174.

Leonard, Jonathon. 1985. "The Effect of Unions on the Employment of Blacks, Hispanics, and
Women." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 39, No. 1 (October), pp. 115-132.

Masters, Marick. 1997. Unions at the Crossroads: Strategic Membership, Financial, and
Political Perspectives. Westport, CT: Quorum.

McAteer, Davitt. 1985. Miner’s Manual. (West Virginia: Keystone Publishers).

Reilly, Barry, Pierella Paci, and Peter Holl. 1995. "Unions, Safety Committees and Workplace
Injuries." British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 33, No. 2 (June), pp. 275-288.

Rogers, Joel. 1995. “United States: Lessons from Abroad and Home.” In Works Councils:
Consultation, Representation, and Cooperation in Industrial Relations, eds. Joel Rogers and
Wolfgang Streeck, 375-419, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

32

Samuelson, Paul. 1955. "Diagrammatic Exposition of a Theory of Public Expenditure." Review
of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 37, pp. 350-356.

Stern, Robert and Deborah Balser. 1996. “Regulations, Social Control, and Institutional
Perspectives: Implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act.” Unpublished manuscript,
Cornell University.

Stigler, George. 1974. “Free Riders and Collective Action.” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 5,
pp. 359-365.

Trejo, Stephen. 1991. "The Effects of Overtime Pay Regulation on Worker Compensation."
American Economic Review Vol. 81, no.4, pp. 719-740.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1998. “Full Hot Goods Compliance Program Agreement.” DOL
Form FCPA(AB).CP1. Washington, D.C.: Wage and Hour Division, U.S. Department of Labor.

_________________. 1999. “Protecting America’s Garment Workers: A Monitoring Guide.”
Washington, D.C.: U.S. DOL.

U.S. Government Accounting Office. 1989. How Well Does OSHA Protect Workers from
Reprisals: Inspector Opinions. GAO/T-HRD-90-8.

33

____________. 1992. Occupational Safety and Health: Worksite Safety and Health Committees
Show Promise. GAO/HRD-92-68.

____________. 1994. Workplace Regulation: Information on Selected Employer and Union
Experiences. GAO/HEHS-94-138.

____________. 2000. Worker Protection: OSHA Inspections at Establishments Experiencing
Labor Unrest. GAO/HEHS—00-144.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1983. Risk by Choice: Regulating Health and Safety in the Workplace.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Viscusi, W. Kip. and Charles O'Connor. 1984. "Adaptive Responses to Chemical Labeling: Are
Workers Bayesian Decision Makers?" American Economic Review Vol. 74, no.5, pp. 942-956.

Wandner, Stephen and Andrew Skinner. 2000. “Why Are Many Jobless Workers Not Applying
for Benefits?” Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 123 (June), pp. 21-32.

Weil, David. 1990. “Protecting the Mine Face: The United Mine Workers and the Enforcement
of the Mine Health and Safety Act.” Unpublished manuscript. Boston University.

____________. 1991. "Enforcing OSHA: The Role of Labor Unions." Industrial Relations.
Vol.30, no.1 (Winter), pp. 20-36.
34

____________. 1992. "Building Safety: The Role of Construction Unions in the Enforcement of
OSHA." Journal of Labor Research, Vol.13, no. 1 (Winter), pp.121-132.

_____________. 1996. "If OSHA Is So Bad, Why Is Compliance Go Good?" The RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 27, no. 3 (Autumn), pp. 618-640.

____________. 1999. "Are Mandated Health and Safety Committees Substitutes or
Supplements to Labor Unions?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review Vol.52, (April), pp.339360.

____________. 2000. “Everything Old is New Again: Regulating Labor Standards in the U.S.
Apparel Industry.” 52nd Annual Proceedings of the Industrial Relations Research Association,
(Champaign, IL: IRRA), pp. 146-155.

Williamson, Oliver. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: The Free Press.

35

Table 1: Employee Rights and Reporting Requirements under Federal Workplace Regulations
Labor Statute or
Executive Ordera

Designated Employee Rights
Employee right to
initiate agency
action

Private right of
action available
to employee a

Reporting / Disclosure Requirements

Private right of
action, after
exhaustion of
administrative
remedies

Forms
completed or
filed w/ agency

Payroll / other
business data
must be collected

Notices must
be posted in
workplace

ü

ü

ü

ü

SCA

ü

ü

Walsh -Healy Act

ü

ü

Data on
injuries and
complaints
reported

Labor Standards
FLSA

ü

ü

Davis-Bacon Act

ü

ü

CWHSSA

ü

MSPA

ü

ERISA
COBRA

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

Benefits

ü

Unemployment
Compensation
ü

ü

Title VII

ü

ü

Equal Pay Act

ü

ü

FMLA

ü

ü
ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

Civil Rights
ü

ü

EO 11246
ADEA

ü

ü

ü

ü

37

ADA

ü

ü

ü

ü

Rehabilitation Act

ü

ü

ü

ü

STAA

Occupational Health & Safety
OSHA

ü

ü

ü

ü

MSHA

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

ü

DFWA

Labor Relations
NLRA

ü

LMRDA

ü

ü
ü
ü

RLA

Hiring & Separation Decisions

a

PPA

ü

Veterans Re-employment
Act

ü

IRCA

ü

WARN

ü

ü

ü
ü

ü

ü
ü

Full names of statutes, date of passage, and brief description provided in Appendix Table A1.

38

TABLE 2: Impact of Labor Unions on Enforcement and Compliance with Workplace Regulations
Labor Statute or
Executive Order

Union Impact on Enforcement

Union Impact on Employer
Compliance

Study

Fair Labor Standards Act —
Overtime Provisions

Inclusion of premium pay for overtime standard
in collective agreements

Increase the probability of compliance for
unionized workers

Enforcement:
BNA (1997)
Compliance:
Ehrenberg and Schumann (1982);
Trejo (1991)

ERISA

Raise degree of scrutiny over eligible pension
plans

Require more strict adherence to
eligibility and financial management
standards by employers

Enforcement:
Langbert (1995)
Compliance:
Freeman (1985)

OSHA

Higher inspection probabilities; longer
inspections; shorter abatement duration; and
higher penalties

Higher rates of compliance with specific
OSHA standards

Enforcement:
Weil (1991, 1992)
Compliance:
Weil (1996)

MSHA

Higher inspection probabilities; longer / more
intense inspections; shorter abatement duration;
higher penalties

N/A

Weil (1990)

EO 11246

No impact on probability of receiving a federal
contract compliance review

N/A

Leonard (1985)

WARN

Increase in the probability of filing suit under
WARN

No impact on the probability of providing
advance notice to affected workers

Enforcement:
GAO (1993);
Ehrenberg and Jakubson (1990)
Compliance:
Addison and Blackburn (1994)

ADA

N/A

Raise probability that firms comply with
four core practices required by ADA

Stern and Balser (1996)

FMLA

Improve information to workers regarding
rights and eligibility under FMLA

Increase probability that leave was fully
paid by employer as provided

Budd and Brey (2000)

Workers Compensation

N/A

Increase probability of filings for benefits
among eligible workers and benefit levels
for given disability level.

Unemployment Compensation

N/A

Increase in the probability of filing for
benefits among eligible workers

Butler and Worrall (1983)
Hirsch, Macpherson, & DuMond (1997)

Blank and Card (1991)
Budd and McCall (1997)

39

Table 3: Evaluation of alternative labor market institutions in implementing labor
market policies
Address the
public goods
problem?

Lower
marginal
cost of
exercise of
rights?

Protect
against
worker
discrimination
?

Comments on
effectiveness of
workplace
institution

Labor unions (Benchmark)

Yes

Yes

Yes

National issue organizations

No

No

No

Legal service organizations

No

Partially

No

See table 2 for
empirical results
Agency problems
limit role to
precedent setting
cases
Agency problems
limit role to
individual
advocacy

Other public interest
organizations (e.g. COSH /
Disabled workers advocacy
organizations)

No

Yes

Partially

Yes / No

Yes

Yes / No

?

Yes

Partially

No

Yes

?

Labor market
institution

Mandated workplace
committees

Third party monitors (e.g.
FLSA)

Alternative Dispute Resolution
systems

Largest impact in
assisting workers
in receiving
benefits (e.g.
workers
compensation)
Effectiveness is
function of nature
of the mandate
and antecedent
conditions in the
workplace (e.g.
size; workforce
turnover)
Monitors’ agency
relationship with
third party and
government
creates a role as
supplementary
enforcement
resource
Most effective
where divergence
of private and
workplace
benefits from
exercise of rights
is small.

Figure 1
Threshold Model of Employee Exercise of Rights

Benefit / Cost from Exercising Statutory Right

MB j

MBi

MC i=MC j
MC j’
Xj**

Xj *

Xi*

X

X (Divergence between actual and permissible working conditions)

Table A1: Major Federal Workplace Regulations
Labor Statute or Executive Ordera

Acronym

Date of
Passage

Description

Labor Standards
Fair Labor Standards Act

FLSA

1938

Establishes minimum wage, overtime pay and child labor standards

Davis-Bacon Act

--

1931

Provides for payment of prevailing local wages and benefits to workers employed by contractors and subcontractors on
federal contracts for construction, alteration, repair, painting or decorating of public buildings or public works

Service Contract Act

SCA

1963

Provides for payment of prevailing local wages and fringe benefits and safety & health standards for employees of
contractors and subcontractors providing services under federal contracts

Walsh -Healy Act

--

1936

Provides for labor standards including wage and hour, for employees working on federal contracts for the manufacturing or
furnishing of materials, supplies, articles, or equipment

Contract Work Hours and Safety
Standards Act

CWHSSA

1962

Establishes standards for hours, overtime compensation, and safety for employees working on federal and federally funded
contracts and subcontracts

Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural
Workers Protection Act

MSPA

1983

Protects migrant and seasonal agricultural workers in their dealings with farm labor contractors, agricultural employers,
associations, and providers of migrant housing

Employee Retirement and Income
Security Act

ERISA

1974

Establishes uniform standards for employee pension and welfare benefit plans, including minimum participation, accrual and
vesting requirements, fiduciary responsibilities, reporting and disclosure

Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act

COBRA

1986

Provides for continued health care coverage under group health plans for qualified separated workers for up to 18 months

Unemployment Compensation provision
of the Social Security Act

--

1935

Authorizes funding for state unemployment compensation administrations and provides the general framework for the
operation of state unemployment insurance programs

Family Medical Leave Act

FMLA

1993

Entitles employees to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave each for specified family and medical reasons such
as the birth or adoption of a child or an illness in the family

1964

Prohibits employment or membership discrimination by employers, employment agencies, and unions on the basis of race,
color, religion, sex, or national origin; prohibits discrimination in employment against women affected by pregnancy,
childbirth, or related medical condition

Benefits

Civil Rights
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act

--

Equal Pay Act

--

1963

Prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex in the payment of wages

Executive Order 11246

EO 11246

1962

Prohibits discrimination against an employee or applicant for employment by federal contractors, and requires federal
contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that employees and applicants for employment are treated without bias.

Age Discrimination Employment Act

ADEA

1967

Prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of age against persons 40 years and older

Americans with Disabilities Act

ADA

1990

Prohibits employment discrimination against individuals with disabilities; requires employer to make "reasonable
accommodations" for disabilities unless doing so would cause undue hardship to the employer

Rehabilitation Act (Section 503)

--

1973

Prohibits federal contractors and subcontractors from discriminating in employment on the basis of disability and requires
them to take affirmative action to employ, and advance in employment, individuals with disabilities

Anti-retaliatory provision-Surface
Transportation Assistance Act

STAA

1978

Prohibits the discharge or discriminatory action against employees for filing complaints relating to a violation of a
commercial motor vehicle safety rule or regulation or for refusing to operate a vehicle in violation of federal rules, or
because of a fear of serious injury due to an unsafe condition

Occupational Safety & Health Act

OSHA

1970

Requires employers to furnish each employee with work and a workplace free from recognized hazards that can cause death
or serious physical harm

Federal Mine Safety & Health Act

MSHA

1969

Requires mine operators to comply with health and safety standards and requirements established to protect miners

Drug Free Workplace Act

DFWA

1988

Requires recipients of federal grants and contracts to take certain steps to maintain a drug free workplace

National Labor Relations Act

NLRA

1935

Protects certain rights of workers including the right to organize and bargain collectively through representation of their own
choice

Labor-Management Reporting &
Disclosure Act

LMRDA

1959

Requires the reporting and disclosure of certain financial and administrative practices of labor organizations and employers;
establishes certain rights for members and imposes other requirements on labor organizations

Railway Labor Act

RLA

1926

Sets out the rights and responsibilities of management and workers in the rail and airline industries and provides for
negotiation and mediation procedures to settle labor-management disputes

Employee Polygraph Protection Act

PPA

1988

Prohibits the use of lie detectors for pre-employment screening or use during the course of employment

Veterans' Reemployment Rights Act

VRR

1940

Provides reemployment rights for persons returning from active duty, reserve training, or National Guard duty

Immigration Reform & Control Act
(Employment provisions)

IRCA

1986

Prohibits the hiring of illegal aliens and imposes certain duties on employers; protects employment rights of legal aliens;
authorizes but limits the use of imported temporary agricultural workers

Workers Adjustment & Retraining Act

WARN

1988

Requires employers to provide 60 days advance written notice of a layoff to individual affected employees, local
governments, and other parties

Occupational Health & Safety

Labor Relations

Hiring & Separation Decisions

SOURCE: Adapted from GAO (1994), Table 2.1; Figures 2.1.

43

Endnotes
1

For example, Stigler (1974) explains the significant influence of certain small interest

groups arises from their ability to surmount the free rider problem among supporters as a
result of their potentially high payoff from political action and the ability of members of
the coalition to sanction non-participants. In this view, an employment lobby
representing individual workers faces a far greater problem of funding its political
activities because of the more diffuse benefits conferred to individual workers arising
from supporting the lobby’s agenda and the difficulty of denying benefits or instituting
sanctions because of non-participation. Unions address this free rider problem by
allocating a portion of dues revenues to political activities directed towards workplace
issues (see Masters 1997 for a recent discussion). Whether other institutions can play a
comparable role is discussed in Hersch (2000).
2

This can be seen in the relative growth in five categories of employment related

lawsuits filed in federal district courts between 1971 and 1991. The fastest growing
category in relative terms over the period has been litigation on employment law, which
went in absolute terms from 4,331 cases filed in 1971 to 22,968 cases in 1991. As a
result, employment law went from comprising about 6% of the 69,465 civil cases filed in
federal district courts in 1971 to about 16% of the 146,790 civil cases filed in 1991.
These figures are reported in Commission on the Future of Worker-Management
Relations (1994), Exhibit IV-3, p. 134.
3

This is a recurring problem under workplace regulation. For example, a survey of

OSHA compliance officers by the GAO concluded that "...many OSHA inspectors
believe workers' participation [in OSHA] is limited by their lack of knowledge about

45

their rights and lack of protection from employer reprisal" (U.S. GAO 1989). The
decline in the “take up” rate for unemployment insurance has been partly ascribed to the
lack of information to workers about their access to unemployment benefits (Wandner
and Stettner 2000). Freeman and Rogers (1999, Chapter 6) also present survey evidence
indicating pervasive worker misperceptions regarding their rights under employment and
labor laws.
4

The costs of retaliation may be even more severe, such as in the well-known 1996 case

of apparel workers in El Monte, Ca, held in virtual captivity by their employer who used
physical intimidation to prevent the workers from leaving.
5

The degree to which MBi diverges from MBj will differ across workplace regulations.

For example, there are greater divergences between the functions for regulations like
OSHA, FLSA, or policies dealing with discrimination where the risks or problems faced
by one worker will likely be more pervasive and therefore affect many other workers as
well. In contrast, under benefit programs like workers compensation or unemployment,
the spill-overs are likely much smaller since the program primarily confers benefits to the
worker directly affected. The implications of these differences are discussed in Section
III.
6

Strictly speaking, this third condition is really an aspect of the second condition.

Discrimination for use of a right represents a cost to a worker arising from discipline or
discharge.
7

Williamson (1985: 254) points out, "(u)nions can both serve as a source of information

regarding employee needs and preferences..." In addition to Williamson, the role of

46

unions in providing basic agency functions is discussed in Freeman and Medoff (1984),
particularly in regard to personnel practices and benefits.
8

There might also be divergences in behavior arising from a number of sources. Median

voter models of union behavior would predict that union leadership would tend to pursue
policies reflective of more senior members of the unit which might not be synonymous
with the public goods solution to benefit valuation. Alternatively, principal / agent
divergences in interest may also lead away from optimal behaviors from the perspective
of collective worker interests. For example, the union may have incentives to "overuse"
certain rights for strategic reasons unrelated to the workplace regulation, for example as a
source of pressure in collective bargaining or strikes (U.S. GAO 2000). However,
principal / agent divergences in behavior may be moderated both through electoral
processes and by worker recourse via duty of fair representation claims which tend to
induce unions to pursue activities consonant with the preferences of represented workers.
9

This latter effect of unions as workplace agents is particularly important given the long

term decline in benefit recipiency under these programs (Wandner and Stettner 2000).
10

Jolls cites a number of examples of Congress curtailing class action activity by legal

service attorneys. The median voter hypothesis advanced here could be more rigorously
tested by examining changes in legal service activities over time given shifts in political
coalitions in Congress over time.
11

This is not to argue that the alignment between these organizations and workers is as

close as found in the case of labor unions. For example, donors to COSH or disabled
worker groups may be similarly interested in “large impacts” as those funding national
interest organizations which may skew institutional activities in a similar manner. The

47

importance of union funds may also lead these organizations to direct their resources
towards certain nonunion workplaces of strategic interest to unions. Even more, union
funding could lead COSH groups to devote their resources supplementing the activities of
unions in already organized workplaces. There is some evidence of the latter behavior, as
described below.
12

Indicative of this is the history of “New Directions” grants provided by OSHA in the

1970s and 1980s that provided financial assistance for promotion of private health and
safety programs. The majority of these grants went either to unions or to joint COSH /
union initiatives.
13

Differences in the presence of worker groups to assist disabled workers versus

unemployed workers once again raises the economics of interest group formation
discussed by Stigler and others. The longevity of the effects of workplace disability as
opposed to the transient nature of une mployment creates greater incentives for the
formation of sustainable organizations concerning the former issue, and the difficulty of
sustaining organizations (particularly over the course of business cycles) in the latter
area. Thus, to the extent that workers groups have formed over the latter issue, they have
been linked to industries facing periods of intense crisis (e.g. steel) or deep recessions.
After crises pass (or industry restructuring occurs and workers find other employment)
these groups tend to disband. See Hoerr (1988) for a discussion of these types of
assistance groups in the steel industry.
14

Where monitoring has been adopted out of strictly voluntary agreements and lacking

the “teeth” of government sanctions like the right to embargo goods, the identification of
third party monitors with regulatory objectives will be far weaker. This raises one of the

48

limitations of using third party monitors in the international arena to police labor
standards, where there is no comparable government authority underlying the
agreements. Third party monitors in the international labor standards arena are discussed
in Elliot and Freeman (2000).
15

Gilmer v. Interstate / Johnson Lane Corp. 111 S. Ct. 1647 (1991); Circuit City Stores,

Inc. v. Adams. 532 S. Ct ____ (2001).
16

Among those conditions, the Protocol specifies that the arbitration system provide

employees with a right to representation in proceedings, and a right to participate in the
selection of an arbitrator / mediator drawn from “…a demographically diverse panel of
trained mediators and arbitrators…” (Dunlop and Zack, 2001, p. 6). The Due Process
Protocol has been adopted by a wide variety of institutions drawn on by companies for
arbitration.
17

Note that this argument also supports the use of ADR in cases where some form of

worker representative is already present, such as in unionized workplaces. Here, ADR
can lead to more speedy and cost effective resolution of statutory disputes at the same
time that workers’ interests are protected through third party representation.
18

The Gilmer case involved a case of age discrimination; Circuit City involved

discrimination because of sexual preference.
19

The “Workers’ Page” can be found at http://www.osha.gov/as/opa/worker/index.html.

49

