NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ACTIVE LABOUR MARKET POLICIES AND THE
BRITISH NEW DEAL FOR THE
YOUNG UNEMPLOYED IN CONTEXT
John Van Reenen
Working Paper 9576
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9576
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

This paper was prepared for the NBER conference “Seeking a Premier League Economy”. It draws extensively
on joint work with Richard Blundell, Costas Meghir, Monica Costa Dias. Michal Myck and Tom Clark have both
helped with the calculations. Finance came from Leverhulme Trust. The author is very grateful to comments by
all participants especially David Card, Paul Gregg, Marty Feldstein, Richard Freeman, Richard Layard, Howard
Reed and two anonymous referees. The usual disclaimer applies. On-line information about the New Deal is
available at www.newdeal.gov.uk. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Active Labour Market Policies and the British New Deal for the Young Unemployed in Context
John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 9576
March 2003
JEL No. J18, J23, J38
ABSTRACT
The British New Deal for Young People began in January 1998. After 6 months of unemployment, 1824 year olds are mandated to enter a `Gateway’ period where they are given extensive job search
assistance. If they are unable to obtain an unsubsidised job, then they can enter one of four New Deal
options. One of these is a job subsidy (“employers’ option”), the others involve full-time education and
training, government-provided employment (“environmental task force”) or voluntary work. In this
paper I evaluate the New Deal in a historical and international context. The toughening of the work
search criterion has evolved since the Restart initiative in 1986. Using either the age-related eligibility
criteria and/or a comparison of pilot and non-pilot areas results suggest that there has been a significant
increase in outflows to employment due to the New Deal. Unemployed young men are now about 20%
more likely to get jobs as a result of the policy (the stock of youth employment is about 17,000 higher
than it would be without the New Deal). Much of this effect is likely to be because of the take up of the
employer wage subsidy, but at least a fifth of the effect is due to enhanced job search. Taken as a whole
I conclude that the social benefits of the New Deal outweigh the costs.

John Van Reenen
University College London
and Centre for Economic Performance
London School of Economics
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk

1. Introduction
On March 14th 2001 the number of British people claiming unemployment
benefit fell below one million for the first time in twenty-five years. To
celebrate the event, the Prime Minister gave a speech on the New Deal.
“Nobody says to me they’re on a skivvy scheme. The sort of language used
about employment programs in the 1980s is not used about the New Deal”
This paper addresses two questions. Does Labour’s flagship employment
policy represent a significant break from the past – and has it worked? In the
1980s and 1990s UK governments introduced major changes in the levels
and conditions for receipt of unemployment benefits. I examine the effects of
a large labour market programme that was introduced (initially in pilot form) in
January 1998, the year after the election of the new Government. The New
Deal involves a cluster of different policies designed to getting the jobless
(especially the young unemployed) back to work.
Since April 1998 all individuals aged between 18 and 24 who have claimed
unemployment benefit (called “Job Seekers Allowance” or JSA) enter the New
Deal program. There are two stages. First there is a `Gateway’ period where
the claimant is given intensive help with job search. Those who do not secure
an unsubsidised job during this stage go on to the second stage of New Deal
“options” that include subsidised full-time training/education, a wage subsidy
paid to the employer, voluntary work or the Environmental Task Force
(government provided employment). It is a mandatory programme - there is
no “fifth option” of remaining on benefit.
In this paper I focus on evaluating the success of the programme in moving
people into jobs. In the short-run this occurs in two main ways. First, there is
enhanced job search monitored by a two -weekly meeting with a personal
advisor. Job search could be increased by (a) the more credible threat of
benefit sanctions, (b) the provision of a greater quality and quantity of
information on vacancies, (c) the psychological effect of being “connected”
again with the labour market. Secondly, the wage subsidy reduces the cost to
the employer of taking on an unemployed person (by about 40-50%).
The job search aspect has many antecedents in benefit reforms initiated
under the previous Conservative administration. In particular, the Restart
initiative in 1986 began a new era of increased monitoring of the unemployed
(see section 3). The New Deal has continued this tightening up of the work
search rules, but has combined it with much more generous funding of job
search assistance and subsidised options. For young people there is now
effectively a time limit on benefit receipt. The wage subsidy element also has
antecedents in Britain (and elsewhere) that I discuss briefly in section 3.
I draw on results using a simple difference in difference approach exploiting
two sources of identification. The eligibility for the New Deal is age related, so
we can compare outflows by different age groups before and after the New

2

Deal was introduced. Additionally, the New Deal was introduced earlier i n
some areas, so we can compare young people in these pilot areas to young
people in non-pilot areas. There are numerous factors that may bias these
estimates that are discussed including selectivity, differential macro trends,
job quality, substitution and general equilibrium effects.
I have some things to say about the other parts of the New Deal program
(such as training), but the truth is that it is still early days. The long-run
success of the programme will in large part depend on its ability to enhance
the productivity and employability of people going through the options.
Publicly available data at the time of writing ends in 1999 so we are only just
starting to observe the labour market performance of those leaving the twelvemonth education and training options.
The results suggest that the reforms have successfully increased net
employment for the target group. Young unemployed men are about 20 per
cent more likely per period to gain jobs as a result of the New Deal (i.e. the
probability of a young man unemployed for 6 months or more obtaining a job
rose from about 5 per cent a month to 6 per cent a month). A substantial part
of this effect is attributed to the wage subsidy option, but there is also some
job assistance effect. An initial cost benefit analysis suggests that the
programme is worth continuing on efficiency grounds alone.
The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 gives some background, placing
the UK’s labour market in historical and comparative perspective. Section 3
gives the history and details of the reforms. Section 4 offers some results on
the evaluation of the New Deal. Section 5 gives the cost benefit calculations
and section 6 offers some concluding remarks.
2. General UK Labour Market Background
In this section I sketch out some features of the labour market of the UK in
historical and comparative perspective.
Figure 1 displays the total unemployed claimant count since 1960 and Figure
2 shows the standard ILO unemployment rates from 1978 onwards. In many
respects the UK is similar to other European countries. There has been a
steady upward drift of unemployment since 1960, with a very large increase
post 1979. Until the 1990s, the trough of each recession was associated with
higher unemployment than the previous downturn. The expansion since 1993
has pushed the number of unemployed below that of the previous cycle to
levels not seen since the last Labour government (1974-79).
Another feature of UK unemployment is its volatility. The UK has experienced
sharp boom-bust cycles. There were deep recessions in the early 1980s and
early 1990s and a fast boom in the mid-late 1980s. There was a similar boom
in the late 1990s/early 2000s, although with lower levels of wage and price
inflation.

3

Currently UK unemployment is relatively low by OECD standards (see column
1, Table 1). This has been a relatively recent phenomenon, however.
Between 1983 and 1996 UK unemployment rates have been above the
OECD average, certainly higher than Germany's (which has never fully
recovered from the shock of re-unification in 1989) although lower than
France's 2. Over 1973-1984 UK unemployment was worse than the OECD
average. Furthermore, in terms of its long-term unemployment rates, the UK
appears much closer to a European country than to the US.
Across all countries youth unemployment is higher than unemployment for
prime age individuals. There is a relati vely high proportion of young Britons in
jobs and a low proportion of young people in school. There is also a large
proportion of British youth that are neither in school nor in the labour force
("the idle"). The UK has the highest numbers of 18-year-old men in this
category and is second (after Italy) for 22-year-old men3. Moreover, the UK
has had the largest increase in the proportion of “idle” youth since 1984.
Another feature of the youth labour market is its sensitivity to the business
cycle. The unemployment rates of the younger group (see Figure 3) broadly
mirrors the overall picture, but is more cyclically sensitive. This is also true for
the employment rates (see Bell, Blundell and Van Reenen, 1999)
Turning to wage rates, it is well known there has been a large increase in
earnings inequality in the UK since 1979 (Schmitt, 1992; Gosling et al, 2000).
This has occurred between the younger and older age groups, even within
gender and skill classes. The uprating of many benefit levels (e.g. the state
pension and unemployment benefit) in Britain was pegged to price inflation
instead of earnings inflation from 1979-80. Also there were real cuts of about
10 per cent in most means tested benefits. This has lead to a fall in the
replacement rate relative to other countries (the second column of Table 1).
To summarise this section somewhat boldly. The UK has enjoyed lower than
average unemployment rates since the mid-late 1990s than other European
countries. Over a longer time frame unemployment has been about average
and more volatile than other OECD countries. Youth unemployment is slightly
better than average, but there are a surprisingly large number of young
people in the UK who are neither in school nor actively seeking work. Wages
are relatively low for young British workers, but so are unemployment
benefits.

2

Between 1983-96 OECD average unemployment was 8.2%, 9.7% in the UK 6.2% in West
Germany and 10.4% in France (Nickell, 1997).
3

The proportion idle was 8.4% in the UK in 1997 compared to 2.3% in 1984. In 1997 the
OECD average was 1.8%, with 5.6% in the US, 4.2% in Germany, 3.3% in France and 9.1%
in Italy (see Blanchflower and Freeman, 2000)).

4

3. Institutions of UK unemployment benefit regime
3.1 The New Deal in historical context
Table 2 displays the evolution of the UK unemployment benefit regime. The

network of the labour exc hanges was first founded in 1910 and administered
the first unemployment benefits from 1912. Worries about the disincentive
effects of unemployment benefit persisted from its foundation. The work test
was a fundamental part of the labour exchange, but was seen as more
humane than the workhouses that preceded it. As Beveridge (1909) put it:
“The labour exchange opens the way for `depauperisation’ more humane,
less costly and more effective than that of the workhouse test – the way of
making the finding of work easy instead of making relief hard”
The work test requirement became less pressing during the Post-War “Golden
Years” of low unemployment. From the late 1960s, however, there appeared
to be a shift in attitude towards unemployment benefits away from being a
temporary palliative of social insurance and towards being a more permanent
redistribution from those with work to the jobless “victims”. Additionally, the
role of the Employment Service was re-oriented towards being a service
provider to employers and employees. It attempted to regain a share in the
market for filling vacancies because of the fear that employers were losing
interest in notifying Job Centres of vacancies. The Employment Service
focused less on finding jobs for the difficult to place long-term unemployed.
The most important consequence of these changes was that the work search
requirements were less strictly enforced. The function of Job Centres and
Benefit Offices were split in 1974 and they were increasingly located on
different premises. An indicator of the relaxation in work search is the number
of referrals of unemployed people suspected of not searching for work – this
stood at 28,270 in 1968 and, despite a big increase in unemployment, fell to
5,603 by 1976 (Price, 2000).
Surprisingly, the advent of Mrs. Thatcher’s administration actually reinforced
this trend. In 1982 the compulsion to visit a Job Centre was withdrawn.
Cutbacks in public expenditure reduced the numbers of staff to monitor the
work search requirements and help match the unemployed with jobs 4.
These administrative changes combined with the huge increase in
unemployment in the early 1980s (see Figure 1) swamped the ability of the
employment service to enforce work search. In terms of GDP the UK
4

In the early 1980s large numbers were encouraged to leave the unemployment rolls and draw
other forms of benefit (and therefore exit the labour market). This gave the appearance of
reducing unemployment. For example, the 1983 budget allowed men over 60 to move on to a
higher benefit rate if they signed off unemployment benefit and on to long-term
supplementary benefit. Supplementary benefit required that the recipients did not look for
work (Wells, 2000)! The numbers on invalidity benefit rose by 300,000 between 1984 and
1988.

5

recession troughed in 1981, but despite 5 years of recovery, claimant
unemployment only peaked in 1986
A major period of benefit reform began in 1986. The introduction of Restart
made compulsory interviews with the Employment Service a condition of
benefit receipt for all those whose unemployment claims had reached a
duration of twelve months or more. These were piloted in January and rolled
out nationally in July. Also in 1986 the government extended the
unemployment insurance disqualification period for those deemed to have left
their jobs voluntarily from 6 to 13 weeks (this was further increased to 26
weeks in 1988 and is currently 6 months) 5.
Since this point, there has been a successive tightening of the work search
requirement. In October 1986 Restart interviews were extended to all those
unemployed in excess of six months with repeated interviews after every
subsequent six months. In 1991 mandatory job courses for the very long-term
unemployed were introduced. In 1994 the number of sanctions doubled under
the “stricter benefit regime”.
These changes were consolidated in a new legal framework under Job
Seekers’ Allowance (JSA) introduced in 1996. A range of measures was
introduced to improve job search6 and there were more checks over eligibility.
An indicator of the effect of these cumulative changes has been to reduce the
proportion of people seeking work who actually claim benefit. Schmitt and
Wadsworth (1999) show that in 1983 90% of ILO unemployed men (i.e. those
who had actively sought work within the last two weeks) received
unemployment benefit compared to only 80% in 1993.
Previous UK governments had experimented with wage subsidies. The
common feature of these schemes was the payment of a fixed weekly
subsidy, typically of around £50 or £60, for the initial months of employment of
a long-term unemployed individual. This was sometimes payable to the
individual (Jobstart allowance and Jobmatch) and sometimes to the employer
(Workstart). In addition, an employer's National Insurance (the main UK
payroll ta x) contributions holiday for the long -term unemployed was
introduced in April 1996. Prior to the New Deal none of these schemes were
very well funded and all have suffered from low take up. For example, in 1996
only 1% of all UK active labour market funds were spent on wage subsidies
compared to an EU average of 10% (Martin, 1998)

5

Restart also gave menu of options to help get people into work – short courses, training, job
clubs and a Jobstart subsidy (a £20 bonus to the unemployed person if they took a low paid
job).
6

For example, Jobseekers’ agreements, enhanced advisory interventions, the unemployed
could not refuse jobs outside their own occupation after 3 months, etc.

6

3.2 The elements of the New Deal
The New Deal programme has been targeted at specific groups of the
unemployed, with an emphasis on the young (18 to 24 year olds), long -term
unemployed (eighteen months or more), lone parents and disabled people.
Pilots for the New Deal for young people began in January 1998 and the
programme took effect at the national level from April 1998. The number of
young people on the New Deal peaked at just fewer than 150,000 in July
1999 and stood at 86,200 in September 2002.
The windfall tax on the privatised utilities raised £5.2 billion between 1997 and
1999, and all of these funds were hypothecated to financing New Deals of
some variety. Table 3 shows the government’s estimates of the allocation of
windfall tax receipts to different elements of the programme. The New Deal for
young people received about £1.5 billion by the end of March 2002.
It is tempting to simply divide the cost of the New Deal by the estimate
number of new jobs in Section 4 (about 17,250) to find a “cost per job
created”. This would imply that the scheme was expensive (e.g. using the
estimates in section 4 about £18,550 per job in 1999-00). Such a calculation
is misleading, ho wever, as participants on the New Deal options would have
been claiming Job Seekers Allowance and these costs (and others) must be
deducted off the gross costs in Table 4 to get an estimate of the net
Excheque r cost. We perform an explicit cost -benefit calculation in section 5 to
address this issue. This suggests that the actual social cost per additional
employee is under £4,000 (£68.1m/17,250) and, more importantly, that social
benefits exceeded social costs.
The programme is composed of several parts, with different options offered to
different groups of the unemployed. The New Deal for young people is
compulsory for all those aged 18–24 who have been receiving the Jobseekers
allowance for more than six months. Figure 4 summarises the treatment in a
flow diagram. Initially, individuals enter a ‘Gateway’ period, where they are
assigned a personal adviser who gives them extensive assistance with job
search. If the unemployed person is still on JSA at the end of the Gateway
period (formally, a maximum of four months 7), they are offered up to four
options:
•
•
•

7

Entry into full-time education or training for up to 12 months for
those without basic qualifications (without loss of benefits);
A job for six months with a voluntary sector employer (paid a wage
or allowance at least equal to JSA plus £400 spread over the six
months);
A job on the Environmental Task Force (paid a wage or allowance
at least equal to JSA plus £400 spread over the six months);

In practice the Gateway period can last for longer than the official maximum of four months.

7

•

A subsidy to a prospective employer for six months, with training for
at least one day a week (£60 per week plus an additional £750
training subsidy spread over the six months).

If an option is refused, the claimant is liable to suffer a benefits sanction.
Initially, sanctions take the form of withdrawal of benefit for two weeks, and
further refusals may result in repeated four-weekly withdrawals. Individuals
returning to unemployment within thirteen weeks after leaving an option go
onto the ‘follow-through’ programme of job assistance, which is essentially the
same as the Gateway.
Individuals can enter options at any time after the sixth month of JSA. The
official guidance was that the first month of the Gateway was confined to
unsubsidised employment. The second month would then focus on education
and training and the third month on the subsidised job option. The public
employment option was only to be used as a last resort in the fourth month. In
practice this schema was not rigidly adhered to.
Out of the four options, education and training has been the most popular
(about 40% of all those who had joined the New Deal options by the end of
April 1999 chose education and training). The employer’s option had a much
lower take-up than anticipated (only 20% of all those in options). The reasons
for this low take-up is uncertain, but it is worth noting that low take-up have
often been a problem for wage subsidy schemes in other countries. Possible
reasons include: - (1) the UK economy was in a prolonged expansion. The
crop of unemployed who fail to get unsubsidised jobs even after the Gateway
period may have very poor basic skills making them very unattractive to
employers; (2) the requirement to have formal training may impose high costs
on employers; (3) the Employment Service has had little experience in
handling job subsidy schemes; (4) the failure to secure a job during the
Gateway might generate a stigma effect on the individuals.
3.3 The effectiveness of previous UK reforms
In general there has been a paucity of high quality evaluations of UK labour
market reforms compared with the United States. Random assignment has
encountered serious opposition due to a mixture of political and ethical
objections. In this respect the UK is more typical of other European countries 8.
“Evaluations” typically take the form of surveys of participants. Obviously
there is no obvious comparison group so any counterfactual is purely
speculative.

8

Martin (1998, p.14) recounts one leading European policy maker’s frank explanation for this
absence of good evaluations: “Most of our programs are lousy! They were dreamed up quickly
to give the Minister some good news to announce at a time when unemployment is rising. We
do not want evaluations revealing to the general public how bad our programs are; we know
this already”.

8

There are several macro-econometric evaluations where the policy is
essentially indicated by a set of time dummies. For example, using a time
series model the Employment Service (Sweeney and McMahon, 1998)
claimed that the rule changes in JSA reduced claimant unemployment by
about 15,000 to 20,000. Large positive effects of Restart were found by Dicks
and Hatch (1989) and Disney et al (1991). More recently Riley and Young
(2001a, b) found moderate effects of the New Deal for Young People when
they used a macro approach (about 28,000 extra jobs) 9.
The major problem with these macro approaches is that (aside from
conventional aggregation biases) there are many other macro-economic
events occurring simultaneously with the introduction of labour market
programs. It is extremely difficult to disentangle the programme effect from
these macro shocks. For example, the UK economy experienced a very sharp
upturn in the late 1980s (see Figure 2) that would have raised employment in
the absence of the Restart program.
Fortunately, however, there have been useful micro-econometric evaluations
of the Restart initiative using micro data. In 1989 a sample of just under 9,000
individuals approaching there sixth month of unemployment were identified.
Of this set a random control group of 582 were selected who were not obliged
to take part in the Restart interview. These individuals were followed up in
surveys three months and nine months after their first Restart interview (or
nine months and thirteen months after the start of their benefit claim in the
case of the control group). This information was matched to administrative
records using their unique National Insurance (UK Social Security) numbers.
Dolton and O’Neill (1995, 1996) 10 analyse this data and found that the group
who were randomised out of Restart had median unemployment duration one
month longer than those who did received Restart. They also examined the
destinations of those leaving the claimant count using a competing risks
model. They found that the strongest effects of Restart came from exits into
jobs rather than exits to training or non-participation. This Restart effect
appeared to work both through increasing the arrival rate of job offers and by
making the treated group more likely to accept a job if they received an offer.
Some of the job subsidy schemes have been evaluated, but usually through
surveys without a good comparison group. One analysis of the Workstart
pilots (where firms received a subsidy) concluded that only 17% of the
9

Disney et al (1992) used the ratio of Restart interviews to eligible participants, Anderton et al
(1999) and Riley and Young (2001b) use the number of New Deal participants as a share of
the claimant count. Riley and Young (2001a) multiply the latter variable by the average
number of days that individuals receive personal advisor interviews as their indicator of “New
Deal intensity”.
10

White and Leakey (1992) using the same data also found that Restart significantly reduced
unemployment duration, increased the probability of finding a job and increased the
probability of moving into employment training. They could find no evidence that Restart
reduced the average quality of a job match either through lower wages or deteriorating job
length. Surprisingly, however, there was no evidence that this effect was driven by increased
job search (as measured by number of job applications, etc).

9

Workstart vacancies represented new employment that would not have
existed without the subsidy and that much of the employment of the long-term
unemployed occurred at the expense of the shorter-term unemployed
(Atkinson and Meager, 1994)
3.4 The UK in international Context
OECD estimates of spending on active labour market policies (ALMP) across
countries between 1985 and 1996 are given in Table 4. These include
administration of the public employment service (a rough proxy for resources
in job assistance and job search monitoring), youth measures, training, public
sector job creation, subsidised private sector jobs, and job help for the
disabled. The first column simply gives ALMP as a proportion of GDP. This
might be seen as misleading as some countries will have different
unemployment and wage levels than others. To partially, deal with this,
column (2) presents the standard OECD measure of ALMP per person
unemployed normalise on output per head. The figure can be regarded as
analogous to a replacement rate with the generosity of spending on ALMP per
client compared to the outside wage (as proxied by output per head) 11.
Despite the rhetoric, there has not been a rise in this measure of ALMP/GDP
in the OECD as a whole over this period on either measure. If anything there
has been a slight decline. There is a clear difference between the main
Continental European countries and the UK. France and Germany both have
higher spends per unemployed person and both have increased their ALMP
intensity. The UK not only spent less, but also saw a decline over this period.
Britain appears closer to the USA, Japan and Canada in this respect.
The next three columns decompose the spending of ALMP into its three main
components – public employment service, youth programs and government
jobs. The increased toughening of work search requirements in the UK is
indicated by column (3) – there has been a large increase in the proportion of
resources devoted to the public employment service from 22% in 1985 to 43%
in 1996. In contrast there have been large falls in the proportionate spend on
job creation in the public sector (from 25% to 2%) and to a lesser extent in
youth programs (from 35% to 26%).
The picture is different in Continental Europe. Both France and Germany
spend a larger proportion of resources on state job creation and their
proportionate spend on the public employment service has fallen between
1985 and 1996. The trends are also in the opposite direction to the UK. Again
the UK is closer to the US who has also increased the resources going to
public employment services (25% to 39%). Unfortunately, comparative data
post New Deal is not yet available. Overall spending on ALMP in the UK has
almost certainly increased after 1997 and is weighted more towards the youth
component today than in 1996.

11

This variable is used in the cross country comparisons of Layard et al (1991) among others.

10

The level of UK unemployment benefit is low compared to most other
European countries (Table 1). Offsetting this is the fact that the sanctions
regime in the UK is only about average by international standards. The
Netherlands, for example, has also managed to lower unemployment in the
1990s, but unlike the UK has maintained a high replacement rate. The Dutch
introduced a very tough sanctions regime, however, to offset the disincentive
effects of high replacement rates (see Nickell and van Ours, 2000, for a
discussion).
3.5 What elements of the New Deal might work? Evidence from U.S.
research
The New Deal Gateway provides both job search assistance and job search
monitoring (with accompanying sanctions for non-compliance). The study
reported below (in Section 4) identifies a treatment effect over and above the
impact of employment subsidy, but is this effect due to the “carrot” of
mentoring from the personal advisor or the “stick” of a harsher benefit regime?
There is a large literature on the evaluation of the US unemployment
insurance (UI) system. The Social Security Act of 1935 created the U.I.
system. Each state administers and implements its own system subject to
Federal guidelines. In particular there is a requirement for work search
monitoring, although the precise way this is implemented varies state by state.
There have been several demonstration projects (randomised trials)
investigating the impact of variation in the way job search monitoring and
assistance impacts on the duration of claims, and recipients’ employment and
earnings.
Meyer (1995) offers an excellent survey of five experiments 12. He finds
evidence that job search monitoring and assistance together significantly
reduce the duration of claims. There were less clear-cut effects on overall
earnings. Unfortunately “This combination of additional services and tightened
eligibility checks makes it difficult to determine what aspects of the
experiments induced the changes in outcomes…” (Meyer, 1995, p.114).
Ashenfelter, Ashmore and Dechenes (1999) attempt to tackle this problem by
analysing four experiments where the treatment of stricter enforcement and
verification of work search behaviour can be separated from job assistance 13.
They find no significant effects on claim duration from tighter monitoring. They
conclude that although teaching unemployed people how to look better for
jobs (job assistance) is effective, tougher monitoring by itself seems
ineffective.

12

Nevada Claimant Placement Program, Charleston Claimant Placement and Work Test
Demonstration, Wisconsin Eligibility Review Pilot Project, New Jersey UI Reemployment
Demonstration and the Washington Alternative Work Search Experimentation.
13

These sites were in Connecticut, Massachusetts, Virginia and Tennessee.

11

Anderson (2000) reports three further recent experiments 14. Like Ashenfelter
et al (1999) the Maryland study allows a distinction between job assistance
and monitoring. The most stringent monitoring method wherein each of the
normal two contacts a week were verified resulted in a fall in duration of 10%
(about 1.5 weeks) compared to dropping of all job search monitoring. The
treatments in Ashenfelter et al (1999) may have been more minor than those
in the Maryland study.
There have been several recent studies of the impact of reforms to the benefit
regime in the Dutch labour market. Abbring et al (1997) and Van den Berg et
al (1998) estimate that job finding rates double after the imposition of a
sanction. Van den Berg and Van der Klaauw (2001) could find no effect of
counselling and monitoring, but they argue that these interventions provided
little significant job search assistance to the unemployed and were targeted
mainly at groups who had relatively good labour market prospects. Gorter and
Kalb (1996) found that more intensive counselling to an eligible group with
worse prospects had a significant impact on exits to employment.
In our UK results (section 4), we do not find evidence that individuals were
dropping off the rolls as they approached the start of the New Deal Gateway
(between fifth and sixth months of an unemployment spell– see Table 7
below). If monitoring were extremely unpleasant we would have expected
more claimants to stop claiming prior to entering the New Deal (as appeared
to happen with Restart). There is no significant change in outflows as the New
Deal approaches thus we are inclined to believe that it is the “carrot” rather
than the “stick” that has been most effective in delivering employment
increases, a view shared by the qualitative evaluations of New Deal
participants (e.g. Hasluck, 2000) 15.
There is also a more extensive U.S. literature on the use of wage subsidies.
Both Katz (1998) and Dickert-Conlin and Holz-Eakin (2000) conclude that
employer based subsidies have not proven successful. Katz argues that part
of this is due to stigma effects as only the most disadvantaged are typically
able to get such subsidies and this acts as a bad signal to potential
employers. This may also explain why take-up rates are usually very low. Katz
does find some evidence of an effect of the TJTC (targeted job tax credit) for
disadvantaged youth in his own work. In section 4 I report results of using a
similar methodology to Katz exploiting the age-eligibility criterion to estimate
the effect of the New Deal.
Perhaps the closest experimental evidence for the New Deal is the U.S.
welfare to work programs. Bloom and Michalopoulos (2001) survey 29
different initiatives that had demonstration projects (random assignments).
Eight of these schemes were job-focused (rather than education/training
focused) and mandatory for welfare recipients. Although the precise impact
14

Utah Quality Control Programme Improvement Study, Maryland UI Work Search
Demonstration and the Job Search Assistance Demonstration in Florida and Washington DC.
15

Only 2% of participants in the New Deal have suffered sanctions

12

effect differed from program to program, a statistically significant effect of the
program on employment probabilities was found in all eight cases.
In this paper I do not examine the impact of the training and public sector job
element of the New Deal program, due to lack of post-option data 16. There is
a large U.S. literature on the impact of training programs for the unemployed
and a rather smaller literature on the impact of public work programs 17 .
Generally, the outcomes of evaluations of training programs for young men
have been disappointing 18. It is worth remembering that the pool of young
unemployed men in the UK is proportionately much larger than in the US so
there may be greater scope for positive programme effects. The US target
group of disadvantaged are more likely to be “hardcore” jobless whose human
capital is very difficult to raise.
4. An Empirical Evaluation of the New Deal for Young People
It is possible to examine the performance of the Gateway period of job
assistance using publicly available micro data.19
We consider the treatment group to be young people with six months
unemployment (continuous claims of Job Seekers Allowance). The outcome
of greatest interest is the flow of this group into employment over the four
months of the Gateway period (months six through ten of JSA). We also
examine total outflows from unemployment over the same period (e.g. to
training).
Note that the New Deal treatment effect considered (the job outflow by month
ten of unemployment) comprises the effects of both the job
assistance/monitoring element of the New Deal and the wage subsidy
element 20. It is possible to estimate a lower bound to the job
assistance/subsidy element (unsubsidised jobs) as we know from
administrative sources the actual proportion of the unemployed who obtained
16

Bonjour et al (2001) look at the relative success of different New Deal options using a
special survey. They find that eighteen months after entering the New Deal, the employer
option had the best outcomes in terms of getting people into work.
17

For a survey of public service employment and mandatory work see Ellwood and Welty
(2000)
18

See the survey in Heckman, Lalonde and Smith (1999). The main argument is that most of
these schemes fail to significantly raise the human capital of participants. A similar conclusion
is reached about UK public training schemes by Dolton (1992). Previous UK training
schemes have included TOPS, YTS, Employment Training and Training for Work.
19

These numbers are based on an analysis of the Joint Unemployment and Vacancies
Operating System (JUVOS) data, which contain information over time for a sample of 5% of
those claiming unemployment-related benefits in the UK. For more details on the analysis see
Blundell, Costa Dias, Meghir and Van Reenen (2001)
20

Originally, I had hoped to deal with this problem by focusing only on the first two months
of the New Deal Gateway when no one was supposed to go on the wage subsidy option.
Unfortunately, the New Deal Evaluation Database showed that some people went on the
employer option even in the first month of the Ga teway.

13

subsidised jobs (these numbers are presented in the empirical results). By
deducting the proportion that flow into the subsidised jobs from the overall
treatment effect one can obtain a lower bound of the pure “Gateway” effect.
The “true” effect of job assistance is likely to be higher as some of those
obtaining subsidised jobs would have obtained them even in the absence of a
subsidy, despite the best efforts of the employment service to minimise this
deadweight.
In the absence of random assignment there are two possible ways to
construct the comparison group. The first method is to exploit the fact that the
New Deal was piloted in some areas ahead of the National roll out. We
compare 19-24 year olds 21 in the pilot areas (“Pathfinders”) to similar 19-24
year olds in non-Pathfinder areas over the same period of time before and
after the introduction of the program. The second method is to examine an
older age group who are ineligible for the New Deal. We choose to focus on
25-30 year olds who have been unemployed for six months as the
comparison group. After the national roll out only the comparison across age
groups is possible.
There are many potential biases in using either of these comparison groups.
Most pressing is the issue of substitution, that the older unemployed will be
less likely to gain employment because employers will prefer New Deal
participants (for example, firms receive a subsidy for employing a 24 year old
but not a 25 year old). Consequently, using the older age group may lead us
to overestimate the positive effects of the New Deal. The Pathfinder pilo ts vs.
the non-Pathfinder pilot comparison should be informative in this regard.
Substitution effects imply that we should estimate smaller effects when
comparing young people in pilot vs. non-pilot areas than when we estimate
using yo ung vs. older individuals within the pilot areas. Unlike the older group
young people within non-pilot areas are unlikely to be adversely effected by
the New Deal. Substitution also implies that we should, ceterus paribus;
expect to see the outflow rates of the older group decline in the pilot areas
(where they are losing out to the younger group) compared to the non-pilot
areas.
This discussion illustrates that there is no one obviously “correct” age
comparison to consider. Using the regression discontinuity design approach
of comparing eligible 24 year olds with non-eligible 25 year olds has some
appeal as we would expect these groups to be very similar in productivity
characteristics. Unfortunately, substitution would be most severe for this age
comparison because the 25 year olds would be the closest substitutes for the
24 year olds. Furthermore, the precision of the estimates falls as we focus on
smaller and smaller slices of the data. As a consequence we believe the 5
year age groupings for treatment and control are the best balance but we
were also careful to investigate alternative age cut-offs in the empirical work.

21

We drop 18 year olds because there has been a large increase in the participation rate in full
time education for this group in recent years.

14

A second issue is that of equilibrium wage effects. If the New Deal reduces
equilibrium wage pressure (for example through increased search) then we
will be underestimating the effects of the New Deal in increasing employment.
The use of different comparison groups may again be informative in this
context. Consider the scenario where there are no substitution effects and
only equilibrium wage effects in the local labour market. In this case,
comparing young people in the pilot vs. non-pilot areas will reflect some of the
positive job effects associated with reduced wage pressure. Comparing young
vs. older people within the Pathfinder areas will not capture the equilibrium
wage effects as the job chances of both groups are improved. Thus,
equilibrium wage effects imply that we should estimate larger effects when
comparing young people in pilot vs. non-pilot areas than when we estimate
using young vs. older individuals within the pilot areas. The bias is in the
opposite direction to that of the substitution effect.
Whichever comparison group is chosen, the method is to compare the
difference in the outflow rates between these two groups after the New Deal
began compared to the difference in the outflow rates before the New Deal
started.
Table 5 contains the raw data on the outflow rates to jobs for the different
groups. The data is taken from JUVOS, an administrative longitudinal
database. This follows a random 5% of all individuals who have ever claimed
unemployment benefits. The upper panel contains data from the pilot period
and the lower panel from the national roll out. The pilot period considers those
who reached six months on unemployment benefit (JSA) between January 1 st
1998 and the end of March 1998 (“after the program”). I follow them fourth
months later (i.e. ten months after they become unemployed). This group is
compared with the same age group who reached six months on
unemployment between January and March 1997 (“before the program”). The
national roll out considers individuals who reached six months unemployment
between April 1 st 1998 and December 31st 1998 (“after the program). They are
compared with the same age group between April and December 1997
(“before the program”) 22.
Focusing on the flows between six and ten months in the pilot period (row 1
column 6) we can see that 19-24 year olds were 8.9 percentage points more
likely to obtain jobs in the post New Deal period. In the non-pilot areas (row 2)
19 to24 year olds were actually less likely to get jobs (a fall of 2.1 percentage
points). So the difference in difference effect is a full 11 percentage points
(row 3) – an extremely large increase on a pre-treatment base of 24.1
percent. The next two rows compare different possible comparison groups:
“matched Pathfinder areas” (where we select areas with similar characteristics
to the Pathfinder areas) and 25-30 year olds in the Pathfinder areas. The
implied difference-in-difference effects are similar to the first comparison
22

An advantage of ceasing to examine any outflows after April 1999 is that the National
Minimum Wage was first introduced in April 1999. Minimum wage effects in analyses that
cover this later period may confound the New Deal effects.

15

group. The lower panel of the Table 5 examines data from the National-roll
out (post April 1998). The magnitude of the New Deal effect is still positive,
but about half the size of that estimated for Pathfinder areas. There is an
increase of 5.4 percentage points compared to the pre-programme base of
25.8 percentage points (a 5.4/25.8 = 20% increase in the outflow rate). We
show below that this is due to return to a big “impact” effect in the first quarter
that the New Deal is introduced.
The raw difference in difference estimates in Table 5 do not correct for
compositional changes. These may be important if the composition of the
groups changes systematically over time. In Table 6 we include a set of ext ra
controls – marital status, sought occupation, region, and the number of past
unemployment spells and the proportion of time-spent unemployed in the
previous two years. The final column contains our main results. Rows (1)
through (6) use data only for the pilot period. In row (1) we compare young
people in pilot and non-pilot areas. In row (2) we compare young people to
older people within the pilot areas. The results are almost identical to the raw
difference in difference estimates in Table 5. The fact that the point estimates
are both about 10-11 percentage points regardless of whether we use area or
age as the comparison group is interesting. It implies that we cannot reject a
simple model where there are no substitution or equilibrium wage effects of
the program 23. It is reassuring that row (3) shows that the trends for the older
groups were statistically identical in Pathfinder areas to non-Pathfinder areas.
If young people were being substituted for older age groups in the pilot areas
one would have expected worse outcomes for the 25-30 year olds in the pilot
areas. This does not appear to be the case. We compare the young
unemployed to a slightly older age group (31-40) in row (4) and to matched
non-Pathfinder areas in row (5). These results show (if anything ) a slightly
larger New Deal effect 24.
Note that 5.7% of the sample joined the subsidised job option during the
programme (row 6). This enables us to put a lower bound on the effect of the
job assistance element of the programme of about 5.3 percentage points (i.e.
11% -5.7%). Even if none of those who were given subsidised jobs would
have obtained them in the absence of the program, there remains a 5.3
percentage point outflow into unsubsidised jobs attributable to the New
Deal25. If half of all subsidized jobs are deadweight then the effect of job
assistance/monitoring rises to 8.15 percentage points (11%-2.85%).
The final three rows of Table 5 examine the “program introduction” effect. It is
noticeable that the employment impact of the New Deal was greater in the
23

It is also consistent with a more complex model were both of these effects cancel each other
out. It may be, of course, that these effects take longer to play out due to lags of adjustment.
24

Other studies have also failed to uncover significant substitution effects in the New Deal
programme (e.g. Anderson et al 1999a,b; Riley and Young, 2000)
25

The design of the programme emphasised finding unsubsidised employment when
participants first entered the New Deal. So the true effect of job assistance may be close to this
lower bound. The greater impact of some US/Dutch assistance schemes may have been
because the target group had been employed for shorter periods of time.

16

first quarter that it was introduced (both in the Pilot areas and the non-Pilot
areas after the national roll out) than in the subsequent two quarters.
Comparing rows 8 and 9 (first quarter) with row 10 (second and third quarter)
illustrates that the program introduction effect appears twice as large as the
subsequent impact. Other UK labour market programs have also experienced
“cleaning out the register” impact effects. But these are usually thought to
stem from improved administrative procedures and reductions in fraud. It is
more likely that the impact effect of the New Deal came from the energising of
Personal advisors in the Employment Service who greeted the New Deal with
a lot of enthusiasm. This naturally diminishes over time. It would be unwise,
however, to consider the lower figure post first quarter as the “steady state”
effect as it is still based only on six months of data.
There are many criticisms of these results that are partially taken up in Table
7. First, we examined whether the quality of job matches had deteriorated by
using the outflow to jobs that lasted at least thirteen weeks as the outcome
variable 26. The treatment effect is very close to that for all jobs, so there is no
evidence that New Deal jobs are of significantly lower quality, on this measure
at least. Secondly, it may be that individuals are delaying their exits from
unemployment prior to the New Deal in order to take advantage of the
generosity of the program. If this was the case one would expect to see a
decline in outflows in the month before the programme starts. The third row of
Table 7 shows that there are no selectivity effects between month 5 and 6 of
Job Seekers Allowance (we could also find no New Deal effects on earlier
months of JSA).
The third experiment we consider uses outflows to all destinations as the
outcome variable (row 4). The New Deal effect is much larger – double the
effect on employment. But this is to be expected as a much larger proportion
of individuals flow onto some kind of option (13.7 per cent of the sample in
row 5). Also, the baseline proportion exiting to all destinations is much higher
than to jobs alone.
The analysis focuses on men because three quarters of all New Deal
participants are male. We also found that the pre-New Deal outflow behaviour
of 25-30 year old women was trending in a very different way from that of 1924 year old women whereas it was similar for men. These differential trends
relate to changing patterns of participation due to children. Nevertheless we
can still examine the pilot vs. non-pilot experiments, as the outflow trends for
young women were similar in pilot and non-pilot areas. The results are shown
in row 6. The point estimates are smaller than those of men (six per cent
compared to ten per cent); although the smaller sample size means that the
coefficients are very imprecisely estimated.
Finally, one could consider using other age cut-offs than the ones that we
chose to focus on. For example, in the spirit of regression discontinuity design
(see Hahn et al, 1999) one could simply compare 24 with 25 years olds
26

There is, unfortunately, no information on earnings in JUVOS. The survey information in
Hales et al (2000) suggests that the New Deal participants are earning only slightly above the
minimum wage.

17

(rather than 19-24 with 25-29 year olds). As discussed above this has the
advantage that the two groups will be subject to the same trends, but the
disadvantage that substitution effects (if they exist) will be strongest for these
age groups. The results of this experiment are contained in row 8. The
treatment effect is larger in magnitude (0.068) although not significantly
different from the baseline effect (0.053), which is unsurprising given the
much smaller sample size.
In conclusion, the range of experiments contained in table 7 suggests that the
results are quite robust.

5. Cost Benefit Calculation
Any cost- benefit analysis must proceed with a large degree of caution due to
the uncertainty surrounding key parameters. Nevertheless, it is important to
try and put the numbers into perspective, no matter how crudely (see
Appendix for more details). The analysis is forward looking – I seek to
investigate whether the New Deal wo uld be a programme that would be worth
making a permanent feature of the UK labour market.
One of the main benefits of the New Deal is the number of jobs (and therefore
extra output) created. To estimate the number of jobs a number of
assumptions have to be made regarding the counterfactual. I simulate the
change in steady state for an economy that broadly matched the UK economy
in 1998 when the New Deal was introduced (see Appendix for full details).
The estimates from the previous section showed that the effect of the New
Deal was to raise the employment outflows (see Table 5) of young men by 5.3
percentage points- an elasticity of about 0.2 (i.e. 5 percentage points over a
pre-sample base of 25.8%). I consider three main labour market states only
(employment, short-term/under six months unemployment and long-term/over
6 months unemployment). I then simulate a permanent increase in monthly
outflow rates from long-term unemployment to employment using this
elasticity of 0.2 (keeping all the other outflow rates constant) and solve for the
new steady states stocks. The stock of long-term unemployment (including
those in the Gateway and on non-job options) falls by about 20,000 a year
and the employment level rises by 17,25027. The number of short-term
unemployed rises by 2,850 since employment is higher and the outflow rate
from employment to short-term unemployment is unchanged (by assumption).
I use the estimates of the mean starting wages of workers on the New Deal
subsidised job option from the survey in Hales et al (2000) of £3.78 per

27

This is consistent with the more macro-based approaches. Anderson et al (1999a) estimate
an employment impact of the New Deal for young people 18,000 between January 1998 and
October 1999. Riley and Young (2001b) estimate that the New Deal for Young people has
increased youth employment by 15,000 per year between March 1998 and March 2000.

18

hour 28, average annual earnings are just under £7300. Using this as our
measure of output leads to a social benefit of £125m (row 1).
On the costs side we have a gross exchequer cost in row (2) of £250m29
(about £100m in allowances for the various New Deal options, £50m for the
Gateway and £100m for the resource inputs into the options). We have to
deduct off (i) the fact that unemployment and other benefits were already
being paid to these individuals, and (ii) those individuals that gain jobs and
enjoy higher allowances will be paying some more tax. These items total
£150m (row 3). In addition, some of these costs are transfers, so these will
contribute only to social costs due to the excess burden of taxation (the
deadweight loss involved in a higher level of taxation). Using an excess
burden rate of 15% this is about £15m (row 6). On the other hand, the cost of
maintaining the Gateway is a real productive cost due to the diversion of
resources from other parts of the economy. There are also real resource costs
involved in supplying the options, but (following Layard, 2000) I assume the
benefits of taking an option (e.g. the increased human capital associated with
training) perfectly offset these costs. Summing the excess burden and
Gateway gives a total social cost of just under £68m.
This social cost is much less than social benefits of the extra output
generated, so there ends up being an annual net social benefit of the
programme of just over £57m. The figure is lower than that of the £100m net
benefit in Layard (2000) mainly because I empirically estimate slightly smaller
effects of the New Deal on unemployment and employment than those on
which Layard bases his calculations. Furthermore, I use actual rather than
assumed wage gains . Nevertheless, I concur with his conclusion that the
social benefits of the New Deal are likely to outweigh its social costs.
The other two columns of Table 8 show the sensitivity of these calculations to
changes in key assumptions. Column (2) assumes optimistically that average
annual earnings of those getting jobs from the New Deal are £8500. This
increases the net benefits to about £80m. The final column makes one
change from the first column by pessimistically assume that the employment
effect is only 15,800, (one standard error below the estimated effect in Table
6). The net benefit falls to £25m, half of that in column (1). This illustrates the
importance of the magnitude of the employment effect in determining overall
benefits. If the employment effect fell to 14,000 then the social costs and
benefits are broadly equal.
This analysis probably underestimates the value of the programme for three
reasons. First, it does not take into account the social benefits of reduced
crime, teenage pregnancy, etc. Secondly, it does not factor in the re28

This may be an underestimate, as it does not take into account wage growth over the year
and the fact that those on the New Deal subsidy may be less productive than those who left the
Gateway for an unsubsidised job.
29

This is lower than the numbers in table 3 because our analysis is in long run. In steady state
the New Deal has reduced the equilibrium numbers of the long-term unemployed, so total
costs are lower.

19

distributive effects from relatively wealthy older taxpayers to the less wealthy
young unemployed. Finally, we do not estimate the extent to which the New
Deal programme enhances the employability and productivity of individuals
who participate in the options. We merely assume that the resource input per
New Dealer is not more than the present value of the benefit received. On the
other hand the welfare benefits may be over-stated as we have not given any
weight to the value of leisure for the unemployed.
The job assistance element of the New Deal is more cost effective than the
New Deal options as there is no subsidy involved. The lower bound of the job
assistance/monitoring effect works out to increase steady state employment
by about 8,000.
Existing U.S. evaluations are rather pessimistic about the ability of temporary
government jobs and training schemes to raise the long -term prospects of the
young unemployed, especially young men.30 It is worth, remembering,
however that the US schemes focus on extremely disadvantaged youth who
may be from a comparatively lower part of the ability distribution than the New
Deal participants considered here (especially for men). The success of the
employment subsidy option will also hinge on the extent to which the
experience of work and training will raise productivity, thereby enabling
workers to keep their jobs when the subsidy runs out. 31

6. Conclusions
In this paper I have examined the British New Deal for the Young
Unemployed. This is a major programme to enhance the employment rates of
18-24 year olds. The youth labour market is an important issue in most
countries, especially in Europe where the unemployment rates of the young
are well above the OECD average.
The main finding is from the analysis of outflow rates to jobs before and after
the introduction of the New Deal. The programme appears to have had a
significant effect in moving more young people into jobs. According to our
estimates, young unemployed men are about 20% more likely to find jobs
each month because of the New Deal. I estimate that the New Deal has lead
to an increase in “steady state” youth employment of over 17,000.
The New Deal should be seen as the latest step in the progressive moves in
Britain to tighten the obligation to search for work whilst claiming
unemployment benefit. This process began with the Restart reform of 1986
that made work-focused interviews compulsory for those on longer
unemployment durations. One important difference, however, is that the New
Deal is much more generous in providing advice and hard cash (e.g. for wage
subsidies and training) than previous reforms.
30

For a recent survey, see M. White, P. Auspos and J. Richhio (1999)

31

Bell, Blundell and Van Reenen (1999)

20

A ‘re-engineered’ New Deal has continued since the Labour party’s re-election
in 2001. The government has put greater emphasis on intensifying job search
and extending mandatory options for an ever-larger proportion of benefit
recipients. The employers’ wage subsidy is the element that is most
vulnerable to being cut, due to its low take-up. Such a cut could be premature.
As this paper has shown, the wage subsidy appears to have had a significant
impact on increasing jobs (at least in the first few months on the programme).
The long-term success of the New Deal hinges critically upon improving
employment prospects through the acquisition of better job skills, either in the
Gateway period or, more likely, during one of the options. It will take some
time to monitor the extent to which these dynamic gains in worker productivity
really have been boosted by the New Deal.
Taken as a whole, though, the programme is judged to be a modest success.
Its social benefits appear to outweigh its social costs.

21

References
Ashenfelter, Orley. Ashmore, David and Dechenes, Olivier (1999) “Do
Unemployment Insurance Recipients actively seek work? Randomized trials
in four U.S. States” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 6982
Anderson, Patricia (2000) “Monitoring and Assisting Active Job Search”
mimeo Dartmouth College.
Anderton, B., R. Riley and G. Young (1999), The New Deal for Young People:
Early Findings from the Pathfinder areas Employment Service Research and
Development Paper No. 34,
Abbring, J.H., van den Berg,G. and van Ours, J. (1997) “The effect of
unemployment insurance sanctions on the transition rate from unemployment
to employment’ Working Paper Tinbergen Institute
Adnett, N. and A. Dawson, (1996) ‘Wage subsidies and European
unemployment: theory and evidence’, Economic Issues, March 1996.)
Atkinson,J. and N. Meager, (1994) Evaluation of Workstart Pilots, Institute for
Employment Studies, Report no. 279
Bell, B. Blundell, R. and Van Reenen, J. (1999) ‘Getting the unemployed back
to work: the role of targeted wage subsidies’, International Tax and Public
Finance 6, 339-360
Beveridge, W. (1909) Unemployment, A problem of industry, London:
Longman’s
Bishop, J. and M. Montgomery, (1993) ‘Does the targeted jobs tax credit
create jobs at participating firms?’, Industrial Relations, 32, 2, 289-306
Blanchflower, D. and Freeman, R. (2000) “The declining economic status of
Young Workers in OECD countries” in D. Blanchflower and R. Freeman (eds)
Youth Unemployment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M., Meghir, C. and Van Reenen, J. (2001)
“Evaluating the impact of a mandatory job search program” Institute for Fiscal
Studies Working Paper No. W01/20
Bloom, H. et al., (1994) The National JTPA Study: Overview: Impacts,
Benefits and Costs of Title II-A, Abt Associates, January 1994

22

Bloom, D. and Michalopoulos, C. (2001) How welfare and work policies
affect employment and income: A Synthesis of Research, MDRC, May
Bonjour, D. et al (2001) “The New Deal for Young People: National Survey of
Participants Stage 2” Employment Service Research and Development Paper
No. 67, March.
Boone, J. and van Ours, J. (2000) “Modelling financial incentives to get
unemployed back to work” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2361
Bryson, A., Knight, G., and White, M. (2000) “New Deal for Young People:
National Survey of Participants stage 1” Employment Service Report ESR44
Costa Dias, M. (2000) “A Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of A Labour
Market Reform”, Institute for Fiscal Studies mimeo
DfEE (1997) Design of the New Deal for 18-24 year olds, Department for
Education and Employment, October
Dickert-Conlin, S. and Holtz-Eakin, D. (2000) “Employee-based versus
employer based subsidies to low wage workers: A Public finance
perspective?" in Card, D. and Blank, R. Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare
Reform, New York: Russell Sage Foundation
Dicks, M.J. and Hatch, N. (1989) `The Relationship between employment and
unemployment’, Bank of England Discussion Paper No. 39
Disney, R., Bellmann, L, Carruth, A., Franz, W., Jackman, R., Layard, R.,
Lehmann, H., and Philpott. J. (1991) Helping the Unemployed: Active Labour
Market policies in Britain and Germany, London, Anglo-German Foundation
Dolton, P. (1992) in Lynch, L . Training in the Private Sector, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press
Dolton, P. and O’Neill (1996) “The Impact of Restart on reservation wages
and long-term unemployment” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
57, 4, 451-470
Dolton,P. and O’Neill, D. (1996) `Unemployment Duration and the Restart
Effect: Some Experimental evidence’ Economic Journal, 106, 387-400
Ellwood, D. and Welty, E. (2000) “Public Service Employment and Mandatory
work: A policy whose time has come and gone and come again?” in Card, D.
and Blank, R. Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, New York: Russell
Sage Foundation
Finn, D. (1997) Working Nation: Welfare Reform and the Australia Job
Compact for the Long Term Unemployed, Unemployment Unit, London, 1997

23

Gorter and Kalb (1996) “Estimating the effects of counselling and monitoring
the unemployed using a job search model” Journal of Human Resources, 31,
590 -610-610
Gosling, A., Machin, S. and Meghir , C. (2000) `The Evolution of male
earnings in Britain 1984-94’ Review of Economic Studies, 67(4), 233, 635-666
Grubb, D. (1999) Making Work Pay: the role of eligibility criteria for
unemployment benefits, mimeo OECD
Grubb, David (2000) “Eligibility criteria for unemployment benefits” OECD
presentation in Prague, July
Hahn, J., Todd, P. and Van der Klaauw, W. (1999) “Identification and
Estimation of Treatment effects with regression discontinuity design” Working
Paper UNC, November
Hales, J., Collins, D., Hasluck, C. and Woodland, S. (2000) “New Deals for
Young People and for Long Term Unemployed: Survey of employers”
Employment Service Research and Development Paper No. 58
Hasluck, C. (2000) “Early Lessons form the Evaluations of New Deal
Programmes” Employment Service Research and Development Report
ESR49, June 2000
Heckman, J. Lalonde, R. and Smith, J. (1999) “The Economics and
econometrics of active labour market policies” in O. Ashenfelter and D.Card
(eds) Handbook of Labor Economics Volume III, 1865-2097
Hollenbeck, K. and R. Willke, (1991) The Employment and Earnings Impact
of the Targeted Job Tax Credit, Upjohn Institute for Employment Research,
HM Treasury (1999), Stability and Steady Growth for Britain: Pre-Budget
Report, November
Katz, L. (1996), ‘Wage subsidies for the disadvantaged’, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper no. 5679, July
Layard, R., Nickell, S. and Jackman, R. (1991) Unemployment:
Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour Market Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Layard, R. (1997) What Labour Can Do London: Warner Books
Layard, R. (2000) “Welfare to Work and the New Deal” The Business
Economist 31, 3, 28-40
Martin, John (1998) “What Works among active labour market policies:
Evidence from OECD countries’ experience’ OECD mimeo

24

Meyer, B. (1995) `Lessons from US Unemployment Insurance Experiments’
Journal of Economic Literature, 33, 1, 91-131
Nickell, S.J. (1997) “Unemployment and Labour Market Rigidities: Europe vs.
North America” Journal of Economic Perspectives
Nickell, S.J and van Ours, J. (2000) “The Netherlands and the United
Kingdom: A European unemployment Miracle? Economic Policy, 30, 137-180
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (1994), The OECD
Jobs Study, Paris,
Price, David (2000) Office of Hope: A history of the Employment Service,
London: Policy Studies Institute
Riley, R. and Young, G. (2001a) “Does welfare-to-work policy increase
employment?: Evidence from the UK New Deal for Young Unemployed”
National Institute for Economic and Social Research Working Paper No. 183
Riley, R. and Young, G. (2001b) “The macroeconomic impact of the New Deal
for Young People” National Institute for Economic and Social Research
Working Paper No. 185
Schmitt, J. (1995) “The changing distribution of male earnings in Britain 197488” in R. Freeman and L. Katz (eds) Differences and changes in wage
structures, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Schmitt, J. and Wadsworth, J. (1999) “You won’t feel the benefit: Changing
Unemployment benefit entitlements and labour market activity in Britain”
Leverhulme Trust Discussion Paper Series on the labour market effects of
technical and structural change No. 39
Sweeney, K. and McMahon D. (1998) “The Effects of Job Seekers’ Allowance
on the claimant count” Labour Market Trends, 195-202
Van der Berg, G., van der Klaauw, B (2001) “Counselling and monitoring of
unemployed workers: Theory and evidence from a controlled social
experiment” CEPR Working Paper No. 2986
Van der Berg, G., van der Klaauw, B. and van Ours, J. (1998) “Punitive
Sanctions and the transition rate from Welfare to Work” Tinbergen Institute
mimeo
Wells, W. (2000) “From Restart to the New Deal in the United Kingdom” DfEE
mimeo
White, M. and Leakey (1992) The Restart Effect, London: Policy Studies
Institute
White, M. , P. Auspos and J. Richhio (1999), ‘A review of US and European
literature on the micro-economic effects of labour market programmes for
young people’, Employment Service Report no. 20,

25

Appendix: Cost-Benefit Analysis
I perform a forward-looking analysis of the effects of the New Deal for Young
people. Assuming the stock of six month plus unemployed people has been
eliminated, the NDYP will have its effect on the flow of six month unemployed
18-24 year olds.
I begin with our estimates of the effects of the New Deal on increasing
outflows. The baseline estimate (Table 6 row 7) is that New Deal has
increased the probability of leaving unemployment for a job by 0.205
(=0.053/0.258). We assume that this elasticity is true for all groups
(men/women, whatever duration of unemployment over six months, etc).
I perform a simulation exercise for a counterfactual economy matched to the
features of the UK economy in 1998. There are three states: employment,
short-term unemployment (under 6 months) and long-term unemployment
(over 6 months). Individuals on the non-employer options are treated as longterm unemployed for the purpose of calculating the stocks. I assume that the
labour force for young people is fixed at 1.875m. Initially there are 125,000
long-term unemployed, 250,000 short-term unemployed and 1.5m employed.
With an outflow rate of 10% this implies an impact effect of an additional
monthly outflow of 2,562 (= 0.1*0.205*125) or 31,000 per year. In steady
state, however the stocks will adjust to the new outflow rates so the
equilibrium flows and stocks will be different. Under the assumption that the
New Deal only impacts on the flow rate between long -term unemployment
and employment we can solve for the new steady state levels of the three
labour market states. Long-term unemployment falls by just over 20,088.
17,250 of these individuals enter the stock of employment and 2,840 become
short-term unemployed.
To compute the benefits we assume that young people who get jobs as a
result of the New Deal produce an amount equal to the corresponding wage.
Hales et al (2000) report on a survey of people on the employer option which
suggests an average hourly wage of £3.78. Assuming a 37-hour week this
implies annual earnings of £7,272. So one clear benefit is the increase in
employment multiplied by annual earnings (17,250x£7,272 = £125.4m).
Other benefits include the gross output of the voluntary and environmental
options and the value of training.
On the cost side we have to include:
•

the resource cost of the Gateway period (although there was already
something like this under the previous JSA regime). These are mainly
administrative costs, such as the salaries of persona l advisors.

•

The transfers to individuals and firms involved with New Deal options.
These only matter for a social point of view because of the excess
burden of taxation. This has to be calculated from the increased
additional taxation necessary to finance the New Deal. There are
transfer payments to employers through subsidised jobs and to
participants through the other options. I assume that in steady state
there are 12,000 participants on the subsidised job option. Of the “long

26

term unemployed” 72 per cent are in the Gateway or Follow-Through,
14 per cent are in the Full-Time education and Training option and 14
per cent are in the Environmental Task Force or Voluntary Sector
option. These proportions approximate those in 1999. The subsidies
given to each of these groups is defined by the programme (see
Section 3.2). The sum of these is the gross exchequer cost. We must
deduct off this the benefit payments that would have been received by
young unemployed people if the New Deal did not exist. Also we
should include the additional taxes received by the Revenue. This net
Exchequer cost is the additional tax that needs to be raised and this
will have a deadweight cost associated with it. Note that the transfers
themselves are not included in the social costs.
•

To calculate the benefit savings one must include the annual cost of
JSA (£2080) for all those on New Deal options. For those who are
employed as a result of the New Deal there are also potential savings
in housing benefit (£2080 on a rent of £40 per week) and council tax
benefit (about £468), but not all participants on the New Deal can
claim these (e.g. if they live with their parents). I extracted data on 1824 year olds on JSA using the Family Expenditure Survey. About 40%
of the relevant group claimed these benefits, so I weighted the value
by this proportion. For the employed group I used the wage (£7,200)
to calculate income tax and national insurance (about £472 and £361
respectively for those on £7300 a year). Finally, as net disposable
income has risen consumption will rise and there will be a further tax
take through VAT and excise duties. Taking all these elements into
account implies an average tax and benefit saving of around £3600 for
each person who moves off unemployment as a result of the New
Deal.

•

The resource costs of the New Deal options. We make the simplifying
assumption that the output of the voluntary and environmental options
is equal to the resource costs. One would expect that the output is
rather higher. We also assume that the value of training is equal to the
resource input. This is controversial as most U.S. studies find little
effect of training on unemployed youth. The New Deal courses are,
however, typically much longer than those in U.S. programs (up to
twelve months in full-time education) so the assumption is not
unreasonable.

•

I have not put any value on the lost leisure time of those who were
unemployed but are now productively engaged in different activities.

These calculations ignore many of the potential benefits of the Dew Deal.
First, it does not take into account the social benefits of reduced crime,
teenage pregnancy, etc. Secondly, it does not factor in the re-distributive
effects from relatively wealthy older taxpayers to the less wealthy young
unemployed. Finally, we do not estimate the extent to which the New Deal
programme enhances the employability and productivity of individuals
who participate in the options. We merely assume that the resource input
per New Dealer is not more than the present value of the benefit received.

27

The calculations also assume that there are no substitution effects or
general equilibrium effects. The former would increase the costs and the
latter would increase the benefits. Strong evidence of large substitution or
major general equilibrium effects were not uncovered in section 4.

28

Table 1 Benefits, Sanctions and Unemployment: International
Comparisons

Australia
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
France
Finland
Germany (W)
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Switzerland
U.K.
U.S.

ILO Unemployment
Rate (c.1999)

Replacement Rate
(c. 1997-98)

Sanction Rate
(1994-95)

7.5
9.1
8.1
4.8
11.2
10.7
7.4
10.0
4.7
3.4
2.9
7.3
1.8
6.2
4.3

71
61
66
80
N/a
81
79
N/a
59
82
73
85
84
67
60

14.7
4.2
6.1
4.3
N/a
10.2
1.1
N/a
0.02
36
10.8
0.8
40.3
10.3
25.7

Notes:
ILO unemployment rate 1999 from Nickell and Van Ours (2000);
Replacement rate calculated as: Benefit entitlements before tax as a percentage of previous
earnings before tax; first month of unemployment for a person on average earnings; assumed
that person is 40 years old, has a dependent spouse, 2 children and started work at 18.
These are all 1994-95 (except for Japan, 1996). Source: Martin (1998, table 4) from OECD
database on taxation and benefits entitlements.
Sanctions rate defined as total Sanctions during benefit periods as a proportion of the
average stock of claims 1997-98. Sources are Grubb (2000) except for Netherlands (Boone
and van Ours, 1999) and Sweden (Swedish Labour Market Board);

29

Table 2 Timeline of UK Unemployment Benefit Reforms
Year

Reform

1910, February
1912
1919

Labour exchange network founded by Winston Churchill
Unemployment benefit introduced and administered by labour exchanges
All claimants had to prove “normally in employment, genuinely seeking
employment and unable to obtain it”

1946
1961
1974
1979
1980
1982
1982-85

National Insurance Act
Visit Job Centre once a week (twice a week before)
Benefit Office and Job Centre Split
13% cut in Employment Service Staff
Visit Job Centre only once every two weeks
Visiting Job centre voluntary
50 per cent cut back in numbers of staff to enforce work search (fall of 940
to 550 in Unemployment Registration Office)
Restart mandatory job-related interview; increases in staff (especially for
checking fraud); vacancies displayed in benefit office; verification letters
sent to unemployed; maximum period of benefit disqualification extended
to 13 weeks (was 6 weeks 1913-1986)
January – pilots; July – nationwide for those with 1 year+ unemployment;
October – extended to all with 6 months unemployment
Maximum period of benefit disqualification extended to 26 weeks
Eligibility requirements increased over “actively seeking work” (must look
every week); cannot refuse “unsuitable” jobs paying less than going rate
Employment Service given more independence by being made into an
“arms -length agency”; performance targets (e.g. on referrals)
Mandatory one week job course for unemployed >2 years
“Stricter benefit regime” doubles number of sanctions/referrals
JSA (Job Seekers’ Allowance”) – new legal framework based around Job
Seekers Agreement: Visit Job Centre once every two weeks; more random
checking over search; after 3 months unemployment have to search for
other occupations
Various compulsory programmes (1-2-1, Workwise, Project Work)
New Deal for Young People (pilots in January, nation roll out in April)
New Deal for Long-Term unemployed – all those unemp loyed for over 2
years (July)
National Minimum Wage introduced at £3.60 for adults and at £3 for youths
New Deal for over 50s piloted
New Deal for over 50s national roll out
New Deal made a permanent feature of UK unemployment benefit regime

1986 Restart

1988
1989 SOCIAL SECURITY
ACT
1990
1991
1994/5
1996 JOB
SEEKERS’ALLOWANCE

1997
1998 NEW DEAL
1998
1999, April
1999, August
2000
2001

Source: Wells (2000), Price (2000) and Labour Market Trends, various issues. Important reforms
shaded

30

Table 3 Allocation of the windfall tax, 1997–98 to 2001–02
Spending by programme
(£m)

1997–98

1998–99

1999–00

2000–01

2001–02

1997–02

New Deal for 18- to 24-year-olds
New Deal for those 25 and over
New Deal for those 50 and over
New Deal for lone parents
New Deal for disabled people
New Deal for the partners of
unemployed people
New Deal for schools
Childcare
University for Industry
ONE pilots
Action teams
Enterprise development

50
0
0
0
0
0

210
10
0
20
10
0

320
110
0
50
30
10

440
160
20
60
90
20

460
320
20
90
80
20

1,480
600
40
220
210
50

90
0
0
0

270
20
5
0

330
10
0
0

0

0

0

580
0
0
5
20
20

310
0
0
5
20
10

1,590
40
5
10
40
30

Total expenditure
Unallocated
Windfall tax receipts

140

550

850

1,420

1,340

2,600

2,600

4,300
900
5,200

Source - FSBR March 2000 (the Pre -Budget Report of November 2000 has the same estimates up to
2000-01 for the New Deal for 18 to 24 year olds.

31

Table 4 Level and composition of Active Labour Market Policies (a)
(ALMP) in the G7 between 1985 and 1996
1. Spending on
ALMP as a
percentage of
GDP

2. Spending on
ALMP per
person
unemployed(b)

3. Spending on
Public
Employment
Service as a %
of all ALMP

4. Spending on
Youth
measures as a
% of all
ALMP

Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
UK
US

1985
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.2(c )
0.7
0.3

1996
0.5
1.3
1.4
1.1
0.1
0.4
0.2

1985
6.2
6.6
10
5.8(c)
6.4
3.8

1996
5.6
10.7
16.1
9
3
5
3.2

1985
37
20
26
17(c)
22
25

1996
36
12
17
26
43
39

1985
5
25
6
0(c)
35
12

1996
5
19
5
0
26
15

5. Spending
on direct job
creation in the
public sector
as a % of all
ALMP
1985
1996
3
6
17
15
21
6(c)
2
25
2
3
3

EU(d)
OECD(e)

0.9
0.7

0.9
0.7

13.3
13

11.3
11.4

19
21

19
21

14
11

15
12

16
17

15
14

Source: Martin (1998) Tables 1, 2 and 5.
Notes
(a) ALMP include public employment service, youth measures, public sector job creation, labour
market training (for employed and unemployed adults), wage subsidies to private sector employment
and measures for the disabled (last three items not shown above).
(b) ALMP/per person unemployed is normalis ed on output per head. Normalising on productivity is in
order to control for the fact that more productive countries will have higher wages, so the figure is
comparable to a “replacement rate”. This indicator is commonly used by the OECD and in the cross
country analysis of Layard et al (1991) and others.
(c) 1987
(d) unweighted average
(e) unweighted average excluding Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland

32

Table 5 (MEN): Flows from the claimant count into
employment (Conditional on being on JSA for 6 months).

Flows by the end of the 8th month on JSA

Pilot period
(1) Treatment group:
19-24s year olds in Pathfinder areas
(2) Comparison group:
19-24 year olds in all other areas
Difference in differences

(3) Comparison group:
19-24 year olds in matched nonPathfinder areas
(4) Comparison group:
25-30 year olds in Pathfinder areas
National Roll Out
(5) Treatment group:
19-24 year olds
(6) Comparison group:
25-30 year olds
(7) Difference in differences

Flows by the end of the 10th month on
JSA
Before the
After the
Difference
program
program

Before the
program

After the
program

Difference

0.141

0.180

+0.039

0.241

0.330

+0.089

0.165

0.146

-0.019

0.271

0.250

-0.021

+0.058

+0.110

0.149

0.133

-0.016

0.228

0.233

+0.005

0.150

0.153

+0.003

0.276

0.260

-0.016

0.158

0.170

+0.012

0.258

0.281

+0.023

0.138

0.124

-0.014

0.230

0.199

-0.031

+.026

Notes:
Estimates used the JUVOS 5% longitudinal sample of JSA claimants. Selected observations are all unemployed
individuals completing a 6 month spell on JSA over a predefined time interval. The present table considers those
obtaining 6 months of JSA between the 2nd to 4th quarters of 1997 and 1998 for the “National Roll Out” estimates,
and the 1st quarters of 1997 and 1998 for the “Pilot period” estimates. Individuals verifying this criterion are then
followed up to the end of the 8th and 10th months on JSA to check whether they have found a job. The eligible
group (defined by the age or pilot area criterion) is compared with the selected control group.

33

+0.054

Table 6 (MEN): Gateway employment effects by the end of the 10th mo nth
conditional on being on JSA for 6 months (Percentage Point increase in the
probability of leaving unemployment). Regression results.
Treatment
group

Comparison
group

Observations

Estimates based
on Difference in
difference
method

(1)

19-24 year olds
living
in
Pathfinder areas

19-24 year olds
living in all nonPathfinder areas

3,716

0.110**
(0.039)

(2)

19-24 year olds
living in
Pathfinder areas

25-30 year olds
living
in
Pathfinder areas

1,096

0.104*
(0.055)

(3)

25-30 year olds
living in
Pathfinder areas
19-24 year olds
living
in
Pathfinder areas

25-30 year olds
living in all other
areas

3,180

0.016
(0.042)

31-40 year olds
living
in
Pathfinder areas

1,169

0.159**

19-24 year olds
living
in
Pathfinder areas

19-24 year olds
living in matched
non-Pathfinder
areas

1193

(6)

Outflow into the employment option
(affecting 19-24 year olds living in
Pathfinder areas). Raw numbers from
NDED

4,486

0.057

(7) Overall effect
for the sample
including the Pilot
period and the
National Roll Out
(first three
quarters the ND is
operating in each
region)
(8)

19-24 year olds

17,433

0.053**
(0.013)

(4)

(5)

25-30 year olds

(0.050)

(0.053)

Outflows to subsidised jobs. Raw
55,051
numbers from NDED
Decomposition of New Deal into First quarter and second/ third quarter effects
(9)
Effect for the
1,096
Pilot period – 1st
quarter the
program operates
in Pathfinder
areas
(10)
Effect for the 1st
5,169
quarter the
program operates
in non-Pathfinder
areas
(11)

Effect for the 2nd
and 3rd quarters
the program
operates in all
areas

0.134**

11,161

0.039

0.104*
(0.055)

0.088**
(0.025)

0.031*
(0.016)

Notes:
Estimates used the JUVOS 5% longitudinal sample of JSA claimants. Estimates of the outflows to options in rows
(6) and (8) are obtained from the New Deal Evaluation Database (NDED). Selected observations are all

34

unemployed individuals completing a 6-month spell on JSA over a predefined time interval. The present table
considers those obtaining 6 months of JSA between the 2nd to 4th quarters of 1997 and 1998 for the “National Roll
Out” estimates, The first quarters of 1997 and 1998 are used for the “Pilot period” estimates. Individuals verifying
this criterion are then followed up to the end of the tenth month on JSA to check whether they have found a job.
The eligible group (defined by the age or pilot area criterion) is compared with the selected control group. Rows
(1) through (6) just use the pilot period. Rows (7) through (12) pool the pilot period with the national roll out. The
decompositions are based on allowing the New Deal effect to differ in the first quarter it was introduced (January
through March 1998 for pilot period and March through May for National roll out) from the subsequent quarters.
All estimates from regressions including a set of other controls, namely marital status, sought occupation, region
and some information on the labour market history (comprising the number of JSA spells since 1982 and the
proportion of time on JSA over the 2 years that precede the start of the present unemployment spell).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** = significant at 0.05 level. * = significant at 0.10 level.
Source: Blundell, Costa Dias, Meghir and Van Reenen (2001)

35

Table 7: Further Investigations of the New Deal Effect (percentage point
increase in the probability of leaving unemployment). Regression results.

Experiment

Observations

Estimates based
on Difference in
difference
method

(1)

MEN: Outflows to sustained jobs (13
weeks or more in job)

17,433

0.045**
(0.011)

(2)

MEN: Outflows to sustained subsidised
jobs
(affecting 19 to 24 year olds)

55,051

0.031

(3)

MEN: Outflows to employment
between 5th and 6th months of JSA

20,957

(4)

MEN: Outflows to all destinations
(19-24 year olds vs. 25-30 year olds
from the National roll-out areas and
Pathfinder areas

17,433

0.004
(0.008)
0.108**
(0.015)

(5)

MEN: Outflows to all New Deal
Options(affecting 19 to 24 year olds)
WOMEN: Outflows to employment
(using 19-24 year olds in Pathfinder vs.
19-24 year olds in non-Pathfinder
areas)

55,051

0.137

1,169

0.061
(0.058)

WOMEN: outflow into the employment
option (affecting19-24 year olds in the
Pathfinder areas)
MEN: Using 24 vs. 25 year olds
(instead of 19-24 vs. 25-29 year olds)

1,693

0.048

2767

0.068**
(0.033)

(6)

(7)
(8)

Notes:
Estimates of the effects of the New Deal used the JUVOS 5% longitudinal sample of JSA claimants. Estimates of
the outflows into options in rows (2), (5) and (7) used the New Deal Evaluation Database (NDED). The table
considers those obtaining 6 months of JSA between the 2nd to 4th quarters of 1997 and 1998 for the “National Roll
Out” estimates, The first quarters of 1997 and 1998 are used for the “Pilot period” estimates. Individuals verifying
this criterion are then followed up to the end of the tenth month on JSA to check whether they have found a job.
The eligible group (defined by the age or pilot area criterion) is compared with the selected control group. Rows
(1) through (6) just use the pilot period. Rows (7) through (12) pool the pilot period with the national roll out. The
decompositions are based on allowing the New Deal effect to differ in the first quarter it was introduced (January
through March 1998 for pilot period and March through May for National roll out) from the subsequent quarters.
All estimates are from regressions including a set of other controls, namely marital status, sought occupation,
region and some information on the labour market history (comprising the number of JSA spells since 1982 and
the proportion of time on JSA over the 2 years that precede the start of the p resent unemployment spell).
Standard errors in parentheses.
** = significant at 0.05 level. * = significant at 0.10 level.
Source: Blundell, Costa Dias, Meghir and Van Reenen (2001)

36

Table 8: Preliminary Cost Benefit Analysis of New Deal
£Millions

Item
Key
assumptions

Description

(1) Increased
output from
Jobs

No. of new
jobs x
average
earnings
Transfers to
participants in
New Deal,
direct cost of
Gateway, etc.
JSA, Housing
Benefit,
income tax
and NI, etc
Personal
advisers, etc

(2) Gross
Exchequer
cost

(3) Benefit
and tax
savings
(4) Direct
cost of
Gateway
(5) Net
Exchequer
cost
(6) Excess
burden of
taxation
(7) total
social costs
(8) Net
Social
Benefit

(1)
Baseline
Employment
up 17,250
average
wage £7,272

(2)
Optimistic
Employment
up by 17,250,
average wage
£8,500

(3)
Pessimistic
Employment
up by 15,000
average
wage £7,272

125.4

146.6

98.8

250.3

250.3

254.2

148.8

156.1

133.6

52.9

52.9

55.0

101.5

94.2

120.6

15.2

14.1

18.1

68.1

67.0

73.1

57.3

79.6

25.7

(2) – (3)

(5) x excess
burden (15%)
(4)+(6)
(1)-(7)

Notes: See Appendix and Section 5 for details of the calculations.

37

Figure 1
Claimant unemployment - total and long-term
(thousands)
3,500
Total
3,000

Over one year

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0
Latest

1995

38

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

1960

1955

1950

Source: Labour Market Trends and Employment Gazette, various issues

Figure 2
Unemployment - claimant and ILO measures
3,500,000
3,000,000
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
Claimant unemployment

500,000

ILO unemployment
0
2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

Source: Labour Market Trends and Employment Gazette, various issues

Notes to Figure 2
Data on ILO defined (International Labor Organization) unemployment were taken from the Labor
Force Survey and claimant count unemployment taken from Labor Market Trends (various years). The
ILO definition is based on asking out of work individuals whether they would be available and
prepared to accept a job within two weeks. The claimant count is the number of people who are
receiving unemployment benefit (called Job Seekers Allowance since 1994). Although the series track
each other relatively well, there will be some people who are ILO unemployed who will not be in the
claimant count (e.g. if they left their job voluntarily this will disqualify them for benefit receipt for a
period of time). Similarly some individuals could be claiming unemployment benefit without genuinely
searching for a job.

39

Figure 3
Claimant unemployment amongst 18-24 year olds
1,200,000

Total
Six months and over

1,000,000

12 months and over
800,000

600,000

400,000

200,000

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

Jan-80

Jan-78

Jan-76

Jan-74

Jan-72

Jan-70

Jan-68

Jan-66

Jan-64

Jan-62

0

Source: Labour Market Trends and Employment Gazette, various issues
Notes: Data underlying figures 1-3 is available online fromhttp://www.statistics.gov.uk and Wells
(2000)

40

Figure 4: A Simplified Flow Diagram of
the New Deal Program
Environmental
Task Force
Jobseekers’
Allowance
(6 months)

Gateway
(4 months
max)

Voluntary
sector

New Deal
options

Subsidised
Jobs

Follow
through

Education and
Training

Unsubsidised
Jobs

Notes to Figure 4
The New Deal for Young Unemployed is a mandatory welfare to work program. All young people
(between the ages of 18 and 24) who had cla imed unemployment insurance (JSA) for sixth months
enter the program. During a “Gateway” period of at most four months participants are given extensive
job search assistance. Those failing to find an unsubsidised job have four different options: entering
employment with a six month wage subsidy to the employer, twelve months full time education or
training, working in the environmental taskforce (a public sector job) or working in the voluntary
sector. The individual faces the withdrawal of unemployment benefits if they do not co-operate. After
the end of the options participants who are rejoin the unemployed enter the “Follow Through” which is
essentially the same as the Gateway. For more details see DfEE (1997)

41

