                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE MEASUREMENT OF FIRM-SPECIFIC ORGANIZATION CAPITAL

                                             Baruch Lev
                                        Suresh Radhakrishnan

                                         Working Paper 9581
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9581


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2003




We are grateful to Rashad Abdel-Khalik, Jason Cummins, Rebecca Hendersson, James Myers, Konduru
Sivaramkrishnan, Shivaram Rajagopal, Theodore Sougiannis, and participants of the 2001 Strategy
Conference–Harvard University, Texas Symposium–University of Texas at Dallas, Berkeley
Conference–University of California at Berkeley, the National Bureau of Economic Research 2002
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, and seminars at University of Illinois, Urbana– Champaign,
and Purdue University. We are also grateful to Omer Pamukcu for his research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Baruch Lev and Suresh Radhakrishnan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
The Measurement of Firm-Specific Organization Capital
Baruch Lev and Suresh Radhakrishnan
NBER Working Paper No. 9581
March 2003
JEL No. G0, M0, M1, M4, O0, O3

                                            ABSTRACT


We develop a firm-specific measure of organization capital and estimate it for a sample of
approximately 250 companies. We test the validity of the organization capital measure within a
widely used investment valuation model and show that our organization capital estimate contributes

significantly to the explanation of market values of firms, beyond assets in place and expected
abnormal earnings (growth potential). We then examine whether capital markets are efficient with

respect to organization capital, namely whether stock prices fully reflect the value of this resource.
We find that while investors recognize the importance of organization capital, they do not fully
factor its value into equity prices. We ascribe this fault or market inefficiency to poor disclosure of
information about intangible capital.



Baruch Lev                                             Suresh Radhakrishnan
New York University                                    University of Texas at Dallas
blev@stern.nyu.edu                                     sradhakr@utdallas.edu
I. Introduction

        It is widely observed that within industries or economic sectors some firms

systematically outperform others. Wal-Mart in retail, Dell in PCs, IBM in computers and

related services, Microsoft in software, Intel in semiconductors, DuPont in chemicals,

UPS and Federal Express in shipping, Goldman Sachs in investment banking, Southwest

among airlines, and so on in practically every industry. Such super- normal performance,

generally manifested by sustained growth in sales, earnings, and market value, is only

rarely the result of a natural monopoly or competition-constraining regulation, but rather

is the consequence of the organization of the enterprise—generally referred to as

“organization capital.” This resource is often the only factor of production that is unique

to the firm and is thus capable of yielding above the cost of capital returns. Most other

factors of production, labor, and capital in particular, are commodities in the modern

economy, since competitors have equal access to them.                           Consequently, such

commoditized factors yield, at best, the cost of capital. 1 Organization capital, in contrast,

is the major value creator of business enterprises.

        While organization capital can be intuitively conceptualized as an extra, often

unmeasured factor of production responsible for abnormal firm performance—somewhat

akin to Solow’s residual—and examples of specific business processes and designs

making up organization capital are easy to provide, there are no operational measures of

firms’ organization capital. 2       Such measures will be highly useful to a multitude of


1
  Even R&D yields, on average, the cost of capital. Chan et al. (2001) reported that the performance of
firms conducting R&D is not superior, on average, to that of firms without R&D. See also Hall (1993) for
similar results.
2
  Examples of specific business processes and designs that are components of organization capital include
the following: Wal-Mart’s supply chain, where the reading of the barcodes of purchased products at the



                                                   2
decision makers. Managers, for example, will obviously be interested in tracking the size

and growth of organization capital, which is the most important of the firm’s assets, and

benchmark it against competitors. Furthermore, valuing organization capital will enable

managers to estimate return on investment for this factor to optimize overall resource

allocation. Investors will similarly be eager to incorporate the value of organization

capital in their firm valuation models. In merger and acquisition cases, the value of

organization capital should pla y a prominent role, particularly because, as will be

discussed below, such capital is predominately tacit and difficult to transfer across firms,

and hence of questionable value in acquisitions.                     Organization and management

researchers, along with consultants, in search of quantifying the elusive concept of

“quality of management” will find an answer in an operational measure of organization

capital.

           In this study, we develop a firm-specific measure of organization capital and

estimate it for a sample of approximately 250 companies. We test the validity of the

organization capital measure within a widely used investment valuation model and show

that our organization capital estimate contributes significantly to the explanation of

market values of firms, beyond assets in place and expected abnormal earnings (growth


checkout register is directly transmitted to suppliers who are in turn largely responsible for inventory
management and product provision to the thousands of Wal-Mart stores; Cisco’s Internet-based product
installation and maintenance system, estimated by Cisco’s CFO to have saved $1.5 billion over three years
(Economist, June 26, 1999, p. 12); Dell’s pioneering built-to-order distribution system, where customers
design their products; Ford’s outsourcing of its auto parts manufacturing; and Merck’s extensive network
of hundreds of R&D and marketing alliances and joint ventures, aimed at facilitating technology transfer
and risk-sharing. Sometimes the absence of organization capital is mentioned as a potential source of
future value: In an interview with Bill Miller (Barron’s, February 3, 2003, p. 26), this most successful fund
manager (an average annual return of 14.5% over the past 10 years) said the following about Home Depot:
“People are talking about its problems…but all these problems are getting fixed. This is a company that
didn’t have any perpetual inventory, didn’t have any point-of-sales terminals, didn’t have pay scales for
their employees, and didn’t have any centralized purchasing. It was remarkable what they didn’t have,
which tells you how powerful the economics of the business were.”



                                                     3
potential).    We then examine whether capital markets are efficient with respect to

organization capital, namely whether stock prices fully reflect the value of this resource.

This is an important issue, since systematic mispricing of securities leads to excessive

cost of capital to organization capital- intensive enterprises, adversely affecting

investment and growth.          We find that while investors recognize the importance of

organization capital, they do not fully factor its value into equity prices. We ascribe this

fault or market inefficiency to poor disclosure of information about intangible capital.

        Section II of the paper discusses concepts of organization capital and related

research, while Section III presents our first measure of firm-specific organization

capital, derived from residual output, and discusses the properties of the measure. Section

IV presents our second measure of organizational capital based on an instrumental

variable. Section V incorporates organizational capital in a widely used valuation model

to validate its usefulness. Section VI examines whether investors in capital markets fully

price the value of organizational capital. Section VII concludes the paper.



II. What Exactly is Organization Capital?

        A succinct definition of organization capital was provided by Evenson and

Westphal (1995, p. 2237): “…organization capital …[is] the knowledge used to combine

human skills and physical capital into systems for producing and delivering want-

satisfying products.”3        Specifically, organization capital according to Evenson and

Westphal relates to the following: (a) operating capabilities, such as product design

3
  In a similar vein, Atkeson and Kehoe (2002, p. 1) wrote: “At least as far back as Marshall, economists
have argued that organizations store and accumulate knowledge that affects their technology of production.




                                                    4
systems, production management and engineering (e.g., just- in-time inventory), input

outsourcing (supply channels), and marketing technologies (e.g., on- line distribution

channels); (b) Investment capabilities, such as new project selection mechanisms (e.g.,

using real-options methodologies for project selection), personnel training, and financial

engineering in fund raising (e.g., issuing convertible securities with put options); and (c)

innovation capabilities, such as enhanced R&D capabilities (e.g., a scientific approach to

drug development), adaptive capacity for learning from others, communities of practice

to share information among employees, managerial and legal procedures for

appropriating maximal benefits from intellectual property (e.g., patent licensing and

technology turf protection), technology transfer and risk-sharing mechanisms (e.g., R&D

alliances). 4   Organization capital is thus an agglomeration of technologies—business

practices, processes and designs, including incentive and compensation systems—that

enable some firms to consistently extract out of a given level of resources a higher level

of product and at lower cost than other firms.

        Some writers on organization capital view this resource as embodied in

employees (e.g., Jovanovic, 1979; Becker, 1993). Elaborating on this view, Prescott and

Visscher (1980, pp. 447–448) include the following factors in organization capital: (a)

“what the firm knows about the abilities of its personnel…improving matches between

employees and jobs by measuring performance…,” (b) what “the firm learns about its

employees to improve the match between employees working in teams,” and (c) “the

human capital of the firm’s employees.” Others view organization capital as “a firm-


This accumulated knowledge is a type of unmeasured capital that is distinct from the concepts of physical
or human capital in the standard growth model.”
4
  The specific details and examples in each of the three categories are ours, not Evenson and Westphal’s.



                                                   5
specific capital good jointly produced with output and embodied in the organization

itself.” (Atkeson and Kehoe, 2002, p. 3). Proponents of this approach include Arrow

(1962), Rosen (1972), Tomer (1987), and Ericson and Pakes (1985). In the present study,

we follow the latter—firm-embodied—concept of organization capital.

       The competitive advantages conferred on firms by organization capital are mainly

due to the fact that this resource cannot be completely codified and hence transferred to

other organizations or imitated by them. As Evenson and Westphal (1995, p. 2213)

stated: “Much of the knowledge about how to perform elementary processes and about

how to combine them in efficient systems is tacit, not physically embodied and neither

codified nor readily transferable. Thus, though two producers in the same circumstances

may use identical material inputs in conjunction with equal information, they may

nonetheless employ what are really two distinct techniques owing to differences in

understanding of the tacit elements.”

       For example, with all that has been written about Japanese car manufacturers’

efficiency systems (e.g., just- in-time production process), and the vast efforts to imitate

these systems by other car producers that took place since the mid-1980s (including joint

Japanese–U.S. production facilities, such as the GM–Toyota Nummi plant in Freemont,

California), Japanese car manufacturers are still the world leaders in profitability and

quality. Clearly, some essential elements of organization capital are not transferable

across firms, even over extended time periods.

       The partially tacit nature of organization capital is among the major reasons this

resource is hard to measure. Much of the investment (input) in organization capital is not

fully tracked by firms. For example, the cost of on-the-job training, particularly the



                                             6
mentoring of young emp loyees by senior ones, is generally not recorded by the

accounting system. Also not recorded is the extensive effort of employees to better

educate themselves and improve the efficiency of firms’ production, research, and selling

processes (the “suggestio ns box”). In general, the smaller the firm, the less of the

investment in organization capital that is systematically recorded. Consequently, firms

and investors lack reliable input (cost) measures of organization capital. Nor is the

output of organization capital easy to quantify.         This output—business designs and

processes—is essentially an intermediate product without a market price (see Aghion and

Howitt, 1998, Ch. 12, for discussion of similar difficulties in measuring knowledge).

Moreover, the contribution of organization capital to the firm’s final output (sales,

profits) is not segregated by the accounting system from the contribution of other inputs.

           Finally, to cap the measurement difficulties, a quantification of organization

capital requires an estimate of the rate of obsolescence of this resource. New systems and

processes along with imitation by competitors reduce the value of the firm’s organization

capital.     But, reliable estimates of the obsolescence of organization capital are not

available. Thus, given the daunting challenges in measuring organization capital, we are

not surprised that firm-specific measures of this resource are not available.

           Absent reliable input or output measures of organization capital, our first estimate

of the value of this resource is based on unaccounted firm output. Specifically, we model

the firm’s output as a function of physical capital, labor, and R&D (representing

innovative activities, i.e., intangible assets).     The estimated residual of this model

captures the portion of output unaccounted for by capital, labor and R&D. We then

estimate the systematic component of the residual output by a fixed firm-specific effect



                                                7
and ascribe the contribution of organization capital to output to this systematic

component of the residual output. This attribution of residual (unaccounted) output to

organization capital opens us to the well-known criticism leveled at Solow’s residual as a

“measure of ignorance.” Indeed, in our case, the estimated residual output left after

accounting for capital, labor and R&D may reflect various missing resources beyond

organization capital. To address this concern, we correlate the estimated residual output

with two variables that are known to be correlated with organization capital: (1) the

firm’s sales, general, and administrative expenses (SGA), which include most of the cost

items related to organization capital (e.g., information systems, employee training, brand

promotion, distribution channels, etc.); and (2) the cost of information systems that are

embedded in most of the technologies and processes that compose organization capital.5

We indeed find a strong correlation between the estimated residual output (proxying for

organization capital) and SGA expenses, as well as with information technology (IT)

costs, lending a certain support to our first estimate of organization capital as

unaccounted output. This also suggests using SGA expenses as an instrumental variable

for developing an organization capital measure, which is our second methodology of

estimating this resource.

        Our second estimate of organization capital uses SGA expenditures as an

instrumental variable that affects the total factor and asset (resource) productivities. The

contribution of organization capital in generating abnormal output is assessed as the

difference between expected sales with the organization capital and the expected sales


5
  For example, Brynjolfsson et al. (1999) ascribe the high impact they documented of information
technology on market values of companies to the fact that IT expenditures in fact represent organization
capital.



                                                   8
considering only the sample’s average asset productivities (i.e., without the organization

capital). We examine the properties of this estimate of organization capital and find that it

is associated strongly with IT costs and firms’ market share. In the following discussion

we describe in detail our two estimates of organization capital.



III. First Estimate: Organization Capital as a Residual

        We model the firm’s output—sales (SALE)—as a function of physical capital

(PPE: property, plant, and equipment), labor (EMP), and R&D capital (RND), where

R&D represents innovative activities, that is, intangible assets. We allow for two types of

organization capital: (a) a common organization capital (A), that is available to all firms

(e.g., a certain level of employee education, the prevailing legal and institutional setting,

etc.), and (b) a firm-specific organization capital (FA) that is developed and enhanced by

each firm (e.g., coded knowledge, production blueprints, business processes and

procedures, marketing networks and channels, etc.). We use for estimation the following

constant returns to scale production function (see Hall, 2000):

SALEit = AtFAitPPEitb1 EMPitb2 RNDitb3 eit,                                               (1)

where SALEit is the revenues of firm i in year t, At is the common organization capital,

FAit is the firm-specific organization capital, PPEit is net plant, property, and equipment,

EMPit is number employees, RNDit is research and development capital (the latter three

variables are at year-end), and eit is an error term.

        The sample consists of all firms that appeared in the Information Week 500 list

between 1991 and 1997. We use the Information Week 500 list to define our sample

space because it provides unique data on IT expenditures—a major component of



                                               9
organization capital—for the surveyed companies. These IT expenditures are later used to

validate our estimates of organization capital. Data for each sample firm on sales

(Compustat data item no. 12), plant, property, and equipment (data item no. 8), number of

employees (data item no. 29), and research and development expense (data item no. 46)

are obtained from the Compustat Annual Database. Research and deve lopment capital

(RND) is estimated by capitalizing and amortizing the annual research and development

expenditures (RNDE) over five years (a 20% annual amortization rate). Other than the

number of employees, the output and inputs in expression (1) are deflated to constant

1996 dollars. Specifically, SALE is deflated using the general price deflator; PPE is

deflated using the fixed- investment deflator, and RNDE is deflated using the average of

the fixed-investment and wage deflators. Data on deflators were obtained from

<http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea>.

         We estimate the systematic component of the residual output of expression (1) by

a fixed firm-specific effect, using an annual growth equation:6

log(SALEikt/SALEik,t–1 ) = b 0t + S ib 0itDit + b1ktlog(PPEikt /PPEik,t–1 ) + b2ktlog(EMP ikt/EMP ik,t–1 )

                            + b 3ktlog(RNDikt/RNDik,t–1 ) + log(eikt/eik,t–1 ),                         (2)

for k = t,…,(t – 4); t = 1987,…,2000. 7 Dit is a firm- specific dummy variable proxying for

organization capital. That is, we estimate expression (2) using five- year panel data

spanning year t back to year (t – 4), for each year t (1987–2000). For example, to estimate

expression (2) for 1991, we use data for the years 1987–1991 (k = 1987,…,1991). This



6
  See Caves and Barton (1990) and Jorgenson (1986) for details on estimating firm production functions
with fixed effects. Hulten (2000) provides a review of the theoretical foundations of the Solow residual and
Divisia Index.
7
  We estimate expression (2) for the years 1987– 2000, to examine the persistence properties of the
organization capital estimates that will be discussed later.



                                                      10
procedure yields firm-specific coefficient estimates on the dummy variable, which are

then used to develop our first firm- specific organization capital measure. Admittedly, this

introduces a certain ad hoc persistence to our organization capital estimate, since four

years of data are common to every adjacent estimate (e.g., for t = 1991 and 1992, data for

1988–1991 are common). Since organization capital, composed of business technologies

and processes, is by nature persistent, this feature of our estimate may indeed reasonably

reflect real world conditions. An alternative procedur e for estimating organization capital

as a residual output would be to eliminate the dummy variable from expression (2) and

attribute organization capital to the model residuals, eikt. Then one could use a moving

average or similar process to extract a systematic component from the residuals. We

implemented this approach and obtained similar results to those of expression (2),

reported below.

       We set R&D expense to zero when data were not available on Compustat.

Expression (2) is estimated separately each year for two groups of firms—those with

R&D expenditures and those without. The sample contains 1,246 (non-RND), and 1,952

(RND) firm- years, spanning 1987–2000.

       Panel A of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the input and output

variables in expression (2), while Panel B provides the correlations among the variables.

Panel C presents the mean of the annual estimates of expression (2) for the R&D and

non-R&D firms. For the R&D (non-R&D) firms, the logarithm of growth in common

organization capital (intercept) is 0.03 (0.02), which represents approximately 3% (2%)

average output growth. This is consistent with the aggregate Divisia index estimates in

Hall (2000). For the R&D (non-R&D) firms, the marginal productivity of plant, property,



                                            11
and equipment (b1 * ) is 0.20 (0.12), the marginal productivity of human capital (b2 * ) is

0.38 (0.44), and the marginal productivity of research and development (b3 * ) is 0.19

(where the asterisk indicates the coefficient estimates). The difference between the

marginal productivities of PPE and EMP across the R&D and non-R&D firms is

statistically significant at the P < 0.05 percent level, which suggests that R&D,

particularly process R&D, improves the efficiency of manufacturing processes, enhances

the productivity of plant, property, and equipment of R&D firms. The most productive

input is employees (EMP) for both the R&D and non-R&D firms, highlighting the

significant role of human capital in generating output. The mean growth estimate of the

firm-specific organization capital (b0i* )—the focus of this procedure—for both the R&D

and non-R&D firms is 0.02, indicating that the firm-specific organization capital is

important for both groups of firms.

        To transform coefficient estimates to a monetary measure of organization capital,

we define two expectations of firm’s output from expression (2): the first output

expectation (expression (2A)), incorporates organization capital, and the second output

expectation (expression (2B)) abstracts from organization capital. The difference between

these expectations (expression (3)) yields an estimate of the impact of organization

capital on output:

SALEit* = SALEi,t–1 exp{b0t* }exp{b 0it* }(PPEit/PPEi,t–1 )b1* (EMPit/EMPi,t–1 )b2*

            (RNDit /RNDi,t–1 )b3*                                                      (2A)

SALEit* = SALEi,t–1 (PPEit/PPEi,t–1 )b1* (EMPit/EMPi,t–1 )b2* (RNDit/RNDi,t–1 )b3* ,   (2B)




                                               12
where b0 * , b0i* , b1* , b2 * , and b3 * are the coefficient estimates obtained by estimating

expression (2). 8     Thus, the residual output (RO), reflecting the contribution of

organization capital to output, is given by the difference:9

ROit = SALEit* – SALEit** .                                                                     (3)

The quantity RO it, the difference between expected sales with and without organization

capital, is our first firm-specific measure of organization capital. (Since the data used to

estimate expression (2) are in constant 1996 dollars, RO it is inflated to nominal value

using the general price deflator.)

        Table 2, Panel A (top row), provides descriptive statistics for the RO

(organization capital) estimate. The mean RO is $251 million, representing three percent

of the output (SALE in Table 1), on average. A little more than 25% of the firms have a

negative RO value, indicating that organization capital can be counter productive. Our

estimate of three percent average contribution of organization capital to output is

strikingly close to Atkeson and Kehoe’s (2002, Table 1) estimate of the share of

organization capital in aggregate output, which ranges from 2.7–4.0%. Since the mean

annual change in sales is $576 million (Panel A, Table 2), the contribution of

organization capital to sales growth is 43%, indicating the importance of organization

capital in generating growth of output.




8
 For the non-R&D firms, expression (2) does not include RND and b 3 *.
9
 Note that RO is a flow measure, thus RO can be capitalized into a stock measure by discounting the
expected RO at the firm-specific cost of capital for a specified number of future years.



                                                13
Correlating Organization Capital with Known Proxies

        Confidence in the validity of our estimate of organization capital will obviously

increase if it is found to be correlated with known proxies of this resource. Accordingly,

we report here the correlation of the organization capital estimated by expression (2) with

firms’ IT expenditures, firm’s market share, and their sales, general, and administrative

expenses (SGA). Effective organization capital is achieved through the establishment of

unique marketing networks, innovations in distribution channels, and strong customer

acquisition and retention. These, in turn, result in a large market share (MKS).

Accordingly, MKS is expected to be positively associated with RO, our first estimate of

organization capital. The market share of firm i, operating in the two-digit SIC code m in

year t, is computed as the ratio of firm i’s sales to the total sales of firms belonging to

code m. Thus, MKSimt= SALES imt/? jSALES jmt, where the subscript j indicates all firms

that belong to the two-digit industry code m in year t.

        Brynjolffson and Yang (1999) argued that information technology creates firm

value by enabling improvements and innovations in business processes and procedures,

namely organization capital. Thus, if our RO adequately measures organization capital,

then it should be associated with IT expenditures. To examine this conjecture, firm-

specific information systems expenditures (ISE) were obtained from Information Week

500 surveys for 1991–1997. 10 Combining the above arguments concerning market share

and IT expenditures leads to the following cross-sectional regression: 11

log[RO it]= m0 + m1 [Year dummy] + a1 MKSit + a2 log[ISEit] + eit.                           (4)


10
   Information Week stopped providing the information systems budget data after 1997.
11
  To retain observations with negative RO, we added the absolute value of the minimum RO to each
observation. Similar results were obtained when negative RO firms are eliminated.



                                              14
We expect a1 and a2 to be positive.

        Table 2, Panel C (left box), provides the results of estimating expression (4). The

coefficients on MKS and ISE are both positive and highly significant, explaining 31%

(adjusted R2 ) of our measure of organization capital (RO). This suggests that our

estimation procedure captures real elements of organization capital.

        The right box of Table 2, Panel C, provides the estimates of regressing log(RO)

on log(SGA), where SGA is the sales, general, and administrative expenses. The firm’s

SGA expenses include many outlays related to organization capital, such as information

systems, employee training, brand promotion, and distribution channels, and thus should

be correlated with RO if the latter measures organization capital. (Note that SGA is data

item no. 132, obtained from the Compustat Annual Database.) The coefficient estimate in

Panel C on log(SGA) is 0.75 and highly significant, with an adjusted R2 of almost 40%.

This reaffirms the validity of our estimate of organization capital (RO), and further

suggests that SGA may be a good instrument to model organization capital in expression

(1). 12 We accordingly turn to our second methodology of estimating organization capital.




12
   We do not consider market share as an instrument, because conceptually it is an intermediate output.
While IT spending is an input, and hence can serve as an instrument, it is largely contained in SGA and
thus, if SGA turns out to be associated with RO, then using SGA should subsume the IT spending. More




                                                  15
III. A Second Estimate of Organization Capital – the Instrumental

Variable Approach

        For our second estimate of organization capital, we consider the following

production function with firm-specific productivity parameters:13

SALEit = b0it PPEitb1itEMPitb2it RNDitb3it eit.                                                      (5)

The productivity parameters are modeled as a function of the instrumental variable, SGA

as follows:

log(b0it) = c0t + g0tlog(SGAit)                                                                      (6)

bnit = ct + gntlog(SGAit) ,                                  for n = 1,2,3.                          (7)

We estimate expression (5) by taking logarithms of annual changes, after substituting

expressions (6) and (7) into (5):14

log(SALEit/SALEi,t–1 ) = c0t + g0tlog(SGAit /SGAi,t–1 )

                            + g1t[log(SGAit )log(PPEit) - log(SGAi,t–1 )log(PPEi,t–1 )]

                            + g2t[log(SGAit )log(EMPit) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(EMPi,t–1 )]

                            + g3t[log(SGAit )log(RNDit ) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(RNDi,t–1 )]

                            + c1tlog(PPEit/PPEi,t–1 ) + c2tlog(EMPit/EMPi,t–1 )

                            + c3tlog(RNDit/RNDi,t–1 ) + log(eit/ei,t–1 ).                            (8)

Expression (8)—our second method of estimating organization capital—addresses the

limitation of the residual approach in expression (1) of not allowing the individual asset

productivities to differ across firms. That is, in addition to the total factor productivity,


importantly, while SGA data are available readily through the firm’s annual reports, the IT spending is
typically not publicly available.
13
   Considering firm-specific asset productivity parameters in the former residual approach (1) would
require a longer panel. Expression (5) is a more general specification that subsumes the specification in
expression (1).



                                                   16
b0it, being firm-specific and influenced by SGA (as in expression (6)), we now allo w the

productivities of the individual inputs (PPE, EMP, and RND) to be affected by SGA (as

in expression (7)). Expression (8) is estimated each year for R&D and non-R&D firms

separately. Note that the common organization capital, b0t, in expression (2) corresponds

to c0t in expression (8); whereas the firm-specific organization capital in expression (2)

corresponds to the following in expression (8):

b0it = g0tlog(SGAit /SGAi,t–1 )

         + g1t[log(SGAit )log(PPEit) - log(SGAi,t–1 )log(PPEi,t–1 )]

         + g2t[log(SGAit )log(EMPit) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(EMPi,t–1 )]

         + g3t[log(SGAit )log(RNDit ) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(RNDi,t–1 )].

           Table 3 presents the means of the annual cross-sectional estimates of expression

(8) for the R&D and non-R&D firms. For R&D and non-R&D firms, the logarithm of

growth in common organization capital is 0.02 and 0.01, respectively. For the R&D (non-

R&D) firms, the marginal productivity of plant, property, and equipment (c1 * ) is 0.21

(0.21), the marginal productivity of human capital (c2 * ) is 0.26 (0.30), and the marginal

productivity of research and development (c3 * ) is 0.11. The difference between the

marginal productivities of PPE and EMP across the R&D and non-R&D firms is not

statistically significant at the P = 0.05 percent level. The marginal productivity of SGA

(g0 * ), our instrument for organization capital, is 0.41 and 0.51 for R&D and non-R&D

firms, respectively.          For the R&D firms, the organization capital enhances R&D

productivity by about 2% (g3t* = 0.02), although it does not have a significant impact on

PPE and EMP productivity. This indicates that organization capital is important for


14
     We also measure organization capital without expression (7) and obtain qualitatively similar measures.



                                                      17
sustaining R&D productivity, while the firm-specific productivity of the physical capital

and employees, on average, corresponds to the sample average productivity of those

resources. On the other hand, for the non-R&D firms, the organization capital enhances

the employee productivity by approximately 3% (g2t* = 0.03), but does not affect the

firm-specific PPE productivity. This indicates that for non-R&D firms organization

capital is important for sustaining firm-specific human capital productivity.

        We compute the contribution of organization capital to output by using the

estimates obtained from expression (8) and by comparing the expected output (sales)

computed with and without the common and firm-specific organization capital measured

through the instrument of SGA. From expression (8), the expected output of firm i in

year t with organization capital is as follows:

SALEit* = SALEi,t–1 exp{c0t* + g0t* log(SGAit/SGAi,t–1 )

            + g1t[log(SGAit )log(PPEit) - log(SGAi,t–1 )log(PPEi,t–1 )]

            + g2t[log(SGAit )log(EMPit) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(EMPi,t–1 )]

            + g3t[log(SGAit )log(RNDit ) – log(SGAi,t–1 )log(RNDi,t–1 )]

            + c1t* log(PPEit /PPEi,t–1 ) + c2t* log(EMPit /EMPi,t–1 )

            + c3t* log(RNDit /RNDi,t–1 ).                                               (8A)

where cnt* and gnt* for n = 0,1,2,3 are the coefficient estimates obtained by estimating

expression (8). The expected output of firm i without the effect of organization capital is

SALEit** = SALEi,t–1 (PPEit/PPEi,t–1 )c1* (EMPit/EMPi,t–1 )c2* (RNDit/RNDi,t–1 )c3* .   (8B)

Similar to the residual-based RO it, the instrument-based estimate of organization capital

(ISO) is the difference between expected sales with and without organization capital,

given by



                                                 18
ISOit = SALEit* – SALEi,t–1 ** ,                                                       (9)

where SALEit* and SALEit** are given by (8A) and (8B), respectively. The quantity ISO

is inflated to nominal value using the general price deflator.

        Table 4, Panel A, provides the estimated value of the contribution to output of

organization capital (ISO), estimated by the instrumental variable. The mean (median)

ISO is $411 ($286) million, considerably larger than the organization capital estimated by

our first approach—mean (median) RO of $251 ($72) million, see Table 2. The standard

deviation of ISO ($667 million) relative to the me an is substantially smaller than the

standard deviation of the RO ($777 million), our first estimate of organization capital.

Examining the contribution of ISO to the change in output—the mean change in SALE is

$576 million (see Table 2, Panel A)—we find that ISO contributes 71% toward change in

sales, on average. This highlights the importance of organization capital in sustaining

growth of output. We turn now to an examination of some properties of our second

measure of organization capital, ISO.



Properties of ISO

        We first examine the persistence of ISO, since organization capital is expected to

be persistent over time. Figure 1 illustrates the persistence of ISO. The sample is sorted

each year into three equal groups based on the firm’s ISO, scaled by sales in the previous

year (SALEi,t–1 ). The figure plots the group mean of ISOit/SALEi,t–1 for the five years

preceding and five years following the estimation year t, in which the groups of high,

medium, and low organization capital firms are formed. The figure shows that, on




                                             19
average, firms in the high-ISO group continue to have a high ISO for at least five years;

the medium and low ISO (organization capital) also persist. 15

        Table 4, Panel B, provides the results of estimating expression (4) with ISO as the

dependent variable. Market share (MKS) and information systems budget (ISE) explain

34% (adjusted R2 ) of ISO suggesting that our second estimate of organization capital

captures real elements of this resource.



V. Equity Valuation and Organization Capital

        Having developed two estimates of organization capital, we now examine the

validity of these estimates by incorporating our second estimate (ISO, derived from the

instrumental variable) in a widely used equity (stock) valuation model, known as the

residua l earnings valuation (REV) model. This model, introduced by Preinreich (1938)

and rigorously derived by Ohlson (1995), relates the stock price to the firm’s assets- in-

place and the present value of residual (abnormal) earnings (growth potential). Residual

earnings are earnings in excess of the required rate of return (cost of capital). The REV

model is

Vit = BVit + REit,                                                                                  (10)

where, Vit is firm i’s value of equity at the end of year t, BVit is firm i’s book value

(balance sheet value of net assets) at the end of year t, representing assets- in-place, and

REit is firm i’s present value of residual (abnormal) earnings at the end of year t.




15
   We examine the residuals of our estimate defined as RESit = SALEit – SALEit * where SALEit * is given
by (8A), to verify whether any systematic component of abnormal output is contained in the residuals, and
find that the residuals are not persistent.



                                                   20
         To operationalize the model in expression (10), we need estimates of expected

earnings, and discount rates. For this purpose, we use the mean of analyst earnings

forecasts for three years ahead (or two years when the third year ahead forecast is not

available) and extend these forecasts to five years with the analysts’ long-term growth

forecasts. 16 A firm-specific discount rate is estimated using the capital asset pricing

model (CAPM) with beta (systematic risk) estimated using previous 60 months returns.

Accordingly, the discount rate (rit) is computed as the twelve- month treasury-bill rate

(risk- free rate) plus beta times a risk premium of 5.5%. 17 Thus, the present value of

residual (abnormal) earnings (RE) in the valuation expression (10) is given by


REit = ∑k=1,5 [FEikt – ritBVi(k–1)t](1 + rit)–k + [FEi6t – ritBVi5t](rit – git)–1 ,                       (11)

where FEikt is the consensus analysts’ earnings forecast for firm i, k years ahead, made

four months after the fiscal year t (to allow financial analysts access to the annual report

of year t); rit is the discount rate; BVit is the book value (net assets) of firm i at the end of

year t [BVikt = BVi,(k–1)t + FEikt – DIVikt]; DIVit is the dividend, git is the growth rate of

[FEi6t – ritBVi5t] beyond five years. 18 Thus, residual earnings for each future year—the

difference between analysts’ earnings forecast (FE) and a charge for cost of equity

(rBV)—are predicted for each company for the next five years, followed by a terminal



16
    Most public companies are followed by financial analysts who, among other things, predict future
earnings. These earnings forecasts are commercially available from various sources. Analysts generally
forecast the next two to three years of earnings along with a long-term growth rate. Analysts’ consensus
(mean) forecasts of earnings (in case of multiple forecasts per firm) and long-term (up to five years) growth
estimates were obtained from I/B/E/S (now a part of First Call).
17
   Similar results are obtained when a constant discount rate of either 10% or 12% is used for all firms.
18
  The growth rate, git , is set equal to rit minus 3%, if g it > (rit – 0.03). The current dividend payout ratio
(dividends to earnings) was used to estimate expected dividends. The dividend payout ratio was winsorized
at 10% if the current dividend payout ratio was greater than 10%.



                                                      21
value, based on a constant growth expression. 19 The present value of residual earnings,

RE, based on firm-specific earnings forecasts and discount rates, is added to the firm’s

net assets (BV), to provide an estimate of firm value of equity—expression (10).

            To examine the extent to which our second estimate of organization capital, ISO

(expression 9), is reflected in firm values as indicated by stock prices, we estimate the

following two expressions:

[MVit /SALEit] = q0 + q1 [Year dummy/SALEit ]

                       + b1 [Vit/SALEit] + b2 [ISOit/SALEit] + eit                     (12)

[MVit /SALEit] = q0 + q1 [Year dummy/SALEit ] + b1 [Vit/SALEit ] + eit,                (13)

where, MVit is the total market value of firm i four months after fiscal year t, SALE is the

sales of firm i in fiscal year t, ISOit is firm i’s estimated organization capital using

expression (9), and Vit (expression 10) is firm i’s estimated equity value computed as the

sum of its book value (BVit), the present value of residual earnings (REit, see expression

(11)). All variables are scaled by SALE, to account for size effects. 20 Expression (13)

provides the benchmark estimation without organization capital, ISO, whereas expression

(12) includes the organization capital. We expect the coefficient on ISO (b2 ) to be

positive, and the explanatory power of expression (12) to be higher than that of

expression (13), since current accounting rules exclude most intangibles from book value

(BV), a component of Vit. Stated differently, organization capital is an unmeasured

resource by accountants. Of course, if financial analysts fully incorporate the benefits of

organization capital in their forecast of earnings (included in RE), then ISO in expression

(12) will be statistically insignificant. In this manner, in fact, we indirectly assess


19
     We also used RE without the terminal value and obtained similar results.



                                                      22
analysts’ ability to value firms’ organization capital. Note that RE, MV, and BV in

expressions (12) and (13) are stock variables, while ISO is a flow variable (contribution

of organization capital to annual sales). The estimate of b2 obtained from expression (12)

will therefore indicate the horizon over which investors capitalize organization capital, on

average.

           Stock prices (MV) for each sample firm were obtained from the CRSP database,

and financial data on book value (data item no. 11), and dividends (data item no. 27)

were obtained from Compustat. The financial data for year t were matched with stock

prices four months subsequent to the fiscal year-end, to ensure that the financial

information is available to the investors from published annual reports. We deleted from

the estimations firms with negative book value of equity and negative three-years ahead

earnings forecasts. The sample contains 2,037 firm- year observations, spanning 1987–

2000.

           Panel A of Table 5 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the

equity valuation tests (expressions (10)–(13)). The mean (median) market value (MV) is

$7.4 ($3.1) billion, with a minimum of $41 million and a maximum of $258 billion (Wal-

Mart). The mean (median) book value (BV) is $2.8 ($1.4) billion. Thus, the average

market-to-book ratio of the sample companies is 2.7. The mean present value of residual

earnings (RE) is $0.9 billion, while the median is $264 million. Thus, on average, the

firm’s book value ($2.8 billion) plus the present value of residual earnings (growth

potential), $0.9 billion, constitute about half of the mean market value of equity ($7.4

billion), indicating that the two components of the REV valuation model miss a


20
     See Brown et al. (1999) for the appropriateness of using sales as the scaling variable.



                                                        23
substant ial portion of market value. The mean value of the estimated organization capital

(ISO) is $411 million in Table 5, and the median is $286 million. This value of ISO

accounts for a small part of the gap between market value and V, because it is a flow

measure.

       Panel B of Table 5 provides estimates of expressions (12) and (13), indicating that

the addition of organization capital (ISO) to the valuation expression (12) almost doubles

its explanatory power from 34% (expression (13), adjusted R2 ) to 66% (expression (12),

adjusted R2 ). The coefficient estimate on the flow variable ISO is 7.33, representing

investors’ assessment of the present value of the benefits of organization capital. This

suggests that the market expects the benefits of organization capital to persist for

approximately ten years (a one-time addition to capital should produce a market multiple

of one).

       Panel C of Table 5 provides estimates of expressions (12) and (13) when the

sample is partitioned into three equal groups of firms ranked by size (market

capitalization). The quantity ISO provides the highest improvement in explanatory power

for small firms: the adjusted R2 of expression (12) is 70% versus 28% for expression (13).

This is consistent with the evidence that the accounting model and analysts’ forecasts

provide low-quality information for small firms relative to larger ones.

       The yearly estimates of explanatory power for expressions (12) and (13) are

presented in Figure 2: the top line is the R2 value of the model that includes organization

capital, and the bottom line is without organization capital. The figure indicates that the

impact of organization capital as a stand-alone variable in the explanation of equity

values has decreased during the 1990s. The probable reason: financial analysts, whose



                                            24
forecasts determine V in expression (13), have become increasingly sophisticated in

incorporating the benefits of organization capital in their earnings forecasts.

          Overall, the results in Table 5 indicate that our organization capital estimate, ISO,

is a valid measure of an important component of corporate value. It complements book

value (assets- in-place) and analyst-based abnormal earnings (growth potential),

particularly in settings where the accounting model does not perform well (e.g., small

firms).



VI.       Market Efficiency and Future Returns: Is the Lemon Fully

Squeezed?

          The regression estimates reported in Table 5 and Figure 2 indicate that some of

the benefits of organization capital in generating output are recognized by investors and

incorporated in market values of companies. But do investors contemporaneously fully

recognize the benefits of organization capital? After all, hardly any useful information is

provided by firms to investors about intangibles in general, or about organization capital

in particular (see Lev, 2001: Chapter 4). It will not be surprising, therefore, if investors

overlook some of the value of organization capital.

          This is an important question for managers, investors, and policymakers. If the

benefits of an asset are not fully priced by investors, then the firms’ cost of capital is

excessively high, impeding investment and growth. This should obviously be of concern

to managers and shareholders. For investors, any systematic mispricing of securities

provides opportunities for profitable investment strategies. Policymakers in charge of

corporate reporting constantly search for ways to improve the information provided to


                                               25
capital markets. Thus, identifying capital asset mispricing is of considerable social and

private value.

       The standard methodology in finance research and practice to examine whether

security prices fully reflect an information item (organization capital, in our case) is to

form portfolios of stocks based on the examined information (e.g., firms with high and

low organization capital) and trace the behavior of the risk-adjusted returns on these

portfolios subsequent to portfolio formation. If stock prices fully capture the value or

implications of the examined information, namely the market is efficie nt with respect to

this information, subsequent risk-adjusted portfolio returns should average to zero. If, on

the other hand, stocks are mispriced regarding the examined information, subsequent

returns should exhibit systematic patterns, as investors gradually learn about the

information and its consequences, and adjust stock prices accordingly.

       The key to this test is the proper adjustment of subsequent returns for risk.

Without such adjustment, systematic return patterns and differences may result simply

from the compensation for risk bearing in capital markets. For example, if companies

with high organization capital also happen to be of above-average risk, then one would

expect efficient markets to yield returns on high organization capital stocks that are

systematically higher than on low organization capital stocks, thus compensating

investors for the high risk of the former. Accordingly, in our test we employ the state-of-

the-art adjustment for risk in finance—the “four-factor model.”

       In the four- factor model, future excess returns of portfolios structured on some

publicly known attributes are regressed on four systematic risk factors: the market return

(beta), firm size, the book-to-market ratio, and the stock return momentum (past stock



                                            26
performance). These four factors were widely documented to be systematically

associated with subsequent stock returns, accounting for various risk factors (e.g., market

risk, bankruptcy risk, liquidity risk, etc.)—see Fama and French (1992 and 1993). This

four-factor model is depicted thus:

Ri(t) – Rf(t) = a + b1 [Rm(t) – Rf(t)] + b2 SMB(t) + b3 HML(t) + b4 UMD(t) + eit,        (14)

where Ri (t) is the month t value-weighted portfolio return of firm i subsequent to

portfolio formation, Rf(t) is the corresponding one- month treasury bill rate. [Ri(t) – Rf(t)]

is thus the excess portfolio returns. Rm(t) is the value-weighted monthly return on all

stocks in NYSE, AMEX, and Nasdaq, representing the market return; SMB(t) (small

minus big) is the difference between returns on small and la rge companies’ stocks,

representing the effect of firm size on returns; HML(t) (high minus low) is the difference

between returns on high book-to- market stocks and low book-to-market stocks,

representing the return to firms’ book-to-market value; UMD(t) (up minus down) is the

difference between the average return in month t on the high and low prior return

portfolios, representing return momentum (the tendency of stock returns to persist).

Monthly time series data on the risk- free rate (Rf(t)), market portfolio (Rm(t)), and the

SMB, HML, and UMD factors were obtained from Ken French’s website

<http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/ pages/ faculty/ken.french/data_library.html>.

       The focus of this analysis is on the estimated regression intercept, a, in expression

(14). A statistically significant intercept indicates that the post-portfolio formation excess

returns (Ri(t) – Rf(t)), after being adjusted for risk (the four independent variables in

expression (14)), still exhibit systematic patterns. This is consistent with the conjecture




                                              27
that the information used to form portfolios was not fully captured in contemporaneous

stock prices.

         To examine whether investors fully comprehend the potential of organization

capital, we form two portfolios in each year based on the estimated organization capital,

scaled by sales [ISO/SALE], that is, high and low ISO/SALE firms. Subsequent value-

weighted excess monthly returns for each ISO/SALE portfolio are computed. 21 We then

estimate expression (14) for each portfolio using the following set of monthly portfolio

returns: (a) contemporaneous, (b) one year ahead, (c) two years ahead, and (d) three years

ahead. For example, expression (14) with contemporaneous returns means that the high

and low organization capital portfolios are formed based on the size of ISO/SALE in, say,

fiscal year 1991. 22 Then, monthly portfolio returns are computed for the period

September 1991–August 1992 (contemporaneous with fiscal year 1991) and are regressed

on the four-factor returns for the same months. 23 Similarly, portfolios are formed for each

year 1989 through 1997. For each of the organization capital portfolios (high and low)

the regression includes 108 observations, corresponding to the 9 sample years and the 12

months in each year.

         One-year-, two-years-, and three-years-ahead regressions mean that the portfolios

formed in, say, 1991 are used to form value-weighted monthly returns for the periods

September 1992–August 1993, September 1993–August 1994, and September 1994–

August 1995, respectively. Each of these regressions is also run on 108 observations.

21
   We believe that value-weighted (by total market capitalization) portfolio returns best reflect the purpose
of our tests. We replicated the analysis with equally weighted portfolio returns, and obtained very simi lar
returns to those reported in Table 8.
22
   Fiscal year 1991 includes all firms with fiscal years ending between June 1991 and May 1992.




                                                    28
         As mentioned earlier, the intercept estimate, a, in expression (14) indicates the

existence of abnormal portfolio returns after controlling for the four known risk factors.

The implications of the contemporaneous and forward return analyses are different. A

significant intercept yielded by a contemporaneous return regression indicates that

organization capital generates systematic risk-adjusted returns—a reassuring, though not

a highly unexpected result. If, however, the forward-returns test yields a significant

intercept (one to three years ahead), this indicates that the contribution of organization

capital is not fully captured contemporaneously by investors (investors learn gradually

about the benefits of organization capital)—a case consistent with market inefficiency, or

alternatively, with an unknown risk factor associated with organization capital.

         Table 6, Panel A, provides the intercept estimates of expression (14) for the

contemporaneous as well as for the subsequent-returns regressions. The annualized risk-

adjusted abnormal returns (i.e., the monthly intercept estimate converted to an annual

estimate) for high organization capital portfolio for the contemporaneous, one-year-

ahead, two-years-ahead, and three-years-ahead regressions are 1.80%, 2.60%, 1.29%, and

0.46%, respectively. For the low organization capital portfolio the abnormal returns are –

0.11%, 1.05%, 0.68%, and 0.12%, respectively—substantially lower than for the high

organization capital portfolio. 24 Important for our study is the difference in the risk-

adjusted abnormal returns between the high and the low ISO/SALE portfolios—a hedge

23
   We choose the period September of year t through August of year t + 1, so that all the financial
information that is required to estimate organization capital value (ISO) is available to the investors well
before computing the one-year-ahead portfolio returns.
24
   The coefficient estimates of the four risk factors (not reported) are consistent with expectations. The
estimated coefficient on Rm – Rf, excess market returns, (b 1 * ) is 0.98, which is close to the average market
beta of 1. The sign of the SMB coefficient (b 2 * ) is negative (small stock earn higher returns), the coefficient
of the HML (b 3 * ) is positive (consistent with the widely documented positive association between book-to-




                                                       29
portfolio: long on high ISO/SALE and short on low ISO/SALE companies. In all cases

(contemporaneous and subsequent returns), the returns on high organization capital (ISO)

portfolios are higher than those on low-ISO portfolios. The differences are significant for

the contemporaneous and one-year-ahead returns. The abnormal returns are also

economically significant. For example, the annual risk-adjusted return on high- minus

low-ISO firms in the year subsequent to portfolio formation is 1.55%—a fairly

substantial abnormal return.

        Thus, much of the value of organization capital in enhancing output is captured by

investors contemporaneously with the publication of financial reports and other

information, as indicated by the largest differential abnormal return (1.91%) between

companies with high and low ISO/SALE. Ho wever, investors do not fully capture

contemporaneously the potential of organization capital, as evidenced by the relatively

large differential in the one- year-ahead abnormal returns (1.55%). There appears to be a

certain degree of market inefficiency concerning organization capital, a not-so-surprising

finding, given the poor disclosure to investors of information about intangible capital

(e.g., no data on employee training, brand enhancement, IT expenditures, among others).



VI. Concluding Remarks

        Intangible (knowledge) assets are major drivers of corporate and national growth.

Organization capital—a major form of intangibles, embodied in unique organization

designs and processes—is the least documented type of intangible assets. We develop a



market and returns), and the sign of the UMD coefficient (b 4 * ) is positive (consistent with the positive
association between prior returns and subsequent returns).



                                                    30
methodology for estimating firm-specific organization capital, and examine the validity

of our estimates with a widely used equity valuation model. These tests indicate that our

organization capital estimate adds considerable explanatory power to the original

independent variables of the equity valuation model: assets- in-place and the present value

of abnormal earnings. Further tests indicate that while investors incorporate the value of

organization capital, they do not fully recognize and price the contribution of such capital

in a timely manner, as evidenced by the existence of post-portfolio formation risk-

adjusted returns to portfolios of firms ranked by the size of organization capital. This

presumed market inefficiency might be related to poor and biased public information on

intangible assets.




                                            31
References
Aghion, P. and P. W. Howitt. 1997. Endogenous Growth Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.

Arrow, K. J. 1962. “The economic implications of learning by doing.” Review of
Economic Studies, 29(3): 155–173.

Atkeson, A. and P. J. Kehoe. 2002. “Measuring organizational capital.” Working Paper
8722, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Becker, G. S. 1993. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Brown, S., K. Lo, and T. Lys. 1999. “Use of R2 in accounting research: Measuring
changes in value relevance over the last four decades.” Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 28(2): 83–116.

Brynjolfsson, E. and S. Yang. 1999. “The intangible benefits and costs of computer
investments: Evidence from the financial markets.” Working Paper, Sloan School, MIT,
Cambridge, MA.

Caves, R. E. and D. R. Barton. 1990. Efficiency in U.S. Manufacturing. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Chan L. K. C., J. Lakonishok, and T. Sougiannis. 2001. “The stock market valuation of
research and development expenditures.” Journal of Finance, 56(6): 2431–2456.

Ericson, R. and A. Pakes. 1995. “Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework for
empirical work.” Review of Economic Studies, 61(1): 53–82.

Evenson, R. E. and L. E. Westphal. 1995. “Technological change and technological
strategy.” In Handbook of Development Economics, edited by J. Behrman and T. N.
Srinivasan, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 3A: 2209–2299.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French. 1992. “The cross-section of expected stock returns.”
Journal of Finance 47 (3): 427–465.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French. 1993. “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds.” Journal of Financial Economics 33 (1): 3–56.

Hall, B. H. 1993. “Industrial research during the 1980s: Did the rate of return fall?”
Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1993(2): 289–330.

Hall, R. E. 2000. “e-capital: The link between the stock market and the labor market in
the 1990s.” Working Paper, Hoover Institution and Department of Economics, Stanford
University, CA.



                                          32
Hulten, C. R. 2000. “Total factor productivity: A short biography.” Working Paper 7471,
NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Jorgenson, D. W. 1986. “Econometric methods for expressioning producer behavior.” in
Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 3, Editors: Z. Griliches and M. D. Intriligator, North
Holland, NY.

Jovanovic, B. 1979. “Job matching and the theory of turnover.” Journal of Political
Economy, 87(5): 972–990.

Lev, B. 2001. Intangibles: Management, Measurement and Reporting, The Brookings
Institution Press, UK.

Ohlson, J. 1995. “Earnings, book values and dividends in security valuation,”
Contemporary Accounting Research, 11(2): 1–23.

Preinreich, G. A. D. 1938. “Annual survey of economic theory: The theory of
depreciation.” Econometrica, 6(3): 219–241.

Prescott, E. C. and M. Visscher. 1980. “Organization capital.” Journal of Political
Economy, 88(3): 366–382.

Rosen, S. 1972. “Learning by experience as joint production.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 86(3): 366–382.

Tomer, J. F. 1987. Organizational Capital: The Path to Higher Productivity and Well-
being. Praeger Publishing Co.




                                          33
                           Table 1: Estimating Organization Capital—the Residual Approach

      Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
                                                   With RND                                                         Without RND
  Variable
                       Mean         Min      Q1      Median          Q3           Max      Mean          Min      Q1         Median       Q3         Max
  SALE
                           9,123     146     2189       4,678    10,056       101,781          6,532       3     1,711           3,104    6,068     191,329
  ($ millions)
  PPE
                           3,433      17      571       1,302        3,437     51,161          1,808       2       270            632     1,858      40,934
  ($ millions)
  EMP
                             42        2       12          25          50          813           39        1           7             16      35          1,244
  (thousands)
  RNDC
                           1,036       1      119        323          957      16,439
  ($ millions)

      Panel B: Correlation
                                                         With RND                                                            Without RND
Variable
                             log(SALEt/SALE t–1)        log(PPEt/PPEt–1 )          log(EMP t/EMP t–1 )         log(SALEt/SALE t–1)         log(PPEt/PPEt–1 )
log(PPEt /PPEt–1)                    0.61                                                                             0.56
log(EMPt/EMPt–1)                     0.67                     0.70                                                    0.65                        0.63
log(RNDt/RNDt–1)                     0.41                     0.34                        0.33

      Panel C: Expression (2)
                                              With RND                                        Without RND
                                   Coefficient t-statistic             P          Coefficient    t-statistic                 P
      Intercept                       0.03             5.41           0.00              0.02              5.58             0.00
      log(FA t /FA t–1 )              0.02             5.61           0.00              0.02              6.16             0.00
      log(PPEt /PPEt–1)               0.20             8.87           0.00              0.12              4.39             0.00
      log(EMPt/EMPt–1)                0.38            12.47           0.00              0.44             16.12             0.00
      log(RNDt/RNDt–1)                0.19             6.61           0.00
      R2                                            62.53%                                             58.13%

      Notes:
           1. The numbers in Panel A are in millions of dollars, other than EMP, which is in thousands.
           2. The numbers in Panel B are the Pearson correlation coefficients.
           3. Expression (2): log(SALEikt/SALEik,t–1 ) = b 0t + S i b0it Dit + b 1ktlog(PPEikt/PPEik,t–1 ) + b 2ktlog(EMPikt/EMPik,t–1 )
               + b 3ktlog(RNDikt/RNDik,t–1 ) + log(eikt/eik t–1 ), for k = t,…,(t – 4); t = 1989,…,1997
           4. Expression (2) is estimated over a rolling panel of five years for each year t. For example, to estimate expression
               (2) for 1991, we use data for the years k = 1987– 1991.
           5. Panel C provides the mean coefficient estimates and alternative t-statistics obtained from estimating expression (2)
               each year.
           6. The sample contains 1,246 (non-RND) and 1,952 (RND) firm-estimation year panels, spanning 1987–2000.
      Variable Definitions
      SALE is the net revenues; PPE is the plant, property, and equipment net of depreciation; EMP is the number of
      employees; RNDE is the research and development expenditure; RND is the research and development capital
      computed by capitalizing and amortizing RNDE over five years; Dit is the dummy that equals 1 for each firm i in the
      estimation year t, and is 0 otherwise.




                                                                             34
                            Table 2: Organization Capital: Descriptive Statistics

   Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
                                     Standard                          First                       Third
Variable                Mean         Deviation      Minimum           quartile      Median        quartile     Maximum
RO
                         251           777            –2,724            –7             72           233           8,654
$ millions
SALEit – SALEi,t–1
                         576          1,876          –27,425             29            207          656          27,379
$ millions
ISE
                         192           421               1               31            71           179           4,679
$ millions
MKS                      0.04          0.06            0.00             0.01          0.02          0.04           0.51
SGA
                        1,608         2,650              1              367            707         1,662         22,977
$ millions

   Panel B: Correlations
                         RO             ISE           MKS
   ISE                   0.35
   MKS                   0.26           0.29
   SGA                   0.53           0.76           0.29

   Panel C: Expression (4)
                        Dependent variable = log(RO)                   Dependent variable = log(RO)
                     Coefficient t-statistic      P                 Coefficient t-statistic      P
   log(SGA)                                                            0.75         21.65           0.00
   log(ISE)             15.16           6.43           0.00
   MKS                   0.47           15.16          0.00
   Adj. R2                             31.30%                                      39.22%

   Notes:
         1. Expression (4): log[ROit ]= m0 + m1 [Year dummy] + a 1 MKSit + a 2 log[ISEit ] + eit
         2. The sample contains 1,246 (non-RND) and 1,952 (RND) firm-estimation year panels, spanning 1989–2000.
   Variable Definitions
   RO is the abnormal output computed as the predicted value of sales and the predicted value without the contribution of b0t*
   and b0it* obtained by estimating expression (2). MKSit is the percentage of market share of firm i in year t computed at the
   two-digit SIC level, MKSimt = SALEimt/Σj SALEjmt where firm i belongs to the two-digit SIC m and the sum of sales is over
   all firms in the two-digit SIC m. ISEit is the information systems expenditure of firm i in year t as reported in the Information
   Week 500 survey.




                                                               35
                     Table 3: Estimating Organization Capital with Instrumental Variable, SGA


                                              With RND                                 Without RND
                                Coefficient   t-statistic         P      Coefficient    t-statistic        P
Intercept                          0.02          3.02            0.01        0.01          1.06           0.31
log(PPEt /PPEt–1 )                 0.21          3.24            0.01        0.21          5.54           0.00
log(EMPt /EMPt–1 )                 0.26          2.26            0.04        0.30          2.68           0.04
log(RNDt /RNDt–1 )                 0.11          2.87            0.03
log(SGA t /SGA t–1 )               0.41          6.65            0.00        0.51          12.62          0.00
log(SGA t )log(PPEt )
                                  –0.02         –1.53            0.15       –0.01          –1.99          0.07
  – log(SGA t–1 )log(PPEt–1 )
log(SGA t )log(EMPt )
                                   0.01          0.15            0.88        0.03          2.07           0.06
  – log(SGA t–1 )log(EMPt–1 )
log(SGA t )log(RNDt )
                                   0.02          2.61            0.03
  – log(SGA t–1 )log(RNDt–1 )
R2                                             77.61%                                     78.44%

     Notes:
     1. Expression (8): log(SA LEit /SALEi,t–1 ) = c0t + g 0t log(SGA it /SGA i,t–1 )
                                                   + g 1t [log(SGA it )log(PPEit ) - log(SGA i,t–1 )log(PPEi,t–1 )]
                                                   + g 2t [log(SGA it )log(EMPit ) – log(SGA i,t–1 )log(EMPi,t–1 )]
                                                   + g 3t [log(SGA it )log(RNDit ) – log(SGA i,t–1 )log(RNDi,t–1 )]
                                                   + c1t log(PPEit /PPEi,t–1 ) + c2t log(EMPit /EMPi,t–1 )
                                                   + c3t log(RNDit /RNDi,t–1 ) + log(eit /ei,t–1 )
     2. Expressions (8) are estimated annually.
     3. The sample contains 1,246 (non-RND) and 1,952 (RND) firm-estimation year panels, spanning 1987–2000.
     Variable Definitions
     SALE is the net revenues; PPE is the plant, property, and equipment net of depreciation; EMP is the number of employees;
     SGA is the selling, general, and administrative expenses; RNDE is the research and development expenditure; RND is the
     research and development capital computed by capitalizing and amortizing RNDE over five years.




                                                            36
                         Table 4: Properties of Organization Capital Estimate
   Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
                             Standard                          First                 Third
Variable        Mean         deviation          Minimum       quartile   Median     quartile     Maximum
ISO
                 411             667             –4,415          213      286         445           8,036
$ millions

  Panel B: Expression (4)
                         Dependent variable = ISO
                    Coefficient   t-statistic         P

  MKS                  5.30          9.02            0.00
                       0.41         16.16            0.00
  log(ISE)
  Adj. R2                          34.30%

  Notes:
  1. Expression (4): log[ROit ]= m0 + m1 [Year dummy] + a 1 MKSit + a 2 log[ISEit ] + eit
  2. The sample contains 1,246 (non-RND) and 1,952 (RND) firm-estimation year panels, spanning 1987–2000.
  Variable Definitions: see Table 2 notes.




                                                            37
                                             Table 5: Organization Capital and Equity Valuation
 Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
                                                        Standard                      First                  Third
          Variable                       Mean           deviation      Minimum       quartile   Median      quartile        Maximum
          MV ($ millions)                  7,404           14,362             41       1,559      3,118        6,883          258,333
          BV ($ millions)                  2,763            4,053             35         729      1,428        2,789           42,832
          [MV/BV]                           2.66              1.93          0.01        1.54       2.21         3.38            31.68
          RE ($ millions)                    882            2,243         –3,117           22       264          805           30,023
          ISO ($ millions)                   411              667         –4,415         213        286          445            8,036
          r (%)                               10              0.03             3            8        10           12               29

 Panel B: Contribution of Organization Capital to Valuation
                                       Expression (12)                                       Expression (13)
                        Coefficient      t-statistic             P             Coefficient    t-statistic        P
V (b 1 )                     1.09               8.81            0.00               1.75         10.50           0.00
ISO (b 2 )                   7.33              31.83            0.00
Adj. R2                                       65.75%                                             33.69%

 Panel C: Partitioned by Market Value of Equity [Size]
                               Expression (12)                                                Expression (13)
                    Coefficient   t-statistic    P                                Coefficient    t-statistic           P
               V    (b 1 )            1.70             2.69            0.00           4.23           3.71            0.00
               ISO (b 2 )             4.82             18.36           0.00
 Low




               Adj. R2                            70.44%                                          28.13%
               V    (b 1 )            3.79             18.24           0.00           6.51          27.86            0.00
 Medium




               ISO (b 2 )             7.24          15.96              0.00
               Adj. R2                            79.78%                                          63.56%
               V    (b 1 )            0.78             7.28            0.00           1.44          10.63            0.00
                                    10.11              14.61           0.00
 High




               ISO (b 2 )
               Adj. R2                            67.57%                                          43.35%

 Notes:
    1.             Expression (12): [MVit /SALEit ] = q 0 + q 1 [Year dummy/SALEit ] + b 1 [Vit /SALEit ] + b 2 [ISOit /SALEit ] + eit
    2.             Expression (13): [MVit /SALEit ] = q 0 + q 1 [Year dummy/SALEit ] + b 1 [Vit /SALEit ] + eit
    3.             The t-statistic is the White’s heteroskedasticity adjusted t-statistic.
    4.             The low, medium, and high market value of equity groups contain the bottom, middle, and top one-third of the
                   observations sorted each year based on the market value of equity, respectively.
          5.       The sample contains 2,037 firm-year observations spanning 1987–2000.

 Variable Definitions
 MV is the market value four months subsequent to the fiscal year-end; BV is the stockholders’ equity; the discount rate (r) is
 computed as beta times risk premium of 5.5% plus the twelve-month treasury bill rate. The beta value is obtained from CAPM
 using the monthly returns for firm i from year (t – 5) to (t – 1). RE is the sum over five years of the discounted abnormal
 earnings plus a terminal value. Specifically, REit = Σk=1,5 [FEikt – rit BVi,(k–1)t ](1 + rit )–k + [FEi6t – rit BVi5t ](rit – git )–1 , where git is
 the growth in [FEi6t – rit BVi5t ]. FEikt is the consensus analysts’ earnings forecast k years ahead for firm i, four months after the
 fiscal year t; Vit is the value of equity computed as the sum of REit and BVit ; ISOit is the abnormal output computed as the
 predicted value of sales obtained by estimating expression (8) and the predicted value of sales with asset productivities alone
 in expression (8) estimates.




                                                                          38
    Table 6:Annual Risk-Adjusted Stock Returns on Portfolios Formed by Size of Organization
                                           Capital

Fame– French four-factor risk model
                  Contemporaneous          One year ahead         Two years ahead          Three years ahead

High ISO                 1.80*                  2.60*                   1.29**                    0.46

Low ISO                  –0.11                  1.05**                   0.68                     0.12
Difference               1.91*                  1.55*                    0.61                     0.34


Notes:
   1. The * and ** indicate statistical significance of P < 0.0001 and P < 0.0005, respectively, for a two-tailed
       test.
   2. Expression (14): Ri (t) – Rf(t) = a + b 1 [Rm(t) – R f(t)] + b 2 SMB(t) + b 3 HML(t) + b 4 UMD(t) + eit
   3. The high (low) ISO portfolio contains the bottom (top) 50% of the observations sorted each year based on
       the ISO scaled by SALE.
   4. Table entries are the percentage annual returns obtained by compounding the monthly abnormal risk
       adjusted stock returns obtained as the coefficient estimates of the intercept (a) in expression (14).
   5. The portfolios are formed based on the ISO/SALE in each year (Y). Contemporaneous monthly (t) returns
       span from year September (Y – 1) to August Y; one-year-ahead returns span from year September Y to
       August (Y + 1).

Variable Definitions
Rm is the value-weighted monthly return for the market; Rf is the one-month treasury bill rate; SMB is the difference
in the value-weighted monthly return between the small and the big size firms; HML is the difference in the value-
weighted monthly return between the high and the low book-to-market firms; UMD is the difference in value-
weighted monthly return between firms with high prior returns and low prior return (i.e., the momentum factor);
Ri (t) is the monthly value-weighted returns for the portfolio i; ISOit is the abnormal output computed as the predicted
value of sales obtained by estimating expression (8) and the predicted value of sales with asset productivities alone
in expression (8) estimates.




                                                          39
                                 Figure 1: Persistence of Organization Capital Estimate (ISO)


                   0.1




                  0.08




                  0.06
  ASL/SALE(t-1)




                  0.04




                  0.02




                     0
                          t-5   t-4    t-3    t-2     t-1           t       t+1     t+2   t+3     t+4      t+5




                  -0.02
                                                                  Years

                                                       Low         Medium    High




Note: Three portfolios with equal number of observations are formed based on ISOit /SALEi,t–1 each year.

Variable Definitions
ISO is the abnormal output computed as the predicted value of sales obtained by estimating expression (8) and the predicted
value with the contribution of asset productivities alone in expression (8).




                                                             40
                                 Figure 2: Explanatory Power of Expressions (12) and (13)


                  80



                  70



                  60



                  50
   R-square (%)




                  40



                  30



                  20



                  10



                  0
                       1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992    1993      1994    1995        1996   1997   1998   1999
                                                                      Years

                                                          Expression (13)     Expression (12)



Notes:
   1. Expression (12): [MVit /SALEit ] = q 0 + q 1 [Year dummy/SALEit ] + b 1 [Vit /SALEit ] + b 2 [ISOit /SALEit ] + eit
   2. Expression (13): [MVit /SALEit ] = q 0 + q 1 [Year dummy/SALEit ] + b 1 [Vit /SALEit ] + eit

Variable Definitions: see Table 5 notes.




                                                                   41
