                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE
                           COMPOSITION OF INDUSTRIAL GROWTH

                                            Raymond Fisman
                                              Inessa Love

                                          Working Paper 9583
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9583


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2003




We thank Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, as well as Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and
Andrei Shleifer, for kindly allowing us the use of their data. We are also extremely grateful to Bill Simpson
for providing his QAP Stata subroutine. Finally, we thank Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Ann
Harrison, Charles Himmelberg, Andrei Kirilenko, Luc Laeven, Sendhil Mullainathan, Jan Rivkin, Tarun
Khanna and Luigi Zingales for extremely helpful conversations and advice. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Raymond Fisman and Inessa Love. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.
Financial Development and the Composition of Industrial Growth
Raymond Fisman and Inessa Love
NBER Working Paper No. 9583
March 2003
JEL No. G15, G21

                                             ABSTRACT


We re-examine the role of financial market development in the intersectoral allocation of resources.
Specifically, we propose the use of a new methodology that looks at the co-movement in growth
rates across pairs of countries to examine the role of financial development in allowing firms to take

advantage of growth opportunities. Our model begins with the assumption that there exist common
global shocks to growth opportunities, and we hypothesize that countries should therefore have

correlated patterns of growth if they are able to take advantage of these shocks. We find that
countries have more highly correlated growth rates across sectors when both countries have well-
developed financial markets; this is consistent with financial markets playing an important role in
allowing firms to take advantage of global growth opportunities. We further observe that growth

opportunities will be more similar for countries that are at similar levels of economic development.
This allows for a further refinement of our initial test: the impact of financial development on
country-pair co-movement is much stronger between country pairs at similar levels of economic

development. Finally, we note that our results imply that private banking appears to play a
particularly important role in resource allocation, as our results are particularly strong when financial
development takes into account both the level and composition of financial market institutions.



Raymond Fisman                                          Inessa Love
823 Uris Hall                                           The World Bank
Columbia University                                     1818 H Street NW
3022 Broadway                                           Washington DC, 20433
New York, NY, 10027                                     ilove@worldbank.edu
and NBER
rf250@columbia.edu
         Economists have long claimed that financial market institutions perform an important

function in the development process, particularly through their role in allocating resources to

their most productive uses. This allocative role of financial institutions was recognized first by

Schumpeter (1911), who conjectured that bankers help to identify entrepreneurs with good

growth prospects, and therefore help to reallocate resources to their most productive uses. If this

is the case, then well-developed financial institutions will be crucial to an efficient allocation of

resources in response to shocks to growth opportunities. In light of this proposed function, a test

of the role of financial development in the allocation of resources would involve examining

whether financial development helps firms or industries to take advantage of growth

opportunities in a timely manner. This is not straightforward, however, since growth

opportunities are not generally observable to the econometrician.                  In this paper, we propose a

new (indirect) test of the financial development – growth hypothesis that circumvents the need to

measure these opportunities directly. Our approach utilizes a methodology that focuses on the
                                                                                                              1
patterns of growth, that is, the cross-sectional allocation of growth across industries.                          Our

primary variable of interest is the degree of co-movement in growth rates across industries in

different countries, which we measure by the correlations in intra-industry growth rates across

country pairs during the 1980s. This correlation will be high if two countries are growing (or

declining) in similar industries during the same time period.

         Our tests are based on the observation that if industries in a pair of countries have a

relatively high rate of co-movement, it may be because they are both effectively responding to

the same shock, or because they have shocks to growth opportunities that are relatively highly


1
  A similar approach utilizing pairwise correlations has been utilized in the past by sociologists examining social
networks, and more recently, has been applied to the field of corporate strategy. In particular, Khanna and Rivkin
(2001) use this approach to look at the related topic of patterns of profitability across countries.


                                                          2
correlated. If financial development helps firms to take advantage of growth opportunities, then

we may use the preceding observations to test the role of financial development in efficient

resource allocation by examining whether co-movement is predicted by extent of financial

development.

       We focus first on the presence of global shocks that affect a given industry equally across

all countries. Such opportunities could result as a consequence of technological innovations or

global shifts in factor prices. These global shocks will create new opportunities for growth in

some industries and will require reallocation of resources to these industries. If this reallocation

process requires well-developed financial institutions, only countries with high levels of financial

development will be able to respond to these new growth opportunities. As a result the patterns

of growth will be more similar (i.e. we will observe a higher correlation) among countries with

well-developed financial markets that are thus able to make this reallocation. This is our first

main result – we find that the correlation in growth rates is higher for pairs of countries in which

both countries have high levels of financial development, which allows them to respond to

industry-specific global shocks.

       Now, as mentioned above, country pairs may also have pair-specific growth shocks. If we

were able to generate a proxy for pair-specific similarities in growth opportunities, it would

generate an additional test of the role of finance: financial development should lead to more

correlated patterns of growth rates for countries that have more similar growth opportunities.

This requires a measure of similarities in growth opportunities across countries. We create a

measure that is based on an intuitive idea that countries at similar levels of per-capita income

will experience demand-driven similarities in industrial growth rates (see Chenery (1960),

referred to below as the Chenery hypothesis). Dornbusch, Fisher, and Samuelson (1977) propose




                                                 3
a supply-side theory that generates the same empirical prediction. As an auxiliary result we find

support for this hypothesis using our methodology –countries that are closer together in terms of

income per capita experience higher correlations in intra-industry growth rates. This finding

leads to our second identifying assumption – that growth opportunities are more similar in

countries at similar levels of income per capita. In contrast to our first test, which assumes that

shocks affect industries in the same way across all countries, this allows different groups of

countries to receive different shocks. We argue below that this assumption represents a

significant step forward relative to the previous work in this literature (specifically that of Rajan

and Zingales (1998)). We find support for this more refined test of the financial development –

growth hypothesis in the data: financial development leads to more correlated growth rates

primarily for countries at similar levels of industrial development (and hence with similar growth

opportunities). More precisely, we find that the interaction of level of financial development and

the similarity in income levels has a significant effect on the correlation in industrial growth

rates.

         To summarize, while we never actually observe growth opportunities, we are able to test

the finance and growth hypothesis by looking at commonalities and differences in growth

opportunities. We find support for the finance and growth hypothesis, primarily when the level

of financial development is measured as domestic credit provided by private sector banking

institutions, suggesting that both the level and composition of financial institution development

are important. This paper also makes an important methodological contribution: the usefulness of

our approach is not limited to the two tests that we propose, and other identifying assumptions

are possible avenues for future exploration. In the concluding section we make several

suggestions for future applications of our methodology.




                                                 4
        Our work is closely related to that of Rajan and Zingales (1998), who also develop a test

of the ‘finance and growth’ hypothesis. They deal with the non-observability of growth

opportunities by assuming that there are certain industries that are ‘financially dependent,’ and

hence have a greater need for outside financing. Their findings parallel those described above;

however, they make the strong assumption that some industries have an inherent need for outside

financing, and that the level of outside financing of U.S. firms may be used as a proxy for this

need in other countries. Our approach is less restrictive in a couple of ways: in a sense, their

assumption of the constant industry-specific “external financing needs” is similar to our first

assumption that global shocks to growth opportunities that are constant across all industries, in

that both involve an industry characteristic that is constant across countries. However, in our

test, we are never required to actually measure this characteristic, and therefore do not have to

rely on the US data to generate any industry-specific measures. Furthermore, our second test

offers a significant step forward, as it allows growth opportunities to depend on country-

characteristics, thereby relaxing the assumption of uniform shocks across countries.

        Our paper fits into the more general literature on the role of financial development in the

growth process which began with Goldsmith (1969), and has been followed by the empirical

work of King and Levine (1993), and more recently by Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998),

Wurgler (2000), Love (2002) and others. Unlike these previous papers we focus on the

composition, rather than the average level, of growth. Our paper is also related to the strand of

literature that focuses on disaggregating growth rates into country-, time-, and sector-specific

components.2 These papers look at the percent of the total variation in growth rates that each of


        2
            The identification of components in these studies is based on the temporal dimension in growth rates. By
estimating the error-components models, the country- and industry- fixed effects, which are referred to as long-run
trends, are identified, along with the short-term deviations from these trends. See for example, Stockman (1988),
Costello (1997), Bayoumi and Prasad (1997) and more recently Loayza, Lopes and Ubide (2001).


                                                         5
the components can explain, rather than the underlying factors that cause these components to

vary. Our focus is on understanding the underlying determinants of industry co-movement.3

         The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 1, we describe our methodology

in greater detail. In Section 2 we describe our data. In section 3.1 we introduce our pairwise

correlations methodology with a motivating application and show that the correlation is higher

for countries that have similar levels of income. In Section 3.2, we present results supporting our

first assumption of the common shocks to growth opportunities and in section 3.3 we examine

the second assumption and test the interaction of the similarity in growth opportunities and

financial development. We conclude in section 4.



                                            I. Methodology


         The difficulty in testing whether financial development helps the allocation of resources

to sectors with good growth opportunities, as noted in the introduction, is that growth

opportunities are not generally observable to the econometrician: a firm (or industry, or country)

may be not growing because there are no growth opportunities, or because there are

opportunities, but no financing to allocate resources to them. In the latter case, the availability of

financing will affect the relationship between actual (realized) growth and potential growth (i.e.

growth opportunities). The test of whether financial development helps an economy to shift

resources to those industries with good growth opportunities can be formally written as a



         3
           A few other distinctions are noteworthy. Since we are using a correlation coefficient as a measure of co-
movement, the country-level components are differenced out, i.e. our correlation measure is not affected by average
country-level growth rates. Similarly, we abstract from the temporal dimension by using average growth rates for
the decade of 1980-1990. Finally, unlike previous papers that studied aggregate sectors (primary, manufacturing,
agriculture), we focus on 37 disaggregated industries within the manufacturing sector.


                                                         6
relationship between actual (realized) growth, growth opportunities, denoted GO* (the asterisk

emphasizes that this variable is unobservable) and the level of financial development, FD:

    (1)               (Actual) Growthic = βGO*ic *FDc +e ic

where β is expected to be positive (i.e. financial development increases the alignment of actual

growth with potential for growth – i.e. GO*).4 Because we cannot actually measure growth

opportunities directly, we identify possible commonalities in the shocks to growth opportunities

that will allow us to make inferences about co-movements in growth rates. If financial

development plays the allocative role it has been ascribed, responses to any given shock will be

greater in countries that are more financially developed. Industries in countries that lack financial

markets will not respond to shocks to their growth opportunities but instead will grow in the

industries with favorable “pre-existing conditions” – for example those that have plenty of cash

on hand from the past profits or those supported by the government through protectionists

policies. Here we offer tests based on two identifying assumptions; we emphasize again that our

methodology is not limited to these two specific approaches, and in the conclusions we will

discuss other potential applications of our methodology.



    1. Global industry-specific shocks

    We begin by assuming that there exist global industry-specific shocks to growth

opportunities (due to technological shocks and/or shifts in factor prices, as noted in the

introduction), i.e., some component of GO*ic is common across countries:

    (2)               GO*ic = ηi + εic




4
  The subscripts above emphasize that for each firm or industry i, in a country c, growth opportunities will be
industry and country specific (the time dimension is suppressed for the notational simplicity).


                                                          7
If financial development helps industries to take advantage of these common shocks, this

assumption implies that the co- movement of growth rates will be higher in countries with higher

level of financial development. Intuitively, if one country in the pair is not at a high level of

financial development, its patterns of development will be dominated by the random component

to actual growth (eic in (1) above), and so will not be correlated with patterns of growth in the

other country in the pair.           By contrast, if both countries have well-developed financial

institutions, growth will be dominated by GO*ic, and hence the countries will share a common

component, ηi, to their patterns of growth.

          As discussed above, our measure of co-movement is the correlation in industrial growth

rates for any two pairs of countries. In other words, for any pair of countries c and d we take the

growth rates for a set of industries (in our case we have 37 industries aggregated by the 3-digit

SIC level) and calculate the correlation in the growth rates of these industries in the two

countries over the same time horizon.5 Our unit of observation is therefore a country-pair and the

first test results in the following specification:

    (3)               Corr(Growthic,Growthid) = α * f(FDc, FDd) + εcd

where f(.) is a function of two countries’ levels of financial development: If both countries have a

high degree of financial development, the correlation in their growth rates should be high, as

both countries in a pair take advantage of ηi. However, if either member of the pair is not

financially developed, there will be little co-movement, as at least one country will not be

responding to the common shock ηi. The function f(., .) that captures this intuition is one that

will result in a high value only if both countries in a pair have high level of financial


5
 For the purposes of this paper we focus on the average growth rates for the decade of 1980’s, so our correlation
does not have a temporal dimension (as it is a correlation in average growth rates over that decade). We are currently
working on extending this work to the temporal dimension.


                                                          8
development. This is best represented by a minimum metric, i.e. Min(FDc, FDd). We refer to this

metric as a measure of high development of both countries. Based on the assumption of common

industry-specific shocks, the financial development and growth hypothesis implies that α is

positive.6



2. Differential growth opportunities and financial development

         In this section, we relax the assumption that shocks to growth opportunities are common

to all countries in our sample.7 It is likely that industries in different groups of countries will

have different growth opportunities. For example, some theories suggest that as technologies

mature, industries using those technologies migrate from developed to developing economies

(see Dornbush, Fisher and Samuelson (1977) also cited in RZ (1998)). This will result in growth

opportunities that are similar for countries at similar levels of economic development. The same

pattern is predicted by the early work of Chenery (1960), who also argued that countries at a

similar level of development should grow in similar industries, though in his model this pattern is

driven by differences in income-elasticities of demand. In terms of the pairwise correlations that

we are studying here, these theories imply that the correlation will be higher for countries that

are more similar in their levels of economic development. We use the absolute value of the

difference between two countries’ log GDP per capita as a measure of (dis)similarity in the

levels of development for a pair of countries. We test this hypothesis by:


6
  It may seem unusual at first to treat a high FD country paired with a low FD country symmetrically with a low FD
country paired with a low FD country, since in the former case, at least one country in the pair will indeed have a
systematic component to its intersectoral allocation. Note, however, that this immediately will require us to provide
some structure for global growth opportunities, rather than it as an unobserved, latent variable. We take the
approach of trying to directly measure growth opportunities in a related paper. See Fisman and Love (2003).
7
  As we argued in the introduction, the limitation of our first assumption is similar to that of the methodology in
Rajan and Zinzales (1998) which relies on the measure of the dependence on external finance constructed using the
US data. The technological reasons that result in such an industry-level dependence are likely to be different in
countries at different level of development.


                                                          9
       (4)             Corr(Growthic,Growthid) = β |log(Incomec) – log(Incomed)| + εcd

We predict a negative value for β, so that countries that are closer in their level of development

(i.e. have smaller distance) have more correlated industrial growth rates. We find strong support

for this hypothesis in section III.1.

             This hypothesis facilitates our second test of the financial development – growth

hypothesis, by providing an empirical validation for the assumption that growth opportunities for

each industry i depend on the level of development of the country c:

       (5)             GO*ic = ηi φ (Incomec) + εic

This implies that countries at a similar level of development will have similar growth

opportunities. The test of whether financial development helps industries to take advantage of

their growth opportunities is now a test on the interaction of the “similarity in growth

opportunities” (i.e. distance in the per capital income) and the minimum level of financial

development in a pair:

       (6)     Corr(Growthic,Growthid) = γ * |log(Incomec) – log(Incomed)| * Min(FDc,FDd) + εcd



If our Finance and Development theory holds, firms in both countries will be able to take

advantage of these similar opportunities (and hence generate a high correlation in growth rates),

only if both countries are at a sufficiently high level of financial development. This implies that

the interaction, γ, is expected to be negative. Once again, we underscore that if firms are unable

to take advantage of growth opportunities, then similarity in log(GDP) should not be predictive

of patterns of co-movement, since resource allocation will be dominated by the noise term, eic, in

(1).




                                                   10
         Finally, before continuing, we note that in our regressions, an econometric issue arises

because of the use of pairwise correlations (i.e. we have what is called dyadic data). Since each

country appears N – 1 times in the data, it is probably not appropriate to assume independence of

the error terms in our models.8 Techniques to deal with this issue have already been developed

by social network researchers. Thus, in addition to reporting standard t-statistics, we utilize the

non-parametric quadratic assignment procedure (QAP) to calculate significance levels (Baker

and Hubert, 1981; Krackhardt, 1988).9


                                                    II. Data

For easy reference to earlier work our data are drawn primarily from Rajan and Zingales (1998)

and described in detail in that paper. The main variable of interest is real growth in valued added,

estimated for each of 37 industries in 42 countries (UNCTAD, 1999). To be consistent with

previous work we use the total growth for these industries between 1980 and 1990. To study the

co-movement in growth rates across countries we calculate the correlation of industry growth

rates for each pair of countries (c,d). The correlation will be high if two countries have been

growing (or declining) in similar industries in the decade of 1980’s. We have total of (42*41)/2

(i.e. 861) of such pairs. Table 2 shows the basic summary statistics and Figure 1 shows a

histogram of the distribution of the correlations for all possible pairs of countries. The average

number of industries used in calculating this correlation is 26 because not all industries are


8
  For example, if εcd and εde are both large, our priors would be that εce would be large as well.
9
  QAP is in essence a Bootstrap procedure which preserves interdependencies between rows and columns. Repeating
this procedure N times generates a distribution of coefficients under the null of no relationship. The reported
percentiles correspond to the place of the actual coefficient in this sampling distribution. The percentiles below 2.5%
and above 97.5% represent significance at 5% level. The results reported in the paper used 1000 repetitions. We
thank Bill Simpson for kindly providing us with his STATA routines to implement the QAP.


                                                          11
available for all countries. The correlations range from –0.65 to 0.8 with an average of 0.096.

While the average level of correlation is quite low, among more similar countries, it is

considerably higher. For example, the average rate of correlation between the United States and

all other countries is 0.025; however, the correlation is 0.65 with Canada and 0.58 with the

United Kingdom.10

         We calculate the distance and minimum metrics as discussed above for our country-level

variables of interest, which include the level of income per capita, several measures of financial

development as discussed below, and a number of controls. A complete list of the variables used

in this paper with the original sources is given in Table 1; in Table 2 we report the correlation

matrix for the main country-level measures.



A. Measures of Financial Development


We consider a number of measures of financial development. First, to once again be consistent

with previous work: DOMCRED (total domestic credit deflated by GDP) and MCAP (stock

market capitalization deflated by GDP). Furthermore, we take advantage of new data collected

by La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer (2001), referred to henceforth as LLS, on the

ownership of banks around the world. In their work, they look at the impact of government

ownership of banks on the level of development, and find that concentration of banking assets in

the hands of the government is negatively correlated with subsequent growth. They claim that

10
  Several examples of the similarities in the growth rates in these countries help to show that, indeed, the same sets
of industries seem to be growing (and declining) in this group of similar countries: Plastic products, industry 356,
has grown by about 7% in both the US and Canada and about 5% in the UK; Drugs, industry 3522, has been grew
by 9.5% in Canada, 8% in the US and 6% in the UK. On the other side the Footwear, industry 324, has declined by
about 5% in the US, 4% in Canada and 1.5% in the UK; and petroleum refineries, industry 353, have declined by
about 3% in all three countries. Similar growth rates are also observed for Motor vehicles, Printing and Publishing,
Food and Beverage and many other industries. There are of course dissimilarities as well, for example Tobacco has
grown at 10% in the US and 0% in the UK – this could easily be incorporated by allowing for a noise term in the
expression for GO*.


                                                          12
may be because government bank ownership results in politically expedient, rather than

economically efficient, resource allocation. Thus, resources may be diverted to industries with

political clout rather than those with positive growth opportunities. Barth, Caprio and Levine

(2000) make similar arguments in claiming that greater state ownership of banks is associated

with more poorly developed banks and non-bank financial institutions. This is also consistent

with evidence from case studies: for example Clarke and Cull (1999) find that public banks in

Argentina divert a much larger proportion of resources to primary production and government

services than do private banks, and that public banks also have higher percentage of non-

performing loans. Collectively, this suggests that both quality and quantity of financial assets

need to be considered.

        We extract two variables from LLS paper: GOVPCT70 and GOVPCT95, which are the

proportion of assets of a country’s top ten banking institutions that were held by the public banks

in 1970 and 1995 respectively. Since we are interested primarily in government ownership of

banks during the 1980's, we take a simple average of these two numbers as our measure of the

concentration of government ownership (GOVPCT).11                      As our main measure of financial

development we define:

        PRIVCRED = (1 – GOVPCT)*DOMCRED

This gives an estimate of the ratio of total privately provided credit to GDP, and incorporates

both elements of banking asset quantity as well as quality.12



11
   Not surprisingly, the correlation of GOVPCT70 and GOVPCT95 is fairly high (ρ = 0.77). Since most banking
privatizations took place during the '80s and '90s, GOVPCT70 perhaps deserves more weight. None of our
regressions change substantially if we use GOVPCT70 in place of GOVPCT.
12
   We also experimented with other measures of financial development. Instead of total domestic credit we have
used private credit, which is credit provided by depositary institutions to the private sector. We have similarly
looked at the product of private credit with percent of privately owned banks. Both measures produced virtually
identical results to the ones reported below. As alternative measures of stock market development we used turnover
(value traded over market capitalization), value traded over GDP and new equity issuance over GDP, obtained from


                                                        13
                                               III. Results

III.1 Pairwise Correlations and Similarity in Level of Development


        We start our pairwise analysis with the hypothesis that countries at similar levels of per

capita income will have similar patterns of industrial growth. We begin with this hypothesis in

order to (a) illustrate our methodology in an intuitive setting; and (b) set the stage for a further

test of the role of financial institutions in the resource allocation process.

        To test this ‘modified Chenery hypothesis’ we use the model given in (4), and predict a

negative value for β, so that countries that are closer in their levels of economic development

have more correlated industrial growth rates. In Table 2, we observe that the co-movement in

industry growth (i.e. our correlation measure) and distance in GDP are negatively correlated with

coefficient of –0.3, significant at 1%. To provide a visual illustration we present in Figure 2,

Panel A the relationship between distance in income and correlation in growth rates for each

country paired with the United States. The data show a strong negative correlation: the

regression coefficient is –0.99 with a t-statistic of -6.7 and R2 of 0.46. In Panel B we present a

similar graph, for all pairs of countries.

        Table 3 shows our main results on the relationship between similarity in income and

correlations in industry growth rates for all pairs of countries. We find strong support for the

hypothesis embodied in (4): countries that are closer in per capita income have industry growth

patterns that are more highly correlated. Using the QAP method for calculating standard errors,

we find that the coefficient on |log(Incomec) – log(Incomed)| is significant at the one percent


Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001). As in the results reported below, no other alternative measure of stock market
development produced significant results.


                                                       14
level. Its size implies that countries that are twice as close in per capita income (equal to one

standard deviation; σ =1.13 ) will have a correlation of industry growth rates that is higher by

0.10. We add various other measures of development distance metrics as regressors in models

(2) – (9). Additional covariates include measures of: corruption (as a summary statistic of

legal/institution distance), education (a proxy for human capital, which could be an important

determinant of the industrial composition), accounting standards, population (to proxy for market

size), legal origin (we add a dummy equal to one if two countries in a pair have the same legal

origin), similarity in income distributions measured by the similarity in Gini coefficients, and

two measures of trade: ‘trade openness’ that reflects similarity in the total level of trade (exports

+ imports) as a fraction of GDP, and a second that measures the total trade flows between two

countries in a pair as a fraction of the sum of the two countries’ GDP. We find that only |Gini

Coefficient| and the trade measures are significant at the five percent level or greater, using QAP

bootstrapped standard errors. The most important result of this table is that the significance of

|GDP| is unaffected by the inclusion of these covariates.




III.2. Assumption 1 - Global Shocks to Growth Opportunities



       In this section we test our primary hypothesis that well-developed financial markets are

necessary to take advantage of growth opportunities. As discussed in section 1, our first approach

is based on the assumption that there exist global shocks to growth opportunities in particular

industries that are common across all countries. Since responses to global shocks require a high

level of financial development, growth rates will move together only if both countries have high

levels of financial development. We implement this idea by considering Min(FDi,FDj) as a



                                                 15
regressor to explain correlations in growth rates. Given our results in section III.1., we augment

the model given in (3) to also include a measure of the distance in income levels to make sure

our measures of financial development are not picking up the effect of similarities in income

levels.

          These results are reported in Table 4, utilizing various measures of financial

development. We find that when FD is measured as Domestic Credit, its coefficient is significant

at 2% (using QAP percentiles). However if FD is measured as market capitalization, β2 is no

longer significant.13 Finally, our preferred measure of financial development, Private Bank

Credit is significant at 1%. Thus, if we accept the assumption that there is some component of

growth opportunities that is common across countries, our results support the hypothesis that

well-developed financial institutions (at least in the form of private sector banking institutions)

allow firms to better take advantage of these opportunities.

          This baseline specification suffers from a potential omitted variable bias: it may be that

Min(FDc,FDd) is simply picking up the fact that growth rates are only correlated if both countries

are rich, i.e., growth opportunities are more correlated in generally well-developed countries, but

not in underdeveloped countries. One way of examining this possibility is to include

Min(log(Incomec),log(Incomed)) as an independent variable. We add this variable in model (5)

and find that it takes a significantly positive coefficient, indicating that pairs of well-developed

countries have higher co-movement in industrial growth patterns. We then add this measure

along with our two measures of FD that were significant on their own - DOMCRED and

PRIVCRED. They both remain significant (although the coefficient on min(DOMCRED) is now

significant at 6%, while min(PRIVCRED) remains significant at 1%). However Min(GDP) is no

          13
             There are two extreme outliers in the Market Capitalization index: South Africa and Singapore; when we
exclude them in model (3), the coefficient becomes weakly significant according to a standard t-test but not
significant according to the QAP bootstrapped percentile method.


                                                        16
longer significant at conventional levels. Finally, in columns (6) and (7) we add the two

measures of trade flows as potential omitted variables that are correlated with both financial

development and the comovement in growth rates, and find that the coefficient on Min(FD)

remains significant. Thus, we find support for our theory of Finance and Development, which

does not seem to be explained by a simple omitted variable problem.



III.3. A Further Test– Growth Opportunities as a Function of Level of Development


In our initial set of regressions (Table 4) we assumed that there was some component of growth

opportunities that was common across all countries (commonalities).            In our final set of

regressions below, we will take advantage of a model that suggests systematic similarities in

growth opportunities, and use this to look for systematic similarities in growth patterns in

countries that are financially well-developed. In particular, recall that above, we described

several theories that predict similar growth opportunities in countries at similar levels of per

capita income. However, if our Finance and Development theory holds, firms will be able to

take advantage of these similar opportunities only if a country is at a sufficiently high level of

financial development; hence, a pair of countries at similar levels of development will only have

highly correlated patterns of growth if they also have well-developed financial institutions to

allow firms to take advantage of these opportunities. This implies that the interaction,

Min(PRIVCREDc,PRIVCREDd)*|log(Incomec) – log(Incomed)|, should be negative. We report

the results of this interaction in Table 6. As predicted, the coefficient on this interaction term is

negative and significant at 2% for our preferred measure of financial development, PRIVCRED.

The result is robust to inclusion of other control variables, though its significance is affected

marginally by the inclusion of trade-related variables.



                                                 17
       As a final robustness test we look at the distance in financial development. There is no a

priori reason to expect that the distance in financial development should matter for the co-

movement in growth rates once we have controlled for the distance in income levels. In other

words, we do not expect that pairs of countries that are both underdeveloped financially (i.e.

have similar but low level of financial development) will exhibit a high correlation in their

growth rates. However, if our (theoretically motivated) minimum measure is simply another

proxy for ‘level of development,’ this should be better captured by the distance measure. We find

in Table 6 that the inclusion of the distance in financial development is not significant, and does

not affect the significance levels of our distance measure of income, or the minimum measure of

financial development. This further reinforces the differences between the behavior of financial

development and overall level of development in our regressions, and our tests of the role

financial development in resource allocation.




                            IV. Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we extend the literature on finance and development, by presenting a heretofore

unutilized technique for examining the intersectoral allocation of resources across countries. We

argue that this technique allows for a more refined testing of hypotheses than previous methods

that have been utilized in research in finance. Furthermore, our approach does not require that

we actually observe growth opportunities: we are able to test the finance and growth hypothesis

by looking at commonalities and differences in growth opportunities across countries. In our

first set of results we assume that there is some component of growth opportunities that is

common across all countries (commonalities). In later results we relax this assumption, to allow




                                                18
for systematic similarities in growth opportunities, arguing that growth opportunities are more

similar for countries at similar levels of economic development, as measured by per capita

income. As an auxiliary result we also find support for the hypothesis that countries at a similar

level of economic development have similar patterns of intersectoral allocation. This result

supports our second assumption for identifying growth opportunities.

       The second test offers an improvement over previous work, as it allows growth

opportunities to depend on country-characteristics, i.e., countries at a similar level of

development to have similar growth opportunities. Our methodology thus relaxes the need to

assume constant growth opportunities and also does not have to rely on the US data to generate

any industry-specific measures (since shocks to growth opportunities are latent in our models).

       We find strong support for the allocative role of financial institutions: countries have

correlated intersectoral growth rates only if both countries have well-developed financial

markets. This is consistent with our model where only industries in countries with well-

functioning financial systems can effectively respond to common shocks to their growth

opportunities. Our results also suggest that private financial institutions are particularly important

in facilitating resource allocation in response to growth opportunities, as we find that measures

of financial development that reflect the presence of private sector banking institutions perform

better than previously used measures of total domestic credit.

       This methodology could potentially be extended to incorporate many other assumptions

on the similarities in growth opportunities across groups of countries. One extension that we are

currently investigating takes the changes in the price of oil as an indicator of global shocks that

will generate similarities and differences in growth opportunities for different industries and

groups of countries. Other extensions will take advantage of the temporal dimension of our data,




                                                 19
by looking at how correlations change over time, to examine the impact of increased

globalization, financial liberalizations and business cycle effects on intra-industry growth. It may

also be possible to study regional co-movement (using concordance coefficients instead of

correlations), to further understand the allocative effects of economic integration.




                                                 20
References


Barro, R., 1997, Determinants of Economic Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Baker F.B. and L.J. Hubert, 1981, The Analysis of Social Interaction Data, Sociological Methods
and Research vol 9, pp. 339-361.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio and Ross Levine, 2000, “Banking Systems Around the Globe: Do
Regulations and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?”, World Bank Policy Research
Paper 2325.

Bayoumi, T. and E.Prasad, 1997, Currency Unions, Economic Fluctuations and Adjustment:
Some New Empirical Evidence, IMF Staff papers, vol.44(1), pp.37-58.

Chenery, Hollis, 1960, Patterns of Industrial Growth, American Economic Review, Vol. 50 (4),
pp. 624-654.

Chenery, Hollis and Lance Taylor, 1968, Development Patterns: Among Countries and Over
Time, The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 50 (4), pp. 391-416.

Chenery, Hollis and Moshe Syrquin, 1992, Three Decades of Industrialization, Development
Economics, Vol. 1, pp.78-114.

Clark, George and Robert Cull, 1999, Why Privatize? The Case of Argentina’s Public Provincial
Banks, World Development, Vol.27, No. 5 pp.865-886.

Costello, D., 1993, A Cross-Country, Cross-Industry Comparison of the Behavior of the Solow
Residuals, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, pp.207-22.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic, 1998, “Law, Finance and Firm growth,” Journal of
Finance, 53(6) pp. 2107-31.

Demirgüç-Kunt and Ross Levine, 2001, Financial Structure and Economic Growth : a Cross-
country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
c2001.

Fisman, Raymond and Inessa Love, 2003, Financial Development and Growth Revisited, mimeo,
Columbia University.

Francis Jere, Inder Khurana and Raynolde Pereira, 2001, Investor Protection Laws, Accounting
and Auditing Around the World, Mimeo, University of Missouri-Columbia.

Goldsmith, Raymond, 1969, Financial Structure and Development, New Haven, CT, Yale U.
Press, 1969.




                                              21
Khanna, Tarun and Jan Rivkin, 2001, The Structure of Profitability Around the World, Mimeo,
Harvard University.

King, R.G. and R. Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108(3), pp. 717-37.

Krackhardt D., 1988, Predicting with Networks: Nonparametric Multiple Regression Analysis
with Dyadic Data, Social Networks, vol. 10, pp. 359-381.


La Porta, R., Lopez de Silanes, and Shleifer, 2001, Government Ownership of Banks, Mimeo,
Harvard University.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998. Law and finance. Journal
of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Levine, Ross, 1997, Financial Development and Economic Growth, Journal of Economic
Literature, vol 35, pp. 688-726.

Loayza, N., H. Lopes and A.Ubide, 2001, Comovements and Sectoral Interdependence:
Evidence for Latin America, East Asia and Europe, IMF Staff Papers, vol.48, no.2.

Love, I., 2001, Financial Development and Financing Constraints: International Evidence form
the Structural Investment Model, World Bank Working Paper 2694.

Merton, Robert and Zvi Bodie, 1995, A Conceptual Framework for analyzing the Financial
Environment in The global Financial System: A Functional Perspective Eds. Dwight Crane et al.
Boston, MA, Harvard Business School Press, 1995.

Schumpeter, J.A., orig. 1912, The Theory of Economic Development, trans. 1934 (Harvard U.P.,
Cambridge, MA).

Stockman, A., 1988, Sectoral and National Aggregate Disturbances to Industrial Output in
Seven European Countries, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 21, pp.123-53.

Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic
Review 88(3), 559-86.

Wurgler, J., 2000, “Financial Markets and Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 58(1-2), pp. 187-214.




                                               22
Table 1. Variable Definitions and Sources.

Variable                    Description



Industry-level variables.
Industry growth             Annual compounded growth rate in real value added estimated for the period 1980-1990 for
                            each ISIC industry in each country From Rajan and Zingales (1998).



Country-level variables:

Domestic credit             Ratio of domestic credit held by monetary authorities and depositary institutions (excluding
                            interbank deposits) scaled by GDP for 1980. Original source is International Financial
                            Statistics (IFS).

Market cap.                 Ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP in 1980. IFS.

Log GDP PC                  Log of GDP per capita in US dollars in 1980. IFS

Private Bank Credit         Domestic Credit provided by non-governmental financial institutions, calculated using average
                            percent of assets held by private banks over 1970 and 1995 from La Porta et al. (2001)
Legal origin                Dummies for English, French, German or Scandinavian origin of the legal system. La Porta et
                            al. (1996).

Accounting Standards Amount of disclosure of company’s annual reports in each countries. La Porta et al.(1996)

Education                   Percentage of population receiving secondary school education, 1980. From Rajan and
                            Zingales (1998)

Corruption                  ICRG Measure of corruption; higher number indicates lower corruption.


Trade Openness              Ratio of exports and imports over GDP



Measures calculated on pairs of countries:

Correlation                 Correlation over all industries in Industry Growth (described above) for all pair of countries.


| Xc, Xd |                  Absolute Distance in variable X for each pair of countries (c,d) defined as | X(c)-X(d) |. If X is
                            the level of development, distance will be small if both countries are either similarly developed
                            or similarly underdeveloped. It is a measure of similarity in the level of X.

Min (Xc, Xd)                Minimum value in variable X for each pair of countries (c,d) defined as Min(X(c),X(d)).
                            Minimum is high only when both countries have high value of X.
Total Trade Flows           Total trade flows between two countries in a pair as a percent of the sum of the two countries’
                            GDP
Same legal origin           Equals to one if both countries come from the same legal origin and zero otherwise.




                                                           23
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics and Correlations
See Table 1 for Variable Definitions and Sources. All variables are calculated for each pair of
countries using formulas given in Table 1. Numbers in [ ] in the first row show the number of
Industries used in calculating the correlation for each pair of countries.

Panel A. Descriptive Statistics


                              N obs.    Min          Mean    Median   Max      Std.


Correlation                   861      -0.647        0.096   0.092    0.796    .27
                                       [6]           [26]    [27]     [37]     [9]
| Log GDP PC |                861       0.002        1.537   1.354    4.780    1.13
| Domestic Credit |           861       0.001        0.260   0.216    0.841    0.19

| Market Capitalization |     861       0.000        0.281   0.144    1.624    0.36

| Private Bank Credit |       861       0.000        0.237   0.197    0.964    0.19

Min (Log GDP PC)              861       4.793        7.137   7.047    9.505    1.24

Min (Domestic Credit)         861       0.162        0.395   0.378    0.990    0.15

Min (Market Capitalization)   861       0.000        0.080   0.052    1.203    0.11

Min (Private Bank Credit)     861       0.005        0.182   0.137    0.771    0.14




                                                24
             Panel B. Correlations


                                                                | Private |            Min     Min
                                          | Dom. |    | Market| | Bank |      Min      (Dom. (Market
                   Correlation | GDPPC|   | Credit|   | Cap. | | Credit |     (GDP PC) Credit) Cap.)
| GDP PC |         -0.31*
                   (0)

| Domestic Credit | -0.06     0.04
                   (0.08)     (022)

| Market
Capitalization|    0.05       -0.08*      -0.08*
                   0.15       0.01        0.02

| Private Bank     -0.08*     0.26*       0.41*       -0.03
Credit |           (0.01)     (0)         (0)         (0.32)

Min (GDP PC)       0.32*      -0.71*      0.05        0.08*      -0.08*
                   (0)        (0)         (0.15)      (0.01)     (0)

Min (Dom.          0.22*      -0.15*      -0.26*      -0.12*     0.06         0.35*
Credit)            (0)        (0)         (0)         (0)        (0.8)        (0)

Min (Market        0.05       -0.17*      -0.08*      0.12*      -0.09*       0.27*   0.08*
Capitalization)    (0.11)     (0)         (0)         (0)        (0.001)      (0)     (0.02)

Min (Private Bank 0.31*       -0.35*      -0.03       0.11*      -0.24*       0.61*   0.52*    0.43*
Credit)           (0)         (0)         (0.36)      (0)        (0)          (0)     (0)      (0)




                                                      25
  Table 3. Co-movement in Growth rates and Distance in Income
  Dependent variable is Correlation in Growth rates across all industries for each pair of countries.
  Constant is included in all regressions (not reported). T-statistics are in () and Bootstrapped
  Percentile (using QAP Procedure described in text) in [], percentiles below 2.5% or above 97.5%
  represent significance at 5% level.

                    (1)        (2)     (3)      (4)          (5)    (6)       (7)      (8)      (9)

Distance in:
| Log GDP PC |     -0.074    -0.06    -0.07    -0.07     -0.079    -0.067   -0.075   -0.075   -0.063
                   (-9.65)   (-5.5)   (-5.8)   (-8.9)    (-9.2)    (-8.9)   (-9.7)   (-9.9)   (7.8)
                   [0%]      [0%]     [0%]     [0%]      [0%]      [0%]     [0%]     [0%]     [0%]


| Corruption |               -0.02
                             (-2.8)
                             [4.9%]


| Accounting                          0.004
Standards |                           (0.5)
                                      [59%]


| Log of                                       0.002
Population |                                   (0.3)
                                               [54%]


| Education |                                            0.009
                                                         (2.3)
                                                         [92%]
| Gini                                                             -0.004
Coefficient |                                                      (-4)
                                                                   [2%]

Same Legal                                                                  -0.009
Origin                                                                      (-0.5)
                                                                            [36%]

| Trade                                                                              -0.022
Openness|                                                                            (3.5)
                                                                                     [9.9%]
Total Trade                                                                                   9.85
Flows                                                                                         (3.1)
                                                                                              [100%]



N Obs              861       861      561      820   820           861      861      861      820
R2                 0.094     0.10     0.06     0.085 0.092         0.11     0.095    0.10     0.11



                                                        26
Table 4. Co-movement in Growth rates and Level of Financial Development


Dependent variable is Correlation in Growth rates across all industries for each pair of countries.
Model 3 excludes South Africa and Singapore which are outliers on Market Capitalization.
Constant is included in all regressions (not reported). T-statistics are in () and Bootstrapped
Percentile (using QAP Procedure described in text) in [], percentiles below 2.5% or above 97.5%
represent significance at 5% level.


                (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)       (9)

| Log GDP       -0.067   -0.074    -0.074    -0.055     -0.038    -0.045   -0.048   -0.054    -0.049
PC |            (-8.8)   (-9.5)    (-9.5)    (-6.8)     (-3.5)    (-4.1)   (-4.3)   (-6.5)    (-6.06)
                [0%]     [0%]      [0%]      [0%]       [2.5%]    [0.8%]   [0.7%]   [0%]      [0%]



Min             0.31                                              0.25
(Domestic       (5.5)                                             (4.4)
                [99%]                                             [97%]
Credit)
Min (Market              0.004     0.11
Cap.)                    (0.03)    (2.1)
                         [56%]     [77%]
Min (Private                                 0.44                          0.40     0.45      0.36
Bank Credit)                                 (7.3)                         (5.6)    (7.5)     (5.53)
                                             [99.8%]                       [99%]    [99.8%]   [99.4%]
Min (Log                                                0.044     0.029    0.01
GDP PC)                                                 (4.3)[9   (2.7)    (0.9)
                                                        9%]       [91%]    [64%]
| Trade                                                                             -0.024
Openness |                                                                          (-3.76)
                                                                                    [6.4%]
Trade Flows                                                                                   7.71
                                                                                              (2.92)
                                                                                              [99.8%]
N Obs           861      861       780       861        861       861      861      861       820
R2              0.13     0.095     0.11      0.14       0.12      0.13     0.14     0.15      0.14




                                                   27
Table 5. Interaction Of Financial Development and Distance in GNP PC
Dependent variable is Correlation in Growth rates across all industries for each pair of countries.
Constant is included in all regressions. T-statistics are in () and Bootstrapped Percentile (using
QAP Procedure described in text) in [], percentiles below 2.5% or above 97.5% represent
significance at 5% level.

                                         (1)           (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)

| Log GDP PC |                           -0.023        -0.077   -0.026   -0.028    -0.029
                                         (-1.2)        (-7.9)   (-2.5)   (-2.71)   (2.75)
                                         [27%]         [0%]     [10%]    [9%]      [8.5%]

Min (Domestic Credit)                    0.47
                                         (4.7)
                                         [99.7%]
Min (Market Capitalization)                            -0.07
                                                       (-0.3)
                                                       [38%]
Min (Private Bank Credit)                                       0.7      0.71      0.59
                                                                (7.9)    (7.9)     (6.24)
                                                                [100%]   [100%]    [99.5%]
Interactions :
| Log GDP PC | * Min(Domestic            -0.11
Credit)                                  (2.2)
                                         [7.9%]
| Log GDP PC | * Min(Market Cap.)                      0.059
                                                       (0.6)
                                                       [66%]
| Log GDP PC | * Min(Private Bank                               -0.19    -0.18     -0.15
Credit)                                                         (4.1)    (3.99)    (3.06)
                                                                [2.2%]   [3%]      [5.9%]
| Trade Openness |                                                       -0.024
                                                                         (3.67)
                                                                         [7%]
Total Trade Flows                                                                  6.84
                                                                                   (3.13)
                                                                                   [99.7%]
N Obs                                    861           861      861      861       820
R2                                       0.13          0.095    0.15     0.17      0.14




                                                  28
Table 6. Co-movement in Growth rates and Distance in Financial
Development
Dependent variable is Correlation in Growth rates across all industries for each pair of countries.
Constant is included in all regressions (not reported). T-statistics are in () and Bootstrapped
Percentile (using QAP Procedure described in text) in [], percentiles below 2.5% or above
97.5% represent significance at 5% level.


                            (1)      (2)       (3)

| Log GDP PC |              -0.074   -0.074    -0.074
                            (-9.6)   (-9.6)    (-9.1)
                            [0%]     [0%]      [0%]

| Domestic Credit |         -0.065
                            (1.4)
                            [19%]
| Market Capitalization |            0.02
                                     (0.7)
                                     [61%]
| Private Bank Credit |                        -0.006
                                               (0.1)
                                               [45%]

N Obs                       861      861       861
R2                          0.096    0.096     0.095




                                                29
Figure 1. Distribution of the Correlation Coefficients



Corr(Growthic,Growthid)




                                  30
Figure 2. Distance in income levels and correlation of industrial growth patterns.



Panel A. Correlation with US

            Corr (Growth(c), Growth(USA))
          Norway
 0.69
         Canada

            UK
           Sweden
        Denmark
         Finland
        Germany        Spain
        France
        Netherla                                    Jordan
          Japan
        Belgium              Greece Portugal
                         Singapor
                                         Malaysia
                     Italy                                          Egypt
                               Israel
                                                    Turkey
                                                                            Kenya
                                               Colombia
                                                                        Zimbabwe
                                                       Peru
           Austria
                          Venezuel
                                 Mexico
                                    CostaRic
          Australi                 Chile

             NewZeala                        Korea                                        India
                                                             Philippi
                               SouthAfr   Brazil
                                                                                    Pakistan


                                                          Morocco
                                                                                       SriLanka
                                                                                                  Banglade
-0.32
         0.00                                                                                     0.67
                                    Distance in Log(GDP PC) with US




Notes: the regression coefficient is –0.99 with t-statistic of -6.7 and R2 of 0.46




                                                     31
Figure 2. (continued)



Panel B. Correlation of industrial growth for country-pairs



            Correlations of country pairs

.795825




-.647271
        .002065                                                       4.77951
                                   distance in Log GDPPC




   Note: The regression line corresponds to the Model 1 in Table 3.




                                                 32
