NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE THERE CIVIC RETURNS TO EDUCATION?
Thomas S. Dee
Working Paper 9588
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9588
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

I would like to thank Cecilia Rouse, William Evans, Orley Ashenfelter, seminar participants at Syracuse and
Maryland and Princeton’s Public Finance Working Group for helpful comments and Josh Angrist for
providing data on child labor laws. I would also like to thank the National Academy of Education, the
Spencer Foundation and the Center for Information and Research on Civic Learning and Engagement
(CIRCLE) for their financial assistance. The usual disclaimers apply. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Thomas S. Dee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Are There Civic Returns to Education?
Thomas S. Dee
NBER Working Paper No. 9588
March 2003
JEL No. I2, H1
ABSTRACT
The hypothesized effects of educational attainment on adult civic engagement and attitudes provide
some of the most important justifications for government intervention in the market for education.
In this study, I present evidence on whether these externalities exist. I assess and implement two
strategies for identifying the effects of educational attainment. One is based on the availability of
junior and community colleges; the other, on changes in teen exposure to child labor laws. The
results suggest that educational attainment has large and statistically significant effects on
subsequent voter participation and support for free speech. I also find that additional schooling
appears to increase the quality of civic knowledge as measured by the frequency of newspaper
readership.

Thomas S. Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu

1
“…since the achievement of American Independence, the universal and ever-repeated argument in
favor of Free Schools has been, that the general intelligence which they are capable of diffusing, and
which can be imparted by no other human instrumentality, is indispensable to a republican form of
government.”
Horace Mann (1846)
INTRODUCTION
Economists typically justify the government’s extensive and varied involvement in the
market for education by appealing to distributional concerns and several types of market failures.
The most frequently discussed types of market failure involve the positive externalities that might be
associated with schooling. For example, some have argued that education generates external social
benefits by reducing the prevalence of crime and by promoting knowledge spillovers and technology
diffusion in the workplace.1 However, the externality that is arguably featured most prominently in
discussions about education involves civic behaviors and attitudes. Specifically, it is widely believed
that education is an essential component of a stable democratic society because it encourages citizens
to participate in democratic processes and prepares them to do so in an informed and intelligent
manner. The putative existence of such civic returns to education motivated the proliferation of
common schools in the early 19th century and early educational reformers like Horace Mann and
continues to provide one of the most important justifications for the many public policies and
institutions that promote access to all levels of education.
An extensive, empirical literature in political science has documented a strong correlation
between educational attainment and various civic behaviors. In particular, this literature has
demonstrated that higher levels of schooling are associated with substantive increases in voter
turnout. Political scientists generally interpret this literature as providing strong support for the view

1

See Wolfe and Haveman (2001) for a discussion of the non-market and social benefits possibly
associated with education. Poterba (1996) and Taylor (1999) discuss the case for governmental
intervention in the market for education and conclude that there is surprisingly little empirical
evidence to indicate whether or not hypothesized, positive externalities exist. However, several
recent empirical studies have assessed the effects of schooling on knowledge spillovers (e.g.,
Moretti, forthcoming, Acemoglu and Angrist 2000) and on criminal behavior (Moretti and Lochner
2001, Witte 1997).

2
that education is effective at promoting the quantity and quality of civic participation. However,
these correlations could actually be quite misleading since both schooling and civic outcomes are
simultaneously influenced by a wide variety of inherently unobservable traits specific to individuals
and the families and communities in which they were reared. For example, individuals who grew up
in cohesive families and communities that stressed civic responsibility may also be more likely to
remain in school. The plausible existence of such unobservables implies that conventionally
estimated correlations may spuriously overstate the true civic returns to education.2
This study attempts to construct less ambiguous empirical evidence on this policy-relevant
issue by identifying the causal effects of additional schooling on civic behaviors and knowledge. The
research designs adopted here essentially parallel the extensive, empirical literature on the labormarket returns to schooling (e.g., Angrist and Krueger 1999, Card 1999). More specifically, these
inferences rely critically on instrumental variables that generated possibly exogenous variation in
individual levels of schooling but that should otherwise be unrelated to adult civic outcomes.3 First,
using data from the High School and Beyond (HS&B) longitudinal study, I estimate the effects of
college entrance on adult voter and volunteer participation by relying on the geographic proximity
and density of junior and community colleges as a teen. Then, using data from the 1972-2000
General Social Surveys (GSS), I estimate the effects of years of schooling on adult voter
participation, on group memberships and on attitudes towards free speech by relying on changes in
teen exposure to child labor laws (Acemoglu and Angrist 2000). Using the GSS data, I also estimate
the effects of additional schooling on the frequency of newspaper readership, an outcome that is
closely related to measures of civic awareness. The results of these evaluations suggest that
additional schooling, both at the secondary and post-secondary levels, had large and statistically
2

An additional concern is that the existence of measurement error in self-reported schooling could
lead correlations to understate the true effects of schooling (Angrist and Krueger 1999, Card 1999).
The direction of omitted variable biases could also be negative. For example, the high-ability
individuals who continue their schooling may have higher opportunity costs and may think that
voting is largely an expressive act that is extremely unlikely to actually influence policy.
3
I discuss a variety of ad-hoc empirical evidence that is consistent with the maintained assumptions
regarding instrument validity.

3
significant effects on voter participation. I also find that the additional secondary schooling
significantly increased the frequency of newspaper readership as well as the amount of support for
allowing most forms of possibly controversial free speech.

EDUCATION AND CIVIC ENGAGEMENT
One of the fundamental mechanisms by which education has long been thought to generate
civic externalities involves improvements in the quality of civic participation and awareness.
Specifically, it is widely alleged that increases in education generate broad social benefits by
allowing citizens to make more informed evaluations of the complex, social, political and
technological issues that might be embedded in campaign literature, legislative initiatives and ballot
referenda. However, the contemporary literature among political scientists has also put a particular
stress on the positive effects that schooling may have on the likelihood of civic participation (e.g.,
Wolfinger and Rosenstone 1980). Education could promote civic participation through at least two
broad channels. First, schooling may reduce the effective costs of certain forms of civic participation.
In particular, this is thought to occur because increased cognitive ability makes it easier to process
complex political information, to make decisions and to circumvent the various bureaucratic and
technological impediments to civic participation.4 Second, education may increase the perceived
benefits of civic engagement by promoting "democratic enlightenment" or, stated differently, by
shaping individual preferences for civic activity. Similarly, it is often alleged that education plays an
important public role by directly inculcating students with other fundamental democratic and
pluralistic values (e.g., support for free speech, for the separation of church and state, etc.).5

4

However, there are other indirect mechanisms by which education may currently lower the
effective costs of voting. For example, since thirteen states currently prohibit ex-felons from voting,
education may also reduce the effective costs of voting through its effects on criminal activity.
Similarly, to the extent that education increases the likelihood of having a driver’s license, the recent
expansion of “motor-voter” policies may have added to the effects of education on voter turnout.
5
The preference-shaping nature of schooling is typically viewed as normatively desirable. However,
Lott (1990, 1999) argues that governments use the indoctrination that occurs in pubic schools to
support totalitarian regimes and large wealth transfers.

4
However, it is also possible that additional schooling shapes civic preferences indirectly through
altering the composition of peer groups and shared social norms.
Interestingly, an economic perspective could also suggest alternative mechanisms by which
additional schooling might actually reduce civic engagement. For example, by raising the
opportunity cost of an individual’s time, increased schooling could reduce the amount of time and
attention allocated to civic activity. This could be particularly relevant for volunteering, which,
unlike voting, can involve a substantial commitment of time. However, education could also reduce
voter participation by promoting an awareness of voting as an essentially expressive act with an
infinitesimally small probability of influencing actual policy.6 Nonetheless, the available empirical
evidence seems to provide an emphatic confirmation of the conventional view that education does
promote civic engagement. Numerous studies over the last fifty years have demonstrated that higher
levels of individual schooling are strongly associated with civic behaviors and knowledge.7 For
example, in a widely repeated interpretation of this empirical evidence, Converse (1972) refers to
educational attainment as the "universal solvent" of political participation. Similarly, Putnam (2001)
notes that "education is by far the strongest correlate that I have discovered of civic engagement in
all its forms" (emphasis mine). Also, in their earlier study of voting participation, Wolfinger and
Rosenstone (1980) suggest that their core finding is the "transcendent importance of education."
However, they also note that an individual's level of schooling could easily proxy for unobserved
traits that also influence civic behaviors (pages 19-20). For example, they suggest that the types of
family backgrounds that promote increased schooling may also promote increased socialization into
civic activities like voting. Wolfinger and Rosenstone (1980), like other researchers in this field,
have attempted to control for the possible bias in the estimated effect of education by introducing a
few additional control variables (e.g., income and occupational measures) into multiple regression
6

See Mueller (1989) for a discussion of the paradox of voting, models of voting behavior and issues
related to the quality of the vote.
7
See Nie, Junn and Stehlik-Barry (1996, page 3) for extensive references to this empirical literature.

5
models. The apparent robustness of the correlations between education and civic outcomes has led
most researchers to conclude that education does have a causal effect. For example, in the most
recent contribution to this literature, Nie and Hillygus (2001) note that this orthodox view is "largely
uncontested."
However, the basic approach of introducing a few additional controls may not convincingly
resolve the question of whether the strong correlations between education and civic outcomes
actually reflect the true causal effects. In particular, this could occur because so many of the shared
determinants of civic behavior and educational attainment are inherently difficult for researchers to
measure well. For example, as noted earlier, children who were raised in families or communities
that stressed civic responsibility are almost certainly more likely to remain in school longer. This
may occur in part because such families and communities are also likely to impart values that
encourage schooling. However, it could also occur simply because civic-minded families and
communities may do more to insure that their children attend well-funded, high-quality schools.
These plausible scenarios imply that the strong association between adult civic outcomes and
educational attainment may reflect, to an unknown degree, the confounding influence of unobserved
family and community traits. Alternatively, these correlations could also reflect the confounding
influence of other, inherently unobservable individual traits like the rate at which future outcomes
are valued and the taste for altruism. Certainly, the recent trends in the United States (i.e., declines in
voter turnout and contemporaneous increases in educational attainment) suggest that the association
between education and civic engagement could be specious. And at least two studies in the political
science literature provide more formal evidence that such concerns about omitted variable biases
may be empirically relevant. Both Luskin (1990) and Cassel and Lo (1997) present evidence that the
apparent influence of education on civic outcomes (political literacy and sophistication) may reflect
the spurious influence of other individual traits (e.g., intelligence and parents' socio-economic
status). Similarly, Gibson (2001) presents within-twin estimates, which suggest that education
actually reduces the probability of volunteering. In the next two sections, I present new empirical

6
evidence on the effects of educational attainment on several civic outcomes. I attempt to identify the
causal effects of educational attainment by relying on instrumental variables that generate plausibly
exogenous changes in the levels of individual schooling.8

COLLEGE ATTENDANCE AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION
High School and Beyond (HS&B)
The data for this section are drawn from High School and Beyond (HS&B), a major
longitudinal study conducted by the U.S. Department of Education. This detailed study began with a
cohort of high school sophomores in 1980. Follow-up interviews of roughly 12,000 members of the
sophomore cohort occurred in 1984 when most respondents were 20 years old and again in 1992
when most respondents were 28 years old.9 In the 1992 interview, respondents were asked four civicrelated questions: whether they were currently registered to vote (mean=.67), whether they had voted
in a local, state or national election within the past year (mean=.36), whether they had voted in the
1988 Presidential election (mean=.55) and whether they had volunteered in the last month
(mean=.37). The key measure of educational attainment examined here is college entrance defined as
of the 1984 interview (mean=.54). This definition of college entrance is based on attendance at a
junior college, a community college or a four-year college or university and explicitly excludes those
who only attended a vocational, trade, business or other training school. While this is a somewhat
narrow margin of educational attainment, the available evidence indicates that it is also an
increasingly important one. The rate of college enrollment among young adults has increased
dramatically over the last twenty years with roughly half of this increase being absorbed by junior
and community colleges (Kane and Rouse 1999). And prior studies suggest that modest persistence
at two and four-year colleges has beneficial labor-market consequences even when it does not result
in a degree (e.g., Kane and Rouse 1995). The HS&B respondents who had entered college by 1984
8

A recent study by Milligan et al. (2003) applies a similar methodology to different data sets and
finds results similar to those presented here.
9
See the data appendix for further information on the study and the extract used here.

7
did generally remain in college long enough to accumulate a relatively large amount of
undergraduate credits.10 Furthermore, the baseline evidence discussed below demonstrates that this
measure of college entrance has a strong partial correlation with the probability of subsequent civic
engagement. However, the choice of college entrance as a measure of educational attainment is also
dictated by the availability of a plausible instrument, the geographic availability of junior and
community colleges as a teen, which appears to have substantively influenced the decision to attend
college and to have been otherwise unrelated to civic engagement as an adult.11

Baseline estimates
The validity of the geographic availability of junior and community colleges (hereafter
referred to as two-year colleges) as a basis for identification is a critical issue, which is discussed in
some detail below. However, before turning to an assessment of the relevant instrumental variables,
it is useful to establish an empirical baseline by estimating the effects of college entrance on
subsequent civic behaviors in specifications that assume the absence of omitted variable biases.
Table 1 presents the estimated marginal effects from single-equation probits in which the four
measures of civic behavior are the dependent variables. The first specification (column (1))
conditions on 10 variables representing basic demographic information on age, race, ethnicity,
gender and religious affiliation and on 18 other variables that reflect family income, family
composition and parental education as defined during the 1980 interview.12 The subsequent models
introduce school-level controls (i.e., miles to the nearest 4-year college and urbanicity fixed effects),
10

Specifically, data from the HS&B transcript study indicate that those who had entered college by
1984 had, on average, about 80 more semester hours of undergraduate credit than those who did not:
the equivalent of roughly five full-time college semesters. However, a caveat is appropriate since
transcript data are missing or incomplete for roughly 25 percent of the respondents in this extract.
11
Similarly, I chose to define college entrance as of the 1984 interview when most respondents were
20 years old and not as of later interviews. The estimated effects of college entrance are similar
regardless of which interview is used to define it. However, college entrance defined as of later
interviews had a plausibly weaker relationship to one of the early measures of college availability
(i.e., the distance in miles from the high school to the nearest two-year college).
12
See the appendix for details on these controls. The Huber-White standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the school level.

8
state and county-level controls based on the location of the base-year school and, finally, fixed
effects for the Census division of the base-year school. One of the county-level variables is a wellmeasured proxy for the civic attitudes of the community in which the respondents grew up: the
county-level voter turnout in the 1980 Presidential election. The second county-level variable is a
measure of adult educational attainment in the respondent’s teen community: the percent of adults
aged 25 or older with high school degree. The third county-level control, the population share aged
18-24, may be a relevant determinant of civic engagement and also influence the competitiveness of
post-secondary institutions. The two state-level variables reflect influential voter regulations defined
as of 1992 (Knack 1995). One is a binary indicator for whether the state had an active policy of
allowing voter registration by mail. The second is the number of years the state had active “motorvoter” regulations in place.13 The available evidence suggests that a years-based measure is the
appropriate variable for identifying the early effects of “motor-voter” policies because state drivers
licenses are renewed in cycles as long as six years (Knack 1995).
These models are somewhat unusual in comparison to the prior literature since they
condition on detailed individual and community-level socioeconomic variables defined as of each
respondent’s teen years. The results presented in Table 1 uniformly suggest that college entrance had
positive and statistically significant effects on civic participation. Interestingly, the magnitudes of
these estimated marginal effects are also quite robust to the introduction of the additional controls.
These estimated marginal effects are also quite large, implying that a relatively modest increase in
educational attainment has sizable effects on subsequent civic participation. For example, these
estimates imply that college entrance increased voter registration by approximately 13 percentage
points, an increase of nearly 20 percent in the mean probability of being registered. Similarly, these
estimates imply that college entrance increases the mean probability of voting in the last year, voting
13

“Motor-voter” regulations bundle an application for voter registration with those for driver
licenses. All states were required to institute “motor-voter” policies by 1995 as part of the National
Voter Registration Act. It should also be noted that North Dakota does not have voter registration.
The results reported here are robust to excluding observations from respondents who attended high
school in that state.

9
in the 1988 Presidential election and volunteering by 29 percent, 32 percent and 20 percent,
respectively.
However, the central concern with the results in Table 1 is that the strong partial correlations
between college entrance and civic behaviors may reflect the confounding influence of unobserved
determinants of both schooling and civic engagement. One straightforward way to assess the
possible empirical relevance of this concern is to examine the partial correlations between college
entrance and measures of civic attitudes and knowledge that preceded attendance in college. I rely on
two such measures based on data from the sophomore-year survey. One is a standardized test score
on questions related to civics. The other is the student’s response to a question about the importance
of correcting social and economic inequality (1=not important, 2=somewhat important and 3=very
important). Each of these variables is highly predictive of each measure of future civic engagement.
For example, a 10 percent increase in the sophomore-year civics test score is associated with a
statistically significant 7 percent increase in the mean probability of voting within the last year.
Similarly, a one-unit increase in the ordered attitudinal measure is associated with a statistically
significant 10 percent increase in the mean probability of voting. In auxiliary regressions where these
sophomore-year measures are the dependent variables, the estimated effects of college entrance are
positive and statistically significant. However, since the dependent variables in these models
preceded college entrance, these results cannot plausibly reflect causal effects. Instead, these results
suggest the existence of individual-level unobservables that may have a positive covariance with
both educational attainment and adult civic engagement. This stylized evidence suggests the need to
rely on instrumental variables in estimating the effects of college attendance on civic outcomes.
Another possible concern with the results in Table 1 involves the quality of the self-reported
data on civic engagement. Specifically, prior comparisons of actual voting rates with those based on
survey data indicate that survey respondents often overstate their voter turnout. This problem can be
particularly acute in survey instruments that focus largely on political values. However, in surveys
that emphasize other issues (e.g., the November supplements to the Current Population Surveys), the

10
aggregate voter-participation rates implied by self reports are generally quite close to the actual rates
(Teixeira 1992, Appendix A). Since the HS&B survey instruments asked very few questions about
civic values and engagement, the HS&B responses may also track actual behaviors closely. The
voter-registration rate implied by the HS&B responses (67 percent) is similar to the
contemporaneous CPS-reported rate for 25-34 year olds (61 percent, U.S. Census Bureau 1996). And
the percent of HS&B respondents who reported voting in the past year (36 percent) is actually lower
than the CPS-reported turnout rate for 25-34 year olds in the 1992 Presidential election (53
percent).14 However, further comparisons with the CPS data suggest that the HS&B respondents’
1992 recall of having voted in 1988 may be more biased. In the 1988 CPS survey, approximately 38
percent of 21-24 year olds reported voting in the Presidential election while the 1992 HS&B survey
suggests that 55 percent of respondents did. So, a caveat about this particular variable is appropriate.
However, it is not clear, even in that case, that the estimated marginal effects of educational
attainment would be confounded by over-reporting. For example, if schooling promotes more
accurate self-reports, these evaluations would only understate the true civic returns to education. On
the other hand, it is also possible that educational attainment creates a sense of obligation and guilt
that leads more educated respondents to over-state their actual civic engagement more frequently
than those with lower educational attainment. However, this does not appear to be the case.15
Furthermore, even if schooling did increase over-reporting, that would necessarily imply that
schooling has a type of structural effect (i.e., instilling a sense of civic obligation) that should also
generate true increases in voter turnout.

14

That difference is reasonable since nearly all of the HS&B responses occurred before the
November 1992 general election.
15
Specifically, a regression of actual county-level voter turnout in the 1980 election on the countylevel percent of adults with a high school degree generates marginal effects that are actually
somewhat larger than the estimated effect of being on high school graduate on the voter participation
reported by HS&B respondents. It is also somewhat larger than the estimated effect of being a high
school graduate on self-reported participation in the 1980 Presidential election among GSS
respondents.

11
Measures of college availability as instruments
The partial correlations reported in Table 1 are consistent with the prior empirical studies of
civic participation. However, a more convincing strategy for assessing whether the estimates in
Table 1 reflect the causal effects of attending college is to exploit instrumental variables that
generate plausibly exogenous variation in this measure of educational attainment. The fundamental
requirements of such instrument are that they actually influence educational attainment and that they
are uncorrelated with the unobserved determinants of civic engagement. A recent study of the labormarket returns to schooling by Card (1995) suggests that the geographic availability of colleges may
provide valid instruments for schooling.16 The basic motivation for such instruments is that the
proximity of colleges as a teen should substantially reduce the costs of attending college (particularly
for students from disadvantaged backgrounds) but should otherwise have no effects on adult
outcomes. Rouse (1995) also presents evidence that the availability of two-year colleges increases
educational attainment for those on the margin of attending college (a “democratization” effect) but
actually reduces it among those who would have otherwise attended a four-year college (a
“diversion” effect). I also find some support for a modest “diversion” effect (i.e., the proximity of
two-year colleges reducing the probability of completing a bachelor’s degree) but rely on the
stronger “democratization” effect as a source of identifying information.
Specifically, I rely on two measures of the local availability of two-year colleges. One is the
distance in miles from each respondent’s high school to the nearest two-year college (as reported by
a high-school official as part of the HS&B school survey). The second is a count of the number of
two-year colleges within each respondent’s county in 1983 (mean=2.4).17 These variables provide
16

See Kling (2001) and Currie and Moretti (2002) for further discussions and applications of this
approach.
17
These counts were created using the 1983-84 data from the Higher Education General Information
Survey (HEGIS). See the appendix for details. Card (1995) and Kling (2001) rely similarly on a
binary indicator for any college in county. I also constructed counts of four-year colleges by county
but found that this was highly collinear with the number of two-year colleges and exclude it from
this analysis. So, a caveat about attributing the effects associated with this measure to two-year, not
4-year, institutions is appropriate.

12
related but distinct measures of the availability of two-year colleges. In particular, it is reasonable to
suspect that the probability of attending college would be simultaneously influenced by the
proximity of the nearest two-year institution as well as by the local availability of several
postsecondary options.18 While every state has two-year colleges, their geographic distribution
across the United States is somewhat uneven. For example, several states in the West and Southwest
(e.g., California, Washington, Texas and Arizona) and in the upper Midwest (e.g., Illinois, Michigan)
have relatively extensive systems of public community colleges. Medsker and Tillery (1971) note
that this distribution partly reflects the dramatic mid-century growth in new two-year colleges, which
was shaped by the interaction of state-specific enabling legislation and several sources of enrollment
pressure (e.g., the G.I. Bill, the baby boom and population migration). However, the states of New
York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Florida also have a large number of two-year colleges, with a
particularly large share of them being private junior colleges.
I also considered, but rejected, the idea of using proximity to four-year colleges as an
instrument. Specifically, a central concern with any instrument based on the geographic availability
of colleges is that it might be flawed because it is associated with the unobserved determinants of
both educational attainment and civic behavior. In particular, the unobserved traits of communities
near colleges (e.g., high socioeconomic status) could simultaneously encourage both higher
educational attainment and increased civic participation. Furthermore, the availability of colleges
may promote a youth-oriented and politically aware culture that promotes the civic engagement of
teens independently of its effects on educational attainment. I assess the empirical relevance of these
concerns in a number of ways. For example, I discuss the robustness of the key results to the
introduction of the school, county and state-level controls. However, I also provide three other types
of ad-hoc empirical evidence on the validity of these instruments. First, I examine their effects on
different levels of educational attainment. If the estimated effects of college availability truly reflect
the costs of attending college and not the influence of omitted variables, these instruments are likely
18

These measures are not highly collinear and have a relatively low correlation coefficient of -0.2.

13
to have little or no effects on other levels of educational attainment.19 Second, I examine the partial
correlations between the instruments and sophomore-year measures of civic attitudes and knowledge
that are strongly correlated with future civic participation (i.e., scores on a civics test and attitudes
towards correcting inequality). And, third, I assess how the effects of these instruments vary across
students from advantaged and disadvantaged backgrounds. To the extent that the estimated effects of
these instruments truly reflect variation in the costs of attending college, these effects should be
concentrated among students from disadvantaged backgrounds (Card 1995, Kling 2001). The results
of all of these ad-hoc specification checks suggest that the proximity to 4-year colleges may be an
invalid instrument. In particular, nearness to 4-year colleges is associated with sharp increases in the
probability of graduating from high school as well as significant increases in sophomore-year civics
knowledge. These results do not constitute a definitive case against this particular measure as an
instrument for educational attainment. Nonetheless, all of the models for educational attainment and
civic outcomes reported here condition on this measure.20
In Table 2, I present the estimated marginal effects of the availability of two-year colleges
on the probability of entering college. The results in the top panel suggest that both measures of
availability have plausibly signed and statistically significant effects on college entrance and that
these estimates are relatively robust to the introduction of additional controls. Specifically, the results
from Model (4) suggest that a location 100 miles further away from a two-year college reduces the
probability of college entrance by 6.1 percentage points. Similarly, these results suggest that an
additional two-year institution within county is associated with a 0.6 percentage point increase in the
probability of entering college. In the bottom panel of Table 2, I provide some ad-hoc evidence on
the validity of these instruments by estimating their unique effects on students from advantaged and
disadvantaged backgrounds. Card (1995) suggests that, if the interpretation of college availability as
19

However, a signaling model of education suggests that there could be effects on other levels of
attainment (e.g., Lang and Kropp 1986). Also, as noted earlier, these instruments could influence
higher levels of attainment through diversion effects (Rouse 1995).
20
Models that use this measure as an IV return results similar to those reported here.

14
an independent measure of the costs of attending college is a valid one, the effects of these
instruments should be concentrated among students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Following
Card (1995), I assess the existence of such response heterogeneity by interacting the availability
measures with indicators for high and low parental education.21 The results in the bottom panel of
Table 2 indicate that the effects of the availability of two-year colleges are highly concentrated
among students with poorly educated parents. In particular, the estimated effect of the proximity of
two-year colleges is statistically insignificant for students with highly educated parents (though it has
the same sign). Similarly, the number of two-year colleges within county has a smaller and weakly
significant effect for students with highly educated parents.
In Table 3, I present evidence how the availability of two-year colleges influenced different
margins of educational attainment. These estimates are based on specifications that include all the
individual, family, school, county and state-level controls. The results suggest that the availability of
two-year colleges has small and statistically insignificant effects on the probability of graduating
from high school and on the probability of obtaining an associate’s degree. These results also suggest
that the geographic proximity of two-year colleges led to relatively small and weakly significant
reductions in the probability of obtaining a bachelor’s degree: a “diversion” effect that appears to be
concentrated among students from disadvantaged backgrounds. However, the results in the bottom
panel of Table 3 also suggest that, for students with poorly educated parents, the number of two-year
colleges within county had strong “democratization” effects that increased the probability of entering
college as well as the probability of obtaining a bachelor’s degree.22 However, the more general and
important result from Table 3 is that the effects associated with the availability of two-year colleges
are highly concentrated on the margin of attending college. This evidence is consistent with the
21

As in Card (1995), low parental education implies that the highest educational attainment of the
parents is high school dropout or missing. Students for whom parents’ education is missing have
lower levels of attainment than the students who report their parents are dropouts.
22
These results for attaining a bachelor’s degree are not necessarily inconsistent since the proximity
of a single institution may promote diversion while the availability of several could facilitate the
ultimate progression to a bachelor’s degree.

15
maintained assumption that these measures reflect plausibly exogenous variation in the costs of
college entrance and not other unobserved traits of these communities. In particular, because these
instruments have such a narrowly focused effect on this single margin of educational attainment, it
suggests that they do not proxy for the unobserved determinants of future civic engagement.
However, in Table 4, I present further evidence on the validity of these exclusion
restrictions. As noted earlier, the base-year survey of HS&B sophomores contained two variables
that appear to reflect each student’s latent civic engagement and knowledge well: a standardized test
score on questions related to civics and an attitudinal question about the importance of correcting
social and economic inequality (1=not important, 2=somewhat important and 3=very important).
These latent indicators, which are highly predictive of future civic engagement, provide a potentially
plausible basis for evaluating the validity of the instruments. Specifically, if the measures of college
availability have an association with the unobserved determinants of future civic engagement, we
would expect them to be correlated with these observed measures as well. In Table 4, I present the
key results from auxiliary regressions in which these sophomore-year traits are the dependent
variables. These results are based on models that include all of the prior controls (e.g., Model (4) in
Tables 1 and 2). The estimates in Table 4 uniformly suggest that availability of two-year colleges,
both generally and for students with poorly educated parents, has a small and statistically
insignificant association with sophomore-year civics knowledge and with community attitudes.
Some studies also assess instrument validity and possible biases by considering the sign of the
relationship between candidate instruments and observed determinants of the outcomes under study
(e.g., Altonji et al. 2002). The mixed signs of the estimates reported in Table 4 do not provide
consistent evidence for particular violations of exclusion restrictions. In a similar vein, I also
examined the partial correlations between these instruments and the 1980 county-level voter turnout.
Interestingly, the results indicated that communities with better access to two-year colleges had
lower voter turnout rates. These negative relationships suggest that, if there are violations of the

16
exclusion restrictions, they may impart a negative bias, which would not be fundamentally
confounding for most of the results presented below.

Results
The results in Tables 2, 3 and 4 are consistent with the maintained assumption that the
geographic availability of two-year colleges provides a potentially valid source of identification. The
availability of two-year colleges is associated with a significant increase in college attendance but
smaller and statistically insignificant changes in other measures of educational attainment. These
increases are plausibly concentrated among students with poorly educated parents. And these
measures are unrelated to sophomore-year indicators of civic attitudes (e.g., civics knowledge and
attitudes towards inequality). In Table 5, I present the key results from bivariate probits in which the
adult civic behaviors are the dependent variable of interest and college entrance is an endogenous
regressor (Wooldridge 2002).23 The excluded instruments in Model (1) are miles to the nearest twoyear college and the number of two-year colleges within county. These results of these models
suggest that college entrance has small and imprecisely estimated effects on the probability of
volunteering but uniformly large and positive effects on each of the three measures of voter
participation. Specifically, these estimates indicate that college entrance increases voter participation
by roughly 21 to 30 percentage points. These results are clearly consistent with the conventional
claims that educational attainment is a critical determinant of civic engagement. In fact, these
estimated effects are substantially larger than those based on partial correlations (Table 1). The
sampling variation associated with these estimates suggests that these differences should not be
overdrawn. Nonetheless, it is also worth noting three reasons that the true effects of educational
23

The results of 2SLS estimates generate similarly signed and statistically significant estimates but
are substantially larger than the marginal effects and average treatment effects (ATE) based on these
bivariate probits, particularly in models saturated with the additional controls. Identification in these
bivariate probits appears to be driven by the exclusion restrictions and not by functional form.
Bivariate probits that do not rely on excluded instruments generate small and statistically
insignificant effects.

17
attainment might exceed the estimates based on partial correlations (Table 1). First, as frequently
noted in the literature on wages and schooling, this could reflect an attenuation bias driven by
measurement error in reported schooling. Second, these estimates could indicate that the civic returns
associated with college entrance are particularly large for the non-random subset of individuals
whose post-secondary attainments were influenced by the instruments (e.g., those from
disadvantaged backgrounds, Imbens and Angrist 1994). And, third, a downward bias in conventional
estimates could also reflect the influence of unobserved ability on both schooling decisions and time
allocated to civic endeavors.
However, a fourth possibility with very different implications is that the size of these
estimates reflects undiagnosed violations of the maintained exclusion restrictions. One indication
that this is not so is that the results from Table 5 are quite similar across models, which incrementally
introduce the school, county and state-level controls. However, another way to assess this concern is
to use as instruments the interaction of low parental education and the measures of two-year college
availability. Specifically, in such models, the interaction of high parental education and the measures
of two-year college availability can then be included as controls in the outcome equations (e.g., Card
1995). This approach to identification can provide effective controls for the possible, indirect effects
on civic outcomes associated with college availability to the extent that these effects are constant
across students with different family backgrounds. The results based on this specification are
reported in the right panel of Table 5 (i.e., Model (2)) and are quite similar to those based on the
basic instruments. The robustness of these results suggests that the basic identifying assumptions are
accurate. I also assessed this issue by relying alternatively on miles to a two-year college and number
of two-year colleges in county as the sole instrument and including the other variable as a control.
This approach leads to similarly large and positive point estimates in models for voter registration
and turnout. However, in most cases, the reduction in identifying assumptions makes these estimates
statistically imprecise.

18
SECONDARY SCHOOLING AND CIVIC OUTCOMES
General Social Surveys (GSS)
The evidence from the HS&B data has at least two critical shortcomings. One is that it only
identifies the civic returns to education at the post-secondary level. And the second is that the
available data provide no measures of the degree of civic awareness or of other fundamental civic
values. The data from the General Social Surveys (GSS) provide an opportunity to address both of
these concerns. The GSS is a nationwide survey, conducted every one to two years, on a broad range
of attitudes and behavior.24 My extract is based on the pooled 1972-2000 surveys and consists of the
respondents who lived in the U.S. at age 16 and were 14 years old between 1914 and 1978. In each
survey, these respondents were asked about their educational attainment and whether they voted in
the last Presidential election (mean=.73).25 In most, but not all, survey years, GSS respondents were
also asked about how often they read the newspaper, about their group memberships (e.g., fraternal
and community-service groups, political clubs, school-service and youth groups, church-service
groups, etc.) and about their attitudes towards free speech for particular groups.
The GSS respondents report an average of 1.8 group memberships. The frequency of
newspaper readership is based on five possible responses (never, less than once a week, once a week,
a few times a week and every day) coded here as varying from 0 to 4 (mean=3.2). This measure of
newspaper readership is meant to indicate whether voters stay informed about current affairs. There
are inarguably better ways of measuring the degree of civic awareness. For example, in 1987, the
GSS respondents were asked to identify their congressman. Interestingly, only 37 percent of
respondents were able to answer this question correctly. Unfortunately, since this question was only
asked in 1987, there are relatively few observations (n=1,555) and a plausible identification strategy
24

See the appendix for details on the GSS and construction of this extract.
Actual votes cast as a percentage of the voting-age population declined from 61 to 49 percent over
these eight elections. These observed turnout rates should be somewhat lower than the GSS-reported
rates since the voting-age population includes ineligible voters. However, the GSS respondents may
overstate their actual voter participation more dramatically in the most recent survey years. In Table
10, I present evidence on the implications for this study’s key inferences of this possible change in
reporting biases.

25

19
cannot be implemented. However, the data from 1987 do indicate that the frequency of newspaper
readership is strongly associated with being able to identify your congressman. Specifically,
conditional on all the covariates discussed below, a one-unit increase in the measure of newspaper
readership is associated with a 10 percentage-point increase in the probability of answering correctly
(i.e., a 27-percent increase in the mean). This suggests that the frequency of newspaper readership is
a reasonable proxy for the degree of civic awareness. The measures of attitudes towards free speech
are based on separate survey questions that allowed respondents to indicate whether they would
allow particular types of people to speak in their community. These types include someone against
churches and religion (an anti-religionist), an admitted Communist, an admitted homosexual,
someone who advocates outlawing elections and letting the military run the country (a militarist) and
someone who believes blacks are inferior (a racist). Support for allowing free speech ranges from 59
percent for the militarist to 73 percent for the homosexual (see appendix Table 2).

Baseline estimates
In Table 6, I present baseline OLS estimates of how years of completed schooling influences
these measures of civic engagement and attitudes. The sparsest specification only includes as
controls basic demographic information (9 variables) and fixed effects for survey year (as many as
22 variables), year of birth (64 variables) and Census division of residence at age 16 (8 variables).
The second specification adds three control variables that reflect the quality of public schools and the
degree of civic engagement in each respondent’s teen community. The two school quality measures
are the pupil-teacher ratios and relative teacher salaries in public schools at age 14 in the Census
division of residence at age 16.26 The third variable is the voter turnout in the Presidential election
that occurred between the ages of 13 and 16 in the Census division of residence at age 16. The third
26

Card and Krueger (1992) present evidence that these measures influenced average years of
schooling. I converted average teacher salaries to a relative measure by exploiting data on wages
paid to road workers on Federal projects (Card and Krueger 1992) and data on wages for production
workers in manufacturing. See the appendix for information on the construction of these variables.

20
specification introduces variables based on survey responses that reflect a variety of family and
community-specific traits. These include family income at age 16 (5 variables), family structure at
age 16 (5 variables), parental education (4 variables) and the urbanicity of residence at age 16 (6
variables). In the final model, I control for all the unobserved determinants that might be specific to a
particular Census division in a particular year (e.g., weather, close political races, etc.) by including
approximately 200 fixed effects for each unique Census-division and survey-year combination. The
standard errors are adjusted for unspecified heteroscedasticity specific to the Census division of
resident at age 16.27 The results in Table 6 uniformly indicate that schooling is strongly and
positively correlated with all of these measures of civic engagement and attitudes. For example,
these estimates suggest that an additional year of schooling increases voter participation by 3.8
percent, an increase of approximately 5 percent. These results also imply that another year of
schooling significantly increases the index of newspaper readership (by 0.104, an increase of 3
percent) and the number of group memberships (by .222, an increase of 12 percent). Another year of
schooling also appears to increase support for free speech by a statistically significant 2.2 to 3.6
percentage points, depending on who is doing the speaking. Interestingly, these estimated effects are
generally quite robust to dramatic increases in the set of controls for observed traits.

Restrictive child labor laws as an instrument
The estimates in Table 6 suggest that additional years of schooling led to significant
increases in the quality and quantity of civic engagement and in the support for free speech. I attempt
to assess whether these estimates reflect a causal relationship by exploiting the exogenous variation
in years of schooling generated by teen exposure to changes in child labor laws. Recent studies by
Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) and Lleras-Muney (2002) provide evidence that the variation in child
27

This conservative approach may be appropriate since the pre/post nature of the instrumental
variable and serial correlation in the dependent variables could lead to overstated precision (Bertrand
et al. 2002). As a practical matter, this only appears to increase the 2SLS standard errors slightly.
However, this approach is also a conservative one because there are only 8 degrees of freedom in the
critical value of the t-statistic since there are only 9 Census divisions.

21
labor laws influenced the amount of schooling at the secondary level. In Tables 7 and 8, I present
evidence on how these variables influenced educational attainment among the GSS respondents. The
coding of these child labor laws are discussed in detail in Acemoglu and Angrist (2000). Essentially,
for each state and year from 1914 to 1978, they identified the minimum amount of schooling
required before a child could enter the workforce (the variable CL). This variable is equal to the
greater of the years of schooling a state required before granting a work permit and the difference
between the age at which children could work and the age at which they had to enter school. These
laws are represented here by a dummy variable equal to one for CL greater than or equal to 9. These
state-year laws could not be matched directly to GSS respondents because the available data only
identifies which of 9 Census divisions they resided in at age 16. Therefore, I calculated division-byyear means of these state-year dummies using state-year population estimates as weights.28 I then
matched each GSS respondent to these fractional variables representing restrictive child-labor laws
that were in effect at age 14 in their reported division of residence at age 16.
In Table 7, I present evidence on how this variable influenced years of completed schooling
among the full group of respondents for whom voting data are available as well as among the smaller
samples who were asked questions about newspaper readership, group memberships and free speech.
The sparsest specification (Model (1)) suggests that exposure to a restrictive child labor law
increased years of schooling by roughly one year. These estimates are somewhat sensitive to
introducing the contemporaneous measures of school quality and civic engagement as controls
(Model (2)). However, the results from the remaining specifications are largely unchanged after
introducing the family/community controls and fixed effects specific to each division and surveyyear cell. Specifically, these estimates suggest that teen exposure to restrictive child labor laws

28

This construction introduces measurement error into the instruments. However, it is not clear that
the implied measurement error is any less than that in other studies based on PUMS data, which
identify state of birth but not state of teen residence.

22
increased years of schooling by a statistically significant .5 to .7 years.29 The quality of this measure
of restrictive child-labor laws as an instrument hinges critically on the maintained assumption that
these estimates accurately reflect its independent effects on educational attainment. The evidence
from prior studies is generally consistent with this view. For example, Lleras-Muney (2002) presents
a variety of ad-hoc empirical evidence on changes in child-labor laws and concludes that they were
not endogenously determined. Furthermore, Goldin (2001) argues that such laws played a relatively
minor role in the dramatic “high school movement” from 1910 to 1940, which suggests that these
law changes were not part of substantive social changes that might have also influenced civic
attitudes..
The robustness of the first-stage estimates in Table 7 to the introduction of the additional
controls (i.e., across Models (2), (3) and (4)) also provides supporting evidence. However, in Table
8, I provide additional empirical evidence on the validity of these instruments by assessing some
straightforward counterfactuals. More specifically, if these models effectively identify the influence
of stricter child-labor laws on educational attainment, we should find that these estimated effects are
largely concentrated at the lower end of the distribution of educational attainment (Acemoglu and
Angrist 2000, Lleras-Muney 2002). However, we should be especially concerned about the existence
of undiagnosed specification errors if similarly specified models indicate that these laws had
substantive effects on higher levels of educational attainment. In particular, that could indicate that
the within-division variation in strict child-labor laws had a confounding correlation with the
unobserved determinants of educational attainment and other dimensions of youth development. In
Table 8, I present the estimated effects of restrictive child-labor laws on different levels of
educational attainment based on specifications that include the full set of controls (i.e., as in Model
(4) in Tables 6 and 7). These estimates indicate that the effects associated with stricter child-labor
29

These estimated effects are somewhat larger than those reported by Acemoglu and Angrist (2000).
However, these differences appear to reflect the unique composition of their sample. They consider
older white males from particular birth cohorts. I get similar point estimates for the relevant subsample of GSS respondents.

23
laws were largely concentrated at the secondary level. More specifically, these estimates indicate that
the strictest child-labor laws led to large and statistically significant increases in the probability of
completing 9, 10, 11 and 12 years of schooling and the probability of high school graduation.
However, the same specifications indicate that these law changes had smaller and statistically
insignificant effects on several measures of post-secondary educational attainment.

Results
The results in Tables 7 and 8 suggest that restrictive child labor laws may provide a valid
source of identifying information for estimating effects of variation in secondary schooling on adult
civic behaviors. In Table 9, I present 2SLS estimates of the effect of years of completed on each
measure of civic engagement.30 The results indicate that schooling has uniformly positive and
statistically significant effects on most measures of civic engagement and attitudes. For example,
these 2SLS estimates suggest that an additional year of schooling increased voter participation by a
weakly significant 6.8 percentage points (t-statistic=1.93), which is nearly twice the change implied
by the OLS estimate. The estimates in Table 9 also suggest that schooling increases the quality of
civic engagement and knowledge. More specifically, the 2SLS estimates imply that an additional
year of schooling generates a weakly significant increase (t-statistic=2.02) in the frequency of
newspaper readership that is roughly equivalent to that implied by the OLS estimate. The estimated
effect of schooling on group memberships is also positive but highly imprecise. However, these
estimates also imply that that schooling significantly increased support for free speech by antireligionists, communists and homosexuals. These estimated effects (8.0 to 12.5 percentage points)
are several times larger than those implied by the corresponding OLS estimates. But the estimated
effects of schooling on support for speech by militarists and racists are smaller and statistically
imprecise.
30

I also experimented with specifications that recognized the categorical nature of the dependent
variable and the potential endogeneity of schooling (Wooldridge 2002) and found that they generated
similar results.

24
One of the concerns noted earlier is that the self-reported data on voting participation may
overstate actual turnout more dramatically in the most recent GSS surveys (particularly for survey
responses regarding the 1996 Presidential election). In Table 10, I assess whether a possible change
in reporting biases may have influenced this study’s key inferences. This evidence is based on the
2SLS estimates from models that incrementally exclude data from the more recent GSS surveys. The
results suggest that recent changes in reporting biases may impart a downward bias to the estimated
effect of schooling on voter turnout. Specifically, in models that exclude the most recent surveys, the
estimated effect of schooling on voter participation is nearly twice as large. While this sensitivity
could be due to any number of factors (e.g., cohort-specific changes in the schooling-voting
relationship), it is also consistent with an increased trend towards overstating voter participation
among less-educated respondents. Regardless, these results suggest that the estimates in Table 9
could be understood as a lower bound for the effect of secondary schooling on voter participation.

CONCLUSIONS
In this study, I presented an empirical analysis of one of the fundamental relationships that
motivates public policies towards education: the effects of schooling on civic participation and
attitudes. In particular, I assessed whether increases in educational attainment have causal effects on
civic outcomes by exploiting possibly exogenous sources of variation in schooling that should
otherwise be unrelated to civic outcomes in adulthood (i.e., the geographic availability of two-year
colleges as a teen and exposure to child labor laws as a teen). The results suggested that educational
attainment, both at the post-secondary and the secondary levels, has large and independent effects on
most measures of civic engagement and attitudes. The apparent existence of these civic returns
implies that much of the long-lived hyperbole about the important role of education in a functioning
democracy may be accurate. However, it should also be noted that a great deal of the discussion
surrounding the role of education in a democracy has also confused the existence of these
externalities with other fundamental issues related to how the government should intervene in the

25
market for education (e.g., price subsidies, regulation of the private sector, public production). In
particular, the existence of large civic returns to education is not necessarily relevant to the difficult
question of whether government should be involved in directly producing education (i.e., the “choice
of instrument” problem, Poterba 1996). Nonetheless, these results clearly underscore the dramatic
relevance of schooling to the critical functions of a democratic society and imply that initiatives to
promote educational attainment merit the continued and careful scrutiny of researchers and
policymakers.

26
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist. “How Large Are Human-Capital Externalities? Evidence
from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Ben S.
Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, editors, MIT Press (Cambrige, MA), 2000.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber. “An Evaluation of Instrumental
Variable Strategies for Estimating the Effects of Catholic Schools,” NBER Working Paper
No. 9358, November 2002.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo and S. Mullainathan, 2002, How much should we trust differences-indifferences estimates?, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8841.
Card, David and Alan Krueger. “Does School Quality Matter? Returns to Education and the
Characteristics of Public Schools in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
100, no. 1, February 1992, pp. 1-40.
Card, David. “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Returns to
Schooling,” in Aspects of Labour Market Behavior: Essays in Honor of John Vanderkamp,
L.N.Christofides et al., editors. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995.
Card, David. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings,” in the Handbook of Labor Economics,
edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier Science B.V., 1999.
Cassel, Carol, and Celia C. Lo. 1997. “Theories of Political Literacy." Political Behavior 19(4): 317335.
Converse, Philip E. 1972. "Change in the American Electorate." In The Human Meaning of Social
Change, ed. Angus Campbell and Philip E. Converse. New York: Russell Sage.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings and Longitudinal Data,” NBER Working
Paper No. 9360, December 2002.
Gibson, John. “Unobservable Family Effects and the Apparent External Benefits of Education,”
Economics of Education Review 20(3), June 2001, 225-33.
Goldin, Claudia. “"The Human Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past",
Journal of Economic History, June 2001.
Imbens, Guido and Joshua D. Angrist. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
Effects,” Econometrica 62 (1994): 289-318.
Ingels, Steven and John Baldridge National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988: Conducting
Trend Analyses of NLS-72, HS&B and NELS:88 Seniors, Working Paper No. 95-05,
National Center for Education Statistics, January 1995.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia E. Rouse. “Labor Market Returns to Two and Four-Year College,”
American Economic Review, June 1995; 85(3): 600-614.
Kane, Thomas J. and Cecilia E. Rouse. “The Community College: Educating Students at the Margin
between College and Work,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 1999; 13(1): 63-84.
Kling, Jeffrey R. “Interpreting Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Return to Schooling,” Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 19(3), July 2001, 358-364.
Knack, Stephen. “Does ‘Motor-Voter’ Work? Evidence from State-Level Data,” Journal of Politics
57(3), August 1995, 796-811.
Lang, Kevin and David Kropp. “Human Capital Versus Sorting: The Effects of Compulsory
Attendance Laws,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1986, 609-624.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective? An
Analysis from 1915 to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics 45 (2), October 2002, 401436.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison
Inmates, Arrests and Self-Reports,” NBER Working Paper No. 8605, November 2001.
Lott, John R. "An Explanation for the Public Provision of Schooling: The Importance of
Indoctrination," Journal of Law and Economics 33, April 1990, 199-231.

27
Lott, John R. "Public Schooling, Indoctrination and Totalitarianism," Journal of Political Economy
107(6, part 2), 1999, S127-S157.
Luskin, Robert C. “Explaining Political Sophistication,” Political Behavior 1, 1990, 331-362.
Mann, Horace. 10th Annual Report to the Massachusetts Board of Education (1846) in The Republic
and the School: Horace Mann on the Education of Free Men, edited by Lawrence A. Cremin,
New York: Teacher’s College, Columbia University, 1957.
Medsker, Leland L. and Dale Tillery. Breaking the Access Barrier. McGraw-Hill Book Company,
1971.
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti and Philip Oreopoulos. “Does Education Improve Citizenship?
Evidence from the U.S. and U.K.”, working paper, February 2003.
Moretti, Enrico "Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence From Longitudinal and
Cross-Sectional Data" Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.
Mueller, Dennis C. Public Choice II. Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Nie, Norman H., Jane Junn and Kenneth Stehlik-Barry. Education and Democratic Citizenship in
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Nie, Norman and D. Sunshine Hillygus. “Education and Democratic Citizenship,” in Making Good
Citizens: Education and Civil Society, Diane Ravitch and Jospeh P. Viteritti, editors, New
Haven: Yale University Press, 2001.
National Opinion Research Center. General Social Surveys, 1972-2000 Cumulative Codebook.
University of Chicago. May 2001.
Poterba, James M. “Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health Care: How
and Why?” in Individual and Social Responsibility: Child Care, Education, Medical Care
and Long-Term Care in America, Victor R. Fuchs, editor. University of Chicago Press,
1996.
Rouse, Cecilia E. (1995), “Democratization or Diversion? The Effect of Community Colleges on
Educational Attainment,” Journal of Business Economics and Statistics 13, pp. 217–224.
Taylor, Lori L. “Government’s Role in Primary and Secondary Education,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas Economic Review, First Quarter 1999, pages 15-24.
Teixera, Ray A. The Disappearing American Voter. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution,
1992.
U.S. Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1995. Washington, DC, 1996.
Witte, Ann Dryden. “Crime,” in The Social Benefits of Education, Jere R. Behrman and Nevzer
Stacey, editors, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1997, 219-46.
Wolfe, Barbara and Robert Haveman. “Accounting for the Social and Non-Market Benefits of
Education,” in The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic
Growth and Well-Being, Human Resources Development Canada and Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, September 2001.
Wolfinger, Raymond E. and Steven J. Rosenstone. Who Votes? Yale University Press, 1980.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 2002.
Zahs, Daniel, Steven Pedlow, Marjorie Morrissey, Patricia Marnell and Bronwyn Nichols. High
School and Beyond Fourth Follow-Up Methodology Report, NCES 95426, National Center
for Education Statistics, January 1995.

28

Table 1 - Estimated Marginal Effects of College Entrance on Adult Civic Behaviors,
Single-Equation Probits, HS&B
Dependent Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sample Size

Registered to vote

.129‡
(.011)

.129‡
(.011)

.131‡
(.011)

.130‡
(.011)

11,366

Voted in last 12 months

.102‡
(.011)

.101‡
(.011)

.105‡
(.011)

.103‡
(.011)

11,429

Voted in 1988 Presidential election

.178‡
(.011)

.177‡
(.011)

.180‡
(.011)

.179‡
(.011)

11,370

Volunteered in last 12 months

.073‡
(.010)

.075‡
(.010)

.074‡
(.010)

.074‡
(.010)

11,484

no
no
no

yes
no
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

School-level controls
State/county-level controls
Census division dummies

All models include binary indicators for gender (1), age (1), race/ethnicity (3), religious
affiliation (5), family income (8), parental education (4) and family composition (5).
Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the school level, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

29

Table 2 - Estimated Marginal Effects of College Availability on College Entrance,
Single-Equation Probits, HS&B
Independent Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Miles to a two-year College (÷100)

-.097‡
(.025)

-.077‡
(.024)

-.059†
(.024)

-.061†
(.024)

Number of two-year Colleges in
County
Log Likelihood

.008‡
(.001)
-6,348

.007‡
(.001)
-6,336

.006‡
(.001)
-6,316

.006‡
(.002)
-6,309

Low Parental Education x Miles to a
two-year College (÷100)

-.155‡
(.035)

-.135‡
(.034)

-.113‡
(.033)

-.118‡
(.034)

High Parental Education x Miles to a
two-year College (÷100)

-.053
(.033)

-.035
(.033)

-.017
(.033)

-.018
(.033)

Low Parental Education x Number of
two-year Colleges in County

.010‡
(.002)

.008‡
(.002)

.008‡
(.002)

.008‡
(.002)

High Parental Education x Number of
two-year Colleges in County
Log Likelihood

.006‡
(.002)
-6,343

.005†
(.002)
-6,331

.005†
(.002)
-6,311

.004*
(.002)
-6,304

no
no
no

yes
no
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

School-level controls
State/county-level controls
Census division dummies

The sample size is 11,489. All models include binary indicators for gender (1), age (1),
race/ethnicity (3), religious affiliation (5), family income (8), parental education (4) and
family composition (5). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the school level, are
reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

30

Table 3 - Estimated Marginal Effects of College Availability on Educational Attainment, Single-Equation Probits, HS&B

Independent Variable

High School Graduate

Dependent Variable
College Entrant
Associate’s Degree

Bachelor’s Degree

Model (1)

Number of two-year Colleges in
County

-.001
(.011)
.0005
(.001)

-.061†
(.024)
.006‡
(.002)

.022
(.021)
.002
(.002)

.036*
(.020)
.003
(.002)

Model (2)
Low Parental Education x Miles to
a two-year College (÷100)

.006
(.014)

-.118‡
(.034)

.019
(.028)

.056†
(.023)

High Parental Education x Miles to
a two-year College (÷100)

-.009
(.014)

-.018
(.033)

.024
(.026)

.025
(.027)

Low Parental Education x Number
of two-year Colleges in County
High Parental Education x Number
of two-year Colleges in County

.0005
(.001)

.002
(.002)

.006‡
(.002)

.0004
(.001)

.008‡
(.002)
.004*
(.002)

.001
(.002)

.001
(.002)

Sample Size

11,475

11,489

11,343

11,343

Miles to a two-year College (÷100)

All models include binary indicators for gender (1), age (1), race/ethnicity (3), religious affiliation (5), family income (8), parental
education (4) and family composition (5), school-level controls (3), state/county-level controls (5) and Census division dummies
(8). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the school level, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

31

Table 4 – OLS-Estimated Effects of College Availability
On 1980 Civics-Related Variables, HS&B

Independent Variable

Dependent Variable
Importance of
Civics test score
Correcting Inequality

Model (1)
Miles to a two-year College (÷100)

.034
(.640)

-.021
(.029)

Number of two-year Colleges in
County

-.006
(.030)

.002
(.002)

Model (2)
Low Parental Education x Miles to a
two-year College (÷100)

.419
(.578)

-.045
(.039)

High Parental Education x Miles to
a two-year College (÷100)

-.285
(.875)

-.001
(.041)

Low Parental Education x Number
of two-year Colleges in County

.020
(.040)

.001
(.003)

High Parental Education x Number
of two-year Colleges in County

-.023
(.036)

.003
(.002)

Sample Size

9,751

10,336

All models include binary indicators for gender (1), age (1), race/ethnicity (3), religious
affiliation (5), family income (8), parental education (4) and family composition (5), schoollevel controls (3), state/county-level controls (5) and Census division dummies (8). Standard
errors, adjusted for clustering at the school level, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

32

Table 5 – Estimated Effects of College Entrance on Adult Civic Behaviors, Bivariate Probits, HS&B

Dependent variable

β̂

Registered to vote

.791‡
(.282)

Voted in last 12 months

Model (1)
Marginal
Effect

Model (2)
Marginal
Effect

ATE

Sample
Size

.284

.280

11,366

.552†
(.217)

.201

.198

11,429

.300

.795‡
(.254)

.307

.301

11,366

.010

.059
(.270)

.022

.022

11,484

ATE

β̂

.283

.280

.793‡
(.263)

.579†
(.233)

.210

.208

Voted in 1988
Presidential election

.793‡
(.273)

.307

Volunteered in last 12
months

.028
(.271)

.010

All models include binary indicators for gender (1), age (1), race/ethnicity (3), religious affiliation (5), family income (8), parental
education (4) and family composition (5), school-level controls (3), state/county-level controls (5) and Census division dummies
(8). The two instrumental variables for Model (1) are miles to a two-year college and the number of two-year colleges in county.
The two instrumental variables for Model (2) are interactions of low parental education with miles to a two-year college and with
the number of two-year colleges in county. Model (2) also includes as controls interactions of high parental education with miles
to a two-year college and with the number of two-year counties in county. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the school
level, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

33

Table 6 – OLS Estimates of the Effect of Highest Grade Completed on Civic
Behaviors & Attitudes, 1972-2000 GSS
Dependent Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sample Size

Voted in last Presidential election

.043‡
(.002)

.038‡
(.002)

.038‡
(.002)

.038‡
(.002)

32,111

Newspaper readership

.112‡
(.013)

.104‡
(.014)

.105‡
(.014)

.104‡
(.014)

21,805

Group memberships

.239‡
(.009)

.221‡
(.011)

.222‡
(.011)

.222‡
(.011)

16,361

Allow anti-religionist to speak

.036‡
(.001)

.030‡
(.001)

.030‡
(.001)

.029‡
(.001)

22,449

Allow communist to speak

.043‡
(.002)

.036‡
(.002)

.036‡
(.002)

.036‡
(.002)

22,111

Allow homosexual to speak

.035‡
(.002)

.029‡
(.001)

.029‡
(.001)

.029‡
(.001)

20,678

Allow militarist to speak

.037‡
(.002)

.031‡
(.002)

.030‡
(.002)

.030‡
(.002)

18,514

Allow racist to speak

.027‡
(.002)

.023‡
(.002)

.022‡
(.002)

.022‡
(.002)

18,488

no
no
no

yes
no
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

Teen-division/cohort controls
Family/community controls
Current-division-by-survey-year
dummies

All models include age, age squared and binary indicators for gender (1), race (2) and
religious preference (4) and fixed effects for survey year, year of birth and Census division
of residence at age 16. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the division level, are
reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

34

Table 7 – OLS Estimates of the Effects of Restrictive Child-Labor Laws on Highest Grade
Completed, 1972-2000 GSS
Sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Voting sample (n=32,111)

.97‡
(.15)

.56‡
(.13)

.59‡
(.15)

.53‡
(.14)

Newspaper sample (n=21,805)

1.01‡
(.18)

.52‡
(.16)

.57†
(.20)

.56‡
(.18)

Group membership sample (n=16,361)

1.14‡
(.18)

.72‡
(.14)

.63‡
(.14)

.54‡
(.12)

Free speech sample (n=18,488)

1.13‡
(.13)

.81‡
(.18)

.80‡
(.16)

.70‡
(.14)

no
no
no

yes
no
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

Teen-division/cohort controls
Family/community controls
Current-division-by-survey-year
dummies

All models include age, age squared and binary indicators for gender (1), race (2) and
religious preference (4) and fixed effects for survey year, year of birth and Census division
of residence at age 16. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the division level, are
reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

35

Table 8 – OLS Estimates of the Effects of Restrictive Child-Labor Laws on
Measures of Educational Attainment, 1972-2000 GSS
Dependent Variable

β̂

Highest grade completed

.53‡
(.14)

Completed 9th grade or higher

.12‡
(.02)

Completed 10th grade or higher

.10‡
(.01)

Completed 11th grade or higher

.10‡
(.02)

Completed 12th grade or higher

.10‡
(.01)

High school graduate

.08‡
(.02)

Completed at least 1 year of
college

-.04
(.03)

Associate’s degree

-.03
(.02)

Bachelor’s degree

-.03
(.02)

The sample size is 32,111. All models include age, age squared, binary indicators for gender
(1), race (2), religious preference (4), family income at age 16 (5), parental education (4) and
family composition at age 16 (5), urbanicity of residence at age 16 (6), pupil-teacher ratio at
age 14, relative teacher salaries at age 14, voter turnout as a teen and fixed effects for year of
birth, Census division of residence at age 16 and current division-of-residence by surveyyear dummies. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the division level, are reported in
parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

36

Table 9 – 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of Highest Grade Completed on
Civic Behaviors & Attitudes, 1972-2000 GSS
Dependent Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Sample Size

Voted in last Presidential election

.037*
(.019)

.064
(.036)

.069*
(.036)

.068*
(.035)

32,111

Newspaper readership

.203‡
(.021)

.127*
(.066)

.112*
(.056)

.113*
(.056)

21,805

Group memberships

.138†
(.047)

.144
(.108)

.157
(.141)

.164
(.184)

16,361

Allow anti-religionist to speak

.092‡
(.032)

.137‡
(.028)

.126‡
(.024)

.125‡
(.021)

22,449

Allow communist to speak

.060†
(.026)

.085‡
(.019)

.084‡
(.020)

.080‡
(.021)

22,111

Allow homosexual to speak

.092‡
(.018)

.138‡
(.026)

.126‡
(.021)

.123‡
(.028)

20,678

Allow militarist to speak

.005
(.027)

.054†
(.023)

.053*
(.025)

.036
(.031)

18,514

Allow racist to speak

.040
(.031)

.022
(.032)

.020
(.031)

-.002
(.032)

18,488

no
no
no

yes
no
no

yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes

Teen-division/cohort controls
Family/community controls
Current-division-by-survey-year
dummies

All models include age, age squared, binary indicators for gender (1), race (2), religious
preference (4) and fixed effects for survey year, year of birth and Census division of
residence at age 16. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the division level, are reported
in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

37

Table 10 – 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of Highest Grade Completed on
Voter Participation, 1972-2000 GSS

β̂

Sample Size

1970-2000

.068*
(.035)

32,111

1970-1996

.103*
(.049)

28,533

1970-1994

.102*
(.049)

26,540

1970-1993

.118†
(.050)

24,254

1970-1991

.132†
(.048)

23,013

1970-1990

.134†
(.051)

21,813

1970-1989

.152†
(.062)

20,693

1970-1988

.155†
(.064)

19,425

1970-1987

.162†
(.068)

18,216

Survey Years

All models include age, age squared, binary indicators for gender (1), race (2), religious
preference (4), family income at age 16 (5), parental education (4) and family composition
at age 16 (5), urbanicity of residence at age 16 (6), pupil-teacher ratio at age 14, relative
teacher salaries at age 14, voter turnout as a teen and fixed effects for year of birth, Census
division of residence at age 16 and current division-of-residence by survey-year dummies.
Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the division level, are reported in parentheses.
* Statistically significant at the 10-percent level
† Statistically significant at the 5-percent level
‡ Statistically significant at the 1-percent level

38
DATA APPENDIX
A. High School and Beyond (HS&B) Sophomore Cohort
HS&B, one of the U.S. Department of Education’s major longitudinal studies (Ingels and
Baldridge 1995), began with 1980 high school sophomores and seniors. The base-year samples were
based on a two-stage, stratified, probability design. In the first stage, high schools were chosen.
Certain types of schools (e.g., those with large Hispanic enrollments, Catholic schools with large
minority enrollments) were oversampled (Zahs et al. 1995). In the second stage, as many as 36
sophomores were randomly chosen from participating schools. The initial HS&B sample included
over 30,000 high school sophomores from 1,105 schools. Follow-up interviews of a stratified
sample of the original sophomore cohort occurred in 1982, 1984, 1986 and 1992. This study is based
on the 12,022 respondents from the sophomore cohort who participated in the second (1984) and
fourth (1992) follow-up interviews. The interviews for the fourth follow-up occurred from February
1992 through January 1993. Some observations were deleted because they were missing data on
post-secondary attainment in the 2nd follow-up (n=108) and because they attended a base-year school
for which the school survey responses did not provide information on college proximity (n=425). Of
the remaining 11,489 respondents, almost all answered the 4th follow-up questions on voting and
volunteering (see Table A1). The extract includes basic information on the gender, race/ethnicity,
age, and religious affiliation of the respondents. This extract also includes base-year information for
each respondent on family income (9 categories), highest parental education (5 categories), family
structure (6 categories) and the urbanicity of the high school area (3 categories). The 1980 attitudinal
question on the importance of correcting social/economic inequality has three possible responses: not
important (1), somewhat important (2) and very important (3). These respondents were also matched
to 1980 county-level data on voter turnout, on the percent of the population aged 18-24 and on the
percent of adults who graduated from high school, which were drawn from ICPSR study number
8314. Data on two-year colleges (institution type of 3, 5 or 6) were drawn from the 1983-1984
Higher Education General Information Survey (HEGIS, ICPSR study number 8291). County-level
counts were generated after excluding central offices and institutions that are for-profit or require
graduation from a two-year or 4-year college for admittance. Data on state-level voter regulations in
1992 were taken from Knack (1995, Appendix B).
Table A1 - HS&B Variables and Means
Variables (Survey Year)
Currently registered to vote (1992)
Voted in past 12 months (1992)
Vote in 1988 Presidential election (1992)
Any volunteer work in last 12 months (1992)
High school graduate (1984)
College entrant (1984)
Importance of correcting inequality (1980)
Civics standardized test score (1980)
Female
Black
Hispanic
Other Race
Older (Born Before 1964)
Protestant
Catholic
Other Christian

Mean
.669
.355
.553
.371
.844
.543
1.8
50.8
.521
.124
.209
.051
.284
.332
.382
.047

Sample Size
11,366
11,429
11,370
11,484
11,475
11,489
10,336
9,751
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489

39
Jewish
Other Religion
Religious background: none/missing
Family income missing
Family income <$8,000
Family income $8,000 to $14,999
Family income $15,000 to $19,999
Family income $20,000 to $24,999
Family income $25,000 to $29,999
Family income $30,000 to $39,999
Family income $40,000 to $49,999
Family income $50,000 or higher
Parent education missing
Parent high school dropout
Parent high school graduate
Parent some college
Parent college graduate
Single mother
Single father
Natural mother/stepfather
Natural father/stepmother
Other family structure
Both parents
School-level variables
Urban school
Suburban school
Rural school
Miles to a 4-year college (÷100)
Miles to a two-year college (÷100)
State/county-level variables
Number of two-year colleges in county
1980 county-level votes for President ÷ 18+ population
1980 county-level population aged 18 to 24
1980 county-level percent high school graduates among
25+ population
1992 state-level active mail-in voter registration
1992 state-level years with “motor-voter” regulations

.011
.037
.133
.214
.060
.117
.105
.109
.106
.127
.071
.092
.162
.282
.197
.212
.148
.136
.027
.057
.015
.099
.666

11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489

.227
.503
.270
.167
.167

11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489

2.43
.529
.529
.660

11,489
11,489
11,489
11,489

.474
1.4

11,489
11,489

B. 1972-2000 General Social Surveys (GSS)
The GSS is a personal-interview survey conducted every one to two years since 1972 and
designed to track a broad range of social attitudes and behaviors over time (NORC 2001). These
surveys were based on multi-stage probability samples of English-speaking persons aged 18 and over
living in non-institutional settings. The structure of the sampling design was broadly consistent over
time. The primary sampling units were generally Standard Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSA),
counties and independent cities. In the second stage, block groups and enumeration districts were
chosen. In block groups and enumeration districts with large numbers of dwellings, a third stage was
sometimes carried out to select dwellings within a block. One interview was conducted at each
selected house. The 1972-2000 cumulative data file consists of 40,933 respondents (ICPSR study no.
3197). I deleted respondents aged 22 or less (n=2,810), those aged 14 in 1913 or earlier (n=668),

40
those aged 14 in 1979 or later (n=2,892), those not in the U.S. at age 16 (n=1,709) and those missing
data on educational attainment (n=78). The remaining sample consisted of 32,776 observations.
Each GSS survey asked about voter participation in the most recent Presidential election (19681996). Most of the limited non-response to the voting questions is due to respondents identifying
themselves as ineligible to vote. In most survey years (all but 1973, 1974, 1976, 1980, 1984),
respondents were also asked how often they read the newspaper: never (0), less than once a week (1),
once a week (2), a few times a week (3), every day (4). In all years except for 1972, 1973, 1976,
1982, 1985, 1996, 1998 and 2000, respondents were also asked about their membership in various
types of groups and organizations. Except for the surveys in 1975, 1978, 1983 and 1986, respondents
were also asked about allowing free speech for anti-religionists, communists and homosexuals (also
not asked in 1972). The questions about free speech for militarists and racists were asked in all
survey years except 1972-1975, 1978, 1983 and 1986. The sample means and sample sizes for the
voting, newspaper, group-membership and free speech variables are reported in Table A2. In
addition to the basic demographic information (age, gender, race, religious preference), these
respondents also provided retrospective information on their Census division of residence at age 16
(9 categories), their family income at age 16 (6 categories), family structure at age 16 (6 categories),
the urbanicity of their residence at age 16 (7 categories) and their parent’s highest educational degree
(5 categories). Using state-year data on whether restrictive child labor laws were in effect (CL of 9 or
higher; Acemoglu and Angrist 2000), I calculated a population-weighted variable by year and
Census division. I then matched the GSS respondents to the law variable in effect when they were
aged 14 in their reported Census division of residence at age 16. I also matched the respondents to
the pupil-teacher ratios and relative teacher salary at age 14 in the public schools in their Census
division of residence at age 16. The sources for enrollment and teacher data were various editions of
the Biennial Survey of Education, the Statistical Abstract of the United States and the Digest of
Education Statistics. I interpolated annual values for these series when they were only available
every other year. Another source of measurement error in these data is that, in a small number of
years, some states combined other instructional staff (e.g., librarians) with teacher counts and
salaries. I calculated relative teacher salaries by using division-year data on wages paid to road
workers on Federal projects (1914-1956; Card and Krueger 1992) and wages paid to production
workers in manufacturing (1957-1978). I also matched respondents to the voter turnout in
Presidential elections that occurred in their division of residence between the ages of 13 and 16. For
example, respondents aged 14 between 1914 and 1917 were matched to the voter turnout in 1916 for
their Census division of residence at age 16. The data on voter turnout were drawn from various
editions of the Statistical Abstract of the United States. For elections before 1952, estimates of the
voting-age population are based on the nearest decennial Census. For the voting-age population
during the 1916 election, I used one-half of the 1920 estimate.
Table A2 - 1972-2000 GSS Variables and Means
Variables
Voted in last Presidential election
Newspaper readership (0 to 4)
Group memberships
Allow anti-religionists to speak
Allow Communists to speak
Allow homosexuals to speak
Allow militarists to speak
Allow racist to speak
Highest grade completed
Female

Mean
.73
3.1
1.8
.69
.61
.73
.59
.62
12.5
.56

Sample Size
32,111
21,805
16,361
22,449
22,111
20,678
18,514
18,488
32,776
32,776

41
Black
Other Race
Age
Religious preference: Protestant
Religious preference: Catholic
Religious preference: Jewish
Religious preference: none/missing
Religious preference: other religion
Family/Community variables
Family income at 16: Far below average
Family income at 16: Below average
Family income at 16: Average
Family income at 16: Above average
Family income at 16: Far above average
Family income at 16: Missing/unknown
Family structure at 16: Father/mother
Family structure at 16: Father/step-mother
Family structure at 16: Step-father/mother
Family structure at 16: Single father
Family structure at 16: Single mother
Family structure at 16: Other/missing
Residence at 16: Open country/not farm
Residence at 16: Farm
Residence at 16: Small city (under 50,000)
Residence at 16: Medium-sized city (50,000-250,000)
Residence at 16: Suburb near large city
Residence at 16: Large city (over 250,000)
Residence at 16: Unknown/missing
Parent education missing
Parent high school dropout
Parent high school graduate
Parent associates degree
Parent college graduate
Teen division/cohort variables
CL 9 or higher in Census division at age 14
Pupil-teacher ratio in Census division at age 14
Relative teacher salary in Census division at age 14
Presidential voter turnout in Census division, ages 13-16

.13
.02
48
.65
.24
.02
.08
.02

32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776

.06
.20
.41
.11
.01
.22
.75
.02
.04
.02
.11
.06
.11
.20
.31
.14
.09
.15
.002
.07
.44
.37
.02
.11

32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776

.25
26.9
1.4
.561

32,776
32,776
32,776
32,776

