NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNION PARTICIPATION IN STRATEGIC
DECISIONS OF CORPORATIONS
Eileen Appelbaum
Larry W. Hunter
Working Paper 9590
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9590
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

We thank Reena Ganju for excellent assistance with the research on strategic labor-management partnerships.
We benefited from hearing the views of Steve Early, Thomas Kochan, Larry Mishel, Richard Freeman, and
other participants in the Conference on Emerging Labor Market Institutions. We also thank the labor
representatives, managers, and researchers who shared their views on partnerships with us. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Eileen Appelbaum and Larry W. Hunter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

Union Participation in Strategic Decisions of Corporations
Eileen Appelbaum and Larry W. Hunter
NBER Working Paper No. 9590
March 2003
JEL No. J53
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews workforce participation in strategic decisions - those that affect the basic
direction of the company - when workforce interests are represented collectively through unions.
We consider the problem of corporate governance and review the rationale for what we term
“strategic partnerships” between management and labor. The paper describes the prevalence of such
partnerships in the U.S., focusing on two institutions through which unions have engaged in
discussion of strategic issues: negotiated union-management partnership agreements, and union
representation on corporate boards. We offer detailed accounts of specific strategic partnerships and
of union involvement on corporate boards, showing that unions face a range of challenges in
constructing partnerships that extend possibilities for effective representations of workers’ interests.
Eileen Appelbaum
Professor and Director
Center for Women and Work
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
162 Ryders Lane
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
eappelba@rci.rutgers.edu

Larry W. Hunter
Assistant Professor of Management
and Human Resources
School of Business
University of Wisconsin-Madison
4114 Grainger Hall
975 University Avenue
Madison, WI 53717
Lhunter@bus.wisc.edu

Introduction
In the United States, the explicit representation of workforce interests in strategic
decision-making processes of corporations is rare. Participation in strategic decisions –
those that affect the basic direction of the company – is unusual even when workforce
interests are represented collectively through unions. In this chapter, we consider U.S.
labor-management experiments with two institutions through which strategic
participation for unions might be realized: negotiated union-management partnership
agreements, and union representation on corporate boards.
These types of institutions for strategic participation have emerged from private
sector initiatives, without the support of public policy. The ad hoc character of these U.S.
initiatives stands in contrast to the legally mandated works councils, and provisions for
workforce representation on corporate boards of directors (or “codetermination”), which
are characteristic of many European countries. Europeans are in the process of
constructing similar legally supported institutions for a united Europe. In the U.S.,
however, there are no legal structures that provide American workers with strategic
participation at either the level of the establishment or the corporate board.
Understanding the development of these institutions in the U.S. requires consideration of
the variety of attempts by unions and management to engage strategic decisions jointly.
This chapter examines union experiences with partnership agreements and with
board representation. We begin by considering the problem of corporate governance and
reviewing the rationale for strategic partnerships. The next section discusses the
prevalence of such partnerships in the U.S. The following sections report on specific
strategic partnerships and on union involvement in corporate boards of directors. The

1

chapter concludes with discussions of the challenges and dilemmas facing unions should
they seek partnerships at the strategic level.

Corporate Governance in the U.S.
Corporate governance is generally understood to refer to the legal and
organizational structures that govern the relationship between corporate executives and
the shareholders that are the ultimate owners of the physical capital of the company.
Through corporate governance structures, firms make decisions about investments in
plant and equipment, levels of staff and deployment of workers, location of operations,
the allocation of resources, and the distribution of earnings. In theories of the firm that
dominate U.S. legal and economic discourse, the purpose of corporate governance
structures is to align the interests of corporate executives with those of the shareholders,
and to assure that managers act in shareholders’ best interests (Shleifer and Vishny 1997).
Shareholder-based theories reduce the relationship between owners and workers
to an employment contract that specifies the wage – work effort bargain. In general, U.S.
laws follow these theories: workers have no legally guaranteed rights to participation in
corporate governance structures, or to have their interests taken into account when
strategic decisions are made. While some states have allowed directors to consider other
stakeholders (Orts 1992), most American corporate boards of directors have a primary
fiduciary responsibility to the companies’ shareholders. Shareholders in turn have legally
recognized rights to be represented on corporate boards of directors, and to have the
assets in which they have invested protected from misuse or misappropriation by the
careless or opportunistic behavior of managers.

2

Shareholder-focused conceptions of the firm, and their supporting legal structures,
sharply differentiate decision-making managers from workers who do not make
decisions. Such differentiation does not reflect contemporary practice, for effective
management of modern enterprises requires more than the specification of a wage-effort
bargain. Workers’ engagement in decision-making began on a reasonably large scale in
the U.S. with Quality of Work Life (QWL) programs in the 1970s (Appelbaum and Batt
1994; Heckscher 1997). Subsequent competitive pressures and technological
developments led firms to adopt self-directed work teams and an array of high
performance workplace practices that facilitated worker participation in operational
decisions at the work site. These practices began slowly in the 1980s and became
increasingly prevalent in the 1990s (Lawler, Ledford and Morhman 1989; Lawler,
Mohrman and Ledford 1992; Osterman 1994; Freeman and Rogers 1995; Lawler,
Mohrman and Ledford 1995; Gittleman, Horrigan and Joyce 1998; Osterman 2000)
At the operational level, the benefits of involvement typically outweigh costs
associated with joint decision-making. Empirical evidence demonstrates improvements
in productivity, quality, delivery times, and even financial performance as a result of
worker participation in operational decisions of the enterprise (Katz, Kochan and Weber
1985; MacDuffie 1995; Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi 1997; Appelbaum et al. 2000;
Rubinstein 2000). (Becker and Gerhart (1996), Ichniowski et al. (1996), and Baker
(1999) also review the evidence). These studies suggest that corporate management has
an interest in implementing what have been termed “high performance work systems”
Workers in high performance work systems also generally find that their jobs are more

3

intrinsically satisfying and rewarding – more challenging and able to make better use of
their skills (Appelbaum et al. 2000).
At decision-making levels above that of the day-to-day workplace, however,
participation and partnership typically remain the prerogative of management. Managers
have resisted calls for joint decision-making forums for decisions that might require
downsizing, divesting of parts or whole divisions, or shifting operations to new locations
or to other (often nonunion) subsidiaries, for example. Shareholders, similarly, may
oppose decision-making processes that make it more difficult for owners to capture rents
associated with innovations in technology, work systems, products or services.
Managerial opposition to strategic participation by unions has often been strident (for an
example, see Loughran (1985)).
Traditional collective bargaining by unions, within the existing framework of
labor law, provides some constraints on managerial discretion. Unions have legally
protected rights to negotiate over the effects of strategic decisions (though not the
decisions themselves), and collective bargaining creates governance structures within
firms that affect the distribution of resources, including the extent to which the firm’s
revenue is shared with the workforce, and the ways in which pay is allocated across
workers. Unions may also negotiate to establish grievance procedures that provide a
voice mechanism for workers who feel they have been treated unfairly by management,
and for job rules and employment security arrangements that limit employers’ ability to
hire and fire at will.
Union leaders have been historically reluctant to involve themselves any more
deeply in strategic decision-making than is called for under traditional collective

4

bargaining. Such involvement might require them to assume responsibility for the
performance of the company, or to participate in business decisions that may have
disparate effects on different groups of union members, and labor leaders have not
embraced such a role. Thomas Donahue, then AFL-CIO Secretary- Treasurer,
summarized the traditional viewpoint in a 1976 speech:
Because American unions have won equality at the bargaining table, we have not
sought it in corporate boardrooms. We do not seek to be a partner in management
-- to be, most likely, the junior partner in success and the senior partner in failure.
We do not want to blur in any way the distinctions between the respective roles of
management and labor in the plant. We guard our independence fiercely -independent of government, independent of any political party, and independent
of management.
The rationale for strategic partnerships
Collective bargaining has long been the primary vehicle through which unions
have sought to protect the long-term interests of their members; high-performance work
systems, coupled with union representation, may help workers and firms discover futher
“mutual gains” in the workplace (Kochan and Osterman 1994). Even as new work
practices diffused over the 1980s and 1990s, however, some union leaders came to
believe that neither employee involvement nor collective bargaining provided unions
with the means to deal with the turbulence associated with increasingly mobile capital,
global competition, and corporate restructuring. For example, some evidence on the
diffusion of new work practices suggests that such practices were not typically
accompanied by provisions for employment security (Osterman 1994), and that firms that
adopted them were in fact more likely than others to lay off workers in the 1990s
(Osterman 2000).

5

Workers tended to be favorably inclined toward new work systems, but their
responses were less enthusiastic when reforms were coupled with corporate strategies
that made jobs more precarious rather than more secure (Hunter, MacDuffie, and Doucet
forthcoming). Union leaders began to observe that downsizing, outsourcing, and
reengineering threatened their members even as the high performance work systems they
had negotiated were delivering higher productivity and quality. These threats prompted
more vigorous interest representation through collective bargaining, and more skeptical
attitudes toward high-performance work systems.
Some unions also began to seek venues for engaging the strategic decisions
themselves, looking for influence over the direction of the business, the allocation of
resources, and the distribution of revenues, and for access to the financial information
and business records upon which such decisions were based. While risky, these strategic
partnerships may prove to be popular with union members: the Workplace Representation
and Participation Survey (Freeman and Rogers 1999) provided some recent evidence that
union members would support such institutions. Past opposition to such involvement may
also have been overstated; an earlier survey by Fatehi-Sadeh and Safizadeh (1986), for
example, showed that Illinois United Auto Workers (UAW) and AFL-CIO officials were
favorably inclined toward strategic engagement.
Strategic partnership not only commands some support among workers, but also
has an underlying economic rationale. This rationale is intensified in the current
competitive environment, which features both continued downsizing and increasing use
of high-performance work practices. Workers who invest in firm-specific skills – skills
that do not transfer easily to other jobs – have a vested interest in the long-term

6

performance of the firm that employs them. Further, high performance workplace
practices require that workers, in order to participate effectively in operational decision
making, make large investments in firm-specific skills (Appelbaum and Berg 2000). As
with investments by shareholders in firm-specific physical capital, the returns to
investments in these skills are earned over an extended time period as the company
employs these skills to generate revenue. Should strategic considerations lead companies
to lay off workers before they have the chance to recover the value of their investments in
skills, U.S. workers, unlike their counterparts in many European countries, have no
legally enforceable means to protect their investments. A role for unions in these
decisions may therefore enhance the credibility of commitments made by managers, who
themselves may be employed for relatively short periods and who may have incentives
focused heavily on short-term performance.
U.S. firms also enjoy considerable freedom to oppose workers’ right to organize,
and to move work from union to non-union settings through outsourcing or investment
strategies. These freedoms provide an important backdrop for the U.S. experiences with
labor-management partnerships. On the one hand, because union leaders are centrally
concerned with preserving union jobs, they have incentives to seek a variety of strategies,
including partnerships, that might be effective in doing so. On the other hand, continued
attention to institutional security on the part of the union leaders can distract from other
issues that might be considered jointly. The ability of managers to walk away from labormanagement relationships, and, in some cases, their demonstrated willingness to do so,
can erode the mutual trust necessary to make partnerships effective.

7

The prevalence of strategic labor-management partnerships
Gray, Myers, and Myers’s (1999) review of the Bureau of Labor Statistics file on
contemporary collective bargaining agreements (those expiring between September 1,
1997 and September 30, 2007, and covering more than 1,000 employees) found that
nearly 47% of U.S. collective bargaining agreements contained some form of
“partnership.” In this chapter, we focus on partnerships which include strategic
engagement: negotiated agreements that provide the union with a voice in high-level
decisions and with some influence over the governance of the company. Strategic
partnerships enable unions to participate along with management in financial planning, in
determining competitive strategy, and in decisions governing investments, technology,
and production processes.
Gray et al. (1999) located the strategic partnerships that we discuss here at one
end of a cooperation continuum, with modest arrangements (such as language indicating
the intention of the parties to cooperate) at the other end, and provisions for employee
involvement and information sharing somewhere between. A review of the collective
bargaining agreements showed that strategic partnerships were extremely rare: only 27 of
1,041 contracts contained provisions for what Gray et al. termed “full partnership”; these
contracts covered about 200,000 workers.
The history of some relatively high profile labor-management partnerships, such
as the one that developed between Xerox and ACTWU (now UNITE) implies that
strategic partnerships might evolve from shop-floor cooperation as a result of a sort of
natural progression (see Appelbaum and Batt (1994) for an overview of this case). Gray
et al. (1999), similarly suggest that partnerships may progress from low levels of

8

cooperation, through more elaborate channels for employee involvement, to full strategic
partnership.
We used this premise as a starting point for a small-sample inquiry. In the
summer of 1999, we surveyed 25 researchers in management, human resource
administration, industrial relations, and labor studies. Each had published studies
examining negotiated labor-management cooperation; the studies covered 24 different
companies.1 Many of these studies were assessments, negative as well as positive, of
“high performance workplace” practices implemented through negotiated agreements.
Our survey focused on the extent to which negotiated cooperation, or lower-level
partnerships, served as a precursor to subsequent involvement of the union in strategic
decisions. Because the researchers were well positioned to provide a perspective with a
longitudinal element, we asked them to describe the evolution of cooperation in the
union-management relationship, and the extent to which strategic partnership had
developed, emerged, or been negotiated.
We received usable responses from 12 researchers. Of these, five researchers
reported that the union-management partnerships they studied led to no strategic
participation for the union. At an information technology manufacturing company, for
example, a partnership formed between corporate executives at company headquarters
and the top levels of the union resulted in no high-level joint decision-making at the plant
being studied. Similarly, a telephone company that had negotiated more cooperative

1

The companies include GTE, NYNEX, NUMMI, AT&T, Lucent, NCR, Saturn, Chrysler, US West, Pac
Bell, GM Linden, ALCOA, Levi Strauss, Xerox, Harrison Radiator, Ford-Wayne ISA, Chrysler Canada,
US Steel, Bethlehem Steel, Inland Steel, and companies in semiconductors, trucking, airlines, and steel that
wished to remain unidentified.
9

work practices with its union “never approached [strategic involvement],” according to
the researcher who studied it.
Three researchers reported on companies and unions that negotiated cooperative
relations, but not strategic partnerships, with the relationship blurring into discussions
and consultation on strategic issues. The cooperative relation between the local union and
management at one auto plant, for example, was described by a researcher as based on
information sharing on business and operational matters. However, the relationship was
never meant to be a strategic partnership. On the contrary, the researcher reported that
“both parties jealously guard their rights and their obligations to their respective
constituencies.” This sort of partnership included communication, trust, consultation, and
advance notice of changes; there was, however, no shared decision-making or union
involvement in decisions relating to financial planning, investments, pricing, competitive
strategies, or production processes.
Another researcher characterized an auto agreement similarly: “Dialogue is not
the same as negotiation. Above all, it doesn’t authorize any claim by the union to a
legitimate place at the table. … In my opinion, management has been savvy and
consistent in its efforts to promote worker participation (and not merely symbolic
participation) while at the same time limiting the union to a fairly traditional role.” Here,
the union was informed and consulted prior to implementation of management decisions,
but rarely involved in joint decision-making. For example, the company had already
decided to adopt participatory workplace practices before it began any discussion with
the union. It then involved the workforce extensively in the implementation of these
practices.

10

The remaining four researchers reported on full strategic labor-management
agreements that accompanied other kinds of cooperation at five companies. Differences
in the origins and evolution of these agreements are instructive. In the steel industry,
strategic participation was driven by the United Steelworkers of America (USWA)
national bargaining agenda (discussed in more detail below). The agenda includes a
commitment to build strategic labor-management partnerships wherever possible in order
to gain increased control over company decision-making. Researchers reported that
companies in the steel and aluminum industries entered into strategic partnership
agreements with the USWA because they needed to introduce new workplace practices in
order to meet heightened global competition. The companies sought to redesign work
processes, to increase discretionary effort, and by doing so to improve operational
performance at the plant level; this required union participation. In practice, these
partnerships have been implemented differently across companies and even across plants
in the same company.
Telecommunications researchers described a contrasting case. Competition from
non-union companies led one large company to enter into strategic partnership with the
Communication Workers of America (CWA). The company wanted union support for
favorable legislation and administrative rulings domestically as well as union help when
it sought approval to participate in a foreign telephone company. This, it believed, would
help the company compete and grow; the union supported these efforts because they were
likely to result in more union jobs. The union made company neutrality in union
organizing drives and card check recognition for the union key requirements for its
participation in a strategic alliance at this and other telecom companies. According to the

11

researchers, “The striking aspect of the union security clauses is that while the union
began to demand [them] soon after divestiture, it met with limited success until the
companies began needing union support in the regulatory arena. … The union supported
their efforts in return for some guarantees for union and job security. … The union won
the union security clauses by linking regulatory and collective bargaining activities.”
Researchers suggested, however, that while CWA is involved in an alliance with the
company about strategic issues, unlike the steelworkers, the union does not necessarily
see shared decision-making authority as a key piece of its bargaining agenda.
Our survey of researchers is consistent with the data that show that strategic
labor-management partnerships are rare. Even in cases where labor and management
made commitments to cooperation at other levels, strategic involvement was unusual and
did not typically follow other kinds of cooperation as part of an unfolding process. The
survey suggested further that where such partnerships exist, they need not necessarily
have evolved out of earlier experiences with negotiated cooperative relationships.
Rather, there are a variety of paths to strategic partnership. We turn our attention to these
paths next.

The shape of strategic engagement: negotiated partnerships
Some union leaders and companies have established strategic partnerships
through negotiation. Below we consider in more detail the content of these partnerships,
as well as the reasons that different unions and firms agreed to construct them. We do so
with reference to four different partnerships, negotiated by unions in electrical
contracting, telecommunications, steel, and manufacturing.

12

Two primary kinds of interests – company growth (or stability), and new work
practices -- have brought companies and their workers’ unions together in strategic
partnerships, Below we consider examples of each. First, as competitive pressures
continue to intensify, companies and unions may find that they have a common interest in
seeing the company grow. Growth of the company and expansion of union jobs, when
these are mutually agreed upon goals, can be advanced by a partnership relationship. The
cooperation of the union can help management preserve or increase market share, while
the union sees involvement in defense or expansion of market share as an opportunity to
protect and promote union jobs.
Second, at many companies increased competition also leads managers to
introduce participatory management and high performance workplace practices.
Strategic involvement can complement these practices. An active union role in decisions
about workplace practices provides workers with a further voice and a forum for
addressing the context in which the organization introduces new practices. Unions, like
companies, have an interest in the adoption of practices that contribute to organizational
viability and success. Mutual respect for both company and union goals can also be
advanced by partnership relationships.

Cooperative Efforts in the Electrical Construction Industry
Perhaps the longest standing labor-management joint relationship in the U.S. is in
the electrical contracting industry, between the International Brotherhood of Electrical
Workers (IBEW) and the National Electrical Contractors Association (NECA).
Composed of an equal number of representatives from the IBEW and NECA, the Council

13

on Industrial Relations was established in 1920 as a judicial body to handle labormanagement disputes in the electrical construction industry. Disputes are submitted
voluntarily, and all decisions are unanimous. The Council on Industrial Relations
attempts to keep the industry free of strikes, serves as binding arbitrator for the industry,
and meets to discuss safety and training matters. NECA and the IBEW also jointly
operate the National Joint Apprenticeship and Training Committee for the electrical
industry. This program was established in 1947 as the national coordinating arm for
apprenticeship training. With a budget of approximately $80 million a year, it operates
more than 300 local apprenticeship training programs as well as in-service skill
improvement training for electricians.
Building on these experiences with joint programs, NECA and the IBEW
responded to competition from nonunion electrical contractors by establishing the
National Labor Management Cooperation Committee (NLMCC) in 1995. In addition to
more traditional functions, such as promoting mutual gains bargaining, the NLMCC
functions as a strategic partnership between the thousands of union electrical contractors
associated with NECA and the IBEW, which represents more than 300,000 electrical
construction workers. About 4,200 electrical contractors are members of NECA and
nearly 12,000 other union electrical contractors are “signatory” contractors who have
indicated that they would like to be covered by the NECA contract. The NLMCC is
funded at one cent per person-hour worked, or at about $3.5 million per year.
Five years ago, in the context of its “Blueprint for the 90s,” the NLMCC
developed a “market recovery program” to take back market share from the vast number
of small, nonunion contractors in the construction industry. Local NECA and IBEW

14

groups work together to administer surveys to determine how much construction work is
carried out by union contractors and union workers, and to develop programs for
increasing the share of union work; the NLMCC helps to finance and conduct the
surveys.
The program also includes joint campaigns to increase the number of apprentices,
to create pride in the industry and union, and, especially, to promote the advantages of
using union contractors. NECA and the IBEW jointly advertise union contractors and
jointly hire sales people to market union contractors to builders and architects.
Advertising emphasizes the skills and versatility of union electricians and the pride they
take in doing their jobs well. “Quality Connection,” an industry magazine published by
the NLMCC, also supports this effort.
The IBEW described the market recovery program and the NLMCC as successful
partnerships, noting that the number of union apprentices in the industry rose from
25,000 to 40,000 in the last half of the 1990s. Further, in 1987 only about 28 percent of
the electrical construction market was unionized. By 1999, according to IBEW, the
market share of union contractors had risen to 37 percent of workers in the electrical
construction industry.
The Workplace of the Future in Telecommunications
Concerns over market share and jobs also drove unions to seek strategic
engagement in the telecommunications industry. One example comes from AT&T,
where the loss of monopoly protection in 1984 and the break-up of the Bell System led to
a dramatic decline in union jobs. AT&T eliminated over 60 percent of its unionized

15

workforce between 1984 and 1992, while the regional Bell companies reduced the
number of employees by about 30 percent through attrition (Batt, Katz, and Keefe 1999).
More than 100,000 CWA jobs were lost, and union leadership came to believe
that traditional collective bargaining was limited in its ability to prevent further job
losses. The smaller IBEW presence was also weakened: all IBEW jobs in some units,
such as sales, were lost. The unions were concerned not only about the effects of
restructuring on their membership, but about their own institutional security. In 1991,
after acquiring NCR, a company that had aggressively used plant closures and other
policies to avoid unionization, AT&T allowed NCR to go forward with a full range of
anti-union tactics. This occurred simultaneously with discussions AT&T had begun with
CWA about a code of conduct that would commit both the company and union to nonhostile behaviors during union organizing drives (Nissen 1998).
On the management side, AT&T came to believe it would be able to compete
more successfully if its union relationships were cooperative rather than adversarial. The
company hoped that more cooperative relations with its unions would help it to expand
its market share: unionized workers were heavily involved in customer service, and the
company found it difficult, in a competitive environment, to gain new business and to
retain customers while engaging in adversarial relationships with these workers and their
representatives.
The partnership model negotiated between AT&T and its unions, CWA and the
IBEW, known as the Workplace of the Future, was intended to help all parties move from
an adversarial to a more cooperative relationship. The partnership was kicked off in
March 1993. The agreement states that “[t]he parties share the goals of establishing a

16

world class, high performance organization and protecting employment security through
market success,” and recognizes that market success will require the company to target
customer satisfaction and market flexibility (CWA 1993). Further, the agreement
recognized that “[j]oint training, jointly designed, will be essential to develop common
understandings, describe business strategies, and develop union expertise in new
technology” (CWA 1993).
The partnership structure of the Workplace of the Future had four components.
Workplace models, to be jointly defined by the company and its unions, were charged
with identifying and managing the implementation of workplace practices that enhance
quality, customer satisfaction, quality of work life, and competitiveness. Business
Unit/Division planning councils were intended to facilitate participation by the unions in
business decisions regarding technology, work organization, job content, training, and
employment and in the development of cooperative work and leadership styles. The
Constructive Relationship Council, established through bargaining in 1989, would
continue to function and would facilitate the work of the Workplace Models and Business
Unit/Division Planning Councils. Finally, a Human Resources Board, consisting of three
AT&T executives, one union leader each from the CWA and IBEW, and two
distinguished leaders in the field of human resources, was established. The Human
Resource Board was to address “broad, strategic, global human resources and business
issues within the context of the external environment over long range time frames”
(CWA 1993).
The various partnership structures called for in the Workplace of the Future
agreement have provided the unions and workers with increased opportunities for

17

participation, but the record has been uneven. The joint committees have not met the
unions’ expectations. The top level Human Resources Board has provided only limited
opportunities for union participation in strategic decisions. It functions mainly as a means
for the unions to obtain information from AT&T.
The record of the partnership in promoting greater security for the workforce and
for the union has also been mixed. Employment security language remains weak, and
restructuring continues to cause great insecurity for workers. This problem has been
especially acute for IBEW; CWA has had more opportunities to try to save jobs by
suggesting alternatives to the company, or to mitigate the effects of downsizing on
workers. The company, however, has not always accepted the unions’ job-saving
recommendations.
The partnership has been further strained by the unions’ perception that AT&T is
hostile to the unions’ institutional interests. For example, when CWA successfully
organized a majority of the potential members at AT&T’s American Transtech to sign
union cards, the company backed down on its neutrality pledge, embarking on an antiunion campaign. The union lost the 1995 representation election. More recently, the
company has been buying into parts of the telecommunications industry that are
nonunion, and resisting the unions’ attempts to organize these workers. For example,
AT&T acquired TCI and Media One in order to get into the cable business, but these
acquisitions were not discussed in the partnership. The long-term prospects of the
partnership, in CWA’s view, depend largely on whether AT&T agrees to neutrality when
the unions undertake organizing drives to represent workers in its cable operations.

18

New Directions Bargaining in Steel
In the decade following the 1982 collapse of steel production in the U.S.,
integrated steel mills were idled, employment fell, and wage and benefit concessions led
to sharp declines in real compensation for steelworkers. In 1992, the USWA adopted its
New Directions bargaining program, seeking “an ongoing voice for itself and its
members in managerial decisions affecting shop-floor, plant, and corporate performance,
all with an eye toward producing business success sufficiently sustained and shared as to
serve both company and worker interests on a continuing basis.” (Frankel 1997:3). The
program, according to USWA President George Becker, calls for “employment security
guarantees and partnership agreements providing for union and worker involvement at
every level from a seat on the Board of Directors to problem-solving on the shop floor.”
(Becker 1998: 120).
Building on its 1986 partnership agreement with National Steel, the USWA
introduced New Directions bargaining in the 1993-94 round of contract negotiations. The
main provisions of the New Directions program include a no layoff guarantee; union
involvement in workplace and corporate decision making; restructuring the work place to
increase flexibility, improve productivity, and reduce costs; and neutrality and card check
recognition when the union seeks to organize nonrepresented employees (Frankel 1997).
The program also included a strategic alliance between the company and the union with
respect to public policy and joint company and union responses to industry trends. The
union successfully negotiated contracts that included these partnership provisions with
the major integrated steel companies – Inland, National, Bethlehem, USX, and LTV.
Contracts with other companies, including Wheeling-Pittsburgh, Republic Engineered

19

Steels, USS/Kobe, Acme, J&L Specialty, Lukens Steel, Gulf States, and Northwestern
Steel and Wire, contained many of the substantive features of the New Directions
program. The agreements were for 6 years, and have been renegotiated since August 1,
1999. Partnership agreements remain an important part of the unions’ bargaining agenda,
and have been renegotiated with the major integrated steel companies.
The partnership agreement provides the union with the right to participate, along
with company managers, in decisions at levels of the company. At the corporate level,
joint strategic partnership committees bring union leaders and company executives
together to consider strategic plans, technological change, staffing levels, customer
evaluations, major organizational issues, and facilities utilization. The agreements also
include mechanisms by which union and plant officials can negotiate over instituting
modern work practices, plant steering committees investigate alternative approaches to
safety, work redesign, work assignments and scheduling, planning for technological
change, training, and process improvement.
The New Directions Bargaining Pattern contains provisions that require the steel
companies to remain neutral when the USWA seeks to organize their nonrepresented
employees and, in most cases, to recognize the union once a majority of workers has
signed union cards. The strength of these provisions was tested quickly after their
adoption: in the 1993-94 contracts, such provisions covered only those affiliates in which
the steel company directly or indirectly owned more than 50 percent of the voting power.
LTV subsequently took exactly a 50 percent stake in a mini-mill in Gadsden, Alabama –
in the union’s view, to evade the neutrality provisions – and the USWA put the
partnership it had negotiated with the company in 1993 on hold. Both workers and the

20

union refused to participate in problem solving and decision making activities. In the
1999 bargaining round, the neutrality provisions were extended to cover any entity in
which the steel company owns a material interest and whose business involves steel raw
materials or steel production and distribution. LTV agreed to accept these provisions and
to withdraw from its joint venture in the Alabama steel mill if its partners refused to
remain neutral during a USWA organizing drive.
The acquiescence of LTV to the neutrality provisions suggests that the withdrawal
of the workers and union from involvement in decision making and from cooperation in
plant committees had consequences for performance at LTV’s integrated mills. More
generally, Appelbaum and Berg (2000) report that the partnership program of the USWA
played an important role in increasing the legitimacy of worker involvement on the shop
floor from the perspectives of both workers and managers, observing that employment
security provisions assure individual workers that they will not work themselves out of a
job if they use their capacities to innovate to contribute to increased productivity. The
new workplace practices, these authors show, were associated with significantly higher
productivity, and contributed heavily to the return to profitability of the integrated mills
and to the turnaround in the steel industry.
The extent to which these partnership agreements have been implemented by
union and management officials varies widely, as does the extent to which union officials
participate in strategic decisions at the corporate level. Some local unions and managers
have been able to use the partnership agreement to engage in mutual gains bargaining,
but other facilities have experienced resistance from union officials or local managers to
the basic elements of cooperation and partnership. Both union officials and managers

21

express skepticism about whether the New Directions partnerships in steel live up to
expectations about union participation in top-level strategic decisions. But the
partnerships have proven valuable to both steel companies and the USWA as a means to
modernize workplace practices, improve the economic viability of the integrated steel
mills and the strength of the union as an institution, and preserve or expand union jobs in
the industry.

High Performance Work Organization Partnerships
The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (IAMAW)
has successfully launched HPWO Partnerships or is far along in the process at
approximately 50 (out of several thousand) of the facilities at which it represents workers.
Union locals and managers at a far larger number of work sites have taken some early
steps toward developing a partnership. Some of the best known partnerships are being
developed at leading companies such as Harley Davidson or Weyerhauser, but
partnerships have also been established at small or medium-sized companies, often
family-owned. The union intends the HPWO Partnerships to enhance employers’
competitive position and thus its members’ job security and welfare. Partnerships have
been developed with companies that wanted to increase market share in the face of
intense competition, as well as with those facing severe financial or competitive problems
that pose a threat to their survival.
IAMAW observes that partnerships must begin with the commitment of
management to growth; this commitment enables the union’s joint participation in
developing and implementing a strategy and business plan to achieve that growth. In the

22

view of the union, if all management and the union do “is increase productivity and
efficiency and do not develop strategies to stabilize and grow the business and get control
of costs, employees may improve their way out of employment” (International
Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers 1999: 8-1). IAMAW identifies three
components of a successful partnership: a business plan that incorporates long-term
returns, market expansion, and growth of the workforce; accurate costing out of all the
activities that support production of the products and services the firm offers in the
market place; and changes in the work process that improve quality and productivity.
Partnership agreements establish a governance structure at the corporate or
establishment level to provide leadership and guide the development of a growth strategy.
The corporate partnership committee at Harley Davidson, for example, comprises four
union and two company representatives. In an ideal partnership, a jointly developed
strategic plan charts the future of the business. Only after the union and management
have agreed on a growth strategy and an appropriate system for costing activities will the
union agree to assess work processes jointly and to propose improvements. The
introduction of high performance workplace practices follows, rather than precedes, the
development of the partnership. Extensive education, training and planning go into
developing HPWO Partnerships. Several years may elapse between the time the union
and company agree to explore a partnership relationship and the time an agreement is
implemented.
Partnership structures also include decision making bodies at the workplace, such
as business unit or plant-level teams, that determine appropriate measures to track
performance and make decisions about work processes and implements changes,

23

including the adoption of just-in-time inventory, self-directed work groups, cellular
manufacturing, and so on. Shop stewards meet on a daily basis with their salaried
counterparts, and natural work groups gather and share information, analyze problems
and engage in problem solving activities, and make daily operational decisions.
(International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers 1999). To assist its local
unions in this process, the IAMAW also has a five-person department that provides
consulting and training and seven field staff that provide support services; particularly in
smaller companies, top managers have welcomed advice on business process
improvement and the development of alternative products and workplace practices.
In addition to the commitment to growth and the establishment of joint decisionmaking structures, the IAMAW has several other aims for its high performance work
organizations. These include agreement on employment security, development of an
education and communication plan for all employees, and an implementation plan for
replacing traditional top down decision making by managers with joint decision making
by labor and management at the appropriate levels of the organization. The union
expects to be “recognized as a valued and trusted partner by management.” At the same
time, “the institutional support and protection provided by the union for the Partnership
helps employees accept new roles and explore new work methods” (IAMAW 1999: 6-5).
Many of the HPWOs have been established under difficult competitive
circumstances, in firms and plants that have the inefficiencies typical of older
manufacturing systems. The trying circumstances have provided a motivation for
cooperation, but have also made it difficult to establish trust, develop joint governance
and decision-making structures, or to make fundamental changes in work processes.

24

Obstacles to successful partnerships include the difficulty of taking on new roles for
managers, professionals, other salaried employees, union leaders, and workers. For
example, engineers and supervisors may fear that they have much to lose from the
Partnerships, and may be reluctant to participate in the process. Further, under
competitive duress, managers experience more pressure to turn to layoffs, and the union
may interpret consideration of such options as less than trustworthy. Shop floor
frustration with the pace of change or skepticism about management’s motives can lead
to rejection of union leaders, or of contracts that include partnership agreements.
Yet a partnership that provides a commitment by management and the union to
jointly developing a proactive approach to addressing competitive pressures may be the
key both to survival for the company and to employment security for workers. The
partnership may also increase the union’s strength as it comes to be seen by its members
as providing real leadership to ensure the employer’s long-term survival and growth,
thereby preserving jobs.

Union Representatives on Corporate Boards of Directors
Our reviews and descriptions of partnerships are consistent with the finding that
fewer than 3% of major collective bargaining agreements feature these arrangements: full
partnerships appear to be extremely difficult for unions to establish and maintain.
American unions have no statutory support for strategic involvement, and few firms have
actively sought the involvement of union leaders at this level. The construction of these
forums has required unusual circumstances, strong common interests in surviving in
difficult competitive environments, and determined union leadership.

25

Negotiated strategic partnerships occupy precarious ground. They are vulnerable
to collapse where union members are skeptical of the value of such involvement. Their
survival and effectiveness also depend heavily on management commitment to the
partnership, since information sharing and joint decision-making are integral parts of
strategic involvement. What is less clear is whether unions can force such commitment
upon management given sufficient bargaining power, or whether commitment depends in
part on the good faith of management.
Several American unions, aware of the tenuous nature of negotiated partnerships,
have sought to bolster their strategic influence further by seeking seats on the boards of
directors of companies where they represent members. Board seats could be particularly
valuable in strategic partnerships because directorships come with statutory rights to
information and involvement in decisions. Such seats have emerged as a target of
collective bargaining in programs such as the USWA’s New Directions and the
IAMAW’s HPWO.
Board seats for unions are not always coupled with other joint approaches or a
commitment to partnership in decision-making. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, unionnominated directors resulted chiefly from negotiations over ownership for workers
through the institution of Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs) (Hunter 1998).
Protection of the workers’ ownership interests, rather than an increased commitment to
shared strategic decision-making, motivated union leaders to seek board representation in
many of these cases.
At least three factors constrain union-nominated directors’ abilities to use the
board as a forum for discussions of management and union interests in strategic

26

decisions. First, union nominees, like all directors on American corporate boards, are
required to represent the interests of shareholders (for a more complete description of this
responsibility, see Johnson, Daily, and Ellsrand 1996), and are legally liable should they
fail to do so effectively. Their fiduciary duties typically proscribe directors from explicit
representation of union interests on boards, except where they can argue that meeting
union interests is consistent with protecting shareholders’ investments in the firm.
A second constraint on interest representation in the boardroom is normative: the
view of the proper role of corporate boards that pervades American managerial and
directors’ communities. On typical boards, outside directors -- those not part of the
executive team -- rarely involve themselves with issues of day-to-day governance. Only
major events such as takeovers or changes in top executives bring forth outside director
activism (Useem 1993). Board functioning in less dramatic circumstances relies on
consensus rather than constituency representation or explicit negotiation among
competing interests.
Third, managers’ interests are not always aligned with those of the firms’
shareholders, and managerial opposition to shared control can derail strategic
engagement even in when it is to the benefit of shareholders. Here the experiences of the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT) with board nominees are especially
instructive. Following deregulation and the weakening of pattern bargaining in the 1980s.
trucking companies sought wage concessions. In several firms, workers accepted stock in
return for wage concessions; the IBT insisted on board seats to accompany the stock
plans. Several of the Teamster-nominated directors envisioned these seats as vehicles to
foster joint discussion of the strategic issues facing the firm and union, but this never

27

developed. Instead, the boards became the venues through which the IBT attempted to
protect its members’ financial investments as the firms struggled. The managers guarded
information closely and made as many decisions as possible outside the boardroom.
Most of the IBT boards were characterized by considerable mistrust between outside
directors and inside managers: one Teamster-nominated director actually sued the
managers of his firm. All of the Teamster board schemes eventually disappeared as the
firms were acquired or went bankrupt in the fierce competition that followed
deregulation.
Awareness of the legal, normative, and practical constraints has dimmed union
enthusiasm in board representation as a forum for strategic engagement. Chrysler, for
example, was the first large American company to have a union representative on its
board, with UAW President Douglas Fraser obtaining a seat following the concessions
associated with Chrysler’s near bankruptcy in 1980. In 1984, after some wrangling,
Fraser’s successor as President, Owen Bieber, assumed the seat. The Chrysler-UAW seat
illustrated the limits of board representation: both Fraser and Bieber found it difficult to
influence management policy in this venue. After several years, the UAW did not
emphasize preservation of the board seat as a bargaining objective. The corporation
restructured its board, dropping Bieber, in 1991.
Nevertheless, experiments with board representation continue. Table 1 lists
American firms in which union representatives have recently served on corporate boards
of directors. Typically, these boards have one or more directors, but fewer than a
majority, nominated by a union; the board seats are written into either the collective
bargaining contract or, where backed by share ownership, the ESOP agreement. With

28

the exception of the airlines, the firms have directors representing members of only one
union; airline boards comprise members of both the Airline Pilots’ Association (ALPA)
and the IAMAW. In addition to the American firms listed in Table 1, the United Auto
Workers are represented on the 20-person supervisory board of directors of at the
German company Daimler-Chrysler. Under German law, the unions that represent
Daimler-Chrysler workers in Germany are entitled to three seats; the German union IG
Metall has allowed the current UAW President to assume one of these three seats.
Though union officials (including presidents of international unions such as
Bieber and Fraser) have held directorships, union board representation does not require
the directors to be active unionists or workers. The IAMAW, for example, discourages
active union leaders from serving on boards; among its representatives are a number of
retired union officials. Another common approach is the nomination of friendly
“neutrals” – consultants, lawyers, even college professors – to serve as directors. Some of
these union-nominated directors have been effective in improving firm governance in the
interests of shareholders (Hunter 1998). Many union-nominated directors have the
characteristics that corporate governance theorists claim make directors effective: a
strong interest in the well-being of the company; sources of information; independence
from management; and ties to important stakeholders (Baker and Patton 1987). Union
nominees with the right skills, commitment, and support can be as effective contributors
to governance as any other outside director.
A few of the boards of companies in Table 1 have established themselves as
forums that reinforce or enhance strategic partnerships between labor and management.
Most typically, this occurs when both parties are committed to the success of the schemes

29

in ways similar to those detailed in other kinds of strategic partnerships: the board seats
are seen by the parties as part of a broader approach to labor-management cooperation,
and the parties have strong reasons for cooperation rooted in the demands of the
competitive market. Wever’s (1989) case study of the Western Airlines board, for
example, showed that board participation was stronger when accompanied by further
forms of employee involvement , and that all these forms of involvement were stronger
when unions were more powerful and secure. As with other partnerships, the institutional
security of the union, and the perception of the union that management will not (or is not
powerful enough to) undermine that security, are important prerequisites for success.
Despite the legal, normative, and practical constraints, union-nominated directors
have had influence on strategic decision-making in a number of areas. Cagy or
experienced directors can turn the consensus-seeking environment in their favor, stalling
or delaying decisions by withholding approval, for example. Union-nominated directors
may diminish the likelihood that managers will seek to implement plans that will be
perceived by the unions as divisive or destructive. Typically, they can do so by using
their board positions to raise issues for discussion, and by requiring managers to address
the argument that plans that provoke union opposition may be bad for the company (and
its shareholders) in the long term.
Directors also affect the selection and compensation of top executives. Union
nominees can push to hire managers who are relatively more committed to partnership
and to protecting the institutional interests of the union, for example, and may be able to
stall or block the appointments of managers that they believe would be hostile. Directors
can also ensure that executive pay packages are established (and explained to the

30

workforce) in ways consistent with the preservation of partnership, rather than in ways
that breed distrust or discontent.
Board members can also be helpful in preserving a role for collective bargaining
while placing it in strategic context. While bargaining is required over the distribution of
returns, the presence of union representatives on boards can help both sides to make their
positions credible to the others: books are relatively more open, for example, and
directors can establish additional channels for communication. More generally, the
presence of union-nominated directors adds additional credibility to strategic planning,
while providing another route through which workforce and union concerns can be
incorporated into decisions that affect the future of the company.
While board representation can facilitate aspects of partnership, such as
information sharing, it is clear that such representation provides no guarantees that the
parties will work together to address joint concerns amicably. In addition to the
difficulties at Chrysler and the problems the Teamsters had, other well-publicized fiascos
with union board seats have included the Rath Packing Company (Hammer and Stern
1986), Hyatt-Clark (Labor Research Review 1985), and Eastern Airlines (Smaby 1988).
United Airlines provides a recent example of the challenges that union-nominated
directorships face. ALPA and the IAM obtained one seat each on the board of directors,
along with share ownership, in 1994. (The flight attendants did not join in the plan,
though non-union employees also took partial ownership and one board seat.) Directors
have struggled since then to establish their roles. As do all directors, the union nominees
owed fiduciary responsibilities to all shareholders. Yet they owed their seats, and their
loyalties, to the unions that had nominated them. On the board, directors formally

31

represented employees’ ownership interests. In practice the distinction between these
interests, the interests of employees in their jobs, wages, and working conditions, and the
interests of the unions as institutions tended to get tangled up.
Following the employee buyout, board representation did not emerge as a catalyst
for further cooperative approaches to labor-management relations. Over time, the
likelihood that an effective partnership would be established diminished as trust between
top managers and the union eroded. A difficult round of bargaining in 1997 was followed
by a dispute over the IAM’s organizing of passenger service agents. An on again–off
again proposal for a merger with USAirways provided further controversy. Eventually,
the difficulties in the relationship began to have detrimental effects on company
performance. In summer 2000 pilots were accused of engaging in work slowdowns
(pilots’ spokesmen denied the accusations), and the bargaining between United and the
IAM that continued through summer 2001 was bitter even by industry standards. The
airline’s performance did not improved relative to its competitors after the buyout
(Gittell, von Nordenflycht, and Kochan 2001), and none of the parties saw the ESOP as a
success story.

Concluding remarks: dilemmas for unions
Strategic partnerships in the U.S. seem unlikely to evolve naturally from other
kinds of partnerships or employee involvement programs. Managers will continue to seek
employee involvement in the workplace, should they believe it will enhance
performance, but are less likely to bring unions into the executive suite. Public policy
developments that would mandate, or even encourage, strategic partnerships between

32

unions and management also seem exceedingly unlikely. We therefore conclude this
chapter with remarks that focus on the dilemmas that strategic partnerships raise for
unions and their leaders, for the development of this new institution depends primarily on
union initiative, and the extent to which unions find ways to address these challenges.
There are at least three kinds of orientations that unions have brought to strategic
partnerships. The first is limited: where workers have invested in the firm through stock
purchases and ESOPs, unions can negotiate for ways to monitor managers more carefully
from an investor’s point of view. Second, partnerships can be primarily defensive,
focused on company growth or stability and on the corresponding preservation of union
jobs. Growth and security have provided premises underlying both successful and
unsuccessful partnerships. Third, the partnership may be part of an overall attempt by the
union to involve itself more deeply in the management of the firm, in which the union
seeks venues through which its own expertise and that of its members can be deployed in
ways that promote firm performance.
Participation presents a set of dilemmas to unions at the local level (Frost 2000),
with the commitment of local workforce representatives to programs for labormanagement participation greatly enhancing the chances for success of such efforts. Such
commitment, however, requires local unionists to reinterpret and redefine their roles, and
to convince their members of the value associated with cooperation (Kochan 1985).
Strategic participation from any orientation, whether exercised through negotiated
partnerships or through board seats, raises challenges that may be more difficult for
unions to address. Problems with participation are intensified because the stakes are
high. By definition, the issues taken up at the strategic level may profoundly affect job

33

security, and the future survival of the firm and the union. Historically, union leaders
have been averse to accepting even partial responsibility for managerial decisions without
corresponding authority or influence, and they remain skeptical that partnerships will
provide true influence. Successful strategic partnerships therefore require unions to assess
accurately the extent to which management is willing to participate, or can be forced to
do so.
The primary rationale for union-management strategic partnerships is to promote
the long-term competitive position of the firm in directions consistent with protection of
the workers’ investments in the firm, whether in financial or in human capital. In some
environments, the parties may not have enough common interests to make partnership
viable. As Heckscher and Shurman (1997) note, a potentially “fatal problem” with
partnerships is that they cannot address the turbulence outside the firm that seems to be
endemic to the current economy.
To gain workers’ support, strategic partnerships must protect not only workers’
investments, but the institutional security of the union itself. Union leaders are likely to
see any purported benefits of partnership as vacuous in the presence of threats to the
continued vitality of labor representation for the firms’ workers. One promising area for
further investigation is the relationship between union organizing and strategic
partnerships. Through strategic partnerships, unions have sought to establish conditions
of neutrality toward further organizing and toward treatment of acquisitions. Where
partnerships have floundered, on the other hand, it is often because the unions have been
unable to forge this kind of arrangement. Keeping union jobs inside the firm rather than
outsourcing the may be a similar precondition for success.

34

Even where the parties have enough common interests to warrant cooperation,
further factors also mitigate against the success of strategic partnerships. Among these
factors are mismatches between union structure and the demands of partnerships, and the
failure of partnerships to include all relevant parties (Hecksher and Shurman 1997).
Strategic participation and partnerships raise dilemmas for the union as an institution, at
levels above that of the local, the bargaining unit, or the company. Effectiveness of
strategic partnerships, whether through negotiated agreements or in the boardroom, can
be greatly enhanced by the support and involvement of the international union. The
cooperation of the international can provide directors and local leaders in partnerships
with access to information and expertise, and international unions have the resources to
train and guide local leaders.
International unions, however, are also charged with setting industry frameworks
for bargaining, and with establishment of common standards and principles. This creates
problems for the international with respect to strategic participation. As one union leader
remarked,
“When I talk about a conflict of interest I'm not really talking about the
simple union-management problem. The issue is really single enterprise
loyalty. I don't want me or the [international] union to be in a position of
playing God, to be picking winners in the industry” (quoted in Hunter,
1998).
Strategic engagement and partnerships, however, may push international unions in the
direction of favoring some members’ interests over others, precisely because such
institutions are intended to confront competitive issues. Strategic decisions that help one
firm may harm another; a dilemma for international union leaders is to establish
principles for support of partnerships that will enable them to avoid being caught up in

35

such intra-industry competition. Internationals, and hence partnerships, are more likely
to be effective where circumstances permit the partnership to focus on competitive
challenges that do not raise such internal problems for the union (for example, attacking
the non-union sector in electrical contracting).
Strategic partnerships may also require the commitment of substantial union
resources, both to the achievement of the partnership (since management is often
opposed), and to its support and maintenance. With the benefits of strategic engagement
unclear, unions may be reluctant to provide the required levels of support; few unions
besides the USWA and ALPA, for example, have identified strategic partnerships as an
objective of collective bargaining, and the USWA is currently reassessing the prominence
it has assigned to this goal. Within the CWA, similarly, the future of partnerships is being
debated, with skeptics questioning the commitment of the union’s time and resources to
participation at the expense of activities such as organizing.
Union-management strategic partnerships also may exclude from the discussion
parties that are necessary to the long-term success of the firm (Heckscher and Shurman
1997). For example, inside the firm, middle managers and supervisors may go
unrepresented, yet their reactions may strongly affect the success of strategic initiatives
or the introduction of new work systems. Further, partnerships must be matched to the
appropriate level of organizational decision-making: corporate-level partnerships may be
ineffectual in a highly decentralized management structure, for example, while effective
division- or plant-level partnerships may be undone with a single decision made at
corporate headquarters should the union find the decision objectionable.

36

Table 2 brings together in summary form a range of choices available to unions in
the design of these institutions. The choices union leaders make will depend on a number
of factors: internal union politics and structure; the particular features of the competitive
markets in which the firms seek to compete (the extent of unionization, global
competition, or competition on the basis of price, for example); the bargaining power of
the union at the local and international levels; and the relationship and history union
leaders have with local and corporate-level management.
These choices, for now, will be made in a legal environment that is fits unionmanagement partnerships poorly. Generally, American labor laws provide relatively
weak protections of workers’ rights to organize. Even in unionized firms, managers
typically oppose vigorously any attempts to extend union representation, and seek
opportunities to move work from union to non-union environments. Union involvement
in strategic decision-making tends, therefore, to be concentrated on preserving
membership. In the absence of such security, union leaders find it difficult to engage in
the kinds of cooperation that would permit the parties to confront the kinds of threats to
employees’ job security and earnings that could be addressed by joint efforts such as
those directed toward training or the implementation of high-performance work practices.
Little legal guidance exists on how partnerships should be conducted even where
the parties find ways to establish them: on the extent to which union leaders might
compromise their duty of fair representation to their members in the exercise of their
fiduciary duties as board directors, for example, or how they might reconcile duties of
representation with decisions made in the process of strategic planning. Directors also
enjoy little legal guidance on the extent to which they are allowed to share information

37

with the unions that nominate them to boards. Management lawyers tend to advise union
nominees to share nothing, which is hardly consistent with the spirit of the arrangements.
Anti-trust law governing interlocking directorates is also vague in its application to these
contexts, and with respect to whether international unions can send representatives to
multiple firms. Further, the extent to which conflicts of interest requiring union
nominated directors to remove themselves from discussions is debatable both in theory
and practice. Several boards have considered, with different results, whether the presence
of the union representatives in the boardroom is appropriate during discussions of
collective bargaining strategy. Negotiated partnerships, while less burdened by legal
requirements than are directorships, operate in a legal vacuum. The further emergence of
both these forms of partnership should be considered in the surrounding legal context,
and changes in that context merit close attention for those interested in strategic
participation.

References
Appelbaum, E., T. Bailey, P. Berg, and A. Kalleberg (2000). Manufacturing Advantage:
Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.

Appelbaum, E. and R. Batt (1994). The New American Workplace: Transforming Work
Systems in the United States. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University/ILR Press.

38

Appelbaum, E. and P. Berg (2000). "High-Performance Work Systems: Giving Workers
a Stake." The New Relationship: Human Capital in the American Corporation. M. M.
Blair and T. A. Kochan. Washington, DC, Brookings Institution: 102-144.

Baker, T. (1999). Doing Well by Doing Good: The Bottom Line on Workplace Practices.
Washington, DC, Economic Policy Institute.

Batt, R., H. C. Katz and J. Keefe (1999). "The Strategic Initiatives of the CWA:
Organizing, Politics, and Collective Bargaining." Paper presented at the Symposium of
Changing Employment Relations and New Institutions of Representation, Sloan School
of Management, MIT, May 25-26. Ithaca, NY, Department of Human Resources, Cornell
University.

Becker, B. and B. Gerhart (1996). “The Impact of Human Resource Management on
Organizational Performance: Progress and Prospects.” The Academy of Management
Journal 39(4): 779-801.

Becker, G. (1998). “A History of Advocating Labor/Management Cooperation.” New
Steel 14(March): 120.

CWA (1993). Workplace of the Future. Washington, DC, Communications Workers of
America.

39

Donahue, Thomas (1976). Speech at the International Conference on Trends in Industrial
and Labor Relations, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, May 26, 1976.

Fatehi-Sadeh, K., and Hossein Safizadeh (1986). "Labor Union Leaders and
Codetermination: an Evaluation of Attitudes." Employee Relations Law Journal 12(2):
188-204.

Frankel, C. B. (1997). New Directions Bargaining in the American Steel Industry.
Pittsburgh, United Steelworkers of America.

Freeman, R. and J. Rogers (1999). “Worker Representation and Participation Survey:
First Report of Findings.” Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Meeting of the IRRA.

Frost, Ann C. (2000). “Explaining Variation in Workplace Restructuring: The Role of
Local Union Capabilities.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 53 (4), forthcoming.

Gittell, J. H., A. Von Nordenflycht, and T. Kochan (2001). "Mutual Gains or Zero Sum?
Labor Relations and Stakeholder Outcomes in The Airline Industry." Manuscript.

Gittleman, M., M. Horrigan, and M. Joyce (1998). “'Flexible' Workplace Practices:
Evidence from a Nationally Representative Survey.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 52(1 (October)): 99-115.

40

Gray, G., D. W. Myers, and P. S. Myers (1999). “Cooperative Provisions in labor
agreements: a new paradigm.” Monthly Labor Review 122(1): 29.

Hammer, T.H. and R. N. Stern (1986). "A Yo-Yo Model of Cooperation: Union
Participation in Management at the Rath Packing Company." Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 337-49.

Heckscher, C. and S. Shurman (1997). "Can labour-management cooperation deliver
jobs and justice." Industrial Relations Journal 28 (4): 323-330.

Hunter, L.W. (1998). "Can Strategic Participation be Institutionalized? Union
Representation on American Corporate Boards," Industrial and Labor Relations Review
51 (4): 557-578.

Hunter, L.W., J.P. MacDuffie, and L. Doucet (forthcoming). What Makes Teams Take?
Employee Reactions to Work Reforms," Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

Ichniowski, C., T. A. Kochan, D. Levine, C. Olson, and G. Strauss (1996). “What Works
at Work: Overview and Assessment.” Industrial Relations 35(3): 299-333.

Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi (1997). “The Effects of Human Resource
Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines.” The American
Economic Review 87(3): 291-313.

41

International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers (1999). High
Performance Work Organization Partnerships: Field Manual. Upper Marlboro, MD,
IAMAW.

Johnson, J. L., C. M. Daily, and A. E. Ellstrand (1996). "Boards of Directors: A Review
and Research Agenda." Journal of Management 22 (3): 409-438.

Katz, H. C., T. A. Kochan, and M. R. Weber (1985). “Assessing the Effects of Industrial
Relations Systems and Efforts to Improve the Quality of Working Life on Organizational
Effectiveness.” Academy of Management Journal 28(3): 509-526.

Kochan. T.A., ed. (1985). Challenges and Choices Facing American Labor. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press

Kochan, T. A. and P. Osterman (1994). The Mutual Gains Enterprise : Forging a
Winning Partnership among Labor, Management, and Government. Boston : Harvard
Business School Press.

Labor Research Review, 1(6) (1985). "The Hyatt-Clark ESOP: An Interview with Jim
May," 25-33.

42

Lawler III, E. E., G. E. Ledford Jr., and S. A. Mohrman (1989). Employee Involvement
in America: A Study of Contemporary Practices. Houston, American Productivity and
Quality Center.

Lawler III, E. E., S. A. Mohrman, and G. E. Ledford Jr (1992). Employee Involvement
and Total Quality Management. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.

Lawler III, E. E., S. A. Mohrman, and G. E. Ledford Jr (1995). Creating High
Performance Organizations. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass.

Loughran, C. S. (1985). "Union Officials as Corporate Directors: What Price Survival?"
Directors and Boards, 10 (1).

MacDuffie, J. P. (1995). “Human Resource Bundles and Manufacturing Performance:
Organizational Logic and Flexible Production Systems in the World Auto Industry.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 48(2): 197-221.

Nissen, B. (1998). “Fighting the union in a 'union friendly' company: the AT&T/NCR
case.” Labor Studies Journal 23(3): 3.

Orts, E. W. (1992). "Beyond Shareholders: Interpreting Corporate Constituency
Statutes." George Washington Law Review 61 (1): 14-135.

43

Osterman, P. (1994). “How Common is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 47(2): 173-188.

Osterman, P. (2000). "Work Reorganization in an Era of Restructuring: Trends in
Diffusion and Effects on Employee Welfare." Industrial and Labor Relations Review
53(2): 179-196.

Patton, A. and J. C. Baker (1987). "Why won't directors rock the boat?" Harvard
Business Review, 87(6), 10-21.

Rubinstein, S. (2000). “The Impact of Co-Management on Quality Performance: The
Case of the Saturn Corporation.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53(2): 197-218.

Smaby, B. (1988). "Labor-Management Cooperation at Eastern Air Lines." Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Bureau of Labor-Management Cooperation, U.S. GPO.

Shleifer A. and R. Vishny (1997). “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of
Finance 52: 737-783.

Useem, M. (1993). Executive Defense: Shareholder Power and Corporate
Reorganization. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press

44

Wever, K. R. (1989). “Toward a Structural Account of Union Participation in
Management: The Case of Western Airlines.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
42(4): 600-609.

45

TABLE 1
SOME U.S. COMPANIES WITH UNION-NOMINATED BOARD DIRECTORS
(circa 2000)

Algoma Steel
Allegheny Teledyne
Bethlehem Steel
Cable Systems International
Cleveland Cliffs
Hawaiian Airlines
J&L Specialty
LTV
Maryland Brush Co.
National Steel
Northwest Airlines
TWA
United Airlines
Weirton Steel
Wheeling Pittsburgh

46

TABLE 2
CHOICES FACING UNION LEADERS IN THE DESIGN
OF INSTITUTIONS FOR STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP
TYPE OF
CHOICE
Establishment
of partnership

INTERNATIONAL
UNION

INTERNATIONAL
OR LOCAL
UNION
Does the international Does the union
union advocate
bargain for
partnerships as a
partnership
matter of policy?
structures?
Does the union
support board seats?
Does the union
support negotiated
strategic
partnerships?

What policy should
the union demand of
the company with
respect to subsequent
organizing
campaigns?
Identity of
Should active
union
international union
representatives leaders be permitted
in strategic level to involve themselves
decisions
in governance
decisions of
individual
companies?
Continuing
support for
representatives

Will the international
union provide
training and technical
support for the
representatives?

If management is
reluctant to agree,
how much is
partnership worth?
How should future
organizing
campaigns and
acquisition of nonunion operations be
handled?

LOCAL UNION
Should workers buy
stock in their own
company?
Should partnerships
accompany concession
bargaining?
What role should
employment security
guarantees play in the
partnership agreement?

What criteria will
be used to select
representatives?

Who will the
representatives be?

Will the union
attempt to
coordinate with or
instruct the
representatives?

Will structures be
established for
communication between
representatives, local
union leaders, and local
members?

47

