NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A WORKERS’ LOBBY TO PROVIDE PORTABLE BENEFITS
Joni Hersch
Working Paper 9591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9591
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2003

Forthcoming chapter in “Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the 21st Century.” The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Joni Hersch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

A Workers’ Lobby to Provide Portable Benefits
Joni Hersch
NBER Working Paper No. 9591
March 2003
JEL No. J000
ABSTRACT
How can workers have a voice in the face of declining unionization and rising nontraditional
career paths? To demonstrate how a new labor market institution can emerge, I develop a model
of fundraising by a workers’ organization in which the founder must allocate resources between the
provision of public goods, which attracts foundation grants, and the provision of private goods,
which attracts individual members. My case study for analyzing the performance of the model is
Working Today, a new organization founded with the objectives of representing all workers and
shifting employment rights from the current employer-based regime to one that assigns rights to
individuals. Working Today has evolved from an organization funded by foundation grants that
attempted to represent all workers, to primarily serving as an intermediary to provide group health
insurance for independent workers. In order to examine the market for health insurance supplied
by an organization such as Working Today, I provide statistics on the insurance coverage status and
demographic characteristics of non-standard workers and traditional employees.
Joni Hersch
Harvard Law School
Lewis 425
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
jhersch@law.harvard.edu

A Workers’ Lobby to Provide Portable Benefits
by Joni Hersch, Harvard Law School
Joni Hersch is Lecturer on Law at Harvard Law School and formerly Professor of
Economics at the University of Wyoming. The author thanks James Rebitzer for his
helpful comments and Mckean Nowlin and Jonathan Patchen for excellent research
assistance.
July 5, 2000
This version September 28, 2001 with update October 14, 2002.
In 1993, the prominent sociologist Herbert Gans published a four-page article entitled
“Time for an Employees’ Lobby.” Gans advocated the formation of a national lobby to
promote the interests of workers. In Gans’s vision, this “employees” or “jobs” lobby
would be multi-class and trans-ideological, and would represent all members of the labor
force including traditional employees as well as managers, the jobless, and contingent
and other nonstandard workers. Gans proposed structuring this lobby on the AARP
model of individual membership, with a small membership fee.
Inspired by Gans’s article, Sara Horowitz founded an employees’ lobby she called
Working Today which was launched on Labor Day 1995. As recommended by Gans,
Working Today was initially based on the AARP model of individual membership.
Working Today started with an ambitious objective. The Christian Science Monitor
described the goal of Working Today as “to put jobs back on the public agenda by
lobbying for political action on measures to save jobs, create new ones, and explore longterm solutions to the ongoing erosion of good jobs.”1 An editorial in the Boston Globe
heralded this new organization, noting that “Working Today aims to be a low-dues,
broad-based lobbying organization for workers of all sorts -- full-time, part-time, the

1

increasingly numerous ranks of contingent workers and the unemployed -- patterned on
the immensely successful AARP, with its 33 million members.”2
But the task of operationalizing Gans’s suggestion of a national lobby that would
represent all workers proved illusive. As the evolution of Working Today demonstrates, it
is difficult to form and sustain an organization with such a broad goal. Working Today
has shifted from seeking to represent all workers via a membership organization to
providing private services to independent workers, with the primary emphasis on
provision of portable benefits. Perhaps in recognition of the current focus, in September
2001 the slogan posted on the Working Today website changed to “benefiting the way
you work” from “a national voice for America’s independent workforce.”3 Working
Today maintains that access to portable benefits is a first step to building a strong
constituency that will push for policy changes to advance the interests of independent
workers.
I begin with an overview of how organizations form and survive. Section II provides
additional background on the broad based workers’ lobby suggested by Herbert Gans. I
follow this in Section III with a discussion of two highly successful membership
organizations, AARP and Common Cause, which might serve as potential models for a
workers’ lobby. This section also provides a description of the evolution of Working
Today.
Section IV develops a model of fundraising by a workers’ organization. In this model,
the founder must allocate resources between the provision of public goods, which attracts
foundation grants, and the provision of private goods, which attracts individual members.
While the model applies generally to any private good, for concreteness I discuss health

2

insurance, as this is the main private good provided by Working Today. In order to
examine the market for health insurance supplied by an organization such as Working
Today, in Section V I use data from the Current Population Survey Contingent Workers
Survey to provide statistics on the insurance coverage status and demographic
characteristics of non-standard workers and traditional employees.
Working Today’s original focus was on independent workers, and Section VI
identifies specific policy areas involving independent workers in which a workers’ lobby
might fruitfully address its efforts. Section VII evaluates the accomplishments and
prospects of Working Today. I conclude with an evaluation of the prospects of a broadbased workers’ lobby.
I. Organizational formation.
Organizations exist to serve the common interests of their members that could not be
advanced adequately by individual action. Unions have traditionally provided a
collective voice for covered workers (Freeman and Medoff 1984.) Various theories have
been proposed to explain the incentives for organizations concerned with the common
good to form, with none of the theories being entirely satisfactory. Truman (1951)
maintained that groups formed spontaneously out of shared feelings of frustration. This
view was challenged by Olson (1965) who argued that because of the basic problem of
free riding, members of a large group will not work for the group’s interest unless
membership is compulsory or unless there is some sufficient selective incentive that is
separate from the public (collective) good. AARP is an interest group that would have
been unlikely to form without providing a selective benefit, in particular health insurance
for retirees, at rates extremely profitable to AARP’s founder.

3

In contrast, Hirschman (1982) believed that individuals will work for a common good
because the act of seeking that good provides a benefit in addition to the good itself.
Walker’s (1991) empirical analysis of membership groups reveals that while most
successful advocacy groups appear to provide private goods as incentives, group leaders
do not consider these private benefits as important as collective benefits in attracting
members. Indeed, the success of Common Cause provides a compelling counterexample
to the notion that selective benefits are necessary to attract and sustain membership.
A workers’ lobby can take one of three broadly defined forms: that of a social
movement, a special interest lobby, or a service organization. Herbert Gans’s vision was
that of a social movement, and much of the early interviews with Working Today founder
Sara Horowitz emphasized the social movement nature of the lobby.
Social movements, such as those for civil rights, women’s rights, or the environment,
strive to bring about institutional change by organizing or representing the collective
interests of some disadvantaged or underrepresented group. Social movements tend to be
one of two kinds: empowerment movements or professional movements. Empowerment
movements derive their strength and resources from its intended beneficiaries. This type
of movement seeks broad membership and involvement by the group’s members. They
pursue widespread attention in order to change values, which may in turn be reflected in
public policy in the future. Professional movement associations have professional staff
and receive resources from institutions and isolated constituencies. These organizations
“speak for” rather than organize their nominal beneficiaries. They are likely to lobby
federal bureaus or political leaders such as members of Congress.

4

A special interest lobby seeks specific benefits for its constituency, such as legal

reform and tax reform. There are a large number of organizations that lobby for policy
measures affecting the earnings and employment of their members, either directly or
indirectly. Indeed, it is hard to imagine any occupational or professional organization
that does not seek to benefit its constituency. Existing workers organizations that have
documented successes in benefiting their constituencies include the National Writers
Union, WashTech, and 9to5, National Association of Working Women.
As a service organization, a workers’ organization would provide specific benefits
directly, such as education, training, and insurance benefits. In contrast to social
movements, service organizations do not seek institutional change. For example,
members of the American Economic Association (AEA) receive education and training,
disseminated in the form of journals and conferences, but the AEA does not engage in
lobbying.
Organizations attempt to ensure their continued existence, which means they must
maintain funding, either by appealing to members or potential members, or by appealing
to principal sources of funding such as foundations. The funding of any workers’
organization depends on both its focus and its constituency. Gans envisioned a
membership organization that would be funded by small membership dues, voluntarily
given. However, even if membership dues will ultimately fully finance an organization,
start-up funds are necessary. Roughly, start-up funds for social movements tend to come
from wealthy patrons or private foundations, although the government has also played a
large role; start-up funds for special interest lobbies are often provided by the

5

beneficiaries (and hence are subject to inherent free-riding problems among constituent
groups); and service organizations are often funded by government grants (Walker 1991.)
To attract funding, organizations will choose activities such as lobbying or litigation,
and strategies such as organized protests and media coverage intended to generate public
visibility for the organization, or a combination of these strategies. Common Cause
attracted start-up funding because of the visibility of its founder John Gardner. Most
professional and occupational organizations pursue their lobbying activities quietly. The
NAACP pursued a successful strategy of selective litigation. Jobs with Justice is a
national campaign aimed at raising workers’ incomes. This effort is conducted by
organized labor as well as community and religious organizations, and uses organized
protests as one of its strategies.
Most successful interest groups derive substantial funding from members’ selfinterest or profit motive. Walker (1991) reports that 80 percent of American interest
groups have emerged from preexisting occupational or professional committees. The
remaining 20 percent arise in the wake of broad social movements such as pollution, civil
rights, and women’s issues. These groups often are created by political entrepreneurs
operating with the support of wealthy individuals, private foundations, or elected political
leaders. As Jenkins (1998) documents, the role of foundations in funding social
movements historically has been quite modest. Grants to social movements were a minor
component of total foundation giving between 1953 and 1980, representing at its peak (in
1977) only 0.69 percent of total foundation giving.

6

II. Herbert Gans’s vision of a workers’ lobby
In his article “Time for an Employees’ Lobby,” Gans suggested that a national lobby
of employees be established to encourage President Clinton to keep his campaign
promise to do something about the “ever-declining number of full-time, decent jobs.”
His article included a series of specific policies with the overall focus being to “place the
jobs issue high on the public agenda, and educate the public both about the drastic
changes our economy is facing and the need to address them politically.”
Gans recommended that the principal purposes of such a lobby would be to develop
short-term and long-term policies to save jobs and create new jobs, to begin considering
long-term solutions to the erosion of jobs, and to establish income support programs for
underemployed and unemployed. He suggested that the proper organization would be a
workers’ party, similar to those that exist in Europe, but dismisses this option because the
U.S. has never had an important workers’ party, and the long-established parties in
Europe have become less effective. Gans likewise considered it unlikely that unions will
be able to solve the problems faced by workers, since union membership and influence
are declining. Further he did not consider it possible that a single union or a network of
unions could represent all workers today.
Gans suggested that the membership model of the AARP might serve as the model
for the organizational structure of the lobby. He anticipated that membership would come
from job losers, unemployed, those threatened by future job loss, and their friends and
family, as well as those with jobs who recognize that employment no longer offers the
job security of the past.

7

For the most part Gans’s concerns might seem unwarranted in light of the strong
economy of the 1990s (although they may invite more attention in periods in which the
economy is weaker.) Despite his concern that any jobs lobby represent all workers
regardless of political values, his recommendations are highly politically laden and run
counter to trends to limit government intervention into the economy. Although he
dismisses the possibility that unions can represent all workers, oddly he does not seem to
recognize that any lobby is equally unlikely to represent all workers. Nonetheless, while
one might quibble over the specific reasons he offers, at the time his paper was published,
there was no unified voice offering to speak for all workers.
III. The evolution of three organizations: AARP, Common Cause, and Working Today
Shortly after Gans’s article was published, Sara Horowitz founded the organization
Working Today, which offered to provide a unified voice to speak for all workers. As
noted in the introduction, Working Today was formed with the ambitious goal “to put
jobs back on the public agenda by lobbying for political action on measures to save jobs,
create new ones, and explore long-term solutions to the ongoing erosion of good jobs.”4
Horowitz maintains that today’s economy represents a third industrial revolution, arguing
that in this new economy workers needs were not met because of archaic labor laws.5
In this section I describe the evolution of Working Today since its founding in 1995.
To understand the options for survival and growth available to an organization such as
Working Today, it is useful to examine two successful membership organizations: the
AARP and Common Cause. The AARP mainly attracts members by providing individual
benefits, while Common Cause offers no selective benefits.

8

Membership in the AARP is open to anyone age 50 and older, and as of 2001 the
AARP reports over 34 million members paying dues annually.6 Members do not run it,
and it has no legal status to represent the interests of its constituency of individuals age
50 and older. Yet it is routinely ranked as the most powerful lobbying group in the U.S.7
How did the AARP evolve into such a powerful force, and can this model be applied
to workers?8 A little bit of background shows the integral role of private goods in
attracting and sustaining membership. Ethel Percy Andrus was a retired schoolteacher
who had formed a service organization that provided health insurance policies to retired
teachers. Observing this popular interest in health insurance among other retired
individuals, insurance salesman Leonard Davis provided financial capital to start the
AARP in 1958. Insurance sales were integrally tied with the growth of AARP, which
were publicly revealed during the 1970s to offer protection well below market norms.
Despite this scandal, the AARP retained its strength. Its continued membership is
attracted to discounts offered on car rentals, hotels, and package tours, all of which is
available with the $10 per year membership fee. Membership also includes a
subscription to Modern Maturity, the nation’s largest circulation magazine.
The AARP model of private goods provision differs from that of Common Cause.9
Common Cause was formed to be a people’s lobby to combat undue power of special
interests, i.e., a national “good-government” lobby. Common Cause was founded in
1970 by author and ex-HEW Secretary John W. Gardner. Gardner had headed the
Carnegie Foundation, written 2 best-selling books, chaired a presidential committee on
education policy, and served as Secretary of HEW under Lyndon Johnson from July 1965
to January 1968. He then took on the leadership of the Urban Coalition. Gardner felt

9

that the most effect policy tool was the lobbying arm of the Urban Coalition called the
Urban Coalition Action Council. Common Cause was formed after the passage of the
Tax Reform Act of 1969 which prohibited foundations from contributing to lobbying
activities, thereby undermining the financial basis of the Urban Coalition Action Council.
In order to secure a mass financial base, from its inception Common Cause took the
direction of wide membership. Indeed, their financial support is primarily small
contributions as a matter of organizational policy.
Gardner was a highly regarded and politically connected leader, who had both the
visibility and credibility to raise $250,000 in start-up funds. To generate membership,
Common Cause began with a series of newspaper ads and mass mailings. John Gardner
also appeared on “Meet the Press” in 1970. This initial effort was highly effective,
yielding 100,000 paying members within the first 6 months and 200,000 in the next 6
months. Thirty years later Common Cause is still a viable organization, with over
200,000 individuals in all 50 states voluntarily paying the $20 annual membership fee.10
Working Today began as a mixture of the private goods model of AARP and the
public goods model of Common Cause. Like the AARP, from its inception Working
Today has offered private goods such as access to group health insurance, discounts on
office supplies, and discounted legal services to individuals who pay a small membership
fee (originally $10, now $25.) Like Common Cause, Working Today was founded by a
political entrepreneur and had a broad objective, with “good jobs” substituting for the
“good government” agenda of Common Cause. At its founding, Working Today
positioned itself as a social movement, which was undoubtedly instrumental in securing

10

initial foundation funding. Like both AARP and Common Cause, Working Today has an
open membership policy.
However, individual membership growth was slow and the organization has largely
been supported by foundation and government grants rather than individual membership
dues. In contrast to the rapid membership growth of Common Cause, Working Today
gained new members gradually. By May 1996, nine months after beginning operations,
Working Today had about 700 dues-paying individual members. The remaining source
of its $60,000 budget was a grant from the Ms. Foundation and a salary fellowship from
Echoing Green, a foundation which supports innovative projects.11 Foundations
continued to provide the bulk of Working Today’s funding, with $192,000 in foundation
grants and about $17,000 in member dues and contributions after about one year of
operation.12 The number of individual dues paying members as of January 1999 was
2,072.13
By January 1998 Working Today reported that its membership had rocketed to
35,000. However, this leap in membership represented a transformation in organizational
structure and accounting technique rather than necessarily an increase in interest among
individuals. The organization shifted to linking existing membership groups into one
cohesive group under its Working Today Network umbrella, or in the words of Working
Today, “joining organic associations and worker organizations into a larger whole, and
advancing universal concepts.”14 Working Today counted as a member anyone who was
a member of one of the organizations that have joined the Network, as well as those who
paid dues to Working Today individually. Working Today reported in June 2000 that

11

they had 93,000 members who had joined either individually or through one of the 26
organizations that have joined their network.15
Working Today is currently a mix of a special interest lobby and a service
organization, although it still claims an overriding social agenda. As a special interest
lobby, the organization lobbies for access to portable benefits for independent workers.
As a service organization, Working Today most notably offers group health insurance.
The primary visible project is its Portable Benefits Network launched in September 2001
that acts as an intermediary to provide group benefits to workers in New York’s new
media industry. Like other service organizations, it receives government funding. In
particular, the Portable Benefits Network is funded in part by grants from the state of
New York.
Providing portable benefits is an integral part of Working Today’s broader social
mission of promoting the interests of independent workers. This role of benefit provision
is expressed on the Working Today website in the section “News & Features: Advancing
a New Social Agenda,” as follows:
The key to building a strong constituency will be linking services with advocacy
– bridging people’s economic and political interests to reignite the democratic
discussion..... In building this model we can serve as a pilot, allowing people not
just access to portable benefits, but also to push for a larger set of portable
rights..... We believe it’s imperative to effectively move the “new workforce”
agenda forward by setting a cycle in motion: by accessing services, individuals
will learn more about the larger policy issues facing them; and by getting active
on these issues, they will improve the services they are able to access and make
the policy debate reflect their concerns. Services, however, are only a first
step.... by linking people and groups together, we will assemble a constituency
that can have its voice heard so we may build a secure and more complete safety
net for the future.16
As the Portable Benefits Network seems to be the key to the continued survival of
Working Today as a lobby for workers, it is useful to provide background on the plan. I

12

will be providing information later on the likelihood that this plan will attract a sufficient
number of members to form a critical mass to further change social policy. The Portable
Benefits Network provides access to health insurance at group rates as well as disability
and life insurance. This coverage is currently available to qualifying new media workers
in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, Staten Island, Nassau, Orange, Rockland,
Suffolk and Westchester. The health insurance plan is a comprehensive HMO offered
through HIP Health Plan of New York. The monthly premiums for the 9/1/01 – 8/31/02
coverage year are $242.25 for an individual, $434.07 for two persons (individual plus
spouse or individual plus child); and $685.08 for a family.
With the more recent emphasis on portable benefits, Working Today no longer
includes on its website the statement quoted earlier about linking organic associations,
instead emphasizing the practical advantages to organizations of joining the Working
Today Portable Benefits Network. For example, the website states “a surefire way of
attracting people to your organization is by making relevant, valuable benefits
available.”17
IV. A Model of a Financially Viable Workers’ Lobby
Working Today has survived by providing a mix of private goods and public goods.
The private goods attract individual members, and the public goods, such as offering to
be the spokesperson for the independent workforce, attract foundation grants. These two
activities are closely linked to the organization’s ability to raise funding. This section
models the options for raising funds available to a new organization such as Working
Today. I assume the founder must allocate resources between private goods efforts and
public good efforts. For specificity, I assume that the private good is health insurance at

13

rates more attractive than available to individuals. However, the model applies more
generally to any private good.
The workers’ lobby engages in two types of activities, denoted by its expenditures X
on private goods efforts and its expenditures Y on public goods efforts. The private good
is group health insurance. The workers’ lobby does not engage in underwriting insurance
policies but instead serves as an intermediary between its members and the insurance
company. The contribution of the lobby is forming a group that is eligible for health
insurance priced at group rates. The private good is the principal benefit individuals
receive from their affiliation. The number of organization members N is positively related
to the private goods efforts X. There are several measures a workers’ lobby can take to
increase membership, including widely advertising that group insurance may be
available, holding seminars and educational events, soliciting insurance companies to
offer coverage at attractive rates, and soliciting firms to encourage their employees to
purchase insurance through the organization. The lobby reaps a net gain from this
insurance underwriting given by I ( N ( X ), X ) .

The public goods expenditures Y are on activities that attract foundation funding other
than through the insurance operation. These include activities such as lobbying, efforts to
draw media attention to the organization, public dissemination of information, or efforts
to elicit endorsements that will give the organization greater credibility. Working Today
engages in various public goods activities including lobbying politicians and maintaining
a web site with information on the legal status of independent workers and links to web
sites providing information about insurance options.

14

Foundation grants F depend positively on the level of public expenditures Y and the
number of organization members N. Each of these variables provides a signal that this is
a viable organization meriting support and will consequently lead to greater foundation
support.
Although the workers’ lobby may be a nonprofit organization, for simplicity I model
the effort as one that maximizes profits, π. Treating the lobby’s objective as profitmaximization is consistent with the demonstrable accomplishments to date of Working
Today, which has largely consisted of raising revenues in order to provide private
benefits rather than any observable impact on broader social objectives. The problem for
the lobby is consequently to
(1)

max π = F (Y , N ( X )) + I ( N ( X ), X ) − X − Y
X ,Y

leading to the first-order conditions that
(2)

π X = 0 = FN N X + I N N X + I X − 1

(3)

π Y = 0 = FY − 1.

and

Combining these two conditions and rearranging terms leads to
(4)

FY = ( FN + I N ) N X + I X .

The marginal productivity of publicly visible efforts in boosting foundation support,
which is the term on the left side of equation 4, equals the marginal productivity of the
private goods, represented by the terms on the right side of equation 4. Additional
expenditures on the private insurance operation have two classes of benefits. First,
increasing X will raise the number of affiliated workers N, which in turn will affect both
foundation support F and gross revenues from insurance I. One would expect that FN is
15

positive. A larger affiliated worker base should make the workers’ lobby more attractive
to foundations. Similarly, I N should be positive as well to the extent that greater
economies of scale in insurance underwriting and decreased problems of adverse
selection makes the workers’ lobby more profitable. The second component of the
marginal efficiency of expenditures on insurance provision is the marginal effect on
insurance operating profits, I X . The sign of I X is likely to be positive up to a certain
point but eventually may become negative if, for example, increased expenditures on
advertising fail to sufficiently increase the number of members. Typically the lobby will
want a profitable insurance operation so will operate at the level where I X is positive.
But it will also be possible to offset losses in the insurance effort if doing so will raise the
number of subscribers N sufficiently to attract additional foundation support.
This model highlights the departures of the Working Today model from Gans’s
original vision. The main choice variable is not political effort intended to promote
social change, but rather private goods provision and observable public activities
intended to sustain and attract foundation funding. The source of funds is not workers as
a whole but rather foundations that contribute to support the public good and workers
who are subscribing to receive a well-defined private service.
V. The market for Working Today’s health benefits plan
Provision of health insurance at group rates has been a key feature of many
organizations, including AARP and many unions. Portable benefits, which follow
workers as they move from job to job, have long been available to members of the Screen
Actors Guild and those employed in the unionized construction industry. Recently, Amy

16

Dean of the South Bay Labor Council in California instituted a portable benefits program
for employees of the temporary agency she founded.
Thus, the concept of portable benefits for workers who move from job to job is not
novel. Because of problems of adverse selection, it will not generally be profitable for
insurers to offer health insurance to individuals at group rates. Insurers will enter the
group health insurance market only if profitable; this means identifying a profitable
group, which is generally formed by a company or some entity other than the insurer.
Employees of large firms form a natural group for which group insurance pricing can be
made actuarially attractive to insurers. The risks of moral hazard and adverse selection
increase if the insurer cannot monitor the riskiness of the insured and if the costs to
individuals of entry and exit from the group for the purposes of obtaining insurance are
low.
The ultimate success of Working Today in achieving its broader vision relies first on
its success in drawing members into its portable benefits plan to form a group that is
attractive to insurers, and second in energizing these participants to organize for
additional policy changes. This section examines the likelihood that a broadly available
portable health benefits plan will attract a sufficient number of members that are also
desirable to insurers to form a critical mass to further change social policy.
The potential pool of workers for a portable benefits plan could be drawn from three
groups: those currently uninsured; those currently buying insurance on their own who
might switch plans; and those currently covered by their employer’s plan who might
switch to a non-covered work status such as self-employment or part-time if they could
obtain health insurance from another source at suitably attractive rates. Of course,

17

whether workers will purchase insurance or switch coverage if offered a lower cost
option depends on the responsiveness of demand for insurance to changes in price. There
is evidence that the demand for health insurance among the self-employed is price elastic,
so that lowering the price of health insurance increases the probability that self-employed
individuals purchase insurance (Gruber and Poterba 1994.) Whether other independent
workers, particularly low-income or contingent workers, are likewise price-sensitive is
unknown.
Whether Working Today is able to generate participation in its Portable Benefits
Network in part depends on whether the Working Today plan is a better ‘value’ in terms
of either quality of coverage and/or price relative to the alternatives as well as whether
uninsured workers feel coverage is worthwhile. Working Today faces competition for its
target market of independent workers. First, coverage at a similar cost is available in the
Working Today coverage area.18 Second, lower-income workers who are sole
proprietors, full-time or part-time employees, or employed on an episodic basis are
eligible for reduced cost coverage through the Healthy NY program. In particular, the
plan offered through Working Today is available to workers at a lower cost in the same
coverage area.19
As independent and other nonstandard workers are the target market for the portable
benefits plan, I use data from the February 1999 Current Population Survey (CPS)
Contingent Work Survey supplement to examine their coverage status and characteristics.
This survey provides information on who is uninsured as well as demographic
information which might suggest which of the uninsured are likely to be able to afford to
purchase insurance through a new group plan. In addition to the information provided on

18

the monthly CPS, the Contingent Work Survey supplements, which have been collected
biennially since February 1995, provide data on workers in contingent and alternative
work arrangements as well as information on health and pension coverage.
Workers are characterized as contingent if they hold jobs that are temporary or not
expected to last for non-personal reasons. The CPS provides three estimates of the
number of contingent workers, which ranged from 1.7 to 4.0 percent in 2001.20 The
narrowest definition refers to wage and salary workers with less than one year of tenure
who expect their jobs to last less than one additional year. The broadest definition counts
as contingent any wage and salary worker who does not expect their job to last
indefinitely, and includes self-employed and independent contractors with less than one
year of work experience as self-employed or as an independent contractor who expect to
be in this arrangement for less than an additional year.
In addition to gathering information on contingent workers, the survey elicited
supplemental information on workers in four types of alternative work arrangements:
independent contractors (including consultants and freelancers), on-call workers, workers
paid by a temporary agency (‘temps’), and contract workers. Whether a worker is selfemployed is reported in the main CPS survey, as is whether a worker works part-time.
I consider the following groups: independent contractors and self-employed,
temporary agency workers, part-time, and contingent workers (using the broadest CPS
definition of contingent.) Since 88 percent of the independent contractors are selfemployed, I combine independent contractors and self-employed into one group. I also
define a ‘traditional’ category that excludes any worker who is contingent, in any
alternative arrangement, or works part-time.21 Under this broad definition, about one-

19

third of the workforce is non-traditional, and corresponds to the intended constituency of
Working Today. The traditional category is disjoint from the four other categories, and
independent contractors and self-employed are disjoint from temporary agency workers.
But these workers may be part-time and/or contingent, and part-time workers may also be
contingent.
Of particular importance for this study is information on whether a worker is covered
by health insurance and the source of health insurance. This information is available for
all employed persons who responded to the supplement. Wage and salary workers were
asked if they were insured through their employer’s plan and if they were not covered,
whether they were eligible for coverage. Insured wage and salary workers who were not
covered by their employer were asked the source of their coverage. Self-employed
workers were not asked whether their insurance was provided by their employer, but
were asked the source, with ‘received through company/work’ one of the options.
The CPS includes information on a range of demographic and labor market
characteristics that influence insurance coverage including age, education, marital status,
race, hours worked, family income, and earnings. The regular CPS survey includes
information on earnings of wage and salary workers in the outgoing rotations (about a
quarter of the sample.) Earnings for self-employed workers are not reported in the
regular CPS survey. However, the Contingent Work Surveys also request earnings
information for all contingent workers and workers in alternative arrangements, including
the self-employed, thus providing information on a much larger sample of self-employed
and nonstandard workers than would otherwise be available.

20

The statistics in Tables 1 and 2 exclude respondents who did not provide information
on their health coverage status as well as workers 65 and older as such workers will be
eligible for Medicare. For the sample who report earnings, I also restrict the analysis to
workers with weekly earnings greater than $25. These restrictions resulted in a sample of
50,126 respondents with information on their health benefit status, with 20,237 also
reporting weekly earnings.
The first question is which worker groups are likely to have health insurance
coverage, and what is their source of coverage. Table 1 presents statistics on health
insurance coverage rates and the source of coverage by work arrangement. Traditional
employees have the highest coverage rate at 86.6 percent. The coverage rates for
independent contractors and self-employed is also high, at 75.7 percent. It is perhaps
surprising that part-time and contingent workers also have high coverage rates that are 74
percent and 64.6 percent respectively. Only temporary agency workers have insurance
coverage rates markedly below that of traditional workers, with 41.5 percent covered
from some source. As Table 1 demonstrates, the vast majority of traditional employees
with coverage – 83 percent – are covered under their employers’ plan. Relatively few
nontraditional workers are covered under their employers’ plan. Over half of the
independent contractors and self-employed are covered either by directly purchasing
insurance on their own or through their company. Among those with coverage,
temporary, part-time, and contingent workers are more likely to be covered under a
family member’s policy than to be covered by an employer or to buy insurance on their
own or through their company.

21

To understand some of the sources of variation in coverage rate, Table 2 presents
summary statistics for demographic characteristics and earnings, displayed both by work
arrangement and by health coverage status. As shown by Table 2, the characteristics of
workers vary widely by type of work arrangement and by health insurance coverage.
Among workers in the same type of work arrangement, uninsured workers are younger,
less educated, less likely to be married, and have considerably lower earnings and family
incomes than their insured counterparts. Independent contractors and self-employed are
more likely to be white, male, married, older, and have higher earnings, relative to
workers in traditional arrangements and relative to contingent, temporary, or part-time
workers. But part-time and contingent workers who also have high coverage rates are on
average relatively young and with low earnings. Temporary agency workers who have a
low coverage rate on average are more likely to be black, Hispanic, female, and younger.
What do these results suggest about the potential pool of workers for a portable
benefits plan? As Table 1 demonstrates, coverage rates for all but temporary agency
workers are fairly high, with many workers who are not covered by their employer
covered through a family member. Many of the self-employed and independent
contractors buy insurance through their company or work; such workers may already be
participating in a group health plan available to small businesses. As Table 2
demonstrates, workers with health insurance from any source earn more and are better
educated than the uninsured in the same work status. Earnings among the uninsured
workers on average are sufficiently low that these workers may continue to remain
uninsured even if lower cost health insurance is available. For example, with the
exception of the self-employed and independent contractors, the monthly premium for a

22

family of 4 under the Working Today plan costs about half the gross monthly earnings of
all uninsured workers. Further, there is evidence that despite the lower coverage rate
among self-employed, they are as healthy as wage-earners based on both objective and
subjective measures of health status (Perry and Rosen 2001.) This finding suggests that
many workers may feel that insurance is unnecessary.
VI. The role of a lobby for nontraditional workers
In forming Working Today, Sara Horowitz’s original mission was to provide a
unified voice to speak for all workers, and especially for independent workers. This
section summarizes policy areas that affect nontraditional workers that might be
influenced by the efforts of a workers’ lobby.
The argument that independent and other nonstandard workers need a collective voice
and a new form of representation stems from the view that there has been a large-scale
shift in the structure of the economy and that the existing labor market structure and
political institutions do not serve the needs of the current labor force. Workers in
nonstandard work arrangements frequently are not protected under existing employment
law. They are also less likely to stay in long-term arrangements with employers from
whom they would receive benefits such as health insurance or pensions.
A variety of legal rules create a potentially important role for a workers’ lobby
seeking to provide legal protection and benefits to nonstandard workers. First, the
Wagner Act gives the National Labor Relations Board the right to determine the
appropriate bargaining unit. The level of such units has generally been interpreted as a
single worksite.22 The interpretation of “employee” is also narrow and excludes about

23

half of the workforce from being considered an employee under the National Labor
Relations Act.
Second, whether nonstandard workers are covered by employer health or pension
plans varies. Employers may exempt part-time workers from health care benefits
provided to their full-time employees. Temporary and contract workers are paid by an
agency that has a contract with employers, and receive benefits, if at all, from the agency
that employs them. Self-employed workers, including self-employed independent
contractors, pay for their own health insurance and set up their own pension plans.
Third, unemployment insurance and the Family and Medical Leave Act have hours
thresholds for eligibility often making it difficult for nonstandard workers to qualify for
protection. Even if they qualify, it is more difficult to enforce and monitor these laws for
nonstandard workers, and such workers are less likely to be informed of their rights.
Fourth, whether nonstandard workers are covered under employment discrimination
laws is not always well defined. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act prohibits employers
with at least 15 employees, employment agencies, and unions from discriminatory
employment practices. However, whether firms are required to comply with employment
discrimination laws with respect to their temporary employees is unclear. Companies
using agency temps, leased employees, or contract company workers may have
obligations under labor and employment laws, since even if they are not the employer
they may have “joint employer” status. For example, an individual can be an
independent contractor for IRS purposes but an employee under anti-discrimination laws.

24

VII. Evaluating the impact and prospects of Working Today
Working Today has evolved from an organization offering to provide a voice for
workers to an organization that provides a well-defined private good. Its success in
achieving broader social objectives in part depends on the organization’s visibility.
Although not a household name, Horowitz has received some highly visible media
coverage, including articles in the New York Times, Boston Globe, and the Los Angeles
Times. In 1999 Horowitz was named a MacArthur Foundation Fellow, receiving a grant
of $275,000. The media attention following this award likewise brought visibility to
Working Today. The extent of media coverage indicates not only public interest in the
organization’s agenda but also the scope of the organization in raising public awareness
and changing public perceptions. It is also a mechanism to maintain visibility and gain
funding from foundations and from potential individual members.
Success in influencing legislative change is perhaps the most important indicator of
success but also the hardest to quantify, because it will rarely be possible to identify
whether any such change is a direct consequence of the organization’s efforts. Working
Today reports that their lobbying efforts have had concrete results, noting “in 1999 we
convinced Senators Kennedy and Torricelli to call for a GAO study into the size and
needs of the independent workforce. Also, in 2000 we successfully worked with the
Pataki administration to insure that low-income independent workers be covered by
insurance plans created by New York’s Health Care Reform Act.”23
Currently, Working Today’s continued survival is closely linked to its portable
benefits plan now available to a narrow sector of the labor force, workers in New York’s
Silicon Alley. If the Portable Benefits Plan proves successful and cost-effective when

25

applied to new media workers in New York, it will provide a new example of portable
health benefits outside of the union framework employed in the unionized construction
industry and by the Screen Actors Guild. This demonstration may serve an important
social goal and demonstrate to private insurers that a profitable group insurance market
exists among independent workers.
But it is not clear that the Working Today health insurance plan will be attractive to a
large number of members. First, even at group rates, the rates are high enough to
discourage participation among lower-income and part-time workers. Working Today
notes that only a small fraction of its members participated in the health insurance plan it
offered to members since the organization was formed. This plan was available through
a partnership with the National Writers Union and provided access to insurance at group
rates with Aetna/US Healthcare.24 Unless the new portable benefits plan can be made
sufficiently less expensive, the number of participants is unlikely to increase
dramatically.
Second, many of the targeted independent workers are young enough that they forgo
health insurance out of either a rational or erroneous belief that health insurance is not
economically valuable at their age, and evidence that health status does not differ among
self-employed and wage-earners suggest their belief may be rational (Perry and Rosen
2001.) Third, although it is premature to evaluate the success of the Portable Benefits
Fund since it has just been launched, it is not clear that the adverse selection problem will
be solved by a broad-based insurance plan available to all nonstandard workers. Even
under the best case scenario, the administrative and monitoring costs incurred in trying to
lower the risk pool and avoid adverse selection are unlikely to lead to insurance

26

premiums that will be affordable to low income, part-time workers or contingent workers
more generally.
But for Working Today, a successful portable benefits plan is only a starting point.
The overriding objective is to use access to portable benefits to form a constituency to
push for a larger set of portable rights. The viability of Working Today requires that a
sufficient number of workers participate in the portable benefits plan and that these
workers go on to push for the other components of the Working Today social agenda. It
is notable that any efforts to form a new social movement must overcome the declining
interest in civic affairs as observed by Robert Putman (2000.) Perhaps the biggest
obstacle Working Today faces for its social changes agenda is general social apathy. But
without a social agenda and the membership to support the agenda, it is unlikely that
foundations would continue to provide funding.
After this paper was completed in September 2001, the prospects of Working Today
as a large scale intermediary for health insurance surfaced in conjunction with the
devastating events of September 11, 2001. As described in an article in the New York
Times, the September 11th Fund, which raised money to help victims, wished to provide
health insurance to 15,000 people who had lost jobs or had a reduction in income because
of the attacks.25 Working Today seemed to be uniquely positioned to provide group
health insurance to such individuals, and with a large pool of prospective subscribers,
potentially provides Working Today with the means to demonstrate the viability of its
insurance concept. The New York Times article reports that Working Today now has
almost 1,000 subscribers. It remains unclear, however, whether the post September 11

27

opportunity will be sufficient to jumpstart Working Today into a significant force in the
insurance market.
VIII. The prospects of a broad-based workers’ lobby
There are a number of labor market institutions that are involved in enforcing and
administering labor policies. In addition to traditional unions, these institutions include
legal service organizations such as the ACLU, mandated workplace committees, and
alternative dispute resolution systems. There are also a vast number of service
organizations that exist to help workers, with many organizations involved in improving
the well being of lower-income or lower-skilled individuals. Examples of such
organizations include community groups such as Living Wage campaigns and Industrial
Areas Foundations. Professional organizations also provide a variety of services to their
members that sometimes include lobbying activities. Examples of professional
organizations with demonstrated success in lobbying include the National Writers Union
and WashTech. Thus, any new lobby would need to fill a void not met by existing labor
market institutions or organizations. The void identified by Gans was a lack of a unified
voice to speak for all workers.
The viability of any broad-based workers’ lobby requires that funding is maintained.
There are three sources of funding: individuals who feel their working lives would
improve through the efforts of such a lobby and pay membership dues; existing
organizations who feel they would benefit from becoming linked with a central
organization and contribute to this central group; and foundations that provide grant
funds. But it is doubtful that a single workers’ organization could speak for the interests
of all workers, or even all nonstandard workers. While there are vast differences among

28

conventional employees, the disparities among nonstandard workers may be even greater.
The types of skills and the pay of such workers runs the gamut, from highly skilled and
paid professionals, such as Microsoft’s army of long-term temps, to day laborers. As
such, attempting to find a common ground among workers with seemingly little in
common appears optimistic. For example, most temporary workers will have little in
common with Microsoft permatemps, and labor legislation that improves their status may
appear discriminatory against permanent employees. In contrast to their regularly
employed exempt counterparts, temporary agency employers are eligible for overtime
pay.
It seems likely that having a well-defined constituency with common interests will
enhance an organization’s success. Most successful worker groups are defined more
narrowly by occupation (such as WashTech or the National Writers Union) or by income
or training level (such as those targeted by Industrial Areas Foundations and the
Wisconsin Regional Training Partnership), and it is not obvious that they would gain by
linking to a central organization such as Working Today. In addition to its powerful
voting bloc represented by its membership, the AARP’s influence derives by focusing on
specific issues such as Social Security and Medicare. Thus organizations with a broader
membership base with diffuse interests may ultimately be less influential in changing
policy.
For any workers’ lobby to survive it may likewise be necessary to take the approach
of Working Today and provide private goods such as group health insurance. Although
Common Cause thrived without providing selective benefits, provision of private goods
was essential to the success of AARP. Ultimately there may not be a viable market niche

29

for a general workers’ lobby. What does seem clear at this juncture is that Gans’s vision
of a broadly based workers lobby does not appear promising. Rather success is likely to
come through narrowing the substantive focus of the concern to private benefits.

30

Table 1: Health Coverage Status and Work Arrangementa
Work arrangement

Has health
insurance (%)
Percent of
sample
Sample size

Independent
Contractor/Self
Employed
75.7

Temporary

Part-time

Contingent

Traditional

41.5

74.0

64.6

86.6

10.7

0.8

21.5

4.1

67.4

5,376

419

10,787

2,045

33,786

Source if covered
Employer (%)

1.6

21.8

28.9

33.2

82.8

Spouse/family
member (%)

35.6

42.5

50.9

43.6

12.6

Company/work
(%)
Buy (%)

24.2

0

2.5

0.9

0

28.8

11.5

8.1

6.9

1.5

9.7

24.1

9.7

15.3

3.1

Otherb

a. Author’s calculations from the 1999 Contingent Work Survey. The categories of traditional,
independent contractors and self-employed, and temporary agency workers are mutually
exclusive. Workers in other nonstandard arrangements such as on-call workers are not included
in this table. Independent workers, self-employed, and temporary agency workers may also be
part-time and/or contingent.
b. Other sources of coverage are other job, previous job, Medicare, Medicaid, labor union,
association or club, school or university, and any other source.

31

Table 2: Characteristics of Workers by Health Coverage Status and Work Arrangementa
Independent
Temporary
Contractor/
Self Employed

Part-time

Contingent

Traditional

Without health insurance
Male (%)

68.0

44.5

43.7

55.3

58.8

41.2
(10.8)

33.1
(10.8)

33.6
(12.6)

32.5
(11.4)

34.9
(11.2)

Education

12.9
(2.6)

12.6
(2.3)

12.5
(2.5)

12.7
(3.0)

12.0
(2.8)

Married (%)

57.2

24.5

36.1

31.4

43.6

White (%)

88.5

73.5

82.0

79.5

81.7

Black (%)

6.2

22.4

13.1

13.8

12.7

10.9

14.7

13.8

19.1

21.9

578.9
(526.7)

358.2
(253.8)

303.6
(362.9)

335.6
(329.3)

422.2
(291.9)

Family income
(x 1000)

35.3
(23.2)

26.7
(20.9)

31.0
(23.0)

28.0
(22.4)

31.0
(20.6)

Household size

3.1
(1.7)

3.1
(1.5)

3.3
(1.7)

3.2
(1.6)

3.3
(1.6)

Age

Hispanic (%)
Weekly earnings

Sample size

1,308

245

2,803

723

4,535

With Health Insurance
Male (%)

64.4

36.2

37.2

44.8

53.9

45.0
(10.3)

36.9
(12.8)

36.4
(14.0)

33.9
(13.0)

40.2
(10.8)

Education

14.3
(2.8)

13.5
(2.2)

13.4
(2.6)

14.2
(2.8)

13.9
(2.6)

Married (%)

79.1

50.0

56.7

45.9

64.5

White (%)

93.0

80.5

90.0

84.3

86.3

Black (%)

3.1

14.9

6.1

7.9

9.2

Age

32

Hispanic (%)
Weekly earnings

3.1

8.0

4.9

6.4

6.9

784.4
(682.1)

488.0
(419.9)

408.5
(494.1)

423.2
(447.8)

703.7
(455.5)

Family income
(x 1000)

56.0
(23.1)

42.9
(25.6)

49.6
(24.0)

46.5
(24.6)

51.7
(22.1)

Household size

3.1
(1.4)

3.0
(1.6)

3.3
(1.4)

3.2
(1.6)

3.0
(1.4)

Sample size

4,068

174

7,984

1,322

29,251

a. Author’s calculations from the 1999 Continent Work Survey.

33

References.
Freeman, Richard B. and James Medoff (1984). What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
Books.
Gans, Herbert J. (1993). “Time for an Employees’ Lobby,” Social Policy (24): Winter, 35
- 38.
Gruber, Jonathan and James Poterba (1994). “Tax Incentives and the Decision to
Purchase Health Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 109(3), August, 701-733.
Hirschman, Albert O. (1982). Shifting Involvements: Private Interest and Public
Action. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Jenkins, J. Craig (1998). “Channeling Social Protest: Foundation Patronage of
Contemporary Social Movements.” in Private Action and the Public Good, ed. Walter W.
Powell and Elisabeth S. Clemens, New Haven: Yale University Press, 206 - 216.
McFarland, Andrew S. (1984). Common Cause: Lobbying in the Public Interest.
Chatham, NJ: Chatham House Publishers, Inc.
Morris, Charles R. (1996). The AARP: America’s Most Powerful Lobby and the Clash of
the Generations. New York: Times Books.
Olson, Mancur (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Perry, Craig William and Harvey S. Rosen (2001). “The Self-Employed are Less Likely
to Have Health Insurance than Wage-Earners. So What?” NBER Working Paper 8316,
June.
Putman, Robert D. (2000). Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Truman, David (1951). The Governmental Process. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Van Atta, Dale (1998). Trust Betrayed: Inside the AARP. Washington DC: Regnery
Publishers.
Walker, Jack L. (1991). Mobilizing Interest Groups in America: Patrons, Professions,
and Social Movements. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

34

Endnotes.
1

Nicole Gaouette, “New Lobby Group Gives Harried Workers a Voice,” The Christian

Science Monitor, February 1, 1996, p. 8.
2

David Warsh, “Needed: A Lobby for Labor, Like the AARP,” Boston Globe, September

3, 1995, p. 73.
3

www.workingtoday.org.

4

Nicole Gaouette, “New Lobby Group Gives Harried Workers a Voice,” The Christian

Science Monitor, February 1, 1996, p. 8.
5

Sara Horowitz and Peter DeChiara, “Past Can Teach How to Cope with New Jobs’

Uncertainties,” USA Today, September 1, 1999, p. 11A.
6

http://www.aarp.com/what_is.html.

7

Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, “Follow the Money,” Fortune, December 6, 1999, p. 206.

8

See Van Atta (1998) and Morris (1996).

9

See McFarland (1984).

10

www.commoncause.org.

11

Lini S. Kadaba, “Doing A Job for Workers, Call Sara Horowitz a Savvy Idealist. This

Former Labor Lawyer has a Cause – A Lobbying Group to Better the Lot and Ease the
Pain of American Workers.” Philadelphia Inquirer, May 23, 1996, p. G1.
12

Sandra Livingston, “Reaching Out to Workers; Using AARP as a Model, Group Aims

to Put Jobs on Nation’s Agenda,” The Plain Dealer December 8, 1996, p. 1E.
13

Proposal to the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Working Today,

January 28, 1999, p. 8.

35

14

Reported on web site visited June 6, 2000 at www.workingtoday.org. This statement

no longer appears on the website as of September 6, 2001.
15

Reported on web site visited June 6, 2000. This number is also reported in news

articles. See for example Carol Gurstelle, “Ideas Web Watch Column,” Saint Paul
Pioneer Press April 23, 2000.
16

http://www.workingtoday.org/advocacy/advancing.html.

17

http://64.49.223.100/about/intermediaries2.html..

18

A search of ehealthinsurance.com reveals that the GHI Alliance Value Plan is similarly

priced in the Working Today coverage area. The GHI plan is a PPO rather than an HMO
as offered by Working Today.
19

See www.ins.state.ny.us. Healthy NY is a statewide reduced cost coverage plan which

was introduced in New York after the passage of the Health Care Reform Act of 2000.
The income limits for eligibility vary with family size. For example, the monthly income
cap for a family of 4 is $3678. The rates for the HIP Health Plan of NY through Healthy
NY are $215.25 for an individual, $430.48 for two parents, $400.35 for parent and
child(ren), and $658.44 for family coverage.
20

Reported in Contingent and Alternative Employment Arrangements, February 2001.

http://www.bls.gov/news.release/conemp.nr0.htm.
21

The survey also requested information for workers in three other alternative

arrangements: day laborers, on-call workers, and contract employees. These workers are
likewise excluded from the traditional worker category.

36

22

The success of the Service Employees International Union in gaining representation in

2000 for 74,000 Los Angeles County home-care workers demonstrates that unionization
is not limited to a single worksite.
23

http://64.49.223.100/advocacy/joiningtogether.html.

24

Working Today proposal for the New York New Media Portable Benefits Fund, page 3

(undated.)
25

Stephanie Strom, “Group Health Insurance Offered to Freelancers: A New Focus on

Overlooked Workers.” New York Times, October 2, 2002, p. A28.

37

