                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   RAIL REFORM STRATEGIES:
                                  THE AUSTRALIAN EXPERIENCE

                                                Helen Owens

                                           Working Paper 9592
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9592


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Helen Owens. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Rail Reform Strategies: The Australian Experience
Helen Owens
NBER Working Paper No. 9592
March 2003
JEL No. D4, L9

                                           ABSTRACT

    Widely different approaches to rail reform are evident across countries and within Australia.
Reforms have involved structural separation (both vertical and horizontal) and varying degrees of
private sector involvement.


    Evidence from Australian experience suggests that no one size fits all. The characteristics of
rail networks - namely the degree of market power, the strength of intermodel competition,
competition in downstream markets and traffic density would all influence the approach adopted.
These differ for urban passenger, regional freight (general and bulk) and long distance networks.
The potential implications for future rail reform are outlined.


Helen Owens
Australian Productivity Commission
Melbourne Office
Level 28, 35 Collins Street
Melbourne, VIC 3000
Australia
howens@pc.gov.au
                                            3

                                                                          Helen Owens
                                                   1
                                    I Introduction

     Railways began operating in Australia in the 1850s and, in many ways, they

transformed transport in the country. They became vital links between Australia’s

cities and ports and the rural hinterland, facilitated export expansion and were used

by governments to pursue social and political objectives (PC 1999).

     However, much has changed since those early days. As more air, land and

sea transport options have developed, so the role of rail has changed. Although

railways in Australia still play a significant role in the intrastate transport of bulk

commodities and general freight along major corridors, and in urban transport,

they are not as successful in other areas. Changing modal shares with the decline

of rail in part reflect inherent advantages of other transport modes, particularly

technological improvements. However, there have also been concerns that the

poor performance of rail contributed to its own decline. Indeed, one Australian

State government told the Productivity Commission (PC) during its 1999 inquiry

into rail reform in Australia that a lack of rail (and maritime) productivity has

resulted in an over-reliance on air and road transport in Australia (PC 1999, 1).

     Concerns about the performance of rail led to a number of railway reforms

and inquiries into the industry in the 1990s. However, it is not just in Australia that

reforms have occurred. Railways in many countries have undergone significant

changes in aspects of their organisational structure, ownership and access

arrangements over this period. Widely differing approaches to rail reform are
                                           4

evident, both across countries (discussed briefly below) and in different

jurisdictions in Australia (the focus of this paper).

     Reforms have included structural separation (both vertical and horizontal),

the introduction of commercial disciplines (corporatisation and privatisation) and

arrangements for third party access to track infrastructure.

     The wide range of reforms being implemented raises the question of whether

one approach is superior to another. Using Australian railways as an example, this

paper argues that because rail networks differ in terms of their economic

characteristics and the challenges they face, it is important that individual reform

packages be tailored to each network.

                               II International reforms2

     During the 1990s, reforms in some countries, such as Great Britain (England,

Scotland and Wales), New Zealand and Argentina, involved increased private

sector participation. In Great Britain, for example, 25 passenger service operations

were established under franchising arrangements and the track, signals and stations

were sold to the private sector.3 Structural reform across these countries has

involved different combinations of vertical and horizontal separation (box 1).

     Other countries have adopted reforms that change structures within

government-owned railways. For instance, in 1994 the publicly-owned

Netherlands railways was separated vertically into track infrastructure and train

operations, with the latter divided into four commercial business units (passenger,
                                           5

freight, stations, real estate). Some new private entrants have also entered the

Dutch market.

     Table 1 provides an overview of the structure and ownership of the railways

in selected countries4.

     Many teething problems have been associated with these reforms. A notable

example has been Great Britain. An apparent deterioration of services and major

safety problems — as evident from several rail crashes in the 1990s, as well as the

Hatfield rail crash in October 2000 — led to experts blaming the fragmentation of

the system. One transport specialist suggested that the complex structures created

by privatisation generated some problems, particularly relating to lines of

accountability (Grayling 2000). Others have noted problems such as the setting of

inappropriate benchmarks, shortcomings in liability regimes and weak investment

incentives (The Economist, 3 July 1999, 57–60; Trace 1999).

                                III Australian reforms5

     The development of railways in Australia since the 1850s reflects the fact

that Australia is a federation of states. There is a national (Commonwealth)

government and eight State and Territory governments6.

     Historically, railways have been (and many are today) under the jurisdiction

of State governments. At the start of the 1990s the Australian rail system was

characterised by integrated (State-owned) railways providing passenger and

freight services in their respective jurisdictions.
                                           6

     Australian National (AN) railways (owned by the Commonwealth

government) provided long distance passenger services on the mainland, freight

services across jurisdictions and intrastate freight services in South Australia and

Tasmania.

     The State systems accounted for most rail freight transported. Of the more

than 66 billion net-tonne kilometres of rail freight transported in 1996-97, for

example, about three-quarters were accounted for by State railways. Queensland

was the largest individual freight carrier, transporting about 43 per cent of the total

in that year. The busiest routes (in terms of net-tonne kilometres) tended to be

along the North–South corridor, that is, between Melbourne and Sydney and

between Brisbane and Melbourne. However, rail had the most significant share of

freight transport on the route between Perth and Adelaide (IC 1991).

     One of the legacies of the historical pattern of development of the railways

was a degree of parochialism, resulting in a lack of standardisation of rail gauges.

Standardisation of the interstate network was only completed in 1995 when the

Melbourne to Adelaide broad gauge route was converted to standard gauge.

     A number of factors drove reform in Australian railways in the 1990s. These

included:

• increasing pressure on government budgets to finance railway deficits,

   subsidies and investment (the total amount of explicit subsidies paid to

   railways by State governments in 1997-98, for example, exceeded

   A$2.3 billion, representing 4 to 5 per cent of the outlays of some governments
                                         7

   (PC 1999, 263). In 1996-97, the rail deficit was A$1.36 billion

   (HORSCCTMR 1998, 110), and total Commonwealth, State and local

   government investment in rail was about A$1.6 billion (HORSCCTMR 1998,

   112);

• pressure on railway freight rates arising from increasing intermodal

   competition (this increased competition was due to the removal of the

   legislated monopoly previously given to rail for the carriage of certain bulk

   commodities,7 and improvements in road transport technology and

   infrastructure);

• pressure on railway freight rates from increasing competition in downstream

   markets for some commodities; and

• the introduction of a National Competition Policy8.

     A wide range of different structural, ownership and access arrangements was

introduced by the states in the 1990s (table 2). Queensland has retained a single,

government-owned railway that provides freight and passenger services and

maintains rollingstock and track infrastructure. This entity was, however,

corporatised in 1995-96. New South Wales (NSW), on the other hand, structurally

separated its State Rail Authority in 1996, initially into four government-owned

businesses (with responsibility for urban and non-urban passenger services;

freight; track infrastructure; and track maintenance), of which three were

corporatised.
                                          8

     In other states reforms have led to greater participation by the private sector

through franchising of urban and non-urban passenger rail services (Victoria) and

privatisation of freight operations (Victoria, Western Australia). The

Commonwealth government privatised parts of the Australian National (AN)

railways and has plans to sell the National Rail Corporation (NRC), which

assumed responsibility for AN’s interstate freight operations in 1993. The

interstate track was transferred to a new Federal authority, the Australian Rail

Track Corporation (ARTC) in 1998. On the East-West Corridor across Australia,

private operators now compete directly with the government operator in niche

markets9. Overall the number of private railways rose from 6 in 1991 to 19 in

1999.

     As with the experience overseas, these reforms have not been without

problems. In particular, similar problems to Great Britain seem to have arisen

following structural reforms in NSW, where a series of rail accidents and concerns

over track maintenance standards resulted in an inquiry into the safety of the

network. This safety audit, released in April 2000, noted that poor co-ordination

among the new government-owned rail agencies had impeded the system’s safety

performance, and that a cultural change was required to allow the “effective

delivery” of safety initiatives (Humphries 2000). In 2001, the businesses

responsible for track access (Rail Access Corporation) and maintenance (Rail

Services Australia) were merged into a single entity, the Rail Infrastructure

Corporation, subject to direction from the NSW Transport Minister.
                                         9

     Until recently attempts to privatise the NRC and the NSW Freight Rail

Corporation (FreightCorp) had stalled. The sale of NRC was complicated by the

fact that three governments — the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Victoria

— had joint ownership of the Corporation.10 Disputes over access to Victorian

terminals and tracks initially delayed privatisation (Skulley 1999). These issues

were resolved in 1999. In NSW, the Labor Government faced opposition

(particularly within its own party) to a proposal, made in September 2000, to

privatise FreightCorp in parallel with the NRC. Concerns mainly related to job

losses and the possible impact of the sale on the regions. The NSW Government

eventually received support for the privatisation proposal from an Upper House

Committee of Parliament and a Country Labor Party Conference.11

     The Commonwealth and relevant State Governments have now agreed to

link the two businesses before selling them by the end of 2001. It is intended that

the merged entity would have two divisions – a bulk haulage arm (FreightCorp’s

business) and an intermodal arm for NRC’s interstate freight services. However

concerns have been expressed that the twin sale could substantially lessen

competition, with the merged entity holding a high proportion of standard gauge

rollingstock. The Governments have indicated that any competition issues raised

by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission would be addressed

through the sale process (Batchelor, Fahey, Anderson and Egan, Joint Media

Release, Combined Sale of National Rail and FreightCorp under way, 24 August

2001).12
                                         10
                      IV Performance of Australia’s railways

     Reforms in the 1990s transformed the structure and operations of Australia’s

railways. There is now greater competition between railways and more private

sector participation in some corridors. The Productivity Commission (PC 1999)

found that there were significant improvements in the productivity of

(government-owned) railways providing freight and passenger services over the

period 1989-90 to 1997-98.

     Figure 1 indicates that the average annual growth in (total factor)

productivity of Australia's railways of around 8 per cent was greater than that of

Canada, Japan and the United States.

     Freight customers benefited from this improvement in productivity. Real

freight rates fell 30 per cent between 1990 and 1998. This is comparable with

decreases in Canada (33 per cent) and US (26 per cent) between 1990 and 1997.

     However, while Australia has narrowed the gap in productivity, there

remains a significant difference. Australia’s level of productivity in 1998 was

about two thirds of the best performing countries (in 1997).

     Some of the difference is due to factors that inherently disadvantage

Australia, such as scale of operation. However, technical efficiency (productivity

adjusted for the effect of scale) remains 30 per cent below the best performing

countries.
                                         11
                                  V Future reforms

     As discussed in section IV, improvements in the productivity of Australian

railways had occurred in the 1990s but there was room for further improvement.

Reforms during the decade had contributed to the improved performance but the

Productivity Commission Inquiry report (PC 1999) considered that more needed to

be done to ensure further productivity gains in Australia. It argued that a greater

commercial focus and the harnessing of competitive forces were the keys to

ensuring further productivity gains. Numerous participants to the inquiry agreed

with this view.

     While steps had been taken to corporatise the remaining government-owned

railways, the ongoing problems for these railways appear to reflect the way the

corporatisation model has been implemented. Corporatisation aims to provide a

public enterprise with similar objectives, incentives and sanctions as a private

sector firm (Hilmer, Rayner and Taperell 1993, 300). The Hilmer Report noted

five basic principles for the effective implementation of corporatisation. These

were clarity and consistency of objectives, management authority, performance

monitoring, effective rewards and sanctions, and competitive neutrality.13

     However, governments still subject their rail operators to multiple, often

conflicting objectives relating to social welfare, regional development and

employment. Governments as shareholders face budget constraints and are often

reluctant to provide equity funding or allow railways to borrow on their own

behalf, even if justified commercially. Further, governments are often reluctant to
                                            12

maintain an arm’s length relationship with their railway boards because of political

and community pressures.

         Even in theory, limitations apply to the corporatisation model. In particular,

public ownership subjects governments and taxpayers to considerable commercial

risks.

         Thus private sector alternatives to government provision have an important

role to play in overcoming these problems. These alternatives can include

contracting out and franchising. Competitive tendering and contracting (CTC)

allows the introduction of competition into the provision of certain services and

has been used increasingly by Australian railways, particularly in areas such as

maintenance. Competition is introduced through the bidding process and so

encourages providers to adopt efficient service delivery methods. The main

benefits of CTC are seen to include lower costs, improved service, and greater

flexibility (King 1994). However, contract specification is an important

determinant of the success of CTC. As well as specifying price, contracts need to

contain incentives or conditions to maintain service quality.

         Franchising involves the government granting a franchisee the right to

operate a service for a fixed period. It can generate further gains because

franchisees bear revenue risks, so strengthening their incentives to improve service

quality and expand the size of the market.

         Full privatisation can, in theory, offer a number of benefits over public

ownership. Privately-owned firms are said to have greater incentives and ability
                                           13

than public enterprises to be cost-efficient, make productive investments, be

innovative and customer focused (see for example, Asterisis 1994). Privatisation

thus provides opportunities to change the leadership and culture of rail enterprises

and transfer risk fully to the private sector.

     In Australia, the Tasmanian rail system and interstate non-urban passenger

systems have been privatised. The experience of privatisation with these systems

is encouraging and supports privatising freight railways operating in competitive

markets such as NRC and NSW’s FreightCorp.14 Scrafton (2001) has argued that

“new entrants in both freight and urban passenger railways are showing signs of

turning around formerly declining markets, with commitments to investment, new

services and courageous targets”. For example, since purchasing Tasrail in 1997,

the private owners have increased traffic volumes significantly, winning major

contracts to haul logs and containers. Tasrail’s revenue increased, while costs fell,

making the railway profitable for the first time in 130 years. The private owners

have invested heavily in new sleepers, communications systems and replacing the

ageing rollingstock. Likewise, some interstate passenger routes began to generate

positive margins following privatisation (PC 1999).

     Competition can improve peformance further. There are a number of forms

competition can take — both ‘in’ the market and ‘for’ the market. Much of the rail

network is already subject to intermodal competition from road, air or coastal

shipping, and/or competition in downstream markets. The different forms of

competition are summarised in Box 2.
                                          14

     Competition can be facilitated by structural reform (eg vertical or horizontal

separation — box 1) and the introduction of regulatory arrangements to enable

access to track infrastructure. However no single structure or access regime is

appropriate for all networks.

                           VI Decision making framework

     So how do governments decide which approach is appropriate in reforming

their rail networks? The specification of objectives and examining the

characteristics of the rail network can help in the decision making process. Taking

these steps allows identification of the forms of competition and structural reform

that may be appropriate in each market.

     Specifying the objectives of reform at the outset helps to identify the

rationale for reform, and hence provides guidance on how to best implement

reform (and, indeed, helps to identify if reform is needed at all). For instance, the

overarching objective of reform may be to have an efficient transport system

meeting the freight and transport needs of a country, not to raise revenue from the

private sector or to increase the aggregate level of service from railways. This

implies that the extent to which each transport mode is used in the transport

system would depend on its economic merit. Railways simultaneously compete

with, and complement, other modes in providing a seamless transport service.

     The efficient operation of railways is an important contributor to an efficient

transport system. The sources of improved efficiency in railways — as in other

industries — are static and dynamic efficiency gains. Static gains are achieved
                                           15

through one-off improvements to eliminate the sources of x-inefficiency. This can

involve making better use of existing labour, equipment and infrastructure.

Dynamic efficiency gains involve continual improvement through innovation and,

in the case of rail, continually optimising its position in the transport logistics

chain.

     In most instances rail reform packages implemented across countries have

delivered static efficiency gains. In New Zealand, for example, there were

significant improvements in labour productivity, asset utilisation, traffic levels and

profit in the five years following privatisation (PC 1999, 149). To some extent

these are the ‘easy’ gains. But dynamic efficiency is likely to be more important to

rail in the long run. Achieving greater dynamic efficiency is more difficult as it is

likely to involve fundamental changes to the culture and operations of railways.

     It is also important to understand the differing economic characteristics of

individual rail networks. In a few markets, such as the transportation of bulk

commodities such as coal, railways are able to exercise market power and extract

monopoly rents from users. For other freight operations, railways may generate

just sufficient earnings to be commercially viable and support future investment.

Urban passenger rail services tend to be loss making and rely on government

subsidies for survival.

     In addition, network interface issues, which occur when a train from one

network needs access to another network, can potentially impede the efficiency of

train operations and influence the appropriateness of different policy options. The
                                         16

extent of interface issues will depend on several factors, including the number of

trains from other networks seeking access, the complexity of the network, and the

level of traffic density.

     Having identified objectives and network characteristics, the forms of

competition likely to be effective in each network can be identified. Competition

‘for’ the market, as occurs with franchising, is typically suited to natural monopoly

situations where it is most cost effective to have only one provider of the rail

service. In other markets, it may be possible to have multiple train operators

competing for the same customers, that is competition ‘in’ the market (for

example, long distance rail lines). This can encourage market segmentation and

product diversity. In other markets, intermodal competition or competition in

downstream markets may be sufficient to promote operational efficiency.

     Finally, the emphasis in rail reform on promoting various types of

competition is underpinned by structural reform. In essence structural reform

involves breaking up established railways into separate entities, with separation

occurring on a geographic, functional (track, rollingstock, maintenance), and/or

product (passenger or freight) basis.

     The potential benefits of structural separation may include the promotion of

competition, facilitation of the regulation of natural monopoly elements of the

track, and the implementation of appropriate policies in different markets

(PC 1999).
                                         17

     Separating train operations from the track (vertical separation) is designed to

facilitate competition between train operators for the same customers and

competition for train schedules. But vertical separation may not be effective in

markets where there is limited scope for more than one operator or there is already

effective competition from other modes of transport and/or competition in

downstream markets (OECD 1999). It may also result in coordination and safety

problems.

     Separating railways by function or geography (horizontal separation) can

improve the effectiveness of policies and regulatory regimes relating to different

rail businesses. Contractual arrangements to meet non-commercial objectives

(social, regional or environmental) can also be implemented more readily. It also

enables services to be franchised in order to introduce competition ‘for’ the market

through periodic competitive bidding.

     The potential benefits of structural separation need to be balanced against the

costs. The costs of structural separation potentially can include loss of economies

of scope, interface problems between networks, loss of commercial sustainability,

adverse effects on safety and adjustment costs.15

                   VII Applying the decision making framework

     The PC inquiry report into progress in rail reform (PC 1999) applied this

decision making framework to the Australian railway system. Based on their

economic characteristics, four different types of rail network can be identified in

Australia — urban passenger, regional, main coal lines and the interstate network.
                                          18

For each network the problems to be addressed and the impediments to improved

performance differ, requiring differing policy solutions.

Urban rail passenger networks

     Urban rail passenger networks exist in the mainland state capital cities of

Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide. These networks are non-

commercial and only exist in their current form because of continued government

support. In the markets served by these networks there is strong intermodal

competition from private motor vehicles and from alternative public transport

modes in some instances. There is no rail on rail competition.

     Urban rail passenger networks pose a variety of challenges to governments

and their operators. These railways are often criticised for their deficiencies in

productive efficiency, large financial deficits and poor service quality. These

problems are further compounded by the fact that urban rail passenger services are

highly visible to the public, often in need of capital investment and subject to

industrial disputes.

     Given the loss making nature of these networks, governments ultimately

decide which services will be provided and the contribution users make towards

the cost of provision. The performance of the urban transport system can be

improved by ensuring that urban rail services fulfil an appropriate role within the

system (improving allocative efficiency) and then that those services are provided

at least cost to taxpayers (improving operational efficiency).
                                          19

     Allocative efficiency can be improved through the rigorous application of the

purchaser-provider framework. The purchaser-provider framework separates the

responsibility for deciding which goods and services are provided to the

community from the responsibility for delivering the services (PC 1999).

Governments consider and decide on the choice and mix of transport services

purchased to promote stated objectives, rather than leaving such decisions to

railway management.16

     Greater operational efficiency can be encouraged by generating competition

for the market through contracting or franchising. This approach is preferred to

promoting competition between train operators. Urban rail passenger services

require that trains run frequently and to a complex timetable. Coordination of

services to meet the timetable is likely to be more effectively undertaken by one

operator. In addition, the relatively small size of many urban passenger networks

in Australia limits the scope for competition between train operators for the same

customers.

     Vertical integration can facilitate the franchising process and operational

efficiency of urban passenger networks Vertical separation is not warranted

because there are no benefits to be obtained (through competition between train

operators) to offset the costs of separation. In addition, accountability is also likely

to be weakened in such a structure. If service standards are not achieved or if

accidents occur, a regulator will be required to apportion responsibility and impose
                                           20

sanctions. As noted by Kain (1998), apportioning blame for poor performance may

require considerable information and administration on the part of the regulator.

     Horizontal separation of urban rail passenger networks from other rail

networks can facilitate the application of the purchaser-provider framework by

clearly delineating those services requiring government support from other

commercial rail operations and networks. In addition, it may be worthwhile to

horizontally separate the networks further into two or more geographically based

franchises to promote ‘yardstick’ competition, provided the population size is

sufficient to support such separation.17

     The benefits of further horizontal separation need to be balanced against

potential interface and coordination issues that may occur between operators over

shared segments of the network.18 It has been argued, including by participants to

the PC’s inquiry into rail reform (PC 1999), that in some instances the horizontal

separation of urban rail passenger networks from other rail networks is

impracticable due to the interface issues between them. However, there are

examples both in Australia and overseas of contractual arrangements being used to

overcome such problems. In Victoria, there are contractual arrangements between

an urban passenger operator in Melbourne, M-Train (formerly Bayside Trains),

and interstate and regional operators that allow the use of the urban network by

non-urban and freight trains. Similar arrangements also apply in the United States

(PC 1999,110 and E24). The balance of evidence indicates that the benefits that
                                          21

can be obtained from horizontally separating urban rail passenger networks

outweigh the cost of such contractual arrangements.


Regional networks

     Regional networks in Australia refer to those rail lines that extend from the

ports and capital cities into the regional areas as well as lines from regional areas

that connect into the interstate network. Within the regional networks of New

South Wales and Queensland are the main coal lines that are discussed separately

below. The services provided by regional networks are dominated by the transport

of general freight and grains. The financial performance of these networks is

mixed. Some networks have been able to generate sufficient revenues to earn a

commercial return, while others are reliant on government support. In virtually all

instances, the freight carried on regional networks is subject to strong intermodal

competition, especially from road.

     The poorly performing regional networks are confronted with the problems

of declining market shares, increasing financial deficits and a running down of

existing infrastructure. These problems have arisen primarily due to these

railways’ inability to meet new competitive challenges, especially from road

transport. This stems mainly from government involvement. In many instances,

governments have required railways to pursue a range of conflicting objectives,

interfered with their day-to-day operations and restricted their access to capital.

This has reduced the ability of these railways to meet customer needs at

competitive prices, which is further compounded by the continual running down of
                                          22

the infrastructure base. At the same time, governments have deregulated freight

carried by road, exposing rail to increasing competition.

      Regional networks in Australia need to achieve both static and dynamic

efficiency gains if they are to survive in the competitive transport markets in

which they operate.

      As the impediments to improved performance primarily stem from

government involvement, the most effective way of overcoming them is to

increase the commercial focus of regional networks. This requires that railway

managers have the flexibility to make timely decisions, the ability to form strategic

alliances, to access capital, and not face undue restrictions on input choice.

      The commercial focus of government-owned railways can be improved

through corporatisation. However, as noted earlier, there are often limitations on

how well the corporatisation model is applied. In particular, governments are often

unable to maintain an arm’s length relationship from their railway boards because

of political and community pressure.

      The limitations of government ownership can be overcome through greater

private sector participation by either franchising or full privatisation. Privatisation

of rollingstock and a long-term lease on infrastructure are preferred to franchising

in this case because it allows for greater commercial focus and increased

flexibility.

      Alternatively, the performance of regional railways could be improved by

encouraging competition between train operators through vertical separation
                                          23

combined with access arrangements. However, the small volumes of freight

carried on regional networks, and the resulting inability to achieve economies of

scale, suggest that profitable entry by third party operators is likely to be limited in

most instances. Importantly, as already noted, there is competition from other

transport modes, which would encourage improved performance by the incumbent

operator. The impediments to improved performance are not a lack of competition

but rather an inability to meet existing competitive challenges.

     Thus vertical integration appears to be appropriate for regional railways,

since vertical separation makes little, if any, contribution to overcoming the main

impediments to improved performance.

     Regional networks are also particularly suited to horizontal separation. This

would clearly delineate those markets where direct government involvement is not

required. Rail management would have the freedom to focus on developing new

market opportunities and increase operational efficiency. ‘Light handed’ access

arrangements can be tailored to ensure that non-competing trains from other

networks can gain fair and reasonable access. However, it is expected that access

would not be an issue because owners would have incentives to provide access to

non-competing trains as the increased traffic flow can increase profits to the track

owner or lessee.

Main coal lines

     The main coal lines in Australia are defined as the Hunter Valley coal

network in New South Wales and those lines centred on the Goonyella and South
                                          24

Blackwater regions in Queensland. These networks carry high volumes, are highly

profitable and have a natural monopoly in the carriage of almost all coal in these

regions (that is, there is little competition from road or rail-on-rail competition).

     Unlike other rail networks in Australia, the main coal lines have maintained

their market share in the transport of coal and investment has been easily justified

on a strictly commercial basis. In this instance, the problems associated with the

main coal lines are those of market power and the extraction of monopoly rents

from mining companies, as well as inefficient operations.

     There are two main reform packages the state governments could implement

to control the existence of market power on the main coal lines. First, competition

between train operators could be encouraged, with monopoly pricing of the track

infrastructure addressed through access regulation. Alternatively, franchising of a

vertically integrated network may be used to promote competition ‘for’ the market

by awarding contracts for the right to supply rail services (track and train).

Tenders could be awarded on the basis of the lowest total cost of service provision

over a relevant period. Track and rollingstock could be leased to the franchisee

and access conditions incorporated into franchise agreements.

     The appeal of the first approach is that competition between train operators

can control monopoly pricing on the part of operators, while vertical separation

can increase the transparency of access price regulation. However, there are some

practical problems with this approach. In the first instance, sunk costs associated

with investing in locomotives and wagons can act as a substantial barrier to entry
                                          25

to potential new entrants. This problem is compounded by the fact that the

rollingstock used to haul coal is specific to the haulage of bulk commodities

(especially the wagons), reducing its transferability to other rail markets.

     In addition, even if effective competition between train operators could be

achieved, the issue of monopoly pricing still exists in track infrastructure. The

control of such monopoly power requires complex regulation.

     Franchising has the advantages that the bidding process can be designed to

facilitate the transfer of assets (especially the rollingstock), removing a substantial

barrier to entry and making the market more contestable (OECD 1999). The

franchisee has commercial incentives to obtain dynamic efficiencies and lower

costs by improving the role of railways in the transport logistics chain between the

mines and port(s). In addition, franchising reduces the need for prescriptive access

regulation. Periodic retendering and awarding contracts on the basis of the lowest

freight rate can help to reduce monopoly rents (PC 1999).

     However, franchising is not a perfect or costless solution to controlling

monopoly pricing. The OECD (1999) identified three potential difficulties with the

franchising of rail services, including: the possibility of uncompetitive bidding

when there are insufficient bidders; the difficulties of choosing between bids that

offer different packages; and the specification and administration of contracts.

     On balance, the economic characteristics of the main coal lines suggest that a

process of franchising through competitive tendering is likely to be superior to

facilitating rail-on-rail competition. Government involvement continues under
                                         26

both approaches through access regulation or the franchise process and

agreements. However, it is less certain that vertical separation and access

regulation will lead to new operators entering the market owing to the sunk costs

associated with the rollingstock required. As noted earlier, the franchising process

can be designed to overcome this problem, making the market more contestable to

potential operators.

     To facilitate the franchising process, the main coal lines could be

horizontally separated from other networks. The isolation of the network, together

with transparent information on the costs and revenues of the franchise would

provide confidence to coal companies that monopoly pricing practices had been

eliminated.

Interstate network

     The interstate network can be broadly defined as the standard gauge track

linking all mainland state capital cities. The markets served by the interstate

network are varied, including freight (generally containerised) and interstate

passenger services.

     The financial returns on the interstate network have traditionally been poor.

Although never highly profitable, the profitability of the National Rail Corporation

(NRC), which carries freight on the interstate network, deteriorated significantly

after the introduction of private operators on the network in 1995-96 (PC 1999,

29).19 There is strong intermodal competition (from road and coastal shipping) in

almost all markets served by the interstate network.20 The key feature that
                                          27

differentiates the interstate network from regional networks is that for the former

there are multiple network owners, responsible for allocating train schedules and

undertaking investment.

     Currently the Australian Rail Track Corporation’s responsibilities for the

interstate network are limited to the track that it owns (that is, in South Australia

and parts of New South Wales, Western Australia and Northern Territory) or

manages (Victoria). Operators face significant costs in negotiating access and train

schedules with numerous owners.21

     Figure 2 shows that he interstate network initially lost considerable market

share to road, in both the transport of non-bulk freight and interstate passengers.22

     The operating deficits of the network have discouraged investment, resulting

in a deterioration of the infrastructure, further eroding the competitive position of

railways. It has been estimated that more than half the expenditure of the

Commonwealth from the late 1970s to 1996-97 covered operating losses and

historical debt of its railway bodies (HORSCCTMR 1998). This, it has been

argued, diverted expenditure from capital works. Some participants to the PC’s rail

inquiry noted that there has also been “neglect” of the interstate network by state

governments (PC 1999, 237). A number of reports in the 1990s (HORSCCTMR

1998; Maunsell 1998; Booz Allen & Hamilton 1998) presented evidence of the

inadequacy of rail infrastructure. Participants to the PC’s inquiry also discussed

the inadequacy of investment the contributed to problems in the interstate network

and hindered rail’s ability to compete (PC 1999, 236–38).
                                          28

     There are two main underlying causes of the loss of competitiveness of rail.

First, government ownership and incentive arrangements have impeded the ability

of train operators to improve operational efficiency and achieve dynamic

efficiency gains through market segmentation and better integration into the

transport logistics chain. Second, the multiplicity of network managers imposes

costs on train operators in negotiating train schedules and access charges. This

impedes the efficient allocation of train schedules, overall use of the network and

investment.

     These impediments can in part be overcome through the proposed

privatisation of NRC and encouragement of more rail-on-rail competition from

private niche operators. To overcome the problems associated with multiple

owners of the track infrastructure, integrated management of the network is

required. This could be achieved by establishing a single network manager to

manage the operation of the interstate track on behalf of both train operators and

track owners. This approach has a number of possible advantages. For instance, it

reduces the coordination issues inherent in having multiple managers of the

network. It also avoids the conflicts of interest that could arise if the manager also

owned the track or rollingstock. An access regime could allow for train schedules

to be allocated by auctioning or other market trading methods. This would

maximise the economic value of the network by allocating train schedules to those

operators that valued them the highest. Flexible pricing arrangements would

facilitate investment.
                                          29

     The successful implementation of this approach would be dependent on the

vertical separation of train operations from the track infrastructure. This is to avoid

any conflict of interest or difficulties that may arise from one party both owning

one segment of the network and providing train services in competition with other

operators.

                    VIII Implications for existing arrangements

     The differentiated approach described above has different implications in

each Australian jurisdiction because of differences in the characteristics of their

railways. The potential for further reform exists in them all.

     It has particular implications in states where coal lines are horizontally

integrated with the rest of the network (Queensland and NSW), or where freight

operations are still government-owned (Queensland, and until the sale of

FreightCorp was announced, NSW). In New South Wales, consideration could

also be given to going further and reintegrate the track and operations. It could

adopt the Victorian model such that the privatisation of FreightCorp would involve

a long term lease over the non-metropolitan intrastate track (with appropriate

access arrangements). All passenger services could be franchised. The franchisees

would buy (or lease) the rollingstock and lease the track from the government.

     Further reform of the interstate network has particular implications for the

Commonwealth, New South Wales, and Western Australian Governments. They

are currently owners of parts of the network and have separate access regimes. The

single network manager approach would be more effective if the interstate
                                          30

network is vertically separated and the manager did not own the track

infrastructure. This approach would allow coordinated management and promote

competition over the entire interstate network, generating significant benefits and

give rail an opportunity to strengthen its competitive position on this important

transport corridor.

     Further investigation could also show that the PC’s recommended approach

may have relevance for some networks in other countries.

     The European network, for example, traverses many countries in the same

way as Australia’s interstate network traverses a number of states. It is used

heavily by both freight and passenger trains. This suggests that the approach

suggested for Australia’s interstate network — involving vertical separation and a

single network manager — could be relevant in this context.

     Like Australia’s regional railways, Eastern Europe railways are often heavily

involved in moving general and bulk freight to ports. Where there is already

sufficient intermodal competition, consideration could be given to greater private

sector participation in vertically integrated, horizontally separated railways.
                                         31
                                   IX Conclusion

     The Australian Productivity Commission considered that the overarching

objective of rail reform should be to improve the efficiency of a country’s

transport system. It argued that it should not be seen as a means of involving the

private sector to compensate for inadequate government investment in loss making

railways.

     An important conclusion from the Productivity Commission inquiry was that

the implementation of a common reform package is unlikely to overcome the

impediments to improved performance in all markets. Individualised approaches

need to be developed on a case-by-case basis for each type of rail network.

     Crucial to developing individualised approaches is identifying the

characteristics of markets and their boundaries. Even where rail infrastructure is

considered a ‘natural monopoly’ in a technological sense, other characteristics

influence the ability of providers to exercise market power and, thus, the

appropriate policy approach for a particular network. These characteristics, which

will differ across rail networks, include the strength of intermodal competition

from air and road, the degree of competition in downstream markets, and traffic

density. As such, the appropriate structural and ownership arrangements will differ

for long distance, regional and urban passenger rail networks.

     Tradeoffs are inevitable. While vertical separation may assist in promoting

competition and reducing monopoly rents, it may result in a lack of accountability,

major coordination problems and significant safety concerns, as evidenced in
                                            32

Great Britain and New South Wales. In particular, the implementation of strong

access regulation to promote competition may diminish incentives for business to

invest in maintaining and upgrading the rail infrastructure. Horizontal separation

of different networks may promote viable businesses but interface issues between

networks may arise. Where viable, however, horizontal separation can allow

different policies to be implemented for networks with different characteristics.

     Systematic analysis of structural reform and ownership options would

involve assessing the relevance and likely magnitude of the associated costs and

benefits.

     This paper has highlighted considerations that may be relevant to

determining the preferred vertical structure of particular networks.

     • Where there is sufficient intermodal competition and the possibility of

            rail-on-rail competition developing, vertical separation would be

            appropriate. Benefits are likely to be most significant when infrastructure

            and operations are relatively independent (OECD 1999).

     • Where there is intermodal competition but little possibility of rail-on-rail

            competition (for example, where the potential market is small), gains

            from vertical separation are unlikely to outweigh the costs. In this case,

            vertical integration and promotion of competition for the market (through

            franchising, for example) would be preferred.

     • Where there is market power in the network, vertical integration may also

            be appropriate. Periodic retendering and the awarding of contracts on the
                                          33

         basis of the lowest freight rate can help to reduce monopoly rents.

         Vertical separation, on the other hand, could result in the transfer of

         monopoly rent from train to track operations. In addition, where there are

         barriers to entry such as sunk costs in above rail operations, rail-on-rail

         competition is unlikely to develop.

     In short, there can be no ‘one size fits all’ approach to rail reform. Care must

be taken to ensure that the reform strategy adopted is relevant to the network type,

taking into account its economic characteristics, and is only implemented when the

gains exceed the costs.

                                        Post script

     Since this paper was originally presented, the Australian rail reform process

has continued, including the sale of NRC and FreightCorp in January 2002, and

the establishment of access arrangements for the parts of the interstate network

controlled by the Australian Rail Track Corporation.

     In addition, several developments have highlighted difficulties that can arise

in implementing reform.

     In December 2002, one of the private operators of the Victorian urban rail

passenger network (M-Train), which had incurred large financial losses, withdrew

from the system. (Its part of the network is being operated by receivers on behalf

of the Victorian Government, until a decision is made about longer-term

arrangements.) Several factors are likely to have contributed to M-Train’s

withdrawal. In part, it may reflect problems with horizontal separation within a
                                          34

market (eg urban passenger), if it leaves individual providers with a market which

is too small and/or fragmented. Connex, the current operator of the other part of

the system, argued that horizontally separating the Victorian urban network has

been inefficient, and has expressed interest in operating the whole system

(Masanauskas 2003). Thus, the attempt by the Victorian Government to adopt a

‘one size fits all’ approach to its urban network, by emulating the UK, appears to

have failed because it paid insufficient attention to local conditions, particularly

the relatively small size of the market. This does not, however, undermine the

principle of horizontally separating the urban rail passenger network from other

rail networks.

     In 2001, investment disincentives — purportedly created by the pricing rules

for the rail freight access regimes in Victoria and New South Wales — were raised

as an issue to a Productivity Commission inquiry into the Australian national

access regime (PC 2001). The potential ‘chilling’ effect of access regulation for

investment (in all industries) was highlighted as a major concern in the

Commission’s final report (PC 2001). It suggested some general principles that

would allow access regimes to facilitate efficient new investment. These included

setting regulated access prices to generate expected revenue that: at least meets the

efficient long-run costs of providing access; covers the directly attributable or

incremental costs of service provision; and includes a return commensurate with

(regulatory and commercial) risk.
                                            35

                                                                          Helen Owens

                                         References


ARTC (Australian Rail Track Corporation) 2001, Interstate Rail Network Audit, Booz

       Allen & Hamilton, April.


Asterisis, M. 1994, ‘Rail privatisation: a platform for success’, Economic Affairs,

       February.


Booz-Allen & Hamilton 1998, Project Evaluation for the Interstate Rail Track

       Capital Program, Report for the Commonwealth Department of Transport

       and Regional Development and the Australian Rail Track Corporation.


Bowers, P. 1996, ‘Railway Reform in Germany’, Journal of Transport Economics and

       Policy, vol. 30, no. 1, 94–102.


ECMT (European Conference of Ministers of Transport) 2001, Railway Reform:

       Regulation of Freight Transport Markets.


Hilmer, F., Rayner, M. and Taperell, G. 1993, National Competition Policy, Report by

       the Independent Committee of Inquiry, AGPS, Canberra.


HORSTCCTMR (House of Representatives Standing Committee on Communications,

       Transport and Microeconomic Reform) 1998, Tracking Australia: An Inquiry into

       the Role of Rail in the National Transport Network, Canberra.


Humphries, D. 2000, ‘Safety gets back seat on trains, audit finds’, Sydney Morning

       Herald, 5 April.
                                            36
IC (Industry Commission) 1991, Rail Transport, Report no. 13, AGPS, Canberra.


Jansson, J and Cardebring, P. 1989, ‘Swedish Railway Policy 1979-88’, Journal of

       Transport Economics and Policy, vol. 23, no. 3, 329–37.


Kain, P. 1998, ‘The Reform of Rail Transport in Great Britain’, Journal of Transport

       Economics and Policy, vol. 32, no. 2, 247–66.


King, S. 1994, ‘Competitive tendering and contracting out: an introduction’ Australian

       Economic Review, 3rd quarter, 75–78.


Masanauskas, J. 2003, ‘Train stations are just ‘crap’’, Herald Sun, 4 February, 8.


Maunsell 1998, Study of Rail Standards and Operational Requirements, prepared by

       Maunsell Pty Ltd for the Australian Transport Council.


Murphy, D 2000, ‘FreightCorp sell-off wins crucial Labor support’, Sydney Morning

       Herald, 13 November.


NRC (National Rail Corporation), Annual Report 2000-01.


NSW Legislative Council 2001, Second Reading Speech of the Freight Rail Corporation

       (Sale) Bill, Hansard, 27 June.


PC (Productivity Commission) 1999, Progress in Rail Reform¸ Report no. 6, AusInfo,

       Canberra.


—— 2001, Review of the National Access Regime, Report no. 17, AusInfo, Canberra.
                                            37
Perry, R. and Gargett, D. 1998, Interstate Non-Bulk Freight, Paper presented at the 22nd

       Australian Transport Research Forum, 30 September.


Salerian, J. 1999, Australian Approach to Railway Reform, including Privatisation of

       Railways, Paper presented at the Regional Conference on Railway Reform and

       Restructuring, Ministry of Transport of Vietnam and World Bank, Hanoi,

       September 17-18.


Scrafton, D. 2001, Railway Reform in Australia: Access Regimes, Changes in Owner-

       ship and Structural Change, Proceedings of the Canadian Transportation

       Research Forum, Vancouver, May.


Skulley, M. 1999, ‘Full steam ahead: rail freight sell-off’, The Australian Financial

       Review, 1 March, 3.


Trace, K. 1999, Rail Privatisation: Lessons from the UK, Paper presented at the Industry

       Economics Conference, Melbourne, 12–13 July.


World Bank 1996, Argentina Transport Privatisation and Regulation: The Next Wave of

       Challenges, Report no. 14469–AR, Latin America and Caribbean Regional

       Office.
                                         38

                                                                        Helen Owens

                                        Notes


1. This paper is based on the report of an inquiry into progress into rail reform

undertaken by the Productivity Commission for the Australian Government in

1999 (PC 1999). However, some views expressed in this paper do not necessarily

reflect those of the Productivity Commission. I am grateful to John Salerian, Kim

Gusberti, the seminar discussants and referees for comments and assistance.

2. Discussion of rail reform in Argentina, Australia, Great Britain, Germany,

Sweden and other European countries can be found in World Bank (1996), PC

(1999), Kain (1998), Bowers (1996), Jansson and Cardebring (1989) and ECMT

(2001).

3. The British Government released a White Paper in 1992 proposing changes to

the railways. The Railways Act 1993 allowed the structural reform of the railways,

which were sold or franchised in 1997.

4. PC (1999) benchmarked Australia’s railways with selected systems in Europe,

America and Japan. Railways in other Asian countries were not examined.

5. Rail reform in Australia is discussed further in PC (1999), Salerian (1999) and

Scrafton (2001).

6. The States and Territories of Australia are New South Wales, Victoria,

Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania, Northern Territory

and Australian Capital Territory.
                                          39


7. IC (1991) and PC (1999) discuss the restrictions that existed on the intrastate

carriage of particular commodities. For example, rail was required to transport

coal (in NSW and Queensland) and domestic grains and petroleum (in Victoria,

Queensland and Western Australia).

8. In 1995 the Council of Australian Governments agreed to implement a package

of measures to extend competition policies to previously exempt sectors of the

economy. A Competition Principles Agreement established principles for

structural reform of public monopolies, competitive neutrality between the public

and private sectors, prices oversight of government business enterprises, regimes

to provide access to essential facilities and reviews of legislation restricting

competition.

9. The former AN system now consists of two private operators (Australia

Southern Railroad, Australian Transport Network), a corporatised government

freight operator (NRC), a private passenger train operator (Great Southern

Railway) and a government track authority (ARTC).

10. NRC is 70 per cent owned by the Commonwealth, with minority stakes held

by NSW (20 per cent) and Victoria (10 per cent).

11. The NSW Labor Government support for the sale of FreightCorp was based on

Commonwealth Government decisions to privatise NRC but prohibit the sale of

NRC to FreightCorp. The NSW Government argued that the privatisation of NRC

would have left FreightCorp vulnerable to ‘cherry-picking’ of its most profitable

contracts by NRC. After much debate, the NSW Country Labor Conference in
                                          40


November 2000 voted to condemn the privatisation of NRC, but to make it a

condition of sale of Freight Corp that it be sold to the same bidder as NRC

(Murphy, 2000). An Upper House Committee of the NSW Parliament also made

several recommendations about conditions to be attached to the privatisation

which were incorporated in legislation (NSW Legislative Council 2001).

12. The Trade Practices Act 1974 prohibits mergers and acquisitions that have the

effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition in a substantial

market. The ACCC has the power to reject mergers that would substantially lessen

competition, but can also ‘authorise’ these where there is sufficient public benefit.

13. In October 1992, a committee inquiry was established by the Prime Minister,

with the support of State and Territory Governments, on the need for a national

competition policy and its basic principles. The report of the inquiry (Hilmer,

Rayner and Taperell 1993) became known as the Hilmer Report, after the

Committee’s chairman Frederick G. Hilmer.

14. The PC Inquiry report recommended privatising all remaining government –

owned freight operations, with special arrangements for the rollingstock on the

main coal lines (PC 1999, 145-51).

15. PC (1999, pp. 107–8) discusses the potential costs of vertical separation in

more detail. Further information can also be obtained from: Kessides and Willig

(1995); Brooks and Button (1995); Thompson (1997); King (1997); OECD

(1998); van de Velde and ven Reeven (1998); and OECD (1999).
                                         41


16. The PC identified five stages in the implementation of the purchaser-provider

framework, including the specification of policy objectives, specification of rail

services required to promote the objectives; determination of the level and form of

subsidy; delivery of specified services; and costing of rail services (PC 1999, 12-

16).

17. The establishment of the 25 horizontally separated passenger franchises in the

United Kingdom is an example. In Victoria, the UK approach was adopted with

the horizontal separation of the Melbourne urban train system into two franchises

(Bayside Trains and Hillside Trains).

18. In Australia, network interface issues are of particular concern in Sydney

where congestion in the urban passenger network restricts the passage of freight

trains. Interface issues also arise between the interstate and regional networks, as

well as between the main coal lines and regional networks.

19. NRC made operating losses of between A$5 million and A$31 million in the

period 1996-97 to 1999-00 and recorded a modest profit before tax of A$2.3

million in 2000-01.

20. For example, in 1994-95 the interstate transport of bulk commodities was

dominated by coastal shipping (95% of the market). In contrast, road dominated

the transport of non-bulk freight (57 per cent of the market compared to 32 per

cent for rail).
                                          42


21. Currently four authorities are responsible for the administration of access, five

authorities have a role in allocating train schedules and five authorities undertake

investment in the network.

22. Rail market share of freight traffic on the East-West Corridor reached a low of

65.2% in 1995-96 but has started to rise again, to 77% in 1999-00, the highest

level in a decade. This in part reflects the recent growth in rail-on-rail competition

from niche private operators (ARTC 2001).
Box 1           Definitions relating to structural separation
Structural separation: businesses are separated into discrete legal entities

Horizontal separation: occurs either by product (freight and passenger services) or by

geographic area (interstate, regional and urban railways).

Vertical separation: functional levels are separated (track infrastructure and train

operations).

Above track or train operations: the provision of rail freight and passenger transport

services involving locomotives and other rollingstock.

Below track or track infrastructure: physically fixed rail facilities such as track, sleepers,

signals, terminals and yards.
Table 1 Overview of structure and ownership of overseas railways, 1999

Country          Structure                             Train operator       Track
                                                                            infrastructure

Argentina        Horizontally separated and            Franchisees          Government
                 vertically integrated

Canada           Horizontally separated (by            Various private      Various private
                 function) and vertically integrated
                 with access for passenger services

Germany          Horizontal and vertical separation    Governments and      Government
                 of accounts                           private

Great Britain    Horizontally and vertically           Franchisees          Private
                 separated

Japan            Horizontally separated (by            Franchisees and      Government with
                 function) and vertically integrated   government freight   franchisees having
                 with access for freight services      operator             control of track

Netherlands      Horizontally and vertically           Government and       Government
                 separated                             various private

New Zealand      Horizontally and vertically           Private              Government (leased
                 integrated                                                 for nominal rent)

Sweden           Horizontally and vertically           Government and       Government
                 separated                             various private

United States   Horizontally separated (by             Various private      Various private
                function) and vertically integrated
                with access for passenger services
Source: PC (1999, p. E2).
Table 2 Structure and ownership of Australian railways, 1999

Jurisdiction        Structure                     Train operator             Track
                                                                             Infrastructure

Commonwealth        Vertically separated          Government and various     Government
                                                  private

NSW                 Horizontally and vertically   Government and various     Government
                    separated                     private ª

Victoria            Horizontally separated and    Private                    Government (lease
                    vertically integrated                                    urban and non urban)

Queensland          Horizontally and vertically   Government                 Government
                    integrated (with access for
                    third parties)

Western Australia   Horizontally separated and    Government and private     Government (lease
                    vertically integrated (with                              non urban)
                    access for third parties)

South Australia     Horizontally separated and    Government and private ª   Government (lease
                    vertically integrated                                    non urban)

Tasmania            Horizontally and vertically   Private                    Private
                    integrated

ª        NSW’s FreightCorp has won a major coal haul contract in South Australia and NR is operating
         intrastate services in NSW.
Source: PC (1999).
Box 2           Definitions relating to competition
Intermodal competition: competition between rail and other modes of transport, such as

road and coastal shipping.

Competition ‘for’ the market: competition between bidders tendering for the exclusive

right to provide a specified service over a given period of time.

Competition ‘in’ the market: competition between train operators for the same customers

on a given network (rail-on-rail competition).

Competition for train schedules: competing demands by train operators for access to the

track infrastructure. This can occur between train operators serving different markets (for

example, freight and passenger services); between operators competing for the same

customers; or between trains with different origins/destinations wishing to travel over

common segments of the network.

Competition in downstream markets: competition in markets which railways serve.

Yardstick competition: involves comparing the performance of organisations with similar

objectives operating in separate geographic markets.
 Figure 1                                 Productivity levels of freight and passenger systems

                          1.2


                            1
     Productivity index




                          0.8
                                                                                                         Japan
                                                                                                         United States
                          0.6
                                                                                                         Canada
                                                                                                         Australia

                          0.4


                          0.2


                            0
                            1990      1991      1992     1993     1994    1995     1996    1997   1998




Source: PC (1999, xxiv).

LEGEND:

                          Japan

                          United States

                          Canada

                          Australia
Figure 2                                        Non-bulk interstate freight, Australia, 1970-71 to 1994-95

                                    50




                                    40
 Billions of net-tonne kilometres




                                    30




                                    20




                                    10




                                     0
                                     1971       1974        1977   1980          1983           1986   1989   1992   1995
                                                                          Year ending June 30



Source: PC (1999, 15), based on Perry and Gargett (1998).

LEGEND:

                                         Road

                                         Rail

                                         Coastal shipping
