NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE KINDERGARTEN RULE OF SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
William A. Brock
M. Scott Taylor
Working Paper 9597
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9597
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation and the UW-Vilas Trust. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

The Kindergarten Rule of Sustainable Growth
William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 9597
April 2003
JEL No. H4, O0, Q2
ABSTRACT

The relationship between economic growth and the environment is not well understood: we have
only limited understanding of the basic science involved and very limited data. Because of these
difficulties it is especially important to develop a series of relatively simple theoretical models that
generate stark predictions. This paper presents one such model where societies implement "the
Kindergarten rule of sustainable growth." Following the Kindergarten rule means implementing zero
emission technologies in either finite time or asymptotically. The underlying simplicity of the model
allows us to provide new predictions linking the path of environmental quality to pollutant
characteristics (stocks vs. flows; toxics vs. irritants) and primitives of the economic system. It also
provides a novel Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis.

William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
6448 Social Science Building
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53705
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

M.Scott Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison
6448 Social Science Building
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53705
and NBER
staylor@ssc.wisc.edu

1. Introduction
The relationship between economic growth and the environment is, and will likely
remain, controversial. Some see the emergence of new pollution problems, the lack of
success in dealing with global warming and the still rising population in the developing
world as proof positive that humans are a short-sighted and rapacious species. Others
however see the glass as ha lf full. They note the tremendous progress made in providing
urban sanitation, improvements in air quality in major cities and marvel at continuing
improvements in the human condition made possible by technological advance. The first
group focuses on the remaining and often serious environmental problems of the day; the
second on the long, but sometimes erratic, history of improvements in living standards.
These views are not necessarily inconsistent and growth theory offers us the tools
needed to exp lore the link between environmental problems of today and the likelihood
of their improvement tomorrow. But since the relationship between economic growth
and the environment is complex and we have such limited data, it is important to develop
theoretical models with stark and readily testable predictions. This paper presents one
such model where societies implement “the Kindergarten rule of sustainable growth.” 1
We provide conditions under which long run economic growth with rising
environmental quality is both feasible and optimal; describe the transition path of
environmental quality from short to long run; and link features of the path to both the
primitives of pollutants (stocks vs. flows; toxics vs. irritants) and primitives of the
economic system (technologies and preference).

1

In doing so we develop a novel

We define sustainable growth as continuous economic growth with non-decreasing environmental quality.

1

Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis: initially poor countries experience greater
environmental degradation than rich countries and a worse environment at all levels of
income; despite this, differences in the quality of their environments diminish over time.
The paper differs from others in the literature in two important ways. First, we
treat the pollution production and abatement process at a more detailed level than earlier
authors. This proves to be absolutely critical. We assume both goods and abatement
production functions are linearly homogenous and exhibit diminishing returns; moreover,
pollution is a joint and inescapable output of both the production and abatement process.
Technolo gical progress is an indirect consequence of production and abatement efforts
and our assumptions lead to a specification with constant returns to reproducible factors. 2
These assumptions rule out situations where sustainable growth is achieved by
either accumulating perfectly clean factors of production, or by employing abatement
technologies that exhibit increasing returns. They ensure that assumptions we make
regarding knowledge spillovers that eliminate diminishing returns to capital
accumulation, are also consistently applied to abatement where they eliminate
diminishing returns to lowering emissions per unit output.

Together they generate

sustainable growth when the intensity of abatement is chosen to satisfy what we dub “the
Kindergarten rule.”

This rule is adopted is adopted in finite time or approached

asymptotically. In either case, its implementation generates continuing economic growth

2

To focus our efforts on the implications of ongoing technological progress for the environment and
growth, we adopt the very direct link between factor accumulation and technological progress employed by
Romer (1986), Lucas (1988) and others.

2

and rising environmental quality without imposing the typical, but restrictive,
assumptions ensuring the demand for a clean environment rise rapidly with incomes.
For example, Stokey (1998), Aghion and Howitt (1998), Lopez (1994), etc. all
require a rapidly declining marginal utility of consumption to generate rising
environmental quality and ongoing growth. 3 This restriction is troublesome for several
reasons. As Aghion and Howitt note:
“Thus it appears that unlimited growth can indeed be sustained, but it not
guaranteed by the usual sorts of assumptions that are made in endogenous growth theory.
The assumption that the elasticity of marginal utility of consumption be greater than unity
seems particularly strong, in as much as it is known to imply odd behavior in the context
of various macroeconomics models…” (p. 162.)

This restriction is also troublesome on the empirical front because it implies a
large income elasticity of marginal damage and many question whether the demand for a
clean environment can be so income elastic. 4 Moreover, a rapidly declining marginal
utility of consumption is required in earlier work because, with diminishing returns to
abatement, increasingly large investments in abatement are required to hold pollution in
check.

This implies the share of pollution abatement costs in the value of output

approaches one in the limit. 5 This is inconsistent with available evidence.
Our formulation removes the tension between the ubiquitous empirical finding of
declining pollution levels with theoretic rationales that require very strong income
effects. It does so by introducing a direct role for technological progress in abatement.

3

Also see Chapter 3 of Copeland and Taylor (2003) where they present the leading explanations for the
EKC showing that many rely on this same restriction.
4
See our discussion of marginal damage in Section 4.3 where this link is made explicit. For example,
McConnell (1997) argues that current empirical estimates from contingent valuation and hedonic studies do
not support the very strong income effects needed.
5
See the discussion in Aghion and Howitt (1998, page 160-161) and our discussion of abatement in
Section 5.

3

This ensures that all economies capable of continuing growth will, at some point,
experience falling pollution levels and rising environmental quality.
The simplicity of our specification also enables us to develop several predictions
that open new avenues for empirical investigation. This is our second contribution.
Earlier theoretical work has shown very little interest in developing the empirical
implications of their work, apart from generating the inverse U-shaped relationship found
in empirical studies of the Environmental Kuznets Curve. This is unfortunate, and in
stark contrast to the history of scientific progress in growth theory more generally.
Kaldor’s stylized facts, the Solow residual, real busine ss cycle theory and recent
empirical debates over convergence have all played a major role in the evolution of
thought regarding growth. In many cases, theoretical advance opened up new channels
of empirical investigation that then led to further refineme nt of theory.
Until the discovery of the EKC however, theoretical research examining the
growth and environment link proceeded with little or no guidance from empirical work. 6
Since then, researchers have developed a set of possible explanations for the EKC, but no
new hypotheses have been offered. As a consequence the productive give-and-take
characteristic of growth theory more generally has been largely absent. In recognition of
this fact we develop two types of predictions: predictions holding at or near the balanced
growth path; and predictions concerning the overall transition from initial conditions
through to balanced growth. We develop our Environmental Catch- up Hypothesis and
relate it to the Environmental Kuznets Curve. Throughout we distinguish between

6

There is of course a large literature on green accounting but this is quite different. See Chapter 11 of
Heal (2000) or Dasgupta and Maler (2000).

4

parameter changes altering the level of environmental quality and those affecting its rate
of change.
For example, we find the rate of income growth can be uncorrelated with the rate
of environmental improvement even though there is a strong relationship between the
levels of environmental quality and income. Similarly, we find that the income elasticity
of marginal damage has no effect on the rate of environmental improvement, but does
play a role in determining the level of environmental quality and the time when countries
shift to active abatement. Variation in other pollutant characteristics such as speed of
dissipation in the environment, convexity of damages and abatement cost are shown to
have both level and rate of change effects. The level versus rate of change distinction is
of course basic to most discussions of growth, but as yet absent from work in this area.
Our formal model is related to many others in the literature. It is similar to the
one sector models discussed in Smulders (1993), Smulders and Gradus (1996), Stokey
(1998) and Aghion and Howitt (1998) but differs from each of these significantly because
of our explicit treatment of abatement. It is also related to work seeking to explain the
EKC (Andreoni and Levinson (2001), Jones and Manuelli (2000), Lopez (1994), and
John and Pecchenino (1994)) but differs from these both in purpose and in many
specifics. Its closest connection may be to the much earlier work of Keeler, Spence, and
Zeckhauser (1972) that sought to understand the growth and environment link quite
generally and adopted several alternative formulations for abatement and pollution.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we detail the model
assumptions paying close attention to how individual abatement and production functions
aggregate.

Section 3 then investigates the balanced growth path of the model and

5

presents our balanced growth predictions.

Section 4 examines the two stages of

economic growth and develops predictions concerning transition paths and our
Environmental Catch- up Hypothesis. Since our detailed treatment of abatement,
production and knowledge spillovers is critical to the novelty of our results, in the
penultimate section of the paper we relate our specificatio n to those of earlier authors. A
short conclusion sums up. All lengthy proofs are relegated to an appendix.

2. The Model
We adopt the conventional infinitely lived representative agent model. There is
one aggregate good, labeled Y, which is either consumed or used for investment or
abatement purposes. There are two factors of production: labor and capital. We assume
zero population growth and hence L(t) = L. In contrast the capital stock accumulates via
investment and depreciates at the constant rate δ.

2.1 Tastes
Our representative consumer maximizes lifetime utility given by:
∞

W = ∫ U ( C, X )e − ρ t dt

(1.1)

0

where C indicates consumption, and X is the pollution stock. Utility is
increasing and quasi-concave in C and –X and hence X= 0 corresponds to a pristine
environment. When we treat X as flow, X = 0 occurs with zero flow of pollution. When
we allow pollution to accumulate in the biosphere we assume the (damaging) service
flow is proportional to the level of the stock. Taking this factor of proportionality to be
one, then X is the damaging service flow from the stock of pollution given by X.
6

A useful special case of U(C,X) is the constant elasticity formulation where:
C1−ε B ( L, ρ ) X
U (C , X ) =
−
1 −ε
γ

γ

for ε ≠ 1

B( L , ρ ) X γ
U (C , X ) = ln C −
for ε = 1
γ

(1.2)

where γ ≥ 1 , ε > 0 and Β measures the impact of local pollution on a representative
individual. We follow Copeland and Taylor (1994) and assume exposure and hence
disutility depends positively on population density ρ, and negatively on the physical size
of country indexed by population L. 7 For the most part we assume countries are identical
in terms of size and density, and suppress the arguments of Β in what follows. We
consider the impact of changes in these variables in Section 4.6.

2.2 Technologies
Our assumptions on production are standard. Each firm has access to a strictly
concave and CRS production function linking labor and capital to output Y.

The

productivity of labor is augmented by a technology parameter T taken as given by
individual agents. Following Romer (1986) and Lucas (1998) we assume the state of
technology is proportional to an economy wide measure of activity. In Romer (1986) this
aggregate measure is aggregate R&D, in Lucas (1988) it is average human capital levels;
in AK specifications it is linked to either the aggregate capital stock or (to eliminate scale
effects) average capital per worker. We assume T is proportional to the aggregate capital

7

This assumes a country is comprised of many identically sized communities, so that an increase in L
taking ρ as given implies either an increase in the physical size of the country or the creation of a new
community that suffers only from its own pollution. See Copeland and Taylor (1994) for further details.

7

to labor ratio in the economy, K/L, and by choice of units take the proportionality
constant to be one. 8

2.3 From Individual to Aggregate Production
Although we adopt a social planning perspective, it is instructive to review how
firm level magnitudes aggregate to economy wide measures since this makes clear the
assumptions made regarding the role of knowledge spillovers. We aggregate across firms
to obtain the AK aggregate production function as follows: 9
Yi = F ( K i , TLi)

Y = ∑ F ( Ki , TLi )
i

(1.3)

Y = TLF ( K /TL,1)
Y = KF (1,1) = AK
where the first line gives firm level production; the second line sums across firms; the
third uses linear homogeneity and exploits the fact that efficiency requires all firms adopt
the same capital intensity. The last line follows from the definition of T.
Summarizing: diminishing returns at the firm level are undone by technological
progress linked to aggregate capital intensity leaving the social marginal product of
capital constant.
We now employ similar methods to generate the aggregate abatement technology.
To start we note pollution is a joint product of output and we take this relationship to be

8

As is well known, one-sector models of endogenous growth blur the important distinction between
physical capital and knowledge capital and force us to think of “capital” in very broad terms. Extensions of
our framework along the lines of Grossman and Helpman (1991) or Aghion and Howitt (1998) seem both
possible and worthwhile. These extensions would however add additional state variables making our
examination of transition paths difficult.
9
Implementing our planning solution by way of pollution taxes and subsidies to investment and abatement
should be straightforward. We leave this to future work.

8

proportional. 10

By choice of units we take the factor of proportionality to be one.

Pollution emitted is equal to pollution created minus pollution abated.

Denoting

pollution emitted by P, we have:
P = Y G − abatement

(1.4)

Abatement of pollution takes as inputs the flow of pollution, which is proportional to the
gross flow of output YG, and abatement inputs denoted by YA. The abatement production
function is standard: it is strictly concave and CRS. Therefore we can write pollution
emitted by the ith firm as:
Pi = Yi G − a(YiG , Yi A )

(1.5)

note that in this formulation, the abatement activity pollutes since it is counted in YG.
Now consider a Romeresque approach where individual abatement efforts provide
knowledge spillovers useful to others abating in the economy.

To do so we again

introduce a technology shift parameter T, and assume it raises the marginal product of
abatement.

To be consistent with our earlier treatment of technological progress in

production we assume T is proportional to the average abatement intensity in the
economy, YA/Y G. Then much as before we have the individual to aggregate abatement
technology transformation as:
Pi = Yi G − a(Yi GT , Yi A )
Pi = Yi G [1 − Ta (1, Yi A / Yi GT )]

∑ P = ∑Y
i

i

i

G

[1 − Ta (1, Yi A / Yi GT )]

(1.6)

i

P = Y G [1 − Ta(1,1)], a (1,1) > 1
P = Y G [1 −θ a(1,1)], θ ≡ Y A / Y G

10

Nothing is lost if we assume pollution is produced in proportion to the services of capital inputs. The
service flow of capital is proportional to the stock of capital, and the stock of capital is proportional to
output.

9

where the first line introduces the technology parameter T; the second exploits linear
homogeneity of the abatement production function; the third aggregates across firms; the
fourth recognizes that efficiency requires all firms choose identical abatement intensities,
uses the definition of T and notes that for abatement to be productive it must be able to
clean up after itself. The fifth line defines the intensity of abatement, θ ≡ Y A / Y G . Since
abatement can only reduce the pollution flow we must have θ ≤ 1/ a(1,1) .11
It is important to note that the aggregate relationship between pollution and
abatement given by the last line in (1.6) is consistent with empirical estimates finding
rising marginal abatement costs at the firm level. Each individual firm has abatement
costs given by foregone output used in abatement, and hence partially differentiating the
second line of (1.6) and rearranging we find:
∂Yi A / ∂Pi = −1/[∂ a / ∂Yi A ]< 0, ∂Yi A / ∂Pi 2 > 0
2

(1.7)

Marginal abatement costs are rising at the firm level.
Marginal abatement costs at the society level, are however, constant. To see why
totally differentiate (1.6) allowing T and individual abatement to both vary. We find:
dYi A / dPi = − 1/[∂ a / ∂Yi A ] −

[ ∂a / ∂Yi G ]Yi G dT
[∂a / ∂Yi A ] dPi

(1.8)

T is the average abatement intensity in the economy, which given identical firms, is just
the abatement intensity for the typical ith firm. Using dT / dPi = [1/ Yi G ][dYi A / dPi ] and
rearranging we obtain:

11

Adding the possibility of investments in restoration would probably strengthen the case for sustainable
growth. Abatement of pollution and restoration are however distinct activities. We imagine that a
restoration production function would take as an input the current damage to the environment – our stock
variable X – and then apply inputs to restore it. This is quite different from abatement which operates to
lower the current flow of pollution by use of variable inputs.

10

Yi A
dYi / dPi = −
[[ ∂a / ∂Yi A ]Yi A + [ ∂a / ∂Yi G ] TYi G ]
A

Yi A
1
=−
=−
<0
A
G
a (Yi ,TYi )
a (1,1)

(1.9)

where the first line follows from rearrangement and the second by CRS in abatement.
Note the result given in (1.9) is identical to what we find by differentiating the aggregate
relationship between pollution and abatement given in the last line of (1.6).
Summarizing: diminishing returns at the firm level, that lead to rising marginal
abatement costs, are undone by technological progress linked to aggregate abatement
intensity leaving the social marginal cost of abatement constant.
Putting these pieces together our planner faces the aggregate production relations
for output and abatement given by the last lines of (1.3) and (1.6) together with the
atemporal resource constraint linking gross output, abatement and net production:
Y = Y G −Y A

(1.10)

2.4 Endowments
We treat pollution as a flow that either dissipates instantaneously – such as noise
pollution – or a stock that is only eliminated over time by natural regeneration – such as
lead emissions or radioactive waste. When X is a stock we have:
•

X = AK[1 − θ a] − η X

(1.11)

where η > 0 represents the speed of natural regeneration, and where for economy of
notation we have denoted a(1,1) by a. When X is a flow we have:
X = AK[1 − θ a]

11

3. The Kindergarten Rule
We focus first on the possibility of balanced and continual growth, leaving to the
next section a discussion of transition paths. Consider the following problem:
∞

Maximize ∫ U ( C , X )e− ρt dt
0

s.t . K (0) = K0 , X (0) = X 0 , and θ ≤ 1/ a
•

(1.12)

K = AK [1 − θ ] − δ K − C
•

X = AK [1 − θ a ] − η X
where we adopt U(C,X) from (1.2). Recall the fraction of gross output allocated to
abatement is θ and since the flow of pollution into the environment cannot be negative
this will never exceed 1/a. We can write the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation as:

C1−ε BX γ

ρW ( K , X ) = Max  H =
−
+ λ1[ AK[1 − θ ] − δ K − C] +λ 2 [ AK[1 − θ a] − η X ] (1.13)
1− ε
γ


where ρW(K,X) is the maximized value of the program for the given initial conditions
{K0 , X0 }, and H is the current value Hamiltonian for our problem. The controls for this
problem are consumption, C, and abatement intensity, θ.
Observe the term involving our control variable, θ,
Max { AKθ [ −λ1 − aλ2 ]} s.t . 0 ≤ θ ≤ 1/ a
where λ1 is the positive shadow value of capital and λ2 is the negative shadow cost of
pollution. Since the Hamiltonian is linear in θ, the value of the term S = [-λ1-aλ2 ] will
largely determine the optimal level of abatement. When S > 0, the shadow cost of
pollution is high relative to that of capital. In this case abatement is relatively cheap and
maximal abatement will be undertaken. Conversely when S < 0 the shadow value of

12

capital is high relative to that of pollution. In this case abatement is relatively expensive
and zero abatement will occur. Finally, when S=0, the shadow values are equated and
active, but not necessarily maximal, abatement will occur. Therefore, the value of S
determines when and if the economy switches from a zero-to-active-to- maximal
abatement regime. We deal with these possibilities in turn.
Regardless of the value of S, the optimal level of consumption will always satisfy
∂H
= C −ε − λ1 = 0
∂C

(1.14)

although the shadow value of capital and its dynamic path may differ across regimes.
When S > 0, maximal abatement occurs and the dynamics are given by:
S >0
θ = θ K , θ K ≡ 1/ a
•

λ1 = −g λ1 , g ≡ A[1 −θ K ] − δ − ρ
•

K = [ g + ρ ]K − C( λ1 ), K(0) = K0 , C( λ1 ) ≡ λ1

−1/ ε

(1.15)

•

λ2 = λ2 [ ρ + η] + BX γ −1
•

X = −η X , X (0) = X 0
By choosing the intensity of abatement θ = θK there are no net emissions of pollution and
the environment improves at a rate given by natural regeneration. We dub θK “the
Kindergarten rule” because when economies adopt the Kindergarten rule pollution is
cleaned up when it is created. 12
Alternatively, S may be exactly zero. In this case we have an interior solution for
abatement, with the following dynamics:

12

This is one of the most common rules taught in Kindergarten. For a list of common Kindergarten rules
see All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten: Uncommon Thoughts on Common Things
by Robert Fulgham. Fulgham argues that the basic values we learned in grade school such as "clean up
your own mess" (in effect our Kindergarten rule) and "play fair" are the bedrock of a meaningful life.

13

S =0
θ ∈ [0, θ K ]
•

λ1 = −g λ1
•

K = [ A[1 − θ ] − δ ] K − C( λ1 ), K (0) = K0 , C( λ1 ) ≡ λ1

−1/ ε

(1.16)

•

λ2 = λ2 [ ρ + η] + BX γ −1
•

X = AK [1 − aθ ] −η X , X (0) = X 0
In this situation pollution is not completely abated, and hence the evolution of
environmental quality reflects both the level of active abatement and natural regeneration.
And finally, with no abatement at all we must have S < 0 yielding:
S<0
θ =0
•

λ1 = − λ1 [ A − δ − ρ] − λ2 A,
•

−1/ ε

K = [ A − δ ]K − C( λ1 ), K(0) = K0 , C( λ1 ) ≡ λ1

(1.17)

•

λ2 = λ2 [ ρ + η] + BX γ −1
•

X = AK − η X , X (0) = X 0
Consider growth paths with active abatement. Then from (1.16) and (1.15) we
find the shadow value of capital falls over time at a constant exponential rate:
•

λ
− g ≡ 1 = −  A[1− θ K ] − ρ − δ  < 0,
λ1

(1.18)

provided the net marginal product of capital, at the Kindergarten rule level of abatement,
A[1-θK], can cover both depreciation and impatience. We leave for now a detailed
discussion of what this requires and assume it is true: g > 0. Then it is immediate that
consumption rises at the constant rate gC=g/ε>0.

14

From the capital accumulation equations in both (1.15) and (1.16) we can now
deduce that capital and output must grow at the same rate as consumption if θ is constant
over time.

To determine whether the intensity of abatement is constant over time,

consider the accumulation equation for pollution:
•

X = AK[1 − θ a] − η X

(1.19)

There are two ways (1.19) can be consistent with balanced growth. The first possibility
is that we have a maximal abatement regime where S > 0 holds everywhere along the
balanced growth path. In this situation, K grows exponentially over time and θ is set to
the Kindergarten rule level. Using (1.15), this balanced growth path must have:
•

X = −η X and θ = θ K

(1.20)

In this scenario, the environment improves at the rate η over time and abatement is a
constant fraction of output 1 > θK > 0. As time goes to infinity the economy approaches a
pristine level of environmental quality. Therefore the balanced growth path exhibits
constant growth in consumption, output, capital and environmental quality. Consumption
is a constant fraction of output and we have:
g C = g K = g Y = g / ε > 0, g X = −η < 0

(1.21)

A second possibility is that abatement is active but not maximal. Define the
deviation of abatement from the Kindergarten rule as D(θ) =(θK-θ)/θK. Using this
definition rewrite (1.19) to find:
•

X AK [ D(θ )]
=
−η
X
X

(1.22)

15

It is apparent that if the deviation of abatement from the Kindergarten rule fell
exponentially, then it may be possible for X to fall exponentially while K rises. That is,
in obvious notation, a possible balanced growth path would have:
g K + gD = gX < 0

(1.23)

In this situation abatement is at an interior solution at all times and becomes
progressively tighter over time approaching the Kindergarten rule asymptotically. The
inflow of pollution from production into the environment is always positive but
environmental quality improves nevertheless. This intuitive description suggests that the
possibility of this outcome must rely on both the pace of economic growth and the ability
of the environment to regenerate. This is indeed the case as we now show.
To do so it proves useful to assume S=0 and explore its implications. When S =
0, the shadow values for capital and pollution are related by:
λ1 = − aλ2

(1.24)

which implies, since a is constant, that the rate of change of the shadow cost of pollution
must fall over time at the same rate the shadow value of capital falls over time. From
(1.18) this rate is g. Now using (1.16) and the fact that the time rates of change and
levels of the shadow prices are pinned down by (1.24), we can show that the
instantaneous marginal rate of substitution between consumption and pollution must
remain constant along the balanced growth path. That is, we have:13
1 BX γ −1C ε
=
a η+ g+ ρ

(1.25)

13

Note this is just the equality between marginal abatement costs, 1/a, and the marginal damage from
pollution. We show that this implies a unique K for every X at the start of Stage II and call this relationship
the Switching Locus. See (1.32).

16

Therefore, when abatement is active, but not maximal, we must have:
•

•

X
ε C
g
=
=
<0
X 1 −γ C 1 −γ

(1.26)

As consumption rises along the balanced growth path the environment improves. The
only question remaining is whether the growth rate given by (1.26) is in fact consistent
with remaining in the S=0 abatement regime.
To investigate solve the state equation for X from (1.16) to find the transition of θ
towards the Kindergarten rule.

Manipulating the state equation from (1.16) and

exploiting our definition of D(θ), we find:
D(θ ) =

X
AK

η (γ − 1) − g 
 (γ − 1) 



(1.27)

D(θ) must be non- negative while X and K are always positive. Together these imply that
a necessary condition for us to remain in a S=0 regime is simply:
η( γ -1)>g

(1.28)

This condition reflects two different requirements. The first is simply that γ cannot equal
one. If it did then the (instantaneous) marginal disutility of pollution is a constant and
λ2 is a constant as well. To see this manipulate (1.25) and (1.24) to find:
BX ( t)γ −1
λ2 (t ) = −
<0
η+ g+ ρ

(1.29)

hence when γ is one, the shadow cost of pollution is independent of time. This would
also imply, if S=0 from (1.24), that consumption be fixed as well. This is inconsistent
with growth of any sort.

17

Assuming γ not equal to one is necessary for balanced growth with an interior
solution for abatement. But a second condition must also hold. Natural regeneration, η,
must be sufficiently large relative to the growth rate g. If the rate of regeneration is high
and growth rates quite low, then the optimal plan is to use nature’s regenerative abilities
to partially offset the costs of abating because the shadow value of foregone output is
high in slow growth situations. Conversely, if regeneration is low and the growth rate g
relatively high, then no amount of abatement short of the Kindergarten rule will hold
pollution to acceptable levels.
Finally we need to rule out a zero abatement balanced growth path. To do so we
assume balanced growth occurs and use this to generate a contradiction. Note the last
equation of (1.17) shows balanced growth in X requires equal growth in both capital and
pollution. Since positive growth in the economy requires gK > 0, it also implies:
•

gX ≡ X/ X =

AK
−η, ⇒ g X = gK > 0
X

(1.30)

But gX > 0 implies a monotonically rising shadow cost of pollution that moves us towards
an active abatement regime. To complete the argument use S < 0 to find:
•

λ1 = −[ g + ξ (t) ]λ1 < 0 , ξ (t ) ≡ A[λ1 − λ 2 a ] / a > 0

(1.31)

where g > 0 is required for growth. The shadow value of capital is falling while the
shadow cost of pollution is rising and S < 0 is contradicted in finite time. Summarizing:
Proposition 1. Assume g > 0, then sustainable economic growth with an ever improving
environment is possible and optimal.
i)

If η(γ−1)> g, then the intensity of abatement approaches the Kindergarten rule
level of abatement, θK, asymptotically.

ii)

If η(γ−1)< g, then θ = θK everywhere along the balanced growth path.

18

iii)

Balanced growth with zero abatement is not optimal.

Proof: See Appendix.
Proposition 1 suggests a natural corollary for the case of flow pollutants. If
pollution has only a flow cost it is “as if” the environment is regenerating itself infinitely
fast. This intuition suggests that as we let η get large, our results in the stock pollutant
case should replicate those for a flow. This intuition is, in fact, correct.
Proposition 2. Assume g > 0 and X is a flow pollutant, then sustainable economic growth
with an ever improving environment is possible and optimal.
iv)

If (γ−1)>0, the intensity of abatement approaches the Kindergarten rule level
of abatement, θK, asymptotically.

v)

If (γ−1)=0, θ = θK everywhere along the balanced growth path.

Proof: See Appendix.
Propositions 1 and 2 are important in showing how the Kindergarten rule
generates sustainable growth. The requirement for sustainable growth, g > 0, is very
similar to that in standard endogenous growth models. The assumption g > 0 requires the
marginal product of capital, adjusted for the ongoing costs of abatement, be sufficiently
high. A necessary condition is that A[1-θK] be positive, but this is guaranteed as long as
abatement is a productive activity.

Recall that abatement, like all other economic

activities, pollutes. One unit of abatement creates one unit of pollution, but cleans up a >
1 units of pollution. It is only this surplus between costs and benefits, 1-1/a = 1- θΚ > 0
that makes abatement useful at all!
Given abatement is productive, we still require the adjusted marginal product of
capital, A[1-θK], to offset both impatience and depreciation. If abatement is not very
productive, then 1/a will be close to one and growth cannot occur. If capital is not very
19

productive or if the level of impatience and depreciation are high then ongoing economic
growth cannot occur. These are however very standard requirements for growth under
any circumstances; therefore our addition of the further requirement that abatement be
productive seems both innocuous and natural in our setting. 14

4. Empirical Implications
The model we have presented relies heavily on the assumed role of technological
progress in staving off diminishing returns to both capital formation and abatement. It is
impossible to know apriori whether technological progress can indeed be so successful
and hence it is important to distinguish between two types of predictions before
proceeding. The first class of predictions are those regarding behavior at or near the
balanced growth path.

This set has received almost no attention in the empirical

literature on the environment and growth, although balanced growth path predictions and
their testing are at the core of empirical research in growth theory proper (see the review
by Durlauf and Quah (1999)). The second set of predictions concern the transition from
inactive to active abatement and these are related to the empirical work on the
Environmental Kuznets Curve (See Grossman and Krueger (1993,1995) and the review
by Barbier (2000)).

14

In Keeler, Spence and Zeckhauser (1972) a similar condition describes their Golden Age capital stock.
In their model with no endogenous growth the Golden Age capital stock is defined by (in our notation) the
equality f’(K)[1-1/a]-δ = ρ; simulations of the model assume a to be 12 (see p.22). Chimeli and Braden
(2002) assume a similar condition. Both studies assume abatement or clean up is a linear function of effort
thereby ignoring the reality of diminishing returns and the necessity of ongoing technological progress.

20

4.1 Balanced Growth Path Predictions
Using our previous results it is straightforward to show that near the balanced
growth path we must have: convergence in the quality of the environment across all
countries sharing parameter values but differing in initial conditions; the share of
pollution abatement costs in output approaching a positive constant less than one; overall
emissions rates falling and environmental quality rising; and emissions per unit output
falling as production processes adopt methods that approach zero emission technologies.
An especially sharp prediction is that the rate of change in per capita income is
uncorrelated with the rate of change in environmental quality when pollutants are longlived. They are negatively correlated when they are short- lived. 15 To see why let η be
small. In this case, the fast growth scenario arises, and the environment improves at rate
η. If we now vary g, but remain in the fast growth scenario, this has no effect on the pace
of environmental improvement. Note however that countries with higher g’s produce
greater income gains over any period of time.
This result is counter- intuitive since, as we will show subsequently, higher levels
of income are always associated with higher levels of environmental quality along the
balanced growth path. Nevertheless the logic is simple: in the fast growth scenario, the
constraint on environmental improvement is not income, but rather technology. Since we
have assumed that net inflows of pollution cannot be negative – and hence no restoration
activities can occur - improvement can at most occur at rate η. This result highlights the
fact that income growth may not be the constraining factor in some circumstances. The

The reader should note that in most cases the ratio of η/g is critical in determining these results, and not
the level of either η or g.
15

21

rate of environmental improvement can be limited by other factors – such as the
availability of better technologies - so that the rate of income growth can be uncorrelated
with the rate of environmental improvement even though income levels and
environmental quality are positively related.

16

Conversely, when η is large, the slow growth scenario arises and environmental
improvement occurs at rate g/(γ-1).

In this case, faster growth implies faster

environmental improvement. This faster growth could occur from a higher marginal
product of capital or abatement, or increased patience. This result is surprising since we
would normally associate fast growth with large increases in pollution unless there was a
very strong demand for a clean environment (which we have not assumed). Faster
growth is linked with faster environmental improvement in this case because income
growth is the limiting factor. When g rises the shadow value of capital falls very quickly
and this is, of course, the opportunity cost of abatement.
Whether these predictions are borne out by empirical work is as yet unknown but
an examination of US data shows the model’s strongest predictions – those regarding
falling emissions and improving environmental quality - are not grossly at odds with
available U.S. data. For example, the U.S. EPA reports that over the 1971 to 2001
period, total emissions of the 6 criteria air pollutants (Nitrogen Dioxide, Ozone, Sulfur
Dioxide, Particulate matter, Carbon Monoxide, and Lead) 17 decreased 25%. Over this

16

A suggestive plot of growth rates versus the rate of improvement in an environmental index can be found
in Figure 2.3, p. 27 of the World Bank’s 2003 Development Report. The index aggregates across measures
of deforestation, water pollution and CO2 emissions. The plot shows no relationship between the two rates
of change. In contrast, Carson et al. (1997) finds a negative and significant relationship between the rate of
state income growth and the rate of decline in emissions of air toxics.
17
All US figures are taken from the EPA’s Latest Findings on National Air Quality, 2001 Status and
Trends, available at http://www.epa.gov/air/aqtrnd01/ published September 2002. Corresponding measures
of environmental quality (ground level concentrations of these same pollutants) have also been improving.

22

same period, gross domestic product rose 161%. Looking at the individual pollutants
only nitrogen oxide emission rose over the 1971 period and that by only 15%. In contrast
emissions of carbon monoxide fell 19%, volatile organic compounds 38%, sulfur dioxide
44%, particulates 76% and lead 98%. Moreover, abatement costs as a fraction of output
are both small and exhibit no strong trend over time as our analysis would suggest. For
example, if we consider the size of pollution abatement costs specifically directed to air
pollutants and scale this by real US output, the ratio is incredibly small – approximately
one half of one percent of GDP - and has remained so for over twenty years (See Vogan
(1996)). Moreover, the share of pollution abatement costs in manufacturing value-added
has remained a relatively sma ll 1-2%. Changes in the composition of U.S. output surely
play some role in these figures, but it is difficult to eliminate the inference we draw:
abatement efforts have become much more productive over time.
This partial snapshot of the US environmental record is not meant to imply that
environmental quality is always and everywhere rising in the US or elsewhere. 18 Nor
should it be as our framework suggests that some environmental problems will be
addressed while others are left ignored. Looking across pollutants we would expect this
variability whenever pollutants differ in their abatement costs, their rates of dissipation in
the environment and their marginal damage. 19

Active regulation of the six criteria

18

One important omission from the above is any discussion of air toxics such as benzene (in gasoline),
perchloroethylene (used by dry cleaners), and methyl chloride (a common solvent). These are chemicals
are believed to cause severe health effects such as cancer, damage to the immune system, etc. At present
the EPA does not maintain an extensive national monitoring system for air toxics, and only limited
information is available. Figures from the US National Toxics Inventory show emissions nationwide have
fallen 24% from the baseline (1990-1993) to 1996. Emissions of 33 toxics, believed to be the most
deleterious to human health, have fallen 31%. See U.S. EPA, Toxic Air Pollutants, available at
www.epa.gov/airtrends/toxic.html.
19
It will become clear as we proceed that if we treat the damage from different pollutants separately in
utility and assume abatement is separable in pollutants, then for each pollutant the planner solves a problem

23

pollutants would not imply abatement of all pollutants everywhere. Our point is simply
that the historic trends of these most regulated pollutants are roughly consistent with our
model’s balanced growth path predictions.

4.2 The Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis
We have so far focused on balanced growth paths and these always exhibited
active abatement. It is however natural to ask whether abatement is always undertaken
even off the balanced growth path. The analysis suggests quite strongly that it is not.
To start we present several trans ition paths in Figure 1. One of these paths is that
of a Poor country having small initial capital KP but a pristine environment. The other is
the path of a Rich country starting again with a pristine environment but with a much
larger initial capital KR. Each economy starts with a pristine environment in stage I and
grows. During this stage the environment deteriorates, X rises, and the capital stock
grows until the trajectory hits the Switching Locus labeled SL. Once the economy hits
the Switching Locus it begins stage II. The exact position and shape of the locus depend
on whether parameters satisfy the fast growth or slow growth scenario. For the most part
we will proceed under the assumption that economic growth is fast relative to
environmental regeneration; that is (1.28) fails strongly and we have η(γ−1)< g. This
implies θ(t) = θK everywhere along the balanced growth path (Figure 1 implicitly
assumes this result).

For illustrative purposes we will sometimes discuss the parallel

flow case (where we can think of η approaching infinity but (1.28) failing because γ = 1).

identical to the one we discuss here. This would generate a theory of optimal sequencing of abatement
across pollutants with different characteristics.

24

SL

X

Stage II

Stage I

KP

KR

Figure 1
Transition Paths

K

It is apparent from the figure that the Poor country experiences the greatest
environmental degradation at its peak, and at any given capital stock, (i.e. income level)
the initially Poor country has worse environmental quality than the Rich. Moreover,
since both Rich and Poor economies start with pristine environments, the qualities of
their environments at first diverge and then converge. This is our Environmental Catchup Hypothesis.
Divergence occurs because the opportunity cost of abatement (and consumption)
is much higher in capital poor countries.

A high shadow price of capital leads to less

consumption, more investment and rapid industria lization in the Poor country. Nature’s
ability to regenerate is overwhelmed. The quality of the environment falls precipitously.
In capital rich countries the opportunity cost of capital is lower: consumption is greater
and investment less. Industrialization is less rapid and natural regeneration has time to
work. The peak level of environmental degradation in the Rich country is therefore much
smaller.
But once we enter Stage II abatement is undertaken and since abatement is an
investment in improving the environment, it is only undertaken when the rate of return on
this investment equals (or exceeds) the rate of return on capital. Since economies are
identical, except for initial conditions, rates of return are the same across all countries in
Stage II. Equalized rates of return require equal percentage reductions in the pollution
stock. Therefore absolute differences in environmental quality present at the beginning
of Stage II disappear over time.
To verify these assertions we start with Stage II.

25

4.3 Stage II
Stage II starts at the moment the economy’s shadow prices for capital and pollution
satisfy (1.24) and abatement begins. Denote this transition time t=t* and the associated
capital and pollution stocks at the moment of transition K* and X*. Recall the shadow
values in (1.24) are partial derivatives of the value func tion W(K,X) evaluated at K*, X*.
Where W(K*,X*) is the maximized value of the program starting from capital and
pollution stocks {K*, X*} over the period t = t* until t = ∞ . This implies the set of {K*,
X*} at which a transition to active abatement occurs must satisfy:
−

∂W ( K *, X *)/ ∂K
λ ( K *, X *)
= 1
=a
∂W ( K *, X *)/ ∂X −λ2 ( K *, X *)

(1.32)

We refer to the set of {K*,X*} satisfying (1.32) as the Switching Locus, since any
trajectory of the economy switches from inactive to active abatement when it crosses it. 20
The Switching Locus represents the set of points where the equality of marginal
abatement costs, MAC, and marginal damage, MD(K,X), yields an interior solution for
abatement.
To go further we need to solve for the shadow values as functions of capital and
pollution stocks and then impose (1.24) to find the Switching Locus. We have denoted
the switching time as t*, and hence at t* the S > 0 set of dynamics come into play. Using
(1.15) solve the differential equation for the shadow value of capital.

Eliminate

consumption and then solve for the capital stock. This yields:

20

Trajectories in the fast growth case cross the Switching Locus; trajectories in the slow growth case enter
a similar Switching Locus and then follow it thereafter. We discuss the slow growth case in section 4.5.

26

λ1 ( t ) = λ1 ( t*)exp[ − gt]
t


− 1/ ε
K ( t ) = exp[[ g + ρ ]t ]  K * −λ1 ( t*) ∫ exp[ −[g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ ]s ]ds 

t*


(1.33)

where both K* and λ1 (t*) are unknowns. We can eliminate one of these unknowns by
using the transversality condition, TVC, lim[exp[ − ρt ]λ1 (t ) K (t )] = 0 . Subbing (1.33) into
t →∞

the TVC we find it requires:
t

 
−1/ ε
lim  K * −λ1 ( t *) ∫ exp[ −[g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ ] s] ds  = 0,
t →∞
t*
 


(1.34)

Integrating and solving (1.34) gives us the solutio n for λ1 (t*) as:
λ1 ( t*) = [ hK*] −ε , h ≡ g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ > 0

(1.35)

and using (1.35) in (1.33) solves for λ1 (t). It is important to note the shadow value of
capital is only a function of K* and not {K*,X*}. This is because, in the fast- growthslow-regeneration case, the economy’s shadow value of capital falls so rapidly that
abatement efforts are always maximal. Since abatement is maximal, the {K, λ1 } part of
the problem separates and solves a simple AK model with power utility. Not surprisingly
it is now possible to show that the condition h > 0 is equivalent to the standard sufficient
condition for existence of an optimum path for an AK model with power utility. 21
With the λ1 (t*) in hand we now turn to solve for the shadow cost of pollution,
λ2 (t*).

Assuming we remain in S > 0 forever, we can solve the state and co-state

equations in this case to yield:

21

Denote the growth rate in an AK model with power utility by g*, then in terms of our parameters we have
g* =g/ε and the standard condition is ρ+(ε−1)g∗>0. Τhis is equivalent to h>0. See Aghion and Howitt
(1998, Equation (5.3)).

27

X ( t ) = X *exp[ −η( t − t*)],
λ2 (t ) = exp[[ ρ + η](t − t *)][[ λ2 (t *) + BX *γ −1 [1 − exp[ −c1 (t − t *)]/ c1 ]
c1 ≡ ρ + γη

(1.36)

where λ2 (t*) and X* are unknowns. We can again use a transversality condition to
eliminate one unknown. Using lim[exp[ − ρt ]λ2 ( t ) X (t) ] = 0 and manipulating yields:
t →∞

λ2 (t ) = λ2 (t *)exp[[1 − γ ]η (t − t *)], λ2 (t *) = −BX *γ −1 /[ ρ + γη ]

(1.37)

The shadow cost of pollution falls at rate η(γ−1), which in the fast growth case, is less
than g, the rate the shadow value of capital falls. This implies we have abatement at its
maximum – the Kindergarten rule level – because MAC < MD(K(t), X(t)) for t > t*.
We can now employ (1.35) and (1.37) in (1.24) and set t = t* to find a closed form
expression for the Switching Locus. Manipulating to obtain familiar terms we find:
MAC =

γ −1
1
B
=
X * [ hK*]ε = MD( K*, X *)
a [ ρ + γη ]

(1.38)

which is a downward sloping and convex relationship between pollution and capital. The
left hand side of (1.38) represents marginal abatement costs. The right hand side is
marginal damage evaluated at {K*,X*}. Marginal damage is increasing in the pollution
stock provided γ exceeds one, and since the flow of national (and per-capita) income Y is
always proportional to K, it is apparent that the income elasticity of marginal damage
with respect to flow income is given by ε > 0. Large values of ε correspond to the strong
income effects referred to earlier.
The discussion thus far is incomplete because it has implicitly assumed two key
points yet to be proven. The first is simply that a country starting in a situation below the
Switching Locus – such as the natural initial conditions K0 > 0 and X0 = 0 – will indeed
reach the Switching Locus and make the transition to Stage II. Proposition 1 indicates a
28

balanced growth path is not possible with S < 0 but this does not imply every country
must cross the Switching Locus in finite time. The second is that the locus does indeed
represent an irrevocable change so that once we cross over to Stage II we remain there
forever. These points are possible to establish and hence we record:

Proposition 3. Assume g > 0 and g > η(γ−1), then:
i)

every economy starting in Stage I must enter Stage II in finite time

ii)

every economy in Stage II remains in Stage II.

iii)

The locus of {K, X} at which Stage I ends is given by (1.38)

Proof: See appendix
It is possible to extend this result to flow pollutants. To remain in the relatively
fast growth case with η(γ-1) < g we now assume γ=1 and find:
Proposition 4 Assume g > 0 and γ = 1, then:
iv)

every economy starting in Stage I must enter Stage II in finite time

v)

every economy in Stage II remains in Stage II.

vi)

The Switching Locus is vertical at a finite K* > 0.

Proof: See appendix

4.4 Slow Growth and Fast Regeneration
The previous analysis was undertaken under the fast-growth-slow-regeneration
assumptions because this case illustrates the various forces at work very clearly. Since
many of the same conclusions hold when growth is relatively slow we only provide a
sketch here of some differences, leaving a complete analysis to the interested reader.

29

We can again solve for a Switching Locus which divides Stage I from Stage II. If
we let W(K,X) represent the state valuation function the new Switching Locus is again
defined by (1.32). The interpretation given to the Switching Locus remains the same.
The most important difference is that once a trajectory of the system hits this new
Switching Locus it remains within it forever. This implies the economy’s choice of
abatement remains interior; i.e. the trajectory follows along the Switching Locus
maintaining MAC = MD(K,X) throughout. As time progresses the intensity of abatement
approaches the Kindergarten rule in the limit.
Our transition path predictions remain virtually unchanged except that the model
now predicts an especially strong form of convergence. All transition paths remain on
the Switching Locus once active abatement begins; therefore policy active countries
share the same path for environmental quality and income levels in Stage II.
Solving for the Switching Locus involves similar steps and is left to the appendix.
The Switching Locus again defines a unique X* that is declining in K*. If the economy
is below this locus then abatement is inactive and K rises at a rapid rate. X increases
rapidly until the Switching Locus is reached in finite time. If the initial (K,X) is above
the locus, maximal abatement is undertaken but this drives down the shadow cost of
pollution very quickly and we again hit the locus, this time, from above. Once on the
locus, countries remain trapped within it thereafter.

4.5 The ECH and the EKC
Proposition 3 and 4 prove that all economies follow the stage I – stage II life cycle.
We have assumed g > 0 and the standard sufficient condition required in models of
endogenous growth given here as h > 0 in (1.35). We have met the Aghion and Howitt
30

test of generating sustainable growth while adopting the usual sort of assumptions made
in endogenous growth models.
The model also presents an interesting new prediction, the ECH: countries
differentiated only by initial capital exhibit initial divergence in environmental quality
followed by eventual convergence. 22 Moreover, as Figure 1 makes clear countries make
the transition to active abatement at different income and peak pollution levels. This of
course throws into question empirical methods seeking to estimate a unique incomepollution path. More constructively it suggests that an important feature of the data may
well be a large variance in environmental qua lity at relatively low- income levels with
little variance at high incomes. Empirical work by Carson et al. (1997) relating air toxics
to U.S. state income levels is supportive of this conjecture:
“Without exception, the high- income states have low per-capita emissions while
emissions in the lower- income states are highly variable. We believe that this may be the
most interesting feature of the data to explore in future work. It suggests that it may be
difficult to predict emission levels for countries just starting to enter the phase, where per
capita emissions are decreasing with income”, p. 447-8.
In some cases however, (initially) Rich and Poor will make the transition at the same
income level but still exhibit our Catch-up Hypothesis. Let γ approach one. Then the
slope of the Switching Locus approaches infinity and all countries attain their peak
pollution levels at the same K*. From (1.38), at γ equal to one, we have:
1/ ε

K* =

1
 [ρ + η ]
[ g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ ]  aB 

(1.39)

22

It is possible to show X is rising throughout Stage I and this ensures points along the Switching Locus do
indeed represent peaks in pollution levels.

31

Even with a common turning point differences in environmental quality remain.
Moreover, these are not simple level differences because countries initially diverge and
then converge after crossing K* as shown in Figure 2.
To eliminate our catch-up hypothesis we must assume regeneration is infinitely fast:
X is a flow. The Switching Locus is now vertical at K* and given by:23
1
 1
K* =
[ g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ ]  aB 

1/ ε

(1.40)

Since pollution is proportional to production before K*, and policies are identical after
K*: initial conditions no longer matter.
This tells us that when pollution is strictly a flow, all countries share the same
income pollution path. We have ge nerated an EKC, and empirical methods used to
estimate a unique income-pollution path are appropriate. But when pollution does not
dissipate instantaneously, initial conditions matter. We have the Environmental Catch-up
Hypothesis, and empirical methods must now account for the persistent role of initial
conditions. 24 It is easy to see the two hypotheses are mutually exclusive and exhaustive.
We now ask whether the process of catch-up begins at low or high- income levels.
One important consideration is the income elasticity of marginal damage. To illustrate its
role consider the fast growth regime and let the gross marginal product of capital, A, rise.

23

The turning point in the flow case is related to that of the stock in a transparent manner. Recall from
(1.37) that the shadow cost of pollution is equal to the perpetuity value of the constant marginal disutility of
– B (when γ=1). The perpetuity value arises since any unit of pollution has a constant instantaneous cost of
–B but this cost is discounted by time preference, ρ, and eliminated by natural regeneration at rate η from
the present time until infinity. Therefore, the perpetuity value of any unit of pollution is simply –B/[ρ+η].
Once pollution is a flow, it is eliminated immediately from the environment and has only a current flow
cost of –B. Not surprisingly then (1.40) only differs from (1.39) by the absence of the perpetuity term.
24
This result may explain why empirical research investigating the EKC has been far more successful with
air pollutants like SO2, than with water pollutants or other long lasting stocks (see the review by Barbier
(2000)).

32

X

K*
Figure 2
Common Turning Point

K

This necessarily raises g and if ε > 1, the Switching Locus shifts in. Abatement is
hastened. The same result holds with constant marginal damage, (1.39), and with a pure
flow pollutant (1.40). In terms of Figure 2, peak pollution levels shift left. When ε < 1,
abatement is delayed and peak pollution levels shift right. 25 A similar set of results holds
for increases in the productivity of abatement although there is an additional conflicting
force.

From (1.39) it is clear that an increase in abatement productivity, holding g

constant, necessarily lowers K* and hastens abatement. This is direct impact of higher
productivity on marginal abatement costs. But to this we must add the income response
created by the resulting change in g. When the income elasticity of marginal damage is
greater than one both forces work to hasten abatement. When it is less than one, the
result appears ambiguous. Therefore, in contrast to earlier work we find that while the
income elasticity of marginal damage has an important role to play in determining the
income level at which abatement occurs and the resulting pollution level, it plays virtually
no role in determining if the environment will improve nor its rate of improvement.

4.6 Pollution Characteristics
The ECH focuses on cross-country comparisons in pollution levels, but says little
about how predictions vary with pollutant characteristics. There is however good data in
the U.S. and elsewhere that could be fruitfully employed to test within country but across
pollutant predictions. We have already examined the role of income effects and the
productivity of abatement, therefore we focus on the remaining pollutant characteristics:
permanence in the environment, marginal disutility, and convexity of marginal damages.

25

Our use of the terms delayed or hastened does not refer to calendar time, but rather to whether actions
occur at a higher or lower income level.

33

Consider regeneration and start from a position where η = 0 (radioactive waste).
Then it is immediate from (1.38) that the Switching Locus shifts outwards as we raise η.
The response is to delay action and allow the environment to deteriorate further. Delay is
obvious when the marginal disutility of pollution is constant, because (1.39) shows K*
necessarily rises with η. Once we raise η sufficiently the economy enters the fast
regeneration regime and here we find abatement delayed in another manner – it is
introduced slowly by the now gradual implementation of the Kindergarten rule. Faster
regeneration then implies that countries either begin abatement at higher income levels or
allow their environments to deteriorate more before taking action. Surprisingly, fast
regeneration will be associated with lower and not higher environmental quality - at least
over some periods of time or ranges of income. 26
A change in regeneration rates also affects the pace of abatement. If a pollutant has a
long life in the environment, then once abatement begins it is clear that natural
regeneration can play only a small role. Consequently the optimal plan calls for an initial
period of inaction before starting a very aggressive abatement regime – the Kindergarten
rule. Putting these two features together we find that very long-lived pollutants should be
addressed early with their complete elimination compressed in time. It is optimal to
delay action on short- lived pollutants and adopt only a gradual program of abatement.
This description of optimal behavior is of course consonant with the historical record in
26

An especially colorful example of delay in abatement caused by rapid natural regeneration is that of the
City of Victoria in British Columbia. Every day, the Victoria Capital Regional District (CRD) dumps
approximately 100,000 cubic meters of sewage into the Juan de Fuca Strait. Scientific studies have long
argued that since the sewage is pumped through long outfalls into cold, deep, fast moving water there is no
need for treatment. The CRD has always used these studies to delay building a treatment facility. Current
plans are for secondary treatment to begin in 2020, but until then over 40 square kilometers of shoreline
remains closed to shell fishing. Background information can be found at the Sierra Legal Defense fund site
http://www.sierralegal.org/m_archive/1998-9/bk99_02_04.htm

34

several instances where long- lived chemical discharges and gas emissions were
eliminated very quickly by legislation, whereas short- lived criteria pollutants have seen
active regulation but not elimination over the last 30 years.
Pollutants also differ in their toxicity. The marginal disutility of toxics could exceed
those classified as irritants, and damages from toxics may rise more steeply with
exposure. The first feature of toxics implies their abatement should come early. This is
clear from (1.38)-(1.40) where increases in B hasten abatement. Note that since exposure
is rising with population density and falling with country size it is now also apparent that
abatement should come early when population is dense and late when pollutants can be
spread over large geographic areas. Surprisingly very convex marginal damages call for
the gradual and not aggressive elimination of pollution. The logic is that any reduction in
the concentration of toxics has a large impact on marginal damage. Therefore, only by
lowering emissions slowly can we match a steeply declining value of marginal reductions
with a falling opportunity cost of abatement. Therefore, although toxics may have large
absolute negative impacts on welfare, this argues for their early, but not necessarily
aggressive, abatement.

5. Alternative Approaches to Abatement
Despite several articles examining one-sector models it remained unclear whether
sustained growth with non-decreasing environmental quality was possible in an AK
framework. Early work in a one-sector framework by Smulders (1993) and Smulders and
Gradus (1996) demonstrated how continuing economic growth and constant
environmental quality are compatible. In constrast, Stokey (1998) demonstrated how
continuing growth and constant environmental quality are not possible within a one35

sector model. The difference lies in their assumptions on abatement. To verify this
assertion start with (1.5), ignore knowledge spillovers, and work forward using now
familiar steps to find:
Pi = Yi Gφ (1 − θ ), φ (θ ) ≡ [1 − a(1,1 −θ )]

(1.41)

Stokey employs the specific function form for φ given by (1-θ)β for β > 1, and this
implies a CRS abatement production function given by:
a (Yi G ,Yi A ) = Yi G [1 − (1 − Yi A / Yi G ) β ]

(1.42)

Using (1.41) it is now easy to show abatement is subject to diminishing returns:
∂Pi / ∂Yi A = − β (1 − θ ) β −1 < 0, ∂Pi / ∂Yi
2

A2

>0

which implies marginal abatement costs are rising at the aggregate level. Setting θ = 0
we find the first unit of abatement lowers pollution by the amount β > 1, somewhat
similar to our formulation where a(1,1) > 1. If we now combine (1.41) with (1.3), recall
net output is (1-θ) times gross output, and introduce the variable z = 1-θ, we find the
specification employed in Stokey (1998).
Y = AKz , P = AKz β

(1.43)

Therefore, Stokey’s (1998) result that growth is not possible follows from
matching an AK aggregate production function with strictly neoclassical assumptions on
abatement adopted from Copeland and Taylor (1994).
Comparing our approach to Smulders is more difficult because abatement is not
specifically modeled and he considers a variety of formulations. By specializing his
framework to the AK paradigm we find:
Y = α K , P = [ K / A]γ

(1.44)

36

The first element is just a standard AK production function. The second relates what
Smulders refers to as net or emitted pollution to the capital stock and abatement. If we
employ (1.44) and solve for emissions per unit of gross output we find:
P / Y = [ K / A]γ / α K

(1.45)

If the economy allocates a fixed fraction of its output to abatement, K/A is
constant, and emissions per unit of gross output fall with the size of the economy. This
reflects a strong degree of increasing returns. Moreover, the reader may note from (1.44)
that pollution emitted goes to infinity as abatement goes to zero, which is inconsistent
with pollution being a joint product of output. Therefore, Smulders and Gradus (1993,
1996) match AK aggregate production with assumptions on abatement ensuring
increasing returns; and, in contrast with our specification, assume pollution is not a joint
product of output.

6. Conclusion
The relationship between economic growth and the environment is not well
understood: we have only limited understanding of the basic science involved – be it
physical or economic – and we have very limited data. Because of these difficulties it is
especially important to develop a series of relatively simple theoretical models to
generate stark predictions testable with currently available data. To do so we developed a
model relying on technological progress to drive long run growth and showed how
growth is sustainable whenever the planner implements the Kindergarten rule – clean up
your messes as they are created.

This rule may be implemented in finite time or

approached asymptotically.

37

We provided predictions concerning the path of environmental quality for pollutants
differentiated by their toxicity, their permanence in the environment, and their immediate
disutility. We have shown that changes in abatement productivity, the convexity of
marginal damages, and regeneration rates all affect both the level and rate of change in
environmental quality. Conversely changes in disutility and changes in the income
elasticity of marginal damage have only level effects. These predictions can be evaluated
by exploiting available data for the U.S. and other developed countries.

We also

introduced a novel Environmental Catch- up Hypothesis predicting eventual convergence
in environmental quality across both Rich and Poor countries. Together these predictions
widen the scope for empirical research considerably while offering a theoretically based
alternative to the presently dominant EKC methodology.
To generate these results much simplification was required. Some of our strongest
assumptions produced features that some may find undesirable; nevertheless the model’s
simplicity is a virtue since it has laid bare previously unknown features of the growth and
environment relationship. And by paying special attention to abatement we demonstrate
how sustainable growth need not rely on strong income effects, increasing returns to
abatement, or the assumed existence of perfectly clean factors of production.

38

7. Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
Start with part ii) and assume η(γ-1)< g then given our analysis in the text all that
remains to prove is that the first order condition dynamics of S > 0 and θ = θK remain in
the S > 0 set forever. To start write out the state/co-state equations for S > 0 to find:
•

λ1 = −λ1 g , g ≡ A(1 − θ k ) − δ − ρ
•

K = [ g + ρ ]K − C( λ1 ), K(0) = K0 , C( λ1 ) ≡ λ1

−1/ ε

•

(A.1)

C/ C = g / ε , C (t ) = C(0)exp[( g / ε )t ]
•

•

X = −η X , X (0) = X 0 λ2 = λ2 [ ρ + η] + BX γ −1
In Section 4 of the text we solve these to obtain the switching locus and the shadow
values. In doing so we implicitly assumed:
− aλ2 (t ) > λ1 ( t ), for ∀ t > tS

(A.2)

where ts is the switching time. Solving (A.1) for the shadow value of capital we have:
λ1 ( t ) = λ1 (0)exp{− gt}, λ1 (0) = [ hK (0)]− ε

(A.3)

where the initial value can be found by using the transversality condition (see section 4 in
the text). Similarly solve for the shadow cost of pollution to find:
λ2 ( t ) =

− BX (0) γ −1 exp{(1 − γ )η t}
ρ + γη

(A.4)

where again we have employed a transversality condition to pin down the initial value of
the shadow price in terms of X(0). Hence using (A.3) and (A.4) we find that (A.2)
requires:

39

BX (0) (γ −1)
> exp{[− g −[1 − γ ]η ]t }
[ ρ + γη][ hK (0)] −ε

(A.5)

for all t > t S. By definition (A.5) is an equality when t = ts. Using the definition of ts and
multiplying both sides of (A.5), we obtain:
1 > exp{−[ g −( γ − 1)η ][t − t s ]}

(A.6)

which is true for t > ts if and only if
η(γ − 1) < g

(A.7)

This is of course what we have assumed and this parameter restriction defines the fast
growth-slow regeneration scenario. Note that when (A.7) fails – so we are in the fast
regeneration-slow growth situation – and initial conditions put us above the switching
locus so that S > 0, then (A.6) also implies the S > 0 dynamics drive the system to the
switching locus and S=0 in finite time. This ends the proof to part ii).
Consider part i). The text does not show the economy approaches a balanced growth path
with capital, output and consumption growing. To do so solve (1.19) for θ and substitute
into the capital accumulation equation to obtain:
•

K = [ g + ρ ] K + [ X (0)/ a ]exp{(( g /(1 − γ )) t} − C (0)exp{( g / ε )t }

(A.8)

where use has been made of the solution for λ1 (t) and the solutions for C(t) and X(t)
given by:
C (t ) = C (0)exp{( g / ε )t }
X ( t ) = X (0)exp{( − g /(γ − 1)t}

(A.9)

Now integrate (A.8) to find:
K ( t ) = − Π 1 X (0)exp{(( g /(1 − γ )) t} + Π 2 C(0)exp{( g / ε ) t} + Π 3 exp{( g + ρ )t}
 (γ − 1)



ε
Π1 ≡ 
> 0, Π 2 ≡ 

>0
 γ g − ρ (1 − γ ) 
 ρε − g (1− ε ) 

(A.10)

40

Μultiply (A.10) by exp{-ρt}λ1 (t) and invoke the transversality condition, that:
lim λ1 (t ) K ()exp{
t
− ρ t} = 0
t →∞

(A.11)

This in turn implies
 −Π1 X (0)λ1 (0)exp{( gγ /(1 − γ ) − ρ )t}

0 = lim 

t →∞ +Π C (0)λ (0)exp{(g (1 − ε ) / ε − ρ )t } + Π exp{ gt }
 2
1
3


(A.12)

The limit of the term multiplying X(0) goes to zero as its exponent is negative. The limit
of the term multiplying C(0) goes to zero as long as: g(1-ε)/ε -ρ < 0 which is a standard
condition for the transversality condition to be met in AK models. Together they imply
Π 3 must be zero in (A.10). We can rewrite this condition in a useful way to find:
K ( t ) = exp{( g / ε ) t}[ Π1 X (0)exp{− ε /( γ −1) t} + Π2C(0) ]

(A.13)

First note the term in square brackets approaches Π 2 C(0) as time goes to infinity. This
implies the growth rate of capital approaches that of consumption, gC, in the limit. As the
growth rate of capital and consumption converge, the abatement intensity must be
approaching the Kindergarten rule. Therefo re, for a given rate of consumption growth,
gC, the speed of convergence of θ(t) to the Kindergarten rule level is greater the larger is
ε and the larger is γ. This makes a great deal of sense. In situations where ε is large, the
marginal utility of consumption falls very rapidly and hence the sacrifice of marginal
units of consumption for greater abatement is relatively painless. Similarly, when γ is
large the marginal disutility of pollution is quite high and hence it is important to reduce
it quickly. This is achieved by approaching the Kindergarten rule rapidly. Finally we
must ensure the TVC for X(t) holds as well along this balanced growth path. Solving for
λ2 (t) we find:

41

t


λ2 ( t ) = exp{( ρ + η ) t} λ2 (0) + ∫ BX ( s) γ −1 exp{−( ρ + η ) s} ds 

0


(A.14)

The TVC requires the limit of X(t)λ2 (t)exp{-ρt} go to zero as t goes to infinity. The
solution for X(s) is given in (A.9). Substituting this into (A.14) and integrating shows the
TVC requires:


BX (0)γ −1
lim X (0)exp{(η − g /(γ − 1))t } λ2 (0) +
1 − exp{−( g + η + ρ )t ] = 0 (A.15)
[
t →∞
g + ρ +η


Τhe first term multiplying the brackets goes to plus infinity since the exponent is positive
in the fast regeneration-slow growth scenario we are investigating. Therefore, we are
going to need the initial value of pollution to be given by:
λ2 (0) = −

BX (0)γ −1
g + ρ +η

(A.16)

Finally we need to prove that a balanced growth path with no abatement is not possible.
To do so, recall from the text that this requires a growth rate of pollution equal to that of
capital. By solving for the shadow value of pollution we obtain:

t


(γ −1)
λ2 ( t ) = exp{( ρ + η ) t} λ2 (0) + BX (0)
exp{[ g K (γ −1) − ( ρ + η)] s} ds 
∫

0


(A.17)

and invoking the transversality condition yields:



BX (0)γ −1
X
(0)exp{(
η
+
g
)
t
}
λ
(0)
−

K
 2

g K (γ − 1) − ρ − η  


lim 
=0
t →∞
γ −1


BX
(0)
 + X (0)exp{( gK γ − ρ )t} 



g
(
γ
−
1)
−
ρ
−
η

 K


(A.18)

42

Hence a necessary condition for the TVC to be met is gKγ<ρ as this sends the second
term in brackets to zero. An additional condition is that λ2 (0) take on a specific value to
make the first term in the brackets zero. This in turn, implies, since this shadow value
must be negative, that gK(γ-1)<ρ+η. Using this information we can now write out the
solution for the shadow value completely as:


BX (0)γ −1
λ2 ( t ) = exp{ gK (γ − 1)t} 
<0
 g K (γ − 1) − ( ρ + η ) 

(A.19)

and now note that it rises with t. Therefore, if S < 0 at some t, it will be contradicted in
finite time since the shadow values move in opposite directions – exponentially.
This completes the proof of Proposition 1.

Proof of Proposition 2
The problem in the flow case is given by:
∞
 C1− ε BX γ  − ρt
Maximize ∫ 
−
 e dt
1
−
ε
γ

0
s.t . K (0) = K0 , and θ ≤ 1/ a

(A.20)

•

K = AK (1 − θ ) − δ K − C
X = AK[1 − θ a]
Forming the Hamiltonian we obtain:

C1− ε B[ AK[1 −θ a]]γ

ρW ( K ) = Max  H =
−
+ λ[ AK[1 − θ ] − C − δ K ] 
{C ,θ }
1− ε
γ



(A.21)

with first order conditions,
∂H
= C −ε − λ = 0
∂C

(A.22)

43

 B[ AK [1 − θ a ]]γ

Max  −
+ λ AK[1 −θ ], s.t . θ ≤ 1/ a 
θ
γ


•

λ − ρλ = −

∂H
= − λ[ A[1 − θ ] − δ ] − BX γ −1 A[1 − θ a] 
∂K

(A.23)

(A.24)

Define the sets, S-, S0, S+ as follows:
S− = {( K , λ ) G '(θ = 0) = aB ( AK )γ −1 − λ < 0
S0 = {( K, λ ) G '(θ = 0) = aB( AK )γ −1 − λ = 0

(A.25)

S+ = {( K, λ ) G '(θ = 0) = aB ( AK )γ −1 − λ > 0
Then note that when S- is relevant, no abatement would occur at all. When S0 is relevant
abatement is just worthwhile. And when S+ is relevant some abatement is necessary.
We start with the simple γ = 1 case. Assume {K,λ} are in S+. Then, under this parameter
restriction, we obtain from the above that:
if G '(θ = 0) = aB − λ > 0, then θ = θ k

(A.26)

since marginal damage from pollution is a constant, abatement is either nothing, or it is
set to the Kindergarten rule. When θ = θK we have:
λ (t ) = λ (0)exp{− gt }
K ( t ) = exp[( g + ρ ) t ][ K (0) − λ (0)

−1/ ε

t

∫ exp{−[g (1 −1/ ε ) + ρ ]s}ds]

(A.27)

0

Using the TVC we find λ(0)=[hK(0)]-ε where h=g(1-1/ε)+ρ > 0 is again the standard
sufficient condition for the TVC to hold. To show that ongoing growth is possible in this
situation, note that λ(t) is a strictly decreasing function of K(0). Therefore choosing K(0)
large enough we obtain must be in S+. Once in S+, the dynamics in (A.27) indicate that λ
falls. Hence the dynamics are forward invariant. Balanced growth in consumption,
capital and output occur at rates:

44

gY = gK = gC = g / ε = [ A[1 − θ k ] − (δ + ρ)]/ ε > 0

(A.28)

Suppose instead that K(0) puts us in S-. Then θ = 0 from (A.25), and (A.27) holds if we
replace [1-θk ] with 1. Since the solution for λ shows it must fall exponentially over time
approaching zero, there exists a finite time t at which S+ is entered at which the dynamics
shift to the case previously discussed. This ends the γ=1 proof.
Let γ not equal one, and assume we start in S+. Then from (A.25) we have
aB ( AK [1 − θ a ])γ −1 − λ = 0

(A.29)

and θ=θK is never optimal if λ is positive. Using G’(θ) = 0, we can now write the stateco-state equations as:
•

λ = −g λ ,
•

K = ( g + ρ ) K + Dλ

(A.30)
1/(γ −1)

− C ( λ), D ≡ (1/ a )[1/ aB]

1/(γ −1)

Using the TVC we can now obtain a relationship between the initial shadow value of
capital and the initial capital stock.

Manipulation of the TVC yields an implicit

relationship between these two variables:
K (0) + Dλ(0)1/(γ −1) / α1 = λ(0) −1/ ε / α 2 ,
−α1 ≡ −( g + ρ ) − g /(γ −1), α 2 ≡ h

(A.31)

Straightforward differentiation shows that λ(0) is a decreasing function of K(0).
Therefore, for K(0) large we must be in S+. Once in S+, the dynamics given above shows
λ falls exponentially over time leaving the solution in S+.

Note from (A.30) that

consumption grows at rate gC=g/ε > 0; and from the solution for λ(t) that as t goes to
infinity, θ goes to θK as required. The growth rates of capital and output approach those
of the γ equal to one case. Finally, suppose our initial conditions put us in S-. Then it is

45

again straightforward to show λ falls exponentially over time until some finite time t,
such that S+ is entered. This completes the proof for Proposition 2.

Proof of Proposition 3
Part ii) has already been proven in Proposition 1. Part iii) is proven in the text. We prove
part i) by contradiction. Assume it is never optimal to leave Phase I. This requires we
stay in S < 0 for all t, or that:
0 ≤ −aλ2 (t ) < λ1 (t )

(A.32)

The difficulty in proving this is false arises from the fact that when S < 0 we cannot solve
for either shadow va lue independently. Accordingly we adopt an indirect approach by
bounding λ1 (t) from above and bounding λ2 (t) from below and then showing these
bounds violate (A.32) generating the contradiction. Note since S < 0 is assumed
throughout we must have an upper bound on λ1 (t) given by:
λ1 ( t ) < λ1 (0)exp{− gt}

(A.33)

To bound λ2 (t) we start with its solution which is given by:
t


λ2 ( t ) = exp{( ρ + η ) t} λ2 (0) + ∫ BX ( s) γ −1 exp{−( ρ + η ) s} ds 

0


(A.34)

Use the TVC to solve for the constant and find:
∞

λ2 (0) = − ∫ BX ( s ) γ −1 exp{−( ρ + η) s}ds

(A.35)

0

And hence the solution becomes:
 ∞

λ2 ( t ) = exp{( ρ + η) t}  − ∫ BX ( s) γ −1 exp{−( ρ + η) s} ds
 t


(A.36)

46

The solution for X(t) involves λ1 (t) so we bound λ2 (t) without solving for X(t) by noting
that when S < 0:
•

X = AK − η X ≥ −η X ,
⇒ X ( t ) ≥ X (0)exp{−η t}

(A.37)

Now substitute this solution into (A.36) since this bounds λ2 (t) from below. That is, we
now have constructed the fictitious λ2 (t)* where:
∞

−λ2 (t ) ≥ −λ2 (t )* = exp{(ρ + η )t }  ∫ BX (0)γ −1 exp{− ( ρ + ηγ ) s}ds 
t

γ −1
BX (0)
−λ2 (t )* =
exp{−η (γ − 1)t}
ηγ + ρ

(A.38)

Now employing the inequality in (A.32), substituting using (A.33) and (A.38), and
manipulating slightly we see that staying in S < 0 requires that for all t
aBX (0)γ −1
exp{g − η(γ − 1)t} < λ1 (0)
ηγ + ρ

(A.39)

which is false for t sufficiently large since g > η(γ-1).

Proof of Proposition 4
Τhe proof of Proposition 2 demonstrates that λ(t) is monotonically falling during Stage II.
This is shown by (A.27). Moreover when γ=1 we can find the unique capital stock at
which Stage II begins. Note when Stage II begins we must have from (A.25) and γ=1,
that λ = aB. By definition then, K* must satisfy λ=aB = [hK*]-ε Therefore, once K* is
reached the Stage II dynamics will keep it in stage II since λ(t) falls monotonically.
Since K* is uniquely determined, the Switching Locus is vertical. To show that every
economy must enter Stage II in finite time locate the dK/dt = 0 locus during Stage I. This

47

locus must have λ1 (t) = [(A-δ)Κ]-ε where we have denoted the shadow value in Stage I by
the subscript 1. In stage II the dK/dt = 0 locus is given by λ2 (t) = [(Azk -δ)Κ]-ε where 2
stands for Stage II. Construct a phase diagram in {λ,K}space and note while both loci
are necessarily downward sloping the Stage II dK/dt = 0 locus lies everywhere above that
of the Stage I dK/dt = 0 locus. Also draw in the horizontal line λ=aB. K* is defined by
the intersection of this horizontal line and the Stage II dK/dt = 0 locus. Notice for any
K(0) < K*, a λ(0) can be found such that Stage I dynamics carries the point (K(0), λ(0))
in finite time T to the point (K*, λ*). This is true because the steady state value of λ
assuming we stay in Stage I, is less than aB when g > 0 which we have assumed. For t >
T the Stage II dynamics apply as discussed above.

To prove that this constructed

candidate solution in (K,λ) space, that joins the two candidate Stage I and Stage II
dynamics, is optimal, apply the sufficiency theory of Arrow and Kurz (1970, pp. 43-49).
First the candidate solution satisfies the state/co-state equations by construction. The
TVC is met in Stage II by construction of the Stage II solution of the state/costate
equations. It is easy to see that the projection of the graph of Stage I in (K,λ) space
covers the set (0,K*) on the K-axis as can be seen by the relative location of the
switching locus aB = λ and dλ/dt = 0 in Stage I and by the construction of Stage I by
running the Stage I state/costate dynamics backwards in time from the point (K*,
λ*=aB). Thus we have a well-defined candidate solut ion for all positive initial K(0).
Using the location of the locus aB = λ it is easy to see that θ = 0 in Stage I and θ = θK in
Stage II. Thus the control θ actually optimizes H. The control C optimizes H. Hence we
are done by sufficiency theory.

48

Switching Locus in the Slow Regeneration Case
We have from (A.16) one relationship between the shadow value of pollution and the
pollution level when we move to Stage II. Along the Switching locus we also have from
(1.32) in the text that:
dX / dt + η X = AK [1 − θ a ] = ( g X +η ) X *exp{g X t }

(A.40)

And the accumulation equation for capital gives us:
dK / dt = AK[1 − θ ]− C (λ1 )
 ( g + η) X * 
= [ g + ρ ]K +  X
exp{g X t }− λ1 *−1/ ε exp{( g / ε )t }

a



(A.41)

Integrate (A.41) and use the transversality condition to obtain:
 λ1 *−1/ ε

( g X +η )
 g (1 − 1/ ε ) + ρ  = K * + ( g + ρ − g )(X * / a )


X

(A.42)

Along the Switching Locus we have λ1 =-aλ2 and using this and (A.16) we obtain:
 aBX *γ −1 
g + ρ +η



−1/ ε



g X +η
/ [ g (1 −1/ ε ) + ρ ] = K * + 

 ( g + ρ − g X )(X * / a ) 

(A.43)

Now recall gX=g/(1-γ) < 0. Since η(γ-1) > g together they imply gX + η > 0 and the right
hand side of (A.43) is an increasing function of X*. The left hand side is a declining
function of X* since h > 0. Therefore we obtain a unique X* > 0 for each K*>0.
Rearranging (A.43) yields the more friendly form:
ε


1  BX *γ −1  
h (g X + η )
=
hK * +


a g + ρ +η
( g + ρ − g X )(X * / a ) 

(A.44)

The optimal solution may now be sketched. If (K,X) lies below the SL we put θ = 0 and
the FOC is increasing in K at rapid rate. X increases rapidly until SL is reached in finite
time. If (K,X) lies above SL we put θ = 1/a. The FOC values of K and C grow slowly.
49

Since η(γ−1)>g, the shadow value aλ2 is falling faster than the shadow value of capital on
the FOC solution above SL. Therefore SL will be hit in finite time and which θ is
adjusted to keep the FOC dynamics in SL.

50

8. References
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge MA,
(1998).
Andreoni, James and Arik Levinson, "The Simple Analytics of the Environmental
Kuznets Curve," Journal of Public Economics, 80(2), May (2001), 269-286.
Arrow, K. and M. Kurtz, Public Investment, the Rate of Return, and Optimal Fiscal
Policy, Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press, (1970).
Barbier, E., “Environmental Kuznets Curve Special Issue: Introduction”, Environment
and Development Economics 2 (1997), 369-381.
Carson, R.T., Y. Jeon and D.R. McCubbin, “The Relationship between air pollution
emissions and income: US Data”, Environment and Development Economics, 2 (1997),
433-450.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor, International Trade and the Environment:
Theory and Evidence, Princeton Series in International Economics, G.M. Grossman and
P.O. Gourinchas, eds. Princeton University Press, (2003).
Chimeli, A.B. and J.B.Braden, “Economic Growth and the Dynamics of Environmental
Quality”, mimeo. (2002)
Dasgupta, P., Maler, K.G., “Net National Product, Wealth and Social Well-Being”,
Environment and Development Economics, (2000), 5, 69-93.
Durlauf, S.N. and D.T. Quah, “The New Empirics of Economic Growth”, in the
Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, chapter 4, J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, Eds. Elsevier
Science B.V., (1999), 235-308.
Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT
Press, Cambridge MA, (1991).
Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger, "Environme ntal Impacts of a North American Free
Trade Agreement," in The US-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, (1993).
Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger, "Economic Growth and the Environment," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, (1995), 353-377.
Heal, G. Nature and the Marketplace: Capturing the value of ecosystem services, Island
Press, Washington, D.C. (2000).

John, A. and R. Pecchenino, "An overlapping generations model of growth and the
environment," The Economic Journal, 104 (1994), 1393-1410.
Keeler, E., M. Spence, and R. Zeckhauser., “The Optimal Control of Pollution”, Journal
of Economic Theory, 4, (1972), 19-34.
Jones, L.E. and R.E. Manuelli, ""Endogenous Policy Choice: The Case of Pollution and
Growth," (forthcoming, 2000), Review of Economic Dynamics.
Lopez, R. “The environment as a factor of production: the effects of economic growth
and trade liberalization”, Journal of Enviornmental Economics and Management, 27,
(1994), 163-184.
Lucas, R.E. Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22 (1988), 3-42.
McConnell, K.E. “Income and the demand for environmental quality”, Environment and
Development Economics 2 (1997), 383-399.
Romer, P. “Increasing Returns and long-run growth”, Journal of Political Economy, 94,
(1996), 1002-1037.
Smulders, S. and R. Gradus., “The Trade-off Between Environmental Care and Long
Term Growth – Pollution in Three Prototype Growth Models”, Journal of Economics,
Vol. 58, (1993), 25-51.
Smulders, S. and R. Gradus., “Pollution abatement and long-term growth”, European
Journal of Political Economy, 12, (1996), 505-532.
Stokey, N., "Are there limits to Growth," International Economic Review, 39(1), (1998),
1-31
Vogan, Christine R., “Pollution Abatement and Control Expenditures, 1972-1994”,
Survey of Current Business, Sept. (1996), 48-67.

52

