NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POWER-HUNGRY CANDIDATES, POLICY FAVORS,
AND PARETO IMPROVING
CAMPAIGN FINANCE POLICY
Stephen Coate
Working Paper 9601
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9601
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

Earlier versions of this paper circulated as “On the Desirability of Campaign Contribution Limits” and
“Powerhungry Candidates, Policy Favors, and Pareto Improving Campaign Contribution Limits”. I thank Dan
Bernhardt, Tim Besley, Ted O’Donoghue, Andrea Prat, Tom Romer, Tom Stratmann, Miguel Urquiola, and
seminar participants at Carleton, Cornell, Johns Hopkins, LSE, Syracuse, Yale, and the IGIER-PIER and
Wallis Institute political economy conferences for comments and encouragement. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Stephen Coate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Power-hungry Candidates, Policy Favors, and Pareto Improving Campaign Finance Policy
Stephen Coate
NBER Working Paper No. 9601
April 2003
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that campaign finance policy, in the form of contribution limits and matching
public financing, can be Pareto improving even under the most optimistic assumptions concerning
the role of campaign advertising and the rationality of voters. The argument assumes that candidates
use campaign contributions to convey truthful information to voters about their qualifications for
office and that voters update their beliefs rationally on the basis of the information they have seen.
It also assumes that campaign contributions are provided by interest groups and that candidates can
offer to provide policy favors for their interest groups to attract higher contributions. The argument
is developed in the context of a simple model of political competition with campaign contributions
and informative advertising.

Stephen Coate
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14853
and NBER
sc163@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

This paper argues that campaign finance policy, in the form of contribution limits and matching
public financing, can be Pareto improving even under the most optimistic assumptions concerning the role of campaign advertising and the rationality of voters. The argument assumes that
candidates use campaign contributions to convey truthful information to voters about their qualifications for oﬃce and voters update their beliefs rationally on the basis of the information they
have seen. It also assumes that campaign contributions are provided by interest groups and that
candidates can oﬀer to provide policy favors for their interest groups to attract higher contributions.
The argument is developed in a simple model of electoral competition. There are two political
parties representing opposing ideologies. Parties put forward candidates who represent their ideologies, but may have diﬃculty finding qualified candidates. Thus each party’s candidate may be
qualified or unqualified. Voters know a candidate’s party aﬃliation but not whether he is qualified.
Advertising allows a candidate to provide voters with this information. Such advertising can be
advantageous for a qualified candidate because it may attract swing voters. Resources for campaign advertising are obtained by candidates from interest groups consisting of citizens of opposing
ideologies. If elected, candidates are able to implement policy favors for their interest groups and,
before the election, they can oﬀer to implement such favors to extract larger contributions.
The starting point for the argument is the observation that the potential social benefit of
contributions lies in giving qualified candidates an electoral advantage over unqualified opponents.
With no contributions, there would be no mechanism for qualified candidates to get out the word
to voters. Giving qualified candidates an electoral advantage potentially benefits all citizens, as it
results in better leaders.
In order for campaign contributions to have this benefit, campaign advertising must be eﬀective

1

in that learning that a candidate is qualified will induce some fraction of swing voters to switch
their votes from unadvertised candidates. The larger the fraction of voters who switch, the greater
the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising and the greater the advantage such advertising brings to
qualified candidates. However, when campaign contributions are unrestricted and candidates are
power-hungry, campaign advertising will not be that eﬀective. Voters will rationally be cynical
about qualified candidates, anticipating that they will implement favors for their contributors if
elected. This cynicism will reduce the likelihood of voters switching their votes and, despite the
fact that resources are spent on advertising, qualified candidates will not have much of an electoral
advantage over unqualified opponents.
When campaign contributions are limited, candidates’ incentive to oﬀer favors to extract more
contributions is dampened. Voters now anticipate that advertised candidates will implement
fewer favors than in the unrestricted case and this may increase the likelihood they will vote for
them. This increase in the eﬀectiveness of advertising means that limits, despite reducing the
level of campaign advertising, need not reduce the likelihood that qualified candidates get elected.
Moreover, if elected such candidates will implement lower levels of favors than in the unrestricted
case. Thus, all regular citizens can be better oﬀ when contributions are limited. The only possible
losers are contributors who receive lower levels of favors. But their expected gains from favors will
be dissipated by the contributions they make, meaning they may also be better oﬀ. In this way,
limiting contributions may create a Pareto improvement.
Even when this is not the case, a campaign finance policy which both imposes limits and
provides publicly financed matching grants can always create a Pareto improvement. Limits reduce
favors and raise the eﬀectiveness of campaign spending, while public financing oﬀsets the reduction
in private contributions caused by limits. Since public funds are tax financed, as opposed to favor
financed, this infusion of money has no negative consequences for the eﬀectiveness of campaign
spending. Eﬀectively, public financing substitutes clean money for tainted money received in
2

exchange for policy favors.
The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. The next section presents the
model. Section 3 analyzes equilibrium with unrestricted contributions. Campaign finance policy
is studied in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the relationship of the paper to the growing literature
on campaign finance regulation. Section 6 concludes with a summary of the argument and some
suggestions for further research.

2

The Model

2.1

Overview

The population consists of three groups of citizens - leftists, rightists, and swing voters. These
groups diﬀer in their ideology which is measured on a 0 to 1 scale. Leftists and rightists have
ideologies 0 and 1 respectively. Swing voters have ideologies that are uniformly distributed on
the interval [µ − τ, µ + τ ]. Leftists and rightists constitute an equal fraction of the community,
so that swing voters are the decisive group. Reflecting the fluid nature of these voters’ attitudes,
the ideology of the median swing voter is ex ante uncertain. Specifically, µ is the realization of a
random variable uniformly distributed on [ 12 − ε, 12 + ε], where ε is less than

1
2

− τ .1

The latter

assumption guarantees that the ideologies of the swing voters are always between those of leftists
and rightists.
The community must elect a representative. Candidates are put forward by two political
parties: Party L - the leftist party, and Party R - the rightist party. Following the citizencandidate approach, candidates are citizens and are characterized by their ideologies. Each party
must select from the ranks of its membership, so that Party L always selects a leftist and Party
1 The assumptions that swing voters are uniformly distributed over [µ − τ, µ + τ ] and that the ideology of the
median swing voter is uniformly distributed over [ 12 − ε, 12 + ε] are not key to the argument. They are simply made
to ensure that the probability of winning function derived below has a simple and tractable form.

3

R a rightist. However, candidates diﬀer in their qualifications for oﬃce, denoted by q. They are
either “qualified” (q = 1) or “unqualified” (q = 0). A qualified candidate, for example, may be
one who has previously held elective oﬃce.2

All citizens, including party members, prefer a

qualified candidate. Thus parties will always select qualified candidates if they are available. The
probability that each party can find a qualified candidate is σ.
Assuming that he does not implement favors, a citizen with ideology i enjoys a monetary payoﬀ
from having a leader of ideology i0 and qualifications q given by δq − β |i − i0 | where |i − i0 | is the
distance from i to i0 . The parameter δ measures the benefit of having a qualified candidate in
oﬃce, while β measures the cost of having a leader with a diﬀerent ideology. It is assumed that
leftists and rightists always prefer a candidate of their own ideology even if he is unqualified which
implies that δ is less than β. Candidates have the same payoﬀs as citizens except that the winning
candidate enjoys an ego-rent r. This measures how power-hungry candidates are.
Swing voters do not have perfect information about candidates, in the sense of not knowing
whether each party’s candidate is qualified. Such information could be acquired, but swing voters
are not politically engaged and choose to remain “rationally ignorant”. However, candidates can
convey information concerning their qualifications via advertising. For example, they can inform
voters about the prior elected oﬃces they have held.3 Swing voters cannot ignore such advertising
because it is bundled with radio or television programming.
Campaign advertising is governed by the following rules. First, candidates can only advertise
their own characteristics; i.e., whether they are qualified. This rules out negative advertising.
2 Broader interpretations of q are possible. It could measure any valence characteristic such as managerial
competence, policy creativity, charisma, image, or looks. The significance of valence characteristics for candidate
elections has been stressed by numerous authors. See Aragones and Palfrey (2000) and Groseclose (2001) for two
interesting recent contributions.
3 There is widespread evidence that higher campaign spending leads to greater candidate familiarity (see, for
example, Jacobson (1997)) and some evidence that it leads to greater familiarity with candidates’ policy positions
(see, for example, Coleman and Manna (2000) and Jamieson (2000)). I am not aware of any studies directly
investigating the relationship between campaign spending and voter knowledge of candidates’ records (i.e., elected
oﬃces previously held, past accomplishments, etc).

4

Second, candidates can only advertise the truth. The idea is that candidates have records which
reveal their qualifications and that candidates cannot lie about their records. These two assumptions imply that only qualified candidates can benefit from campaign advertising.4

The

advertising technology is such that if a candidate spends an amount C, his message reaches a
fraction λ(C) = C/(C + α) of the population, where α > 0.5
Candidates’ advertising is financed by campaign contributions from interest groups. There
are two such groups - a group of leftists that contributes to Party L’s candidates and a group
of rightists that contributes to Party R’s. Each group constitutes a fraction γ of the population.
Contributions are shared equally by group members and the interest groups behave so as to
maximize the expected payoﬀ of their representative members.
After he has been selected, each party’s candidate, if qualified, requests a contribution from
his interest group to get the word out to voters. The interest group agrees to a candidate’s request
if and only if it benefits it to do so. To obtain a larger contribution, a candidate may oﬀer to
implement policy favors. When a candidate provides a level of favors f each interest group member
enjoys a monetary benefit b(f ) at the expense of a uniform monetary cost of f to each citizen.
The function b is increasing, strictly concave, and satisfies b(0) = 0. In addition, it satisfies the
conditions that b0 (0) ≤ 1/γ and b0 (δ) > 1. The first condition implies that the aggregate benefits
of the favors γb(f ) are less than their aggregate cost f , while the second implies that interest
group members’ net benefit from favors b(f ) − f is increasing when f equals δ.
In terms of timing, it is assumed that candidates make their requests before they or their
4 This conclusion arises because there is only one possible diﬀerence between candidates and negative advertising
is not permitted. However, the general conclusion that candidates with characteristics swing voters value should
benefit more from advertising seems a natural implication of the informational perspective. Consistent with this,
Jacobson (1989) shows that qualified candidates - defined as those who had previously held elective oﬃce - had
higher levels of campaign spending and were more likely to win in U.S. House elections.
5 Again, this specific functional form for the advertising technology is not key to the results and just helps
produce a tractable probability of winning function.

5

interest group knows the type of their opponent.6

Needless to say, swing voters do not observe

the interaction between candidates and interest groups and hence do not observe the favors a
candidate has promised.
Parties choose the best candidate they can find. Qualified candidates approach their interest
group and decide what contribution to request and how many favors to oﬀer. Interest groups
decide whether or not to accept candidates’ oﬀers. Partisans (i.e., leftists and rightists) always
vote for the candidate put forward by the party representing their ideology. Swing voters, having
possibly observed one or both candidates’ advertisements update their beliefs about candidates’
qualifications and vote for the candidate who yields them the highest expected payoﬀ.7 All these
behaviors are described in greater detail in the sequel.
Throughout the analysis, we maintain the following additional assumptions on the parameter
values.
Assumption 1: (i) τ ≥ ε +

δ
2β

and (ii)

δ
2β

≤ ε.

The role of these will become apparent below.
6 This assumption is made to simplify the argument. If interest groups know the type of the opposing party’s
candidate, they will be willing to contribute more to a candidate running against an unqualified than a qualified
one. This is because the benefit to them of electing their own party’s candidate is higher in the former case. This
diﬀerence in contribution levels means that seeing an advertisement for a candidate provides information to voters
about the likely type of his opponent. After all, a voter is more likely to see an advertisement for a candidate when
he is running against an unqualified opponent. While it is perfectly to develop the argument taking this eﬀect into
account, it is an additional wrinkle that significantly complicates an already intricate analysis. Accordingly, the
eﬀect is assumed away here.
7 We are therefore assuming “sincere” or “naive” voting. It is by now well known that in an election with a
finite number of voters with private information, such behavior may not be fully rational. In particular, rational
voters may choose to ignore their own private information on account of the “swing voter’s curse” (Fedderson
and Pesendorfer (1996)). In our model, there are a continuum of voters and hence such considerations do not
arise. However, it would, of course, be possible to assume a finite number of swing voters and carefully model the
equilibrium of the voting game. I have not taken this approach for two main reasons. First, a key assumption
of the model is that there is aggregate uncertainty concerning the distribution of voter preferences. Specifically,
the location of the median swing voter is unknown. In environments with aggregate uncertainty, the forces that
lead voters to rationally ignore their private information are muted (Fedderson and Pesendorfer (1997)). Thus,
given significant aggregate uncertainty, sincere voting may be a reasonable approximation of equilibrium behavior.
Second, taking this approach would substantially complicate the development of the argument. In particular, the
relationship between election outcomes and campaign spending is likely to be too complex to permit clean analysis
of the contribution game.

6

2.2

Details

Behavior of swing voters: Working backwards, we begin with the behavior of swing voters.
Consider the position of a swing voter with ideology i at the time of voting. He may have seen
advertisements from both, one, or neither candidate. Let (IL , IR ) denote his information where
IK = 1 if he has seen an advertisement from Party K’s candidate and IK = ∅ if not. Let
ρK (IL , IR ) denote his belief that Party K’s candidate is qualified conditional on informational
state (IL , IR ). Since only qualified candidates advertise, both ρL (1, IR ) and ρR (IL , 1) must equal
1. The beliefs ρL (∅, IR ) and ρR (IL , ∅) will be derived as part of the equilibrium.
The swing voter will also have beliefs about the amount of favors that each party’s candidate, if
qualified, will provide to the interest group. In equilibrium, the amount of favors that voters think
that candidates will implement must equal the amount that they actually will. Accordingly, we
will not employ a separate notation to distinguish voters’ beliefs from the actual levels promised.
We let fK denote the amount of favors that Party K’s candidate, if qualified, will provide to the
interest group.
Using this notation, the voter’s expected payoﬀ from Party L’s candidate being elected when
he has information (IL , IR ) is ρL (IL , IR )(δ − fL ) − βi, while that from Party R’s candidate is
ρR (IL , IR )(δ − fR ) − β(1 − i). Letting i∗ (IL , IR ) be the ideology of the voter with information
(IL , IR ) who is just indiﬀerent between the two parties’ candidates, we have that
i∗ (IL , IR ) =

1 ρL (IL , IR )(δ − fL ) − ρR (IL , IR )(δ − fR )
+
.
2
2β

(1)

If i is less than i∗ (IL , IR ), the swing voter will vote for Party L’s candidate, while if i exceeds
i∗ (IL , IR ) he will vote for Party R’s. Thus, using standard terminology, i∗ (IL , IR ) is the cut-point
for swing voters with information (IL , IR ).
The assumption that swing voters’ ideologies are uniformly distributed on [µ − τ, µ + τ ] implies
that when the median swing voter has ideology µ and i∗ (IL , IR ) lies between µ − τ and µ + τ ,
7

the fraction of swing voters in informational state (IL , IR ) voting for Party L’s candidate is
1
2

+

i∗ (IL ,IR )−µ
.
2τ

Assumption 1(i) implies that i∗ (IL , IR ) lies between µ − τ and µ + τ for all

µ when the two parties’ candidates are expected to implement the same level of favors.
Election probabilities: With this understanding of voting behavior, the probability that each
party’s candidate will win can be computed. Suppose first that the two candidates are qualified
and that they receive contributions CL and CR . Then, when the median swing voter has ideology
µ, the fraction of swing voters voting for Party L’s candidate is
1 i∗ (1, 1) − µ
1 i∗ (1, ∅) − µ
( +
)λ(CL )λ(CR ) + ( +
)λ(CL )(1 − λ(CR ))
2
2τ
2
2τ
1 i∗ (∅, 1) − µ
1 i∗ (∅, ∅) − µ
+( +
)(1 − λ(CL ))λ(CR ) + ( +
)(1 − λ(CL ))(1 − λ(CR )). (2)
2
2τ
2
2τ
The first term is those who have seen both candidates’ advertisements; the second those who have
seen only the advertisement of Party L’s candidate; etc.
Party L’s candidate will win if he gets at least half the swing voters vote. From (2), this
requires that µ is less than µ∗ (CL , CR ) where
µ∗ (CL , CR ) = i∗ (1, 1)λ(CL )λ(CR ) + i∗ (1, ∅)λ(CL )(1 − λ(CR ))
+i∗ (∅, 1)(1 − λ(CL ))λ(CR ) + i∗ (∅, ∅)(1 − λ(CL ))(1 − λ(CR )). (3)
Since µ is uniformly distributed on [ 12 − ε, 12 + ε], the probability that Party L’s candidate wins is
0 if µ∗ (CL , CR ) <
π(CL , CR ) = {

µ∗ (CL ,CR )+ε−1/2
2ε

1
2

−ε

otherwise .

1 if µ∗ (CL , CR ) >

1
2

(4)

+ε

If only Party L’s candidate is qualified, he wins with probability π(CL , 0). Similarly, if only
Party R’s candidate is qualified, the probability that Party L’s candidate wins is π(0, CR ). If both
candidates are unqualified, then no contributions are given and Party L’s candidate wins with
probability π(0, 0).
8

Campaign contributions: We can now turn to the contributions received by qualified candidates. Each qualified candidate, not knowing his opponent’s type, must decide the level of favors
to oﬀer its interest group and how much to ask it for. Each interest group, must decide whether
to accept the request. If it does so, it hands over the contribution and the candidate, if elected,
will implement the agreed level of favors. If it does not, then it makes no contribution. Neither
candidates nor interest groups observe the type of the opposing party’s candidate at the time of
contributing.
Recalling that CK denotes the contribution a qualified candidate of Party K receives from his
interest group and fK the amount of favors he promises, interest group L’s expected payoﬀ from
accepting Party L’s candidate’s request is
σ[π(CL , CR )(β + b(fL ) − fL + fR ) + δ − fR ] + (1 − σ)[π(CL , 0)(β + δ + b(fL ) − fL )] − β −

CL
.
γ

(5)

If the interest group does not accept the request, it would make no contributions and obtain a
payoﬀ:
σ[π(0, CR )(β + fR ) + δ − fR ] + (1 − σ)[π(0, 0)(β + δ)] − β.

(6)

Thus, in order for the interest group to accept the request, (5) must exceed (6). Similar remarks
apply to interest group R.
When Party L’s candidate’s request is accepted, his expected payoﬀ is:
σ[π(CL , CR )(r + β + fR − fL ) + δ − fR ] + (1 − σ)π(CL , 0)(r + β + δ − fL ) − β. (7)
Party L’s candidate’s request (CL , fL ) maximizes his expected payoﬀ subject to the constraint
that the interest group will agree to it. Thus, (CL , fL ) maximizes (7) subject to the constraint
that (5) exceeds (6). Similarly, for Party R’s candidate.

9

2.3

Political equilibrium

A political equilibrium consists of (i) candidate requests ((CL , fL ), (CR , fR )); (ii) voter belief functions (ρL (IL , IR ), ρR (IL , IR )) describing swing voters’ beliefs concerning the likelihood that candidates are qualified; and (iii) cut-points for the swing voters (i∗ (IL , IR )) describing their voting
behavior as a function of the information they have received in the campaign. Candidate strategies
must be mutual best responses given voter behavior and the constraint of interest group acceptance. Voter beliefs must be consistent with candidates’ strategies and voter behavior must be
consistent with their beliefs.
The analysis will focus on political equilibria that are symmetric in the sense that candidates
make the same request to their interest groups (i.e., (CL , fL ) = (CR , fR ) = (C, f )). In such an
equilibrium, if C > 0, Bayes Rule implies that voters beliefs about unadvertised candidates must
satisfy:
ρL (∅, ∅) = ρR (∅, ∅) = ρL (∅, 1) = ρR (1, ∅) =

σ[1 − λ(C)]
. (8)
σ[1 − λ(C)] + (1 − σ)

Thus, the probability that voters assign to an unadvertised candidate being qualified is independent of both his party aﬃliation and the information they have recieved about his opponent. If
C = 0 then Bayes Rule implies that ρL (∅, ∅) and ρR (∅, ∅) must equal σ but has no implications for
ρL (∅, 1) and ρR (1, ∅). This is because the event of observing any candidate’s advertisement does
not arise along the equilibrium path when C = 0. Since it seems unreasonable to suppose anything
else, we focus only on symmetric equilibria that have the property that ρL (∅, 1) and ρR (1, ∅) are
σ when C = 0.8

This assumption implies that (8) holds even when C = 0. Voters’ beliefs may

therefore be summarized by a single variable ρ interpreted simply as the probability that voters
assign to an unadvertised candidate being qualified. This must satisfy (8) in equilibrium.
Turning to voter behavior, (1) and (8) imply that in a symmetric equilibrium, the cut-point
8 Henceforth, when we refer to a symmetric political equilibrium we will mean one where the beliefs satisfy this
property. Note also that equilibria in which C = 0 and ρL (∅, 1) and ρR (1, ∅) are not equal to σ are not sequential
equilibria (Kreps and Wilson (1982)).

10

for symmetrically informed swing voters is just

1
2

(i.e., i∗ (1, 1) = i∗ (∅, ∅) = 12 ). For asymmetrically

informed voters, the cut points are given by:
i∗ (1, ∅) = 1 − i∗ (∅, 1) =

1 (1 − ρ)(δ − f )
+
. (9)
2
2β

Voting behavior may therefore be described by the single variable ξ = i∗ (1, 0) − 12 . This variable
measures the size of the interval of swing voters who are induced to vote for a candidate by seeing
him advertise and nothing from his opponent. It therefore measures the eﬀectiveness of campaign
advertising in inducing swing voters to switch from their natural allegiances. In particular, when
ξ is zero, campaign advertising is completely ineﬀective.
Using this notation, equation (3) may be written
µ∗ (CL , CR ) =

1
+ ξ(λ(CL ) − λ(CR )). (10)
2

Since Assumption 1(ii) implies that µ∗ (CL , CR ) must always lie between

1
2

− ε and

1
2

+ ε, the

probability of winning function is given by:
π(CL , CR ) =

1
ξ
+ (λ(CL ) − λ(CR )). (11)
2 2ε

This simple and tractable form of the probability of winning function is a consequence of our
assumptions concerning the distribution of swing voters’ ideal points. The expression nicely illustrates how ξ determines the productivity of campaign spending. In the sequel, we recognize the
critical role of ξ by writing the probability of winning function as π(CL , CR ; ξ).
It follows from the above discussion that a symmetric political equilibrium may be completely
described by four variables (C, f, ξ, ρ); C is the contribution given by interest groups to qualified
candidates; f is the level of favors these candidates promise to interest groups to get their contributions; ξ is the eﬀectiveness of advertising; and ρ is the probability voters assign to unadvertised
candidates being qualified.

11

3

Equilibrium with Unrestricted Contributions

This section discusses the equilibrium that would arise with no restrictions on the amount interest
groups can contribute to candidates. It first provides a general characterization of equilibrium. It
then shows what happens in the limit as candidates become increasingly power-hungry.
As the first step towards characterizing equilibrium, we study the oﬀers that candidates will
make to their interest groups, taking as given the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising ξ. Let
U (CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) be the expected utility of Party L’s candidate if he is qualified and oﬀers his
interest group (CL , fL ) when his qualified opponent oﬀers his group (C, f ); that is,
U = σ[π(CL , C; ξ)(r + β + f − fL ) + δ − f ] + (1 − σ)π(CL , 0; ξ)(r + β + δ − fL ) − β.

(12)

Note that this is decreasing in fL and increasing in CL when advertising is eﬀective.
Now let G(CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) denote the gain (gross of the contribution) to the leftist interest
group from accepting the oﬀer of Party L’s candidate; that is,
1
G = σ(π(CL , C; ξ) − π(0, C; ξ))(β + f ) + (1 − σ)(π(CL , 0; ξ) − )(β + δ)
2
+(b(fL ) − fL )(σπ(CL , C; ξ) + (1 − σ)π(CL , 0; ξ)).

(13)

Provided that advertising is eﬀective, this gain is positive even when the interest group is promised
no favors. This reflects the interest group’s pure policy preference for a qualified candidate who
shares its ideology. The gain is increasing in favors as long as b0 exceeds 1 and increasing in the
size of the contribution when advertising is eﬀective.
Party L’s candidate will optimally demand a contribution from his interest group suﬃcient to
exhaust its gain from contributing. The level of favors will balance the gains of the interest group
to the candidate’s personal policy cost. In equilibrium, (C, f ) must solve the problem:

max

(CL ,fL )∈<2+

U (CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) s.t. G(CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) ≥
12

CL
.
γ

(14)

Figure 1 presents a diagrammatic analysis of problem (14). The family of convex curves represents the candidate’s indiﬀerence map. The candidate dislikes favors and likes contributions,
so that moving in a north-westerly direction increases the candidate’s utility. The convexity
of the indiﬀerence curves follows from the fact that the function U (., ., C, f ; ξ) is quasi-concave.
The concave curve is the set of (CL , fL ) pairs with the property that the interest group’s gain
G(CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) exactly equals the per-capita contribution

CL
γ .

The constraint set for problem

(14) is the set of pairs on or below this curve. As drawn, this is a convex set. This will necessarily
be the case when ξ is small and will typically be true more generally.9 In equilibrium, the optimal
choice for the candidate will be (CL , fL ) = (C, f ) as illustrated in Figure 1.
Turning to the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising, we know from (9) that, in equilibrium, ξ
is given by:
ξ=

(1 − ρ)(δ − f )
.
2β

(15)

Eﬀectiveness depends negatively on the level of favors and voters’ beliefs concerning the likelihood
that an unadvertised candidate is qualified. Using (8) and the functional form for λ, these beliefs
are given by:
ρ=

σα
. (16)
α + C(1 − σ)

Note that ρ is decreasing in C, reflecting the logic that when contributions are plentiful, not having
observed a candidate advertise increases the likelihood that he is unqualified.
We may conclude that (C, f, ξ, ρ) is an equilibrium if and only if (i) (C, f ) solves problem (14)
given ξ and (ii) ξ and ρ satisfy equations (15) and (16). We can substitute the expression for ρ
9 The constraint set will be convex if the extra contributions that can be extracted from a given increase in
favors decreases with the level of favors. There are two forces working in this direction. First, the marginal benefit
of favors is decreasing. Second, the marginal impact of contributions on the probability of winning is decreasing
in the level of contributions. Against this, we have that the marginal benefit of contributing is higher at a higher
level of favors. In the earlier version of this paper “Power-hungry Candidates, Policy Favors, and Pareto Improving
Campaign Contribution Limits” (available at http://people.cornell.edu/pages/sc163/cfrs11.pdf) I solve explicitly
for the curve describing the boundary of the constraint set and find the conditions under which it is concave.

13

from (16) into the expression for ξ in (15) to obtain
ξ=

(1 − σ)(α + C)(δ − f )
. (17)
2β(α + C(1 − σ))

An equilibrium can then be defined more compactly as a triple (C, f, ξ) such that (i) (C, f )
solves problem (14) given ξ and (ii) ξ satisfies equation (17). The associated equilibrium beliefs
may then be recovered from (16). Intuitively, equilibrium requires first that the oﬀers qualified
candidates make to interest groups must be optimal for them given the eﬀectiveness of campaign
advertising, and second that the eﬀectiveness of advertising must be consistent with the amount
of contributions qualified candidates receive and the favors they promise.
We impose an assumption that guarantees that equilibrium does involve candidates providing
favors. This is:
Assumption 2: ( γ(β+(1−σ)δ)
+ α)2 <
2

(1−σ)δαγ
{(b0 (0)
4βε

− 1)r + βb0 (0) + (1 − σ)δb0 (0)}.

Assumption 2 rules out the possibility illustrated in Figure 2, in which contributions are purely
position-induced. Eﬀectively, it guarantees that the candidate’s indiﬀerence curve is flatter than
the contribution curve at zero favors. It will necessarily be satisfied for suﬃciently high r and, for
given r, is more likely to be satisfied the larger the size of the interest groups and the greater is
the marginal value of favors to interest group members.
We now have:
Proposition 1: Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied. Then, in any equilibrium
(C, f, ξ), candidates oﬀer to implement favors for their interest groups to extract larger contributions. The contributions they receive allow them to defeat unqualified opponents with a probability
between

1
2

and 1 (i.e., π(C, 0; ξ) ∈ (1/2, 1)). The level of favors promised is less than the gain from

having a qualified candidate (i.e., f < δ).
Thus, with unrestricted contributions, qualified candidates will oﬀer favors to extract more contributions from their supporters. The campaign advertising these contributions finance gives them
14

an electoral advantage over their unqualified opponents. Campaign contributions therefore play
the social role of raising the likelihood of qualified leaders. However, the favors qualified candidates implement reduce the benefits to non-interest group members from electing them. Moreover,
any benefit of favors to interest group members is at least partially dissipated through their contributions. Indeed, it may well be the case that interest group members have a lower payoﬀ in
equilibrium than partisans who do not belong to interest groups.10
The problem with the unrestricted equilibrium is not so much that policy favors are made. This
is just a transfer, allbeit one which may involve some deadweight loss. Rather, the fundamental
problem is that favors make campaign advertising less eﬀective. This reduces the social benefit
of any given level of campaign spending, in the sense that qualified candidates are less likely to
defeat their unqualified opponents. Or, to put it another way, the cost of generating any given
electoral advantage for qualified candidates is raised by the presence of favors.
This diﬃculty with laissez-faire emerges most clearly when candidates are very power-hungry.
They are then desperate to obtain contributions and willing to promise large amounts of favors.
But the level of favors must be less than the benefits of being qualified if campaign advertising is to
be eﬀective. Equilibrium must therefore involve a low level of advertising eﬀectiveness to dampen
candidates’ propensity to oﬀer favors. Thus, as candidates become more and more power-hungry,
the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising becomes smaller and smaller. More precisely, we have
that:
Proposition 2: Suppose that Assumption 1 is satisfied and, for all r, let (C(r), f (r), ξ(r)) be the
equilibrium (or an equilibrium) that would arise with unrestricted contributions when ego-rents are
r. Then,
lim (C(r), f (r), ξ(r)) = (

r→∞

γ(b(δ) − δ)
, δ, 0).
2

10 In the proof of Proposition 4, it is shown that interest group members have a lower payoﬀ than partisans who
do not belong to interest groups if f (σ + π(1 − 2σ)) is less than (π − 1/2)(β + (1 − σ)δ) where π is the probability
that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one.

15

Proposition 2 implies that the equilibrium probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one tends to 1/2 as candidates become more power-hungry (i.e., limr→∞ π(C(r), 0; ξ(r)) =
1/2). However, the level of contributions remain positive, converging to the expected value to interest groups of the favors to be provided. Accordingly, while resources are expended on campaign
advertising, these resources do not make qualified candidates more likely to be elected. This dramatically illustrates how the social benefit of campaign spending is undercut by favors.

4

Campaign Finance Policy

We now consider the potential of campaign finance policy to improve citizens’ welfare. We study
policies that impose a limit l on the amount of money an interest group can contribute but provide
matching public financing at rate s. Thus, if a candidate raises an amount C from private sources,
he receives a matching grant of sC from public sources. Public funding is financed by a head tax
T levied on all citizens.
By analagous reasoning to that in Section 3, an equilibrium under policy (l, s) is a triple
(C, f, ξ) such that (C, f ) solves the problem

max

(CL ,fL )∈[0,l]×<+

U ((1 + s)CL , fL , (1 + s)C, f ; ξ) s.t. G((1 + s)CL , fL , (1 + s)C, f ; ξ) ≥

CL
, (18)
γ

and
ξ=

(1 − σ)(α + C(1 + s))(δ − f )
. (19)
2β(α + C(1 + s)(1 − σ))

If the equilibrium is (C, f, ξ), the head tax must satisfy T = 2σsC to meet the expected costs of
public financing. A policy (l, s) is a pure contribution limit policy if s = 0 and involves public
financing when s > 0. We first study the potential of pure contribution limits and then consider
the additional benefits that public financing can provide.

4.1

Contribution limits

We begin with the following preliminary observation.
16

Lemma 1: Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied and let (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) be an equilibrium
with unrestricted contributions. Then, if (C, f, ξ) is an equilibrium under the policy (l, 0) which
satisfies (i) π(C ∗ , 0; ξ ∗ ) ≈ π(C, 0; ξ) and (ii) f < f ∗ , (C, f, ξ) Pareto dominates (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ).
Thus if introducing a limit does not appreciably change the probability a qualified candidate
defeats an unqualified one and reduces the level of favors, it will create a Pareto improvement.
That these conditions imply that regular citizens are better oﬀ seems natural. That they imply
that interest group members are better oﬀ is less obvious. The key is to note that the equilibrium
payoﬀ of interest group members is decreasing in f . Intuitively, this is because interest group
members pay for their own favors up front with their contributions and must also share the
burden of favors granted to the other interest group.
Combining Lemma 1 with Proposition 2 enables us to establish:
Proposition 3: Suppose that Assumption 1 is satisfied and, for all r, let (C(r), f (r), ξ(r)) be the
equilibrium (or an equilibrium) that would arise with unrestricted contributions when ego-rents are
r. Then, if candidates are suﬃciently power-hungry (i.e., r is suﬃciently large), (C(r), f (r), ξ(r))
is Pareto dominated by the equilibrium that would emerge if contributions were simply banned (i.e.,
l were set equal to 0).
To understand this result, note that if contributions were banned then no favors would be promised
and the probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one is just 1/2. The result
now follows from the fact that, with unrestricted contributions, as candidates become more powerhungry, the probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one approaches 1/2 while
the level of favors remains strictly positive.
When candidates are only moderately power-hungry, banning contributions could lead to a significant reduction in the probability that qualified candidates win and hence the above argument
does not apply. However, limiting contributions need not necessarily reduce the probability that

17

qualified candidates win, in which case a similar logic would imply that limits could be Pareto
improving. The idea is that limiting contributions reduces favors and thereby raises the eﬀectiveness of advertising, so that even though there is less campaign spending, the probability that a
qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one is maintained.
Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to find simple suﬃcient conditions under which there exists a Pareto
improving contribution limit (other than that r be large enough).11

The diﬃculty reflects the

fact that not only must limiting contributions increase the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising
but, in addition, the increase in the eﬀectiveness of advertising must be suﬃcient to oﬀset the
reduction in the total amount of advertising following the limit. Even the former requirement
is a little tricky because (as is clear from (17)) the eﬀectiveness of advertising is determined not
only by the level of favors but also the level of spending. Intuitively, lower levels of spending
reduce advertising eﬀectiveness, because not seeing an advertisement is less likely to mean that a
candidate is unqualified.
The bottom line is that, while contribution limits can create Pareto improvements, they do
have some drawbacks. By reducing spending, they reduce the fraction of the population who
are exposed to advertising. In addition, they reduce the negative signal from being unadvertised
which works against the increase in advertising eﬀectiveness stemming from reduced favors. The
existence of these drawbacks means that an unambiguous case for limits can only be made when
candidates are very power-hungry.

4.2

Contribution limits and public financing

The drawback of contribution limits as a remedial policy, suggests the desirability of supplementing limits with public financing. Public funds could substitute for the reduction in private
11 A detailed analysis can be found in the earlier version of this paper “Power-hungry Candidates, Policy Favors, and Pareto Improving Campaign Contribution Limits” which is available at
http://people.cornell.edu/pages/sc163/cfrs11.pdf. This version also provides two numerical examples of the model
in which Pareto improving contribution limits exist even when candidates are only mildly power hungry (r = 2β).

18

contributions caused by limits. Since public funds are tax financed, as opposed to favor financed,
this infusion of money has no negative consequences for the eﬀectiveness of campaign spending.
Eﬀectively, clean money replaces tainted private money. This intuition is confirmed in our next
result which establishes the general possibility of Pareto improvements when public financing is
available.
Proposition 4: Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied and let (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) be an equilibrium with unrestricted contributions. Then, there exists a campaign finance policy (l, s) and an
equilibrium (C, f, ξ) under (l, s) such that (C, f, ξ) Pareto dominates (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ).
To prove this result, we consider the class of policies (l, s) satisfying two requirements. First,
interest groups are willing to contribute l to qualified candidates in exchange for no favors. Second,
when they do so, the probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one is exactly
the same as in the unrestricted equilibrium. Under any such policy, total campaign spending
is lower than in the unrestricted case because the lack of favors makes campaign spending more
eﬀective. This implies that aggregate utility is greater than in the unrestricted equilibrium because
the social benefits of candidate selection are obtained at a lower social cost. However, this does not
necessarily imply Pareto gains, because the way in which this spending is financed has changed.
Under a policy in this class, interest group members are worse oﬀ than partisans who do not
belong to interest groups because they bear a larger share of the costs of campaign advertising.
They both contribute l and pay the head tax necessary to finance public funding. As noted earlier,
in the unrestricted equilibrium, interest group members may be better or worse oﬀ than regular
citizens depending upon the level of favors .
When interest group members are worse oﬀ in the unrestricted equilibrium than non interest
group members, we can find a policy in our class that makes interest group members at least
as well oﬀ and makes regular citizens strictly better oﬀ. The key is to note that by successively

19

lowering l and raising s we can make the share of the spending borne by interest group members
become as close as we like to that borne by regular citizens. Thus, since interest group members
bear a greater share of more spending in the unrestricted equilibrium, it is possible to find a
subsidy level s that makes them as well oﬀ as in the status quo. At such a subsidy level, regular
citizens must be better oﬀ because aggregate utility is higher.
When interest group members are better oﬀ in the unrestricted equilibrium than non-interest
group members, it may not be possible to find a policy in our class that compensates them.
However, it turns out that in this case the level of favors in the unrestricted equilibrium must be
suﬃciently high that all citizens would be better oﬀ if contributions were simply banned.12 The
gains from reduced favors oﬀset the losses associated with a smaller probability that the elected
leader is qualified. Thus, it remains possible to find a Pareto improving policy.

5

Related Literature

The welfare economics of campaign finance regulation is attracting increasing attention from
political economists. The topic is not only of considerable policy significance but also poses a
number of intellectual challenges.13

First, it is necessary to take a stand on how and why

campaign spending impacts voter behavior and why contributors give to candidates - issues on
which the empirical literature oﬀers no clear guidance. Then, one faces the analytical challenge of
incorporating the behavior of campaign contributors with that of political parties and voters in a
framework tractable enough to permit welfare analysis.
The standard approach to the problem assumes that there are two types of voters: “informed”
and “uninformed”. Informed voters vote for parties/candidates based on their policy positions,
while uninformed voters can be swayed by campaign advertising. Funds for advertising are pro12 As noted in footnote 10, interest group members have a higher payoﬀ than partisans who do not belong to
interest groups if f (σ + π(1 − 2σ)) exceeds (π − 1/2)(β + (1 − σ)δ) where π is the probability that a qualified
candidate defeats an unqualified one.
13

See Morton and Cameron (1992) for an insightful review.

20

vided by interest groups and depend upon the positions taken by the parties or their candidates.
Parties then choose their candidates or positions taking into account their implications for contributions and, ultimately, votes.14

The assumption that campaign advertising influences “un-

informed” voters may suggest that it provides information. However, this is misleading since the
approach assumes that a party’s ability to attract the votes of uninformed voters is independent
of its or its opponent’s policy position.
The standard approach suggests that contributions lead political parties to distort their platforms away from those that would maximize aggregate utility (see, for example, Grossman and
Helpman (2001)). Parties bias their policy choices to attract money from interest groups and then
use this money to attract the votes of the uninformed. Eﬀectively, parties trade oﬀ the loss of
informed votes resulting from the policy bias with the gains in uninformed votes purchased with
the contributions. Banning contributions would prevent parties distorting their policy choices and
would therefore raise aggregate welfare.
Of course, this argument rests on the assumption that the “uninformed” voters do not have
rational expectations as has been forcefully argued by Wittman (2002). If they did, then they
would realize that a party who was advertising must have distorted its policy platform to obtain
the resources necessary to fund the advertising and a majority of them would switch their votes
to the unadvertised party. Accordingly, advertising would actually lose parties votes and hence
none would be undertaken in equilibrium! Banning contributions would be redundant.
More recent work has sought to provide a more satisfying foundation for policy advice by
analyzing the problem under the assumption that voters update their beliefs rationally. Work
of this form falls into two categories. First, there are those analyses that assume, as does this
paper, that campaign advertising is directly informative (Ashworth (2002), Coate (2003), and
14 See, for example, Baron (1994), Besley and Coate (2002), and Grossman and Helpman (1996), (2001). Baron
and Grossman and Helpman assume that parties just want to win and compete by choosing platforms. Besley and
Coate assume, as does this paper, that parties are policy-motivated and compete by selecting candidates.

21

Schultz (2001)). The idea is that candidates can use advertising to provide voters with hard
information about their policy positions, ideologies, or qualifications for oﬃce, thus permitting
more informed choices.15 Second, there are those who argue that campaign advertising may best
be understood as providing information indirectly (Potters, Sloof, and Van Winden (1997), Prat
(2002a) and (2002b)). The idea is that candidates have qualities that interest groups can observe
more precisely than voters and the amount of campaign money a candidate collects signals these
qualities to voters.
The policy conclusions emerging from the analysis of models with directly informative advertising depend critically on whether contributions are position or service induced.16 Coate (2003)
assumes that policy motivated parties compete by selecting candidates whose ideologies lie in a
one dimensional space. Voters know a candidate’s party aﬃliation but are not sure how extreme
or moderate he is.17

Advertising allows candidates to provide voters with information and it

is financed by interest groups who give solely to advance the electoral prospects of like-minded
candidates. The main result is that contribution limits, in addition to reducing campaign spending, raise the likelihood that parties select extremist candidates. This means that contribution
limits redistribute welfare from moderate voters to interest group members.18

The former lose

15 Austen-Smith (1987) introduces directly informative advertising without the assumption of rational expectations. In his model, voters are assumed to have noisy perceptions of candidates’ policy positions and campaign
advertising sharpens these perceptions. Precisely how campaign advertising works is not explained, but an informational story is suggested. Bailey (2002) develops an argument in support of campaign contributions under
Austen-Smith’s assumption. In Bailey’s model, an incumbent and challenger sequentially choose positions in a
multi-dimensional policy space. Campaign advertising can be selectively targeted to groups with diﬀerent policy
preferences and regular voters are assumed to be less informed about candidates’ policies than special interest
groups. This means that, without contributions, equilibrium policy choices will be biased away from average voters
to those groups who are more informed because the latter are more responsive to policy promises. Bailey argues that
contributions can discipline such behavior. A candidate whose opponent is biasing policy towards more informed
voting blocs can use contributions to inform the uninformed of such behavior.
16 There is considerable debate about this question in the United States. See Groseclose, Milyo, and Primo
(2000) for an interesting discussion.
17

In contrast to this paper, this uncertainty arises endogenously from randomization in parties’ selection strate-

gies.
18 A similar conclusion would emerge from the model of this paper under the assumption that candidates cannot
provide policy favors for their contributors. A contribution limit would reduce the probability that qualified
candidates are elected, making all regular citizens worse oﬀ. The only possible beneficiaries would be interest group
members who spend less of their resources on campaign contributions.

22

out because elected leaders are less likely to be moderate. The latter gain because they spend less
of their resources on campaign spending.
Policy conclusions more consonant with those of this paper emerge from the independent work
of Ashworth (2002). He assumes that voters face (exogenous) uncertainty concerning candidates’
ideologies and that advertising allows candidates to provide information to voters. Advertising is
financed by interest groups who have no interest in the ideology of the winning candidate, but
do care about favors. As in this paper, candidates oﬀer favors to extract contributions from their
interest groups. In contrast to this paper, advertising expenditures are a discrete choice and (in
the language of this paper) candidates are infinitely power-hungry.19 Ashworth shows that voters
would be strictly better oﬀ under a public financing system that funds the same set of candidates
as in the laissez-faire.20

This is because, as in this paper, favors undermine the productivity of

campaign spending and so the same selection benefits can be obtained at a lower cost through
taxation.21
When advertising is indirectly informative, banning contributions may improve aggregate voter
welfare as argued by Prat (2002a) and (2002b). Prat (2002a) considers a world in which two
oﬃce-seeking candidates, who may diﬀer in competence, compete by staking out positions in a
one dimensional policy space. A single interest group with non-median policy preferences oﬀers
contributions to candidates in exchange for them moving their platforms towards its preferred
policy position. Candidates the interest group believes to be more competent are oﬀered larger
19 Ashworth assumes that there is a single decisive voter and that there is a fixed cost of reaching him. In
equilibrium, the level of favors provided by a candidate to his interest group equals this cost divided by the
probability the candidate wins. The fixed cost assumption means that advertising is still eﬀective in equilibrium
despite candidates being infinitely power hungry. Once a candidate has raised enough to cover the fixed cost, there
is no gain from promising additional favors.
20 While Ashworth is not specific about the mechanism that would deliver this result, it seems likely that a
public matching grant would work. However, because interest groups have no ideological preferences, it would not
be possible to totally eliminate favors using this policy.
21 While Ashworth’s analysis identifies the same basic ineﬃciency as does this paper, there are numerous diﬀerences in the modelling approaches. More substantively, while this paper focuses on the welfare economic analysis
of alternative campaign finance policies, Ashworth focuses more on the implications of candidate asymmetries for
equilibrium advertising expenditures. In particular, he shows that when one candidate (say, the incumbent) has a
significantly better reputation than the other, neither candidate will have an incentive to advertise.

23

contributions because they are more likely to win. This is because voters observe a noisy signal of
competence and hence, ceteris paribus, are more likely to vote for the more competent candidate.
In equilibrium, therefore, the more a candidate advertises, the higher is his competence. Campaign
contributions are good for voters in the sense that they provide information about competence,
but bad in that they lead candidates to distort policy away from the median voter’s ideal. Banning
contributions can raise voters’ aggregate welfare when the losses in terms of information about
competence are smaller than the costs of policy distortion.22 This is diﬀerent from our argument
which stresses that there need be no such trade oﬀ - banning contributions need not significantly
impact the probability that competent candidates are elected.
Prat (2002b) considers a multi-dimensional policy space and multiple interest groups, but
assumes these groups only contribute to the incumbent. Incumbent politicians again diﬀer in
competence and choose policy positions to maximize their likelihood of winning. With some
probability, voters will be perfectly informed of the incumbent’s competence and policy position;
otherwise they only observe the incumbent’s campaign spending.23

This makes a competent

incumbent more willing to trade policy for contributions and induces a separating equilibrium
wherein only competent incumbents receive campaign contributions. From the viewpoint of this
paper, the interesting thing is that when voters only observe the incumbent’s campaign spending
they must infer the degree to which the incumbent has biased policy in order to get his contributions. The magnitude of this policy bias then determines the eﬀectiveness of campaign spending.
When the probability that voters are uninformed is large, the magnitude of the bias is almost
suﬃcient to dissipate the benefits of competence and campaign spending is close to ineﬀective.
In these circumstances, banning contributions improves median voter welfare because it has little
22 While Prat does not consider the distributional consequences of banning contributions, it seems likely that
in his model banning is either Pareto ineﬃcient or redistributes from citizens on the side of the interest group to
those on the other side of the political spectrum.
23

This diﬀers from Prat (2002a) who assumes that voters always observe candidates’ policy positions.

24

impact on the probability that competent candidates are elected, while removing policy bias. This
result has a very similar flavor to our Proposition 2.
While banning contributions might be desirable under the signalling view of campaign spending, its general implications for campaign finance policy are very diﬀerent from those of this paper.
In a signalling model, oﬀering candidates public financing would be a bad idea because it would
just induce a pooling equilibrium and eliminate the sorting benefits of campaign spending. Limits
would also seem likely to induce a pooling equilibrium and hence would be undesirable. Thus, it
appears diﬃcult to rationalize common arguments for campaign finance reform with the signalling
view of campaign spending.
The general lesson emerging from the literature (this paper included) is that the desirability
of campaign finance regulation very much depends on what one assumes about the rationality of
voters, the motives of interest groups, the objectives of candidates, the function of advertising, etc.
While this is somewhat unsatisfying, the literature will hopefully yield a clearer understanding
of exactly what the critical assumptions are as it matures. This will help sharpen the focus of
the debate by identifying the key empirical questions that must be resolved before the nature
of optimal regulation can be discerned. The literature may also suggest implications of diﬀerent
assumptions that can be taken to the data. One implication of the assumptions of service-induced
contributions and rational voters suggested by this paper is that contribution limits might raise
the eﬀectiveness of campaign advertising.24 This idea has been investigated by Stratmann (2002)
who exploits variation in campaign finance laws across the U.S. states, to test whether campaign
expenditures are more productive in states that limit contributions. Interestingly, he finds that
the answer is yes.
24 A significant strand of the empirical campiagn finance literature is devoted to assessing the eﬀectiveness of
campaign advertising in delivering votes (see, for example, Abramowitz (1988), Green and Krasno (1988), Jacobson
(1980), (1985), Levitt (1994), and Palfrey and Erikson (2000)). The theoretical literature to which this paper
contributes provides insights into the determinants of this eﬀectiveness.

25

6

Conclusion

When candidates use campaign contributions to finance advertising that conveys truthful information to voters about their qualifications for oﬃce, contributions have the potential social benefit
of helping elect more qualified leaders. But for contributions to have this benefit, voters who are
informed that a candidate is qualified through campaign advertising must be induced to switch
their votes from unadvertised candidates. The larger the fraction of informed voters who switch
their votes, the greater the productivity of any given level of campaign spending. However, when
contributions are unrestricted and candidates are power-hungry, voters will rationally be cynical
about qualified candidates, anticipating that they will implement favors for their contributors
when elected. This cynicism will reduce the likelihood of voters switching their votes, undermining the productivity of campaign spending. In the limit, when candidates are very power-hungry,
campaign spending will be completely unproductive generating no electoral advantage for qualified
candidates.
This ineﬃciency gives campaign finance policy the potential to improve citizens’ welfare. When
candidates are very power-hungry, simply banning contributions will generate a Pareto improvement. Banning will not significantly reduce the likelihood that leaders are qualified, but will
eliminate favors. This benefits even interest groups because their expected gains from favors are
dissipated by the contributions they make to get them. When candidates are less power-hungry,
banning contributions may be undesirable because campaign spending will be productive. However, limiting contributions can be Pareto improving. Limits can reduce the level of favors qualified
candidates provide, without reducing the probability that qualified candidates are elected. The
latter is possible because the reduction in favors created by limits can generate an increase in
the productivity of spending which compensates for the reduction in the level of spending. Even
when limiting contributions fails, a campaign finance policy that combines limits and publicly

26

financed matching grants can always create a Pareto improvement. Limits reduce favors and raise
the productivity of campaign spending, while public financing oﬀsets the reduction in private
contributions caused by limits.
While the underlying logic seems quite general, the argument has been formally developed in
an undeniably simple model. It would be well worth investigating its robustness to alternative
or more general specifications. One obvious assumption to change is that the candidates present
interest groups with “take it or leave it” oﬀers that allow them to extract all their surplus. One
could alternatively follow Grossman and Helpman (1994) in assuming the opposite; i.e., that
interest groups make “take it or leave it” oﬀers. It seems likely that the conclusion that even
interest group members can benefit from campaign finance policy might need modification. That
said, even when interest group members obtain some surplus from the favors they are given, they
must still bear their share of the collective cost of granting other groups favors.
It would also be interesting to allow for a richer set of candidate types. For example, one could
introduce multiple levels of qualifications. Presumably, equilibrium would involve only candidates
with qualifications above some critical level advertising. This critical level would depend on the
cost of advertising. For a result like Proposition 2 to hold, it would have to be the case that, in
equilibrium, more qualified candidates promised more favors. Alternatively, one could assume that
candidates diﬀered in their willingness to take favors - some were less power-hungry than others.
Under the latter assumption, the number of times a voter had seen a candidate’s advertisement
might have some significance. There might be a penalty for advertising too heavily, because voters
would take it as a signal of a candidate being more power-hungry and hence having promised
more favors. This might limit the incentive of power-hungry candidates to oﬀer favors even when
contributions are unrestricted.25

This extension becomes all the more interesting if parties can

25 The idea is that a qualified candidate’s spending would generate a probability distribution over the number
of messages voters had received. A certain fraction would have seen no messages, some fraction just one, etc.
More spending would shift the probability distribution to the right. If less power-hungry spending candidates are

27

observe how power-hungry potential candidates are and can decide what type of candidates to
run.

expected to raise less money, voters who observed a higher number of messages would believe that a candidate
was more likely to be power-hungry. This may dampen the eﬀectiveness of large scale advertising campaigns and
thereby reduce the incentives of power-hungry candidates to raise money.

28

References
Abramowitz, Alan, [1988], “Explaining Senate Election Outcomes,” American Political Science Review, 82, 385-403.
Aragones, Enriqueta and Thomas Palfrey, [2000], “Mixed Equilibrium in a Downsian Model
with a Favored Candidate,” mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (forthcoming Journal of
Economic Theory).
Ashworth, Scott, [2002], “Campaign Finance and Voter Welfare with Entrenched Incumbents,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Austen-Smith, David, [1987], “Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions and Probabilistic
Voting,” Public Choice, 54, 123-139.
Bailey, Michael, [2002], “Money and Representation: An Exploration in Multiple Dimensions
with Informative Campaigns,” mimeo, Georgetown University.
Baron, David, [1994], “Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed Voters,” American Political Science Review, 88, 33-47.
Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate, [2002], “Issue Unbundling via Citizens’ Initiatives,”
mimeo, Cornell University.
Coate, Stephen, [2003], “Political Competition with Campaign Contributions and Informative Advertising,” mimeo, Cornell University.
Coleman, John and Paul Manna, [2000], “Congressional Campaign Spending and the Quality
of Democracy,” Journal of Politics, 62(3), 757-789.
Fedderson, Timothy and Wolfgang Pesendorfer, [1996], “The Swing Voter’s Curse,” American Economic Review, 86, 408-424.
Fedderson, Timothy and Wolfgang Pesendorfer, [1997], “Voting Behavior and Information
Aggregation in Elections with Private Information,” Econometrica, 65, 1029-1058.
Green, Donald and Jonathan Krasno, [1988], “Salvation for the Spendthrift Incumbent:
Re-estimating the Eﬀects of Campaign Spending in House Elections,” American Journal of
Political Science, 32, 884-907.
Groseclose, Timothy, [2001], “Character, Charisma, and Candidate Locations: Downsian
Models when One Candidate Has a Valence Advantage,” American Journal of Political
Science,
Groseclose, Timothy, Jeﬀrey Milyo and David Primo, [2000], “Corporate PAC Campaign
Contributions in Persepective,” Business and Politics, 2(1), 75-88.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, [1994], “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
Review, 84, 833-850.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, [1996], “Electoral Competition and Special Interest
Politics,” Review of Economic Studies, 63(2), 265-286.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, [2001], Special Interest Politics, Cambridge, MIT
Press.
29

Jacobson, Gary, [1980], Money in Congressional Elections, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Jacobson, Gary, [1985], “Money and Votes Reconsidered: Congressional Elections 19721982,” Public Choice, 47, 7-62.
Jacobson, Gary, [1989], “Strategic Politicians and the Dynamics of House Elections, 194686,” American Political Science Review, 83, 773-793.
Jacobson, Gary, [1997], The Politics of Congressional Elections, 4th Edition, New York:
Longman.
Jamieson, Kathleen Hall, [2000], Everything You Think You Know About Politics ... And
Why You’re Wrong, New York: Basic Books.
Kreps, David and Robert Wilson, [1982], “Sequential Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 50, 863894.
Levitt, Steven, [1994], “Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the Eﬀects of Campaign
Spending on Election Outcomes in the U.S. House,” Journal of Political Economy, 102,
777-798.
Morton, Rebecca and Charles Cameron, [1992], “Elections and the Theory of Campaign
Contributions: A Survey and Critical Analysis,” Economics and Politics, 4, 79-108.
Palfrey, Thomas and Robert Erikson, [2000], “Equilibrium in Campaign Spending Games:
Theory and Data,” American Political Science Review, 94, 595-609.
Potters, Jan, Randolph Sloof and Frans van Winden, [1997], “Campaign Expenditures,
Contributions, and Direct Endorsements: The Strategic Use of Information and Money to
Influence Voter Behavior,” European Journal of Political Economy, 13, 1-31.
Prat, Andrea, [2002a], “Campaign Advertising and Voter Welfare,” Review of Economic
Studies, 69(4), 999-1018.
Prat, Andrea, [2002b], “Campaign Spending with Oﬃce-Seeking Politicians, Rational Voters,
and Multiple Lobbies,” Journal of Economic Theory, 103(1), 162-189.
Schultz, Christian, [2001], “Strategic Campaigns and Special Interest Politics,” mimeo, University of Copenhagen.
Stratmann, Thomas, [2002], “Tainted Money? Contribution Limits and the Eﬀectiveness of
Campaign Spending,” mimeo, George Mason University.
Wittman, Donald, [2002], “Rational Voters and Political Advertising,” mimeo, University
of California at Santa Cruz.

30

7

Appendix

The proofs will make use of the following Fact, whose (mechanical) proof is omitted. Define the
function:
Ψ(CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) =

−∂U/∂fL
−
∂U/∂CL

1
γ

∂G/∂fL
.
− ∂G/∂CL

(A.1)

This is simply the diﬀerence between the candidate’s and interest group’s marginal rate of substitution between contributions and favors. Then we have:
Fact: Suppose that f ≤ δ and that G(C, f, C, f ; ξ) ≤ Cγ . Then, Ψ(C, f, C, f ; ξ) ≥ 0 if and only if
r
ξαγ 0
C≥
{(b (f ) − 1)r + βb0 (f ) + b(f ) + (1 − σ)(δ − f )b0 (f )} − α.
2ε

Proof of Proposition 1: Let (C, f, ξ) be an equilibrium. By definition, we know that (C, f )
must solve the problem
max

(CL ,fL )∈<2+

U (CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) s.t. G(CL , fL , C, f ; ξ) ≥

CL
γ

and that (C, f, ξ) satisfies (17). To prove the proposition, we need to establish that f lies in the
interval (0, δ). It will then follow that C > 0 and that π(C, 0; ξ) ∈ (1/2, 1).
Observe first that it must be the case that ξ > 0. If not, then ξ = 0 which implies that
(C, f ) = (0, 0) and hence, from (17), that 0 =

(1−σ)δ
2β

- a contradiction. It follows that

G(C, f, C, f, ξ) = C/γ.

(A.2)

If not, then the candidate could ask for a slightly larger contribution and make himself better oﬀ.
Since ξ > 0, we know from (17) that f < δ. Thus, it remains to show that f > 0. Since
U (·, C, f ; ξ) and G(·, C, f ; ξ) are diﬀerentiable at (C, f ), there exists η ≥ 0 such that
∂U
1
∂G
− η( −
) ≤ 0 (= if C > 0) (A.3)
∂CL
γ
∂CL
∂U
∂G
and
+η
≤ 0 (= if f > 0) (A.4)
∂fL
∂fL
31

Suppose that f were to equal 0. Then, equation (A.4) implies that η ≤
∂G
that η( γ1 − ∂C
)≥
L

∂U
∂CL .

Since ξ > 0,

∂U
∂CL

> 0 and hence

1
γ

−∂U/∂fL
∂G/∂fL

and (A.3) implies

∂G
− ∂C
> 0. Thus, these two inequalities
L

imply that
∂U/∂CL
−∂U/∂fL
≥ 1
∂G
∂G/∂fL
γ − ∂CL
or, equivalently given (A.1), Ψ(C, 0, C, 0; ξ) ≥ 0.
By the Fact, this means that
C≥

r

ξαγ 0
{(b (0) − 1)r + βb0 (0) + (1 − σ)δb0 (0)} − α.
2ε

We know from (A.2) that
C
γ

= G(C, 0, C, 0; ξ)
1
1
= (π(C, 0; ξ) − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) < (β + (1 − σ)δ),
2
2

so that C < γ2 (β + (1 − σ)δ). In addition, since f = 0, it follows from (17) that ξ ≥

(1−σ)δ
2β .

Thus,

it must be the case that
γ
(β + (1 − σ)δ) >
2

s

(1 − σ)δαγ 0
{(b (0) − 1)r + βb0 (0) + (1 − σ)δb0 (0)} − α,
4βε

This is inconsistent with Assumption 2, and hence f must be greater than 0.
Note here for future reference that (C, f, ξ) must satisfy the equation
Ψ(C, f, C, f ; ξ) = 0.

(A.5)

To see this, note that since f > 0, equation (A.4) implies that η =

−∂U/∂fL
∂G/∂fL .

Moreover, it

follows from (A.2) that f > 0 implies that C > 0. This means that equation (A.3) implies that
η=

∂U/∂CL
1
∂G .
γ − ∂C

Thus

L

−∂U/∂fL
∂U/∂CL
= 1
,
∂G
∂G/∂fL
γ − ∂CL

32

which implies (A.5).

It follows that (C, f, ξ) satisfies (A.2), (A.5) and (17). This provides

three equations in the three unknowns and enables the computation of equilibrium by numerical methods.26 QED
Proof of Proposition 2: We prove the result via a sequence of three claims.
Claim 1: Let (C, f, ξ) be an equilibrium, then C < C where
C=

γ
σ
(β + δ) + γ(b(δ) − δ)(1 − )
2
2

Proof: As shown in the proof of Proposition 1 it must be the case that ξ > 0 and that (C, f, ξ)
satisfies equation (A.2). Since ξ > 0, we know that f < δ. It follows that b(f ) − f < b(δ) − δ,
because (by assumption) b0 (δ) > 1 and b is concave. Using this and (A.2), we have that
C
γ

= G(C, f, C, f ; ξ)
1
= (π(C, 0; ξ) − )(β + σf + (1 − σ)δ)
2
σ
+(b(f ) − f )( + (1 − σ)π(C, 0; ξ))
2
1
σ
≤
(β + δ) + (b(δ) − δ)(1 − ).
2
2

Multiplying through by γ yields the result.
Claim 2: limr→∞ ξ(r) = 0.
Proof: We need to show that for all τ > 0, there exists rτ such that if r ≥ rτ it is the case
that ξ(r) ≤ τ . Let τ be given. Let rτ be any value of r satisfying both Assumption 2 and the
inequality
26 If (C, f, ξ) satisfies these three equations then it will be an equilibrium provided that equations (A.2) and (A.5)
are suﬃcient to imply that (C, f ) solves problem (14). Provided that the constraint set in Figure 1 is convex, they
will be suﬃcient. As noted above, the constraint set will necessarily be convex when ξ is small and will typically
be convex more generally. Thus, if (C, f, ξ) satisfies the three equations it will typically be an equilibrium. The
issue of the existence of equilibrium therefore boils down to the existence of a triple (C, f, ξ) satisfying the three
equations. Suﬃcient conditions for the existence of such a solution are developed in the earlier version of the
paper “Power-hungry Candidates, Policy Favors, and Pareto Improving Campaign Contribution Limits” which is
available at http://people.cornell.edu/pages/sc163/cfrs11.pdf.

33

C<

r

τ αγ 0
{(b (δ) − 1)rτ + βb0 (δ)} − α.
2ε

Clearly, such an rτ exists. Now let r ≥ rτ . As shown in the proof of Proposition 1, we know that
Ψ(C(r), f (r), C(r), f (r); ξ(r)) = 0,
which, by the Fact, implies that
C(r) ≥

r

ξ(r)αγ 0
{(b (f (r)) − 1)r + βb0 (f (r)) + b(f (r)) + (1 − σ)(δ − f (r))b0 (f (r))} − α.
2ε

Suppose that ξ(r) > τ . Then because b00 < 0,

r

ξ(r)αγ 0
{(b (f (r)) − 1)r + βb0 (f (r)) + b(f (r)) + (1 − σ)(δ − f (r))b0 (f (r))} − α
2ε
r
τ αγ 0
>
{(b (δ) − 1)r + βb0 (δ)} − α > C.
2ε

C(r) ≥

By Claim 1, this is a contradiction and hence it must be the case that ξ(r) ≤ τ .
b the pair of equations (17) and (A.2)
Claim 3: There exists ξb > 0 such that for all ξ ∈ (0, ξ)

have a unique solution (C ∗ (ξ), f ∗ (ξ)) in the domain <+ ×[0, δ]. Moreover, the functions C ∗ (·) and
b and
f ∗ (·) are continuous on (0, ξ)

lim (C ∗ (ξ), f ∗ (ξ)) = (

ξ&0

γ(b(δ) − δ)
, δ)
2

Proof: This claim may be established graphically by computing the loci of (C, f ) combinations
satisfying equations (17) and (A.2) for given ξ. Consider first equation (17). Let Co (f ; ξ) be
the level of contributions that qualified candidates must receive to generate an eﬀectiveness of
advertising ξ when qualified candidates provide an amount of favors f . When it is defined, Co
satisfies
ξ=

(1 − σ)(α + Co )(δ − f )
.
2β(α + Co (1 − σ))
34

Solving this for Co , we obtain
Co (f ; ξ) =

α[2βξ − (1 − σ)(δ − f )]
(1 − σ)[δ − f − 2βξ]

Thus, for given ξ, Co (f ; ξ) is well-defined for f values between max{0, δ −

2βξ
1−σ },

and δ − 2βξ. On

this interval, Co (·; ξ) is increasing at an increasing rate, approaching infinity as the level of favors
approaches the upper limit of the interval.
Now consider equation (A.2). Let Ci (f ; ξ) be the level of contributions that would make
interest groups indiﬀerent between accepting candidates’ oﬀers when the level of favors promised
is f and the eﬀectiveness of advertising is ξ. Formally, Ci is implicitly defined by the equality:
G(Ci , f, Ci , f ; ξ) =

Ci
.
γ

Note that there may be two non-negative solutions to this equation when f = 0. One solution is
always C = 0, since the gain from giving no contributions in exchange for no favors is obviously
zero. But there will be a positive solution if ∂G(0, 0, 0, 0; ξ)/∂C > 1/γ. We will let Ci (0; ξ) be the
positive solution when it exists.
It is possible to explicitly solve for Ci (f ; ξ). We have that
Ci (f ; ξ) =

a(f, ξ) +

p
a(f, ξ)2 + 16e(f, ξ)
,
8

where:
ξ
ξ
a(f, ξ) = 2γ{ (β + σf + (1 − σ)δ) + (1 + (1 − σ))(b(f ) − f )} − 4α,
ε
ε
and
e(f, ξ) = 2γα(b(f ) − f ).
Note that Ci is increasing in f and bounded above on [0, δ]. Since
Ci (f ; 0) =

γ(b(f ) − f )
,
2

it follows that Ci (·; ξ) is strictly concave on [0, δ] for suﬃciently small ξ.
35

Given ξ, (C, f ) ∈ <+ × [0, δ] is a solution of the pair of equations (17) and (A.2) if and only
if f ∈ [max{0, δ −

2βξ
1−σ }, δ

− 2βξ), C = Co (f, 0) and Ci (f, ξ) = Co (f, ξ). We know that Co (f, ξ)

must become larger than Ci (f, ξ) as f approaches δ − 2βξ. Thus, by continuity, there exists a
2βξ
solution if Co (f, ξ) is smaller than Ci (f, ξ) at f = max{0, δ − 1−σ
}. Moreover, if Ci (·, ξ) is strictly

concave, then this solution must be unique.
2βξ
For ξ suﬃciently small, Co (f, ξ) is indeed smaller than Ci (f, ξ) at f = max{0, δ − 1−σ
}. To see
2βξ
2βξ
2βξ
this, note that for ξ suﬃciently small, we have that max{0, δ − 1−σ
} = δ − 1−σ
and Ci (δ − 1−σ
; ξ)

is positive, while Co (δ −

2βξ
1−σ ; ξ)

= 0. Moreover, as noted above, for ξ suﬃciently small, Ci (·; ξ)

is strictly concave on [0, δ]. It follows that for suﬃciently small ξ the pair of equations (17) and
(A.2) have a unique solution (C ∗ (ξ), f ∗ (ξ)) in the domain <+ ×[0, δ]. The situation is illustrated
in Figure 3. That these solutions are continuous in ξ follows from the Implicit Function Theorem.
Further, we know that δ −

2βξ
1−σ

< f ∗ (ξ) < δ − 2βξ, so that limξ&0 f ∗ (ξ) = δ. Finally, since

C ∗ (ξ) = Ci (f ∗ (ξ); ξ),
lim C ∗ (ξ) = Ci (lim f ∗ (ξ), lim ξ)

ξ&0

ξ&0

=

ξ&0

γ(b(δ) − δ)
.
2

As established in the proof of Proposition 1, we know that (C(r), f (r), ξ(r)) satisfies (17) and
(A.2). It follows from Claims 2 and 3 that limr→∞ C(r) = limξ&0 C ∗ (ξ) and limr→∞ f (r) =
limξ&0 f ∗ (ξ). From the proof of Claim 3 we know that
lim C ∗ (ξ) =

ξ&0

γ(b(δ) − δ)
2

and that
lim f ∗ (ξ) = δ.

ξ&0

The result now follows. QED
36

Proof of Lemma 1: We begin by calculating the payoﬀs of the various types of citizens in the
unrestricted equilibrium. Given symmetry, we can divide the population into just three types:
partisans (i.e., leftists and rightists), interest group members, and swing-voters. We deal with
each in turn.
Consider a representative partisan. Given symmetry, the elected candidate is equally likely to
be from either party. The expected payoﬀ of the partisan is therefore δ − f ∗ − β/2 if the elected
candidate is qualified and −β/2 if not. Recall that both parties select a qualified candidate with
probability σ 2 while only one party selects a qualified candidate with probability 2σ(1 − σ). In
the latter case, the qualified candidate wins with probability π∗ = π(C ∗ , 0; ξ ∗ ) and hence the
probability that a qualified candidate is elected is σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ . The expected payoﬀ of the
partisan is therefore
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ](δ − f ∗ ) −

β
.
2

(A.6)

Interest group members provide campaign contributions to qualified candidates and also get
policy favors enacted when their candidate wins. The expected payoﬀ of a representative interest
group member is therefore
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ](δ − f ∗ +

b(f ∗ )
β
σC ∗
)− −
. (A.7)
2
2
γ

The fact that b(f ∗ ) is divided by two reflects the fact that the interest group only gets its favors
implemented if the qualified candidate it is backing is elected.
For swing voters, matters are more complicated because of the uncertainty concerning their
ideologies. We treat swing voters as ex ante identical so that, for a given draw of µ, each is equally
likely to have any ideology on [µ − τ, µ + τ ]. Under this assumption, the payoﬀ of each swing
voter is just the payoﬀ of the average swing voter. When computing this payoﬀ, account must
be taken of the correlation between which party’s candidate wins and the location of the average
swing voter.
37

Suppose first that both parties select unqualified candidates. Party L’s candidate will win if
the ideology of the median swing voter is less than µ∗ (0, 0) = 1/2. Thus, if µ is less than 1/2
then the average swing voter’s payoﬀ is −βµ. If µ exceeds 1/2 then Party R’s candidate wins and
the average swing voter’s payoﬀ is −β(1 − µ). Taking expectations over the realization of µ, the
average swing voter’s expected payoﬀ is
−

Z

1
2

βµ
1
2 −ε

dµ
−
2ε

Z

1
2 +ε

β(1 − µ)

1
2

dµ
1−ε
= −β(
).
2ε
2

The key point is that states in which the average swing-voter is left-leaning are states in which
Party L’s candidate will win.
Suppose now that both parties select qualified candidates. Party L’s candidate will win if
the ideology of the median swing voter is less than µ∗ (C ∗ , C ∗ ) = 1/2. If µ is less than 1/2 then
the majority of swing voters vote for Party L’s candidate and the average swing voter’s payoﬀ is
δ − f ∗ − βµ. If µ exceeds 1/2 then Party R’s candidate wins and the average swing voter’s payoﬀ
is δ − f ∗ − β(1 − µ) The average swing voter’s expected payoﬀ is therefore
Z

1
2

dµ
δ−f −
βµ
−
1
2ε
2 −ε
∗

Z

1
2 +ε
1
2

β(1 − µ)

dµ
1−ε
= δ − f ∗ − β(
).
2ε
2

Next consider the case in which just one party’s candidate is qualified. For concreteness,
assume that it is Party L’s candidate. Party L’s candidate will win if the ideology of the median
swing voter is less than µ∗ (C ∗ , 0) = 1/2 + ξ ∗ λ(C ∗ ). If µ is less than 1/2 + ξ ∗ λ(C ∗ ) then the
majority of swing voters vote for Party L’s candidate and the average swing voter’s payoﬀ is
δ − f ∗ − βµ. If µ exceeds 1/2 + ξ ∗ λ(C ∗ ) then Party R’s candidate wins and the average swing
voter’s payoﬀ is −β(1 − µ). Taking expectations over the realization of µ and using the fact that
ξ ∗ λ(C ∗ ) = ε(2π ∗ − 1) the average swing voter’s expected payoﬀ is
Z

∗
1
2 +ε(2π −1)
1
2 −ε

dµ
[δ − f − βµ]
−
2ε
∗

Z

1
2 +ε
1
∗
2 +ε(2π −1)

β(1 − µ)

38

dµ
1
= (δ − f ∗ )π ∗ − β( − 2επ ∗ (1 − π ∗ )).
2ε
2

Aggregating over these three situations, the expected payoﬀ of a swing voter is
1
σ 2 + (1 − σ)2
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ](δ − f ∗ ) − β( − ε{
+ 2σ(1 − σ)2π ∗ (1 − π∗ )}). (A.8)
2
2
By similar reasoning, the payoﬀs of partisans, interest group members, and swing voters in the
equilibrium (C, f, ξ) under policy (l, 0) are
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π](δ − f ) −
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π](δ − f +

β
,
2

(A.9)

b(f )
β
σC
)− −
,
2
2
γ

(A.10)

and
1
σ 2 + (1 − σ)2
+ 2σ(1 − σ)2π(1 − π)}). (A.11)
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π](δ − f ) − β( − ε{
2
2
That partisans and swing voters will be strictly better oﬀ if π ∗ ≈ π and f ∗ > f follows directly
from comparing (A.6) and (A.9) and (A.8) and (A.11). Thus, we need only deal with interest
group members.
We know that (A.2) holds at the unrestricted equilibrium. We can use this to express the
expected payoﬀ of an interest group member in the unrestricted equilibrium as:
δ[σ 2 +

σ(1 − σ)
β
+ (1 − σ)σπ ∗ ] − f ∗ σπ ∗ − [1 − σ + 2σπ ∗ ]. (A.12)
2
2

Under the policy (l, 0), it is clear from (18) that
G(C, f, C, f ; ξ) ≥ C/γ
and hence the expected payoﬀ of an interest group member is at least
δ[σ 2 +

σ(1 − σ)
β
+ (1 − σ)σπ] − f σπ − [1 − σ + 2σπ]. (A.13)
2
2

Since π ' π∗ and f < f ∗ , it is clear that (A.13) exceeds (A.12) and hence interest group members
will also be better oﬀ. QED
39

Proof of Proposition 3: From Proposition 2 we know that limr→∞ π(C(r), 0; ξ(r)) = 1/2 and
that limr→∞ f (r) = δ > 0. If contributions were banned, the equilibrium would be (C, f, ξ) =
(0, 0, (1−σ)δ
2β ) and the probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one is 1/2. The
result then follows from Lemma 1. QED
Proof of Proposition 4: As shown in the proof of Proposition 3, the payoﬀs of the three types
of citizens in the unrestricted equilibrium (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) are given by (A.6), (A.7), and (A.8). We
need to demonstrate the existence of a policy (l, s) and an equilibrium under (l, s) which yields
all types of citizens higher payoﬀs.
Let Ω denote the class of policies (l, s) satisfying the following two properties. First, (l, s)
is such that if interest groups contribute l to qualified candidates in exchange for no favors, the
probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified one is the same as in the status quo;
i.e.,
π(l(1 + s), 0;

(1 − σ)(α + l(1 + s))δ
) = π∗.
2β(α + (1 − σ)l(1 + s))

This requires that
l(1 + s) =

αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
.
(δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗ )

(A.14)

Second, (l, s) is such that interest groups are willing to contribute l without the promise of favors
(assuming that the eﬀectiveness of advertising is given by ξ 0 =

(1−σ)(α+l(1+s))δ
2β(α+(1−σ)l(1+s)) ).

This requires

that
G(l, 0, l, 0; ξ 0 ) ≥ l/γ
or, equivalently, that
1
l ≤ γ(π∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ).
2

(A.15)

(1−σ)(α+l(1+s))δ
By construction, for any policy (l, s) ∈ Ω, (C, f, ξ) = (l, 0, 2β(α+(1−σ)l(1+s))
) is an equilibrium

under (l, s). In this equilibrium, the probability that a qualified candidate defeats an unqualified

40

one is π∗ . Payoﬀs are as follows: partisans get
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ]δ −

β
− 2σsl;
2

(A.16)

interest group members get
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ]δ −

β
l
− 2σsl − σ ;
2
γ

(A.17)

and swing voters get
1
σ2 + (1 − σ)2
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ]δ − β( − ε{
+ 2σ(1 − σ)2π ∗ (1 − π ∗ )}) − 2σsl.
2
2

(A.18)

Three general points should be noted. First, partisans are better oﬀ in this equilibrium than in
the unrestricted equilibrium if and only if swing voters are better oﬀ. Second, while interest group
members always bear a higher share of the costs of campaign spending than do regular citizens,
the shares become more equal as l decreases and s increases. Third, aggregate expected utility is
higher in this equilibrium than in the unrestricted case.
To see the third point, note from (A.6), (A.7), and (A.8), that if the fraction of swing voters
in the population is η, aggregate utility in the unrestricted equilibrium is
W∗

= [σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ](δ − f ∗ ) −
+ηβε{

β
b(f ∗ ) σC ∗
+ 2γ{[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ]
−
}
2
2
γ

σ 2 + (1 − σ)2
+ 2σ(1 − σ)2π∗ (1 − π ∗ )}.
2

From (A.16), (A.17), and (A.18) in the equilibrium under the policy (l, s), aggregate utility is
W = [σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ]δ −

β
σ 2 + (1 − σ)2
− 2σl(1 + s) + ηβε{
+ 2σ(1 − σ)2π ∗ (1 − π∗ )}.
2
2

Subtracting the former from the latter, yields
W − W ∗ = −2σl(1 + s) + 2σC ∗ + [σ2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ](f ∗ − γb(f ∗ )).
This is positive, since from (A.14), it is clear that l(1 + s) < C ∗ and, from the properties of b,
f ∗ > γb(f ∗ ).
41

To progress further, we must distinguish two cases depending upon the relative shares of the
costs of campaign spending borne by interest group members and regular citizens in the unrestricted equilibrium. In the unrestricted equilibrium, the aggregate costs of campaign spending
2σC ∗ are borne in the following way. Citizens who are not interest group members bear a cost
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ]f ∗ ,
which is just the expected cost of the favors provided by qualified candidates. Interest group
members bear a cost
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ](f ∗ −

b(f ∗ )
σC ∗
)+
.
2
γ

Using (A.2), the latter can be rewritten as
1
[σ 2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π ∗ ]f ∗ + σ{(π ∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) − f ∗ (σ + π ∗ (1 − 2σ))}.
2
Thus, whether interest group members bear a higher share of the costs of spending in the unrestricted equilibrium depends upon the level of favors.
Suppose first that interest group members bear a greater share of the costs of campaign spending in the unrestricted equilibrium; i.e., that
f ∗ (σ + π ∗ (1 − 2σ)) < (π∗ − 1/2)(β + (1 − σ)δ).

(A.19)

It is then possible to find policies in Ω which make interest group members better oﬀ than in the
unrestricted equilibrium. From (A.12) and (A.17), this requires that:
l
1
+ 2sl ≤ (π∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) + f ∗ π ∗ .
γ
2

(A.20)

In general, when (A.19) holds, there are many policies in Ω that satisfies this requirement. The
precise choice of (l, s) necessary to generate a Pareto improvement depends upon the features of
the status quo equilibrium (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ). We distinguish three diﬀerent cases.
Case 1: This case arises when the status quo equilibrium (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) is such that
42

1
αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
≤ γ(π ∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ).
∗
∗
(δα + (1 − σ)C f )
2

(A.21)

Then, we simply set
(l, s) = (

αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
, 0).
(δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗ )

Clearly, (l, s) is an element of Ω and (A.20) is satisfied. Moreover, since s = 0 and they pay no
(1−σ)(α+l)δ
taxes, regular citizens must be better oﬀ under the equilibrium (C, f, ξ) = (l, 0, 2β(α+(1−σ)l)
) than

in the unrestricted equilibrium.
Case 2: This case arises when the status quo equilibrium (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) is such that
1
1
αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
f ∗π∗
∗
γ(π ∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) <
≤
γ(π
−
)(β
+
(1
−
σ)δ)
+
2
δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗
2
2

(A.22)

Then, we set
1
l = γ(π∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ)
2
and
s=

γ(π∗ −

1
2 )(β

αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
− 1.
+ (1 − σ)δ)(δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗ )

These two values solve the pair of equations (A.14) and (A.15) with equality. That (A.20) is
satisfied follows from (A.22).
(1−σ)(α+l(1+s))δ
To prove that regular citizens must be better oﬀ under the equilibrium (C, f, ξ) = (l, 0, 2β(α+(1−σ)l(1+s))
)

than in the unrestricted equilibrium, we need to show that:
[

σ
+ (1 − σ)π ∗ ]f ∗ > sl.
2

Substituting in the expression for sl, this becomes
[

σ
1
αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
+ (1 − σ)π ∗ ]f ∗ + γ(π∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) >
.
2
2
(δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗ )

43

From (A.2), we know that
1
σ
C ∗ = γ(π ∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) + γb(f ∗ )( + (1 − σ)π∗ ) − γf ∗ (σ + (1 − 2σ)π ∗ ).
2
2
Thus, by (A.19) and the fact that γb(f ∗ ) ≤ f ∗ , we have that
C∗ < f ∗(

σ
+ (1 − σ)π∗ ).
2

This implies the result.
Case 3: This case arises when the status quo equilibrium (C ∗ , f ∗ , ξ ∗ ) is such that
1
f ∗π∗
αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )
γ(π∗ − )(β + (1 − σ)δ) +
.
<
2
2
δα + (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗

(A.23)

Then, we choose (l, s) so that interest group members are exactly as well oﬀ as they are in the
unrestricted equilibrium. Formally, (l, s) solves the pair of equations (A.14) and (A.20) with
equality. This yields
l=

γ{(π ∗ − 12 )(β + (1 − σ)δ) + f ∗ π∗ −
1 − 2γ

2αC ∗ (δ−f ∗ )
δα+(1−σ)C ∗ f ∗ }

and
s=

(1 − 2γ)αC ∗ (δ − f ∗ )

γ{(π∗ − 12 )(β + (1 − σ)δ) + f ∗ π∗ −

2αC ∗ (δ−f ∗ )
δα+(1−σ)C ∗ f ∗ }(δα

+ (1 − σ)C ∗ f ∗ )

− 1.

Equations (A.19) and (A.23) ensure that these values are positive and satisfy (A.15). That regular
(1−σ)(α+l(1+s))δ
citizens must be better oﬀ under the equilibrium (C, f, ξ) = (l, 0, 2β(α+(1−σ)l(1+s))
) than in the

unrestricted equilibrium, follows immediately from the fact that aggregate utility is higher and
interest group members are, by construction, exactly as well oﬀ.
It only remains to deal with the case in which interest group members bear a smaller share of
the costs of campaign spending in the unrestricted equilibrium; i.e.,
f ∗ (σ + π ∗ (1 − 2σ)) ≥ (π∗ − 1/2)(β + (1 − σ)δ).

44

(A.24)

Then it may not be possible to find policies in Ω which make interest group members better oﬀ
than in the unrestricted equilibrium. However, under these conditions, the level of favors in the
unrestricted equilibrium is so high that banning contributions generates a Pareto improvement.
Thus, let (l, s) = (0, 0). Under this policy, there is a unique equilibrium in which (C, f, ξ) =
(0, 0, (1−σ)δ
2β ). Partisans and interest group members get a payoﬀ
[σ 2 + σ(1 − σ)]δ −

β
.
2

Swing voters get a payoﬀ
[σ2 + σ(1 − σ)]δ −

β
σ 2 + (1 − σ)2
+ βε{
+ σ(1 − σ)}.
2
2

Given (A.6), (A.9), and (A.12), to establish that all types of citizens will be better oﬀ than in the
unrestricted equilibrium, it is suﬃcient to show that
[σ 2 + σ(1 − σ)]δ > [σ2 + 2σ(1 − σ)π∗ ](δ − f ∗ ).
This is equivalent to
[

σ
1
+ (1 − σ)π ∗ ]f ∗ > (1 − σ)(π∗ − )δ.
2
2

Given (A.24), it is enough to show that
[

σ
(π ∗ − 1/2)(β + (1 − σ)δ)
1
+ (1 − σ)π ∗ ]
> (1 − σ)(π ∗ − )δ,
2
(σ + π∗ (1 − 2σ))
2

which follows from the fact that
[

σ
+ (1 − σ)π∗ ] > (σ + π∗ (1 − 2σ)).
2

QED.

45

Figure 1
CL
G = CL/γ
C

f

fL

Figure 2
CL

G = CL/γ

fL

Figure 3

Co(f,ξ)

C

Ci(f,ξ)

C* (ξ)

δ−2βξ/(1−σ) f* (ξ) δ−2βξ

f

