NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE AND
ACCIDENT LIABILITY LAWS ON TRAFFIC FATALITIES
Alma Cohen
Rajeev Dehejia
Working Paper 9602
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9602
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We are grateful to Kenneth Abraham, Orley Ashenfelter, Lucian Bebchuk, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein,
Michael Greenstone, Sam Peltzman, Jack Porter, Steven Shavell, and participants at the Harvard labor
economics seminar for their valuable suggestions. We are also grateful to Richard Derrig for helping us with
some of the data. All remaining errors are our own. Cohen thanks the NBER Postdoctoral Fellowship in
Aging and Health Economics for financial support. Dehejia thanks the NBER and the Industrial Relations
Section, Princeton University, for their kind hospitality while working on this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Alma Cohen and Rajeev Dehejia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

The Effect of Automobile Insurance and Accident Liability Laws on Traffic Fatalities
Alma Cohen and Rajeev Dehejia
NBER Working Paper No. 9602
April 2003
JEL No. G22, J28, K13
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the incentive effects of automobile insurance, compulsory insurance laws,
and no-fault liability laws on driver behavior and traffic fatalities. We analyze a panel of 50 U.S.
states and the District of Columbia from 1970-1998, a period in which many states adopted
compulsory insurance regulations and/or no-fault laws. Using an instrumental variables approach,
we find evidence that automobile insurance has moral hazard costs, leading to an increase in traffic
fatalities. We also find that reductions in accident liability produced by no-fault liability laws have
led to an increase in traffic fatalities (estimated to be on the order of 6%). Overall, our results
indicate that, whatever other benefits they might produce, increases in the incidence of automobile
insurance and moves to no-fault liability systems have significant negative effects on traffic
fatalities.

Alma Cohen
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
alcohen@nber.org

Rajeev Dehejia
Department of Economics and SIPA
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rd247@columbia.edu

In the United States today, we are at the threshold of a great
experiment in social insurance – one of the most far-reaching in
consequence of any that has been yet attempted in the New
World. Probably within the next decade or two, most of the
states will pass laws, the purposes of which will be the financial
assistance of some or all of the victims of automobile accidents,
and the prevention of such accidents in so far as is possible.
--Edison L. Bowers, Selected Articles on Compulsory
Automobile Insurance. New York: The W.H. Wilson Company,
1929.

1

Introduction

This paper examines how economic incentives and liability regulation influence driver
behavior and, in turn, traffic fatalities. We use the introduction of compulsory insurance and
no-fault liability regulation to examine the moral hazard effects of automobile insurance,
compulsory insurance laws, and no-fault liability laws. We analyze a panel of 50 U.S. states
and the District of Columbia from 1970-1998, a period in which many states adopted
compulsory insurance regulations and/or no-fault laws. Using compulsory insurance as an
instrument for the proportion of uninsured motorists, we find that automobile insurance has
significant moral hazard costs, namely reducing precautions and increasing traffic fatalities.
We also find that limiting motor vehicle liability through no-fault liability laws leads to an
increase in traffic fatalities. Overall our results indicate that, whatever benefits flow from
increasing the incidence of automobile insurance and from moves to a no-fault system, there
are also significant moral hazard costs to doing so.
Traffic accidents have very large costs which merit substantial attention by
economists (see, e.g., Edlin (1999), Levitt and Porter (2001)). These accidents claim over
40,000 lives each year in the United States, roughly the same as the number of Americans
killed during the Vietnam War. Americans spend roughly $100 billion each year on
automobile insurance premia, and they bear over $250 billion in uninsured accident costs
each year. The incidence of motor vehicle crashes and traffic fatalities is likely to be
influenced significantly by choices made by drivers (including whether to use seat belts or air
bags, how carefully to drive, whether to drink alcohol, and how much to drive). Accordingly,
economists have long been interested in how these choices are influenced by agents’

economic incentives and by various legal rules and policy measures (see, e.g., the seminal
work of Peltzman (1975a,b)).
Beginning in 1970, most U.S. states adopted compulsory automobile insurance
requirements. Over the same period, 16 states adopted no-fault automobile insurance. The
impact of these policy shifts on traffic fatalities is of interest for two reasons. First,
identifying this effect – which we shall see is significant – is necessary for assessing the
social desirability of these policies. Second, these changes in automobile insurance
regulations provide a large-scale natural experiment through which we can examine the
moral hazard effects of automobile insurance and the incentive effects of liability exposure.
In this sense, the changes in laws that we examine offer an interesting window on a larger set
of phenomena.
Specifically, we investigate two related issues. First, we examine whether having
automobile insurance has a moral-hazard effect on traffic fatalities; empirically, we examine
the proportion of uninsured motorists. As a theoretical matter, insurance does have the moral
hazard cost of reducing the policyholder’s incentives to take precautions against the insured
loss.1 This is also theoretically the case for the particular type of insurance that we examine,
namely insurance for automobile accidents (see Shavell (1982, 1987, and 2000)). However,
the question is whether the reduction in precautions against automobile accidents produced
by automobile insurance – which theory predicts – is empirically significant. For example, it
might be that drivers’ concern for their own safety and health provide sufficient incentives
for them to take precautions (to the extent that taking precautions is affected at all by
incentives) and that the presence of insurance makes little difference on the margin.
Although there has been much interest in the incidence of automobile insurance and
uninsured motorists,2 whether automobile insurance leads to moral hazard costs is an open
question that has not been addressed by existing research.

1

Classic references analyzing this effect include Pauly (1968), Spence and Zeckhauser (1971) and Shavell (1979).
For a comprehensive recent survey of models investigating the moral hazard costs of insurance, see Winter (2000).
2
Edlin (1999) documents the congestion externalities of driving, but these are distinct from the moral hazard costs
of insurance.

2

Our strategy for examining this issue is to look at the consequences of a natural
experiment: the adoption of compulsory insurance regulations in some states governed by
tort law. Because this change produces a reduction in uninsured motorists not attributable to
other confounding factors, we are able to test the consequences of a reduction in uninsured
motorists on traffic fatalities. Although some work on compulsory insurance has been done
(see Ma and Schmidt (2000) and Cole, Dumm, and McCullough (2001)), none of these
papers make the connection between such regulations and traffic fatalities. Derrig et al.
(2001), who do connect the two, find insignificant effects on fatalities rates. Our results
indicate that a reduction in the incidence of uninsured motorists produces an increase in
traffic fatalities.
The second issue we examine is the effect on traffic fatalities of the reduction in
liability brought about by no-fault laws. Earlier work by Landes (1982) suggested that, by
reducing incentives to drive carefully, such laws have led to an increase in traffic fatalities in
the United States. Subsequently, Zador and Lund (1986) re-ran Landes’s regressions using a
longer data set and found the opposite effect; Kochanowski and Young (1985) and Derrig et
al (2001) found no significant effect; and Cummins, Phillips, and Weiss (2001) recently
found a significant positive effect of no-fault on traffic fatalities.3 However, all states that
adopted no-fault limitations on liability also adopted compulsory insurance requirements at
the same time, and these earlier studies did not attempt to separate the effects of the two
elements of the legislation. Thus, they did not isolate the effect of limitations on liability as
distinct from the effects of the accompanying adoption of compulsory insurance
requirements. We consider the two elements of legislation simultaneously, and in this way
are able to identify the effect of no-fault limitations on liability separately from the effect of
compulsory insurance requirements. We find that no-fault limitations on liability do increase
fatalities. Specifically, we estimate that the effect of such limitations is to increase fatalities
by about 6%.
This paper is also related to, and seeks to contribute to, the broader literature on the
factors and policy measures that influence traffic fatalities. There is an extensive literature on

3

how the use of seat belts directly reduces fatalities and on whether it indirectly increases
fatalities by encouraging users to drive less carefully (see, e.g., Peltzman (1975a), Levitt and
Porter (1999), Cohen and Einav (2001)). There is also work on how traffic fatalities are
influenced by the consumption of alcohol, and in turn by some measures discouraging the
sale of alcohol (see, e.g., Levitt and Porter (2001), Sloan, Reilly, and Schenzler (1994)).
White (1989) investigates how comparative and contributory negligence rules affect the
levels of care used by drivers (as judged by jury determination in accident cases). Vickery
(1968), Edlin (1999) and Edlin and Mandic (1999) examine the effects of miles driven on
fatalities and how they could be influenced by appropriately designed taxes or insurance
premia.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the necessary background by
discussing the laws regarding compulsory insurance and no-fault liability. Section 3 lays out
theoretical predictions and our approach to testing them. Section 4 describes the data. Section
5 presents our results. Section 6 makes concluding remarks.
2

Automobile Insurance and Liability for Accidents

We start with some background on automobile insurance and liability. There is a wide range
of regulation governing automobile insurance and liability. In this paper, we focus on two
aspects of regulation that directly affect drivers: compulsory insurance and no-fault systems.
2.1 Compulsory Insurance Regulation
Each year a large amount of insurance coverage for automobile accidents is purchased in the
US. Total automobile liability insurance premia are over $100 billion annually. A significant
amount of insurance would be bought without any regulation, simply because drivers are
risk-averse. However, current purchases might be influenced by the existence of compulsory
insurance regulations.
Compulsory automobile insurance means that all those operating a motor vehicle
must purchase insurance. Given the bounded nature of assets that individuals commonly
3

In studies on other countries, Devlin (1992) and McEwin (1989) found that no-fault liability laws increased

4

have, it is often rational for them to elect not to purchase insurance if they are free to do so
(e.g., Huberman, Mayers and Smith (1993)). Compulsory insurance laws ensure some
compensation to those injured in automobile accidents (see Stone (1926) for an early work
advocating compulsory insurance laws on this basis). When drivers have limited assets, such
laws also force drivers to at least partly internalize some of the externality imposed on others
by their driving (Shavell (1987), Keeton and Kwerel (1984)).
Compulsory insurance regulation was first introduced in Massachusetts in 1927. It
had been adopted by 22 states by 1975, and by 45 states by 1997, the end of the sample
period (see Table 2). Among these states, there is variation in the amount of each type of
insurance that individuals are required to purchase and in the methods used to enforce this
regulation. We observe two aspects of enforcement: 40 states require that a driver’s
insurance status be reported at the time of an accident, and 35 states require that insurance
companies notify the appropriate state authorities if a driver’s insurance policy lapses.
2.2 Accident Liability Systems: Tort vs. No-Fault
Historically the liability of drivers for accident losses was governed by tort principles.
Drivers were liable for losses to others that resulted from their negligent behavior. In theory,
a tort system with a negligence rule that functions perfectly – i.e., in which courts can always
costlessly and accurately determine whether behavior was negligent – provides optimal
incentives for care in driving and accident prevention. However, in practice, the tort system
has various flaws, such as the substantial administrative costs and delays involved in
adjudicating negligence and thus liability.
Perceived problems with the tort system have led reformers to propose no-fault
liability systems. As early as 1926, there was analysis of the idea that there are potential
benefits from limiting negligence-based suits and offering protection against injuries in
automobile insurance regardless of fault (see Sherman (1926)). In 1932, the Columbia
University Counsel for Research in Social Sciences proposed a scheme in which each motor
vehicle owner would be required to carry a policy covering him against liability arising from
fatalities in Quebec and in Australia and New Zealand respectively.

5

injury, economic loss, or death, regardless of fault. In 1965, Keeton and O’Connell (1965)
published an influential study calling for a move to a no-fault system.
The first jurisdiction to adopt such a scheme was Saskatchewan (in Canada) in 1946.
In the US, the first state to adopt a no-fault system was Massachusetts in 1971. By 1975, 16
states had adopted a no-fault system. Most of these states (with the exception of
Massachusetts and New York) adopted compulsory insurance concurrently with no-fault
limitations on liability. The number of states with a no-fault system fell to 14 in 1997, with 6
states switching status in between.
There are two important elements of a no-fault system. First, (most) no-fault systems
require drivers to purchase insurance that provides first-party coverage for accident losses,
regardless of who was at fault. Second, no-fault systems limit the extent to which drivers can
be sued through negligence-based suits. In a pure no-fault system, victims do not have any
recourse to negligence-based suits. However, all states provide for thresholds beyond which
the parties to an accident have recourse to lawsuits. As outlined in Table 2, in 13 states
(Arizona, the District of Columbia, Delaware, Maryland, New Hampshire, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin)
no-fault exists in parallel with the traditional tort system. In these so-called add-on states,
there are no limitations to litigation. The remaining states provide either a monetary or verbal
(i.e., descriptive) threshold beyond which individuals have the right to sue.
Add-on regulations are a combination of the no-fault and tort systems, adding no-fault
protection to the tort system without imposing any limitations on the latter. Ten states
adopted add-on regulations. Because of its hybrid nature, it is difficult to predict the effects
of add-on regulation. Hence, we focus on no-fault, but will examine the effect of the
threshold below which tort limitations are imposed.
3

Theoretical Predictions and Testing Approach

We begin by discussing the effect of compulsory insurance laws on uninsured motorists and
fatalities, both theoretically and empirically. Next, we discuss the effect of no-fault laws on
fatalities and uninsured motorists, and the issues that arise in identifying the effect of no-fault
laws as distinct from compulsory insurance laws. Finally, we discuss the direct effect of

6

uninsured motorists on traffic fatalities and the instrumental variables identification of this
effect.
3.1 The Effect of Compulsory Insurance Regulations
The effects of compulsory insurance regulation on drivers will vary depending on what
insurance choice they would have made in the absence of compulsory insurance. Figure 1
identifies four groups of individuals.
Figure 1: Insurance Status before and after Compulsory Insurance
Status with compulsory insurance
Status

Insured

Uninsured

Insured

(Insured, Insured)

(Insured, Uninsured)

Uninsured

(Uninsured, Insured)

(Uninsured,

without
compulsory
regulation

Uninsured)

The individuals in the (1,1) cell would have purchased insurance in the absence of
regulation, and continue to do so when it is compulsory. For these “always-insurers”, the
regulation has no direct effect, since their insurance status does not change (we adapt the
terminology of Imbens and Angrist (1992)).4
Drivers in the (2,1) cell are induced to adopt insurance because of compulsory
insurance regulation. This is the group for whom the instrumental variables method identifies
the effect of insurance on fatalities. These individuals did not deem insurance to be
worthwhile or necessary in the absence of regulation, but they obtain it when it is
compulsory. These drivers are forced to pay the premium, but accordingly are faced with
4

It can, however, have indirect effects, through the price of insurance and through the insurance status of other
drivers. However these indirect effects are either negligible or second-order. This would influence individual’s
decisions regarding how much insurance to purchase. Another indirect effect would be with respect to liability from,
or to, other drivers involved in an accident. If drivers are insured, in principle they are covered regardless of the
insurance status of the other driver. Of course the insurance company is affected, and this may have an indirect

7

diminished liability in case of an accident. Because of the classic moral-hazard problem (see
Shavell (1979, 1982)), these individuals typically will drive less carefully when insured.5
Individuals in the (2,2) cell would not have purchased insurance in the absence of
regulation, and do not purchase it even when it is compulsory. The driving behavior of these
individuals is affected to the extent that compulsory insurance laws succeed in inducing
some individuals to switch from being uninsured to being insured. To the extent that
compulsory insurance laws are effective, those drivers who remain uninsured are induced to
drive more carefully, since their status as uninsured drivers is illegal under compulsory
insurance laws. If, however, compulsory insurance laws were ineffective and did not induce
drivers to switch into insurance, then there would be no effect on uninsured drivers. We
expect that the former case is empirically relevant.
Finally drivers in the (1,2) cells would be insured in the absence of compulsory
insurance, but choose not to insure themselves when it is required. Assuming that individuals
do not derive some benefit from defying compulsory insurance regulations, this cell will be
empty.
In summary, we have identified two critical groups: those who adopt insurance
because of regulation (who are likely to drive more and less carefully) and those who are
always uninsured (who are likely to drive less and more carefully because of regulation).
Hypothesis H1: Under compulsory insurance:
(i)

The proportion of uninsured motorists decreases.

(ii)

The decrease in uninsured motorists produces an increase in fatalities among
switchers.

(iii)

Those who remain uninsured motorists drive more carefully, producing a
decrease in fatalities for this group.

effect on the insured driver through the price of insurance. These indirect effects presumably have only a small
impact on driving behavior, since this is more likely to be affected by insurance status than the extent of coverage.
5
Shavell (1982) notes that the presence of insurance creates equivalence between strict liability and a negligence
rule form of liability. Though insurance does create moral hazard, Shavell demonstrates that the provision of
insurance is socially desirable.

8

We test these hypotheses by examining the direct effect of compulsory insurance laws
on fatalities and uninsured motorists. An issue that arises in identifying the effects of
compulsory as distinct from no-fault regulations is that both sets of laws often were
introduced together. In particular, states that adopted no-fault limitations on liability adopted
compulsory insurance regulations at the same time, and likewise for add-on regulations. As a
result, to identify the effect of compulsory insurance, we restrict attention to states and years
that have neither no-fault nor add-on provisions. We refer to this as the compulsory sample.
Table 3, column (1), presents the states and years that are included in this sample. All 50
states and regions are represented in the sample. In the Midwestern, Southern, and Western
states, approximately half are present for the entire sample period. The least represented
region is the Northeast, with New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont represented for the
full sample period, but many other Northeastern states represented only in the early 1970s.
3.2 The Effect of No-Fault Systems
The literature on no-fault systems has argued that motorists will drive less carefully under
no-fault than a tort system. Since a no-fault system limits drivers’ liability from their actions,
it weakens their incentives to take precautions when driving. By the same token, it also could
lead to increased driving.
However, this argument ignores the fact that the effects of no-fault limitations on
liability will be different for insured and uninsured drivers. The standard analysis applies to
the former group. Insured drivers are protected (by insurance) from liability if they are the
victims of an accident, and no-fault limits their liability if they cause an accident. In contrast,
for uninsured drivers the incentives differ in these two cases. If an uninsured driver causes an
accident, then he faces reduced liability under a no-fault scheme; this presumably leads to
reduced precautions when driving. If an uninsured driver is the victim of an accident, his
recourse to compensation is also limited in a no-fault system; this would lead to more
cautious driving behavior. These two effects go in opposite directions, as summarized in the
following hypothesis.

9

Hypothesis H2: By adopting no-fault limitations on liability in addition to compulsory
insurance requirements:
(i)

For uninsured drivers, coverage decreases, possibly leading to a decrease in
fatalities.

(ii)

For insured drivers, liability decreases, leading to an increase in fatalities.

The overall effect is thus theoretically ambiguous, and an empirical investigation is needed.
As discussed above, one difficulty with identifying the effect of no-fault laws as
distinct from compulsory laws is that most states adopted these laws at the same time. To
identify the effect of no-fault limitations on liability, as distinct from compulsory insurance,
we examine the effect of no-fault among states that have either compulsory insurance or nofault regulation, excluding add-on states (we call this the no-fault sample). As we can see
from column (2) of Table 3, this is a somewhat more restrictive sample. All regions are
represented, but for a reduced period. Many states are present later in the sample period after
they had adopted compulsory, no-fault and compulsory, or had eliminated no-fault or add-on
provisions.
We cannot (and do not) claim that this sample, and likewise the compulsory sample
discussed in Section 3.1, corresponds to the full sample of U.S. states. However, both
samples are broadly representative. Further, we will allow for year fixed effects to address
the issue that the no-fault sample is more representative of the latter half of the sample
period. Finally, the samples represent the only sub-groups in which the effects of these
policies can be identified, so to that extent we have to accept this limitation.
3.3 The Effect of Insurance Status on Fatalities
To the extent that insurers cannot monitor the behavior of the policyholder perfectly and
make the policy conditional on optimal behavior, insurance coverage will tend to reduce the
care and precautions that drivers take while driving. This is the familiar moral hazard cost of
insurance. Thus, the prediction is that the higher the proportion of uninsured motorists, the
lower the number of accidents.

10

Hypothesis H3: A higher incidence of uninsured motorists leads to fewer traffic fatalities.
In the popular press and in the literature on uninsured motorists, the existence of such
motorists is viewed as unambiguously bad. We do not question that the presence of
automobile insurance produces risk-bearing and compensation benefits. Our interest,
however, is in exploring whether insurance also has a down side, a moral hazard cost, which
needs to be taken into account in any assessment of uninsured motorists and regulations
affecting their incidence.
We use an instrumental variable strategy to identify the effect of uninsured motorists
on traffic fatalities; because both of these outcomes are jointly determined, OLS estimation
of the relationship would be subject to simultaneity bias.6 As established in Imbens and
Angrist (1992) and Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin (1994), an instrumental variables strategy
identifies the effect of the instrument on those who are induced to change their “treatment
assignment” based on the instrument. In our case, the instrumental variables strategy thus
identifies the effect on those induced to join insurance as a result of compulsory insurance
regulation. As discussed in Section 3.1, we expect the effect for this group to be negative: as
the proportion of uninsured motorists decreases, fatalities increase because of the moral
hazard effect on switchers.
The two candidates for instrumental variables are compulsory insurance and no-fault
liability laws. In Section 5.1 we argue that both sets of laws are exogenous conditional on a
range of controls, hence plausible candidates for instruments. But we must also consider
whether either of these variables satisfies the requirement that they affect the outcome
(fatalities) only through their effect on uninsured motorists.
As discussed in Section 3.2, no-fault laws affect fatalities by influencing the liability
that drivers face from their actions. Even if the number of uninsured motorists were
unaffected by no-fault laws, the laws could have a significant effect on fatalities through
incentive effects on both motorists who are currently insured and those who are uninsured.
6

In particular, traffic fatalities depend on the number of insured drivers, but we can imagine a second equation in
which drivers choose insurance status based on the rate of traffic fatalities. In this case, the OLS estimates of a
single equation will be inconsistent.

11

Instead, the direct effect of the adoption of compulsory insurance on fatalities is to
induce motorists to switch from being uninsured to insured. There is also potentially an
indirect effect, namely inducing drivers who remain uninsured to drive more carefully.
Despite the possibility of an indirect effect, we believe that an instrumental variable is a
reasonable strategy for two reasons. First to the extent that the indirect effect depends on the
number of uninsured motorists induced to drive more safely, the effect should be small.
Second, and more importantly, to the extent that the indirect effect of compulsory insurance
on fatalities will lead to a reduction in traffic fatalities (if uninsured motorists are induced to
drive more safely), any direct positive effect we find must be downward biased relative to the
true effect.7
4

Data Description

We use a panel of annual state-level variables. The data cover all 50 U.S. states and the
District of Columbia for the years 1970-1998.8 The data include information about (1) some
components of automobile insurance law; (2) the level of uninsured motorists; (3) states’
demographics characteristics; and (4) fatality rates.
We obtain information about automobile insurance regulations and accident liability
regulations from the American Insurance Association (AIA) for the years 1970 to 2001. The
variables we use are: (1) whether a state has compulsory auto insurance – “yes” denotes
those states requiring minimum liability insurance or showing some proof of financial
responsibility; (2) which enforcement mechanisms a state uses for compulsory insurance
(including checking insurance status at the time of an accident, or verifying insurance status
at the time of vehicle registration); (3) whether a state adopted a no-fault or add-on system
instead of a tort liability system (the default), and (4) whether a no-fault state has a monetary
or verbal threshold (and the value of the threshold).
We obtain data on uninsured motorists from the Insurance Research Council (IRC)
for the years 1976-1998. Several methods have been used to estimate the proportion of
uninsured motorists; see Khazoom (1997). From these, we use the IRC’s estimates, because
7

Thus, if the direct effect of uninsured on fatalities is negative, an indirect effect would bias our results toward zero.

12

they are the most comprehensive of those available.9 The incidence rates of uninsured
motorists reported by the IRC vary considerably across states, from 4% in Maine to 30% in
Colorado and South Carolina (for the year 1997).
A description of our variables appears in Table 1, and their sources are outlined in the
Data Appendix.
5

The Results

5.1 The Conditional Exogeneity of the Laws
In studying the effect of compulsory insurance and no-fault regulation on the proportion of
uninsured motorists and driving fatalities, it is important to investigate first whether the laws
are plausibly exogenous (conditional on the covariates and time and year fixed effects in our
specification). The concern is a systematic selection of which states choose to adopt these
laws and when. There are three potential sources of selection.
First is selection on observables: states that choose to adopt may differ in terms of
age, population, ethnicity, and income. We will address this by including these variables as
controls in our subsequent specifications. Second, we are concerned with selection on the
outcome, in particular that states with a higher level of uninsured motorists or fatalities may
be more likely to enact automobile insurance legislation. This will be addressed by allowing
for state and year fixed effects. Third, there could be time-varying selection on the outcome.
In particular, states that experience a shock (for example a sudden increase) in one of the
outcomes may be more likely to adopt regulation. Since controlling for lagged dependent
variables in a fixed-effects regression is challenging, this is a greater concern.

8

Information on uninsured motorist is available only from 1976 on.
The IRC uses two variables to calculate the proportion of uninsured motorists: Uninsured Motorists Claim, which
is the number of uninsured motorists claims for injuries caused to the insured by uninsured motorists and Bodily
Injury Liability Claim (BI), which is the number of injuries caused by insured motorists. The ratio of Uninsured
Motorists Claim frequency to Bodily Injury Liability Claim frequency is then used to measure the extent of the
uninsured motorist problem. Under the null hypothesis of no moral hazard and equal probability of an accident for
insured and uninsured motorists, it can be shown (using the model of Levitt and Porter (2001)) that the IRC measure
is identical to the fraction of uninsured motorists in the population. Thus, this issue does undermine our conclusion
that the possibility of no moral hazard can be rejected. Furthermore, as an empirical matter, we check the robustness
of our results to using the log (rather than the level) of uninsured, since this variable is more robust to potential
measurement error.
9

13

Table 4 examines selection issues empirically. In columns (1) and (4) we present a
probit regression of compulsory insurance and no-fault regulation on a range of exogenous
variables, including population, ethnic composition, crime, per capita income, and the age
profile of the population. Most are statistically significant predictors of the laws. States with
a lower proportion of blacks, more violent crimes, and a higher proportion of drivers outside
the 18-to-24 age range are more likely to have compulsory insurance. For no-fault, the signs
are largely reversed. This basic set of variables predicts the laws with about 70 percent
accuracy. Thus, in our subsequent specifications, controlling for these observables will
account for a significant proportion of selection into the laws. Of course, we will also include
an additional, powerful source of control, namely state and year fixed effects.
In columns (2) and (3) we examine the predictive power of lagged differences in the
proportion of uninsured motorists and fatalities for compulsory insurance, and in columns (5)
and (6) we examine the impact of these variables on no-fault. Neither the first nor the second
set of lagged differences is a significant predictor of compulsory insurance or no-fault
regulation. Furthermore, the increase in the predictive power of the models is minimal,
increasing from 68 to 72 percent for compulsory and 77 to 78 percent for no-fault regulation.
This suggests that shocks to outcomes are not a significant source of selection in our data.
Of course it is impossible to rule out the possibility of forward-looking selection on
outcomes. But the evidence we examine suggests that our exogenous controls and state and
year fixed effects address the most important issues of selection.
5.2 The Effect of Compulsory Insurance
We begin by examining the impact of compulsory insurance laws on the proportion of
uninsured motorists and traffic fatalities. In addition to being of intrinsic interest, this will
serve as the first stage of our instrumental variables strategy, presented in the next section.
As indicated above, compulsory insurance was introduced by some states concurrently with
no-fault. In order to obtain an estimate of the effect of compulsory insurance, unconfounded
with the effects of no-fault, we restrict ourselves to the sample of states and years that were
not under a no-fault or add-on regime.

14

Table 5 presents our specifications. In addition to introducing a dummy for
compulsory insurance, we control for a range of variables including automobile registration
per capita, proportion of trucks among registered vehicles, the fraction black of the
population, violent and property crimes, unemployment, and per capita real income. In
column (1) we see that the direct effect compulsory is negative and statistically significant at
the one percent level. This confirms hypothesis H1(i). The magnitude is large as well.
Compared to a base level of 12.9 percent, compulsory insurance reduces uninsured motorists
by 2.4 percentage points.
The result in column (1) is important for two reasons. First, it establishes that
compulsory insurance achieved at least part of its mandate of reducing uninsured motorists.
Second, the size and significance of the effect will be helpful when using compulsory
insurance as an instrument for uninsured motorists.
In columns (2) and (3), we examine the robustness of this result. In column (2) we see
the effect of compulsory insurance within a four-year window of the passage of compulsory
insurance laws. Though this more than halves the number of observations, using a narrower
window reduces the effect that state-specific time trends might have on the estimates. We
note that the effect remains similar in sign, magnitude, and significance. In column (3), we
reestimate column (1) using log uninsured as the dependent variable.

We find that

compulsory insurance remains negative and significant at the 1 percent level and that the
magnitude of the effect is very similar: the coefficient of –0.024 in column (1) corresponds
roughly to a 20 percent effect on uninsured, as does the effect in column (3).
In column (4) we examine the impact of two mechanisms used to enforce compulsory
insurance, namely checking insurance status at the time of an accident and requiring that
insurance is verified when the vehicle is registered. The former does not have a statistically
significant effect, but the latter is significant and negative, further reducing uninsured
motorists by 1.7 percentage points.
In columns (5) to (7) we see that the effect of compulsory insurance on fatalities per
person is somewhat equivocal. In column (5), the direct effect is negative, though not
statistically significant. When we estimate the effect within a four-year window of the
adoption of compulsory insurance, shown in column (6), we find a positive (and

15

insignificant) effect. In column (7), we see that when we include enforcement mechanisms
for compulsory insurance (checking insurance status at the time of an accident, verifying
insurance status at the time of registration) the direct effect is positive and significant, but the
enforcement mechanisms have a negative (and significant) effect on fatalities.
The fact that the effect on fatalities is not overwhelming is not surprising in light of
the discussion in Section 3.1 (hypothesis H1, ii and iii). Whereas individuals who switch
from being uninsured to insured might drive less carefully, thereby increasing fatalities, we
would expect the opposite effect for those individuals who remain uninsured.
5.3 The Effect of Uninsured Motorists
Table 6, column (1), presents an OLS regression of the effect of the ratio of uninsured
motorists on fatalities per person. The coefficient is positive, but not statistically significant.
However, as discussed above, this estimate potentially suffers from simultaneity bias. In
subsequent columns, we address this issue by using an instrumental variables strategy.
Column (2) presents the estimated effect of uninsured on fatalities using compulsory
insurance as an instrumental variable. We see that effect is negative and significant at the 5
percent level. This confirms hypothesis H3. The magnitude of the effect is such that a 0.01
increase in the ratio of uninsured motorists leads to a 2 percent decrease in fatalities per year
(26 fatalities relative to a per state and year average on the order of 1000). A one standard
deviation variation in uninsured would lead to a 10 percent decrease in fatalities.10
In columns (3) and (4) we examine the sensitivity of our results. When we estimate
the effect in a four-year window of the passage of compulsory insurance regulations, we still
obtain a negative estimate. The fact that the coefficient is no longer significant is not
surprising given that we lose two thirds of our observations, and of course still allow for state
and year fixed effects. In column (4) we examine the impact on log uninsured. The effect has
10

The reason why we estimate the effect of uninsured on fatalities for the compulsory sample is that our
instrumental variables strategy is valid only for this sample. For compulsory insurance we have a clear case that any
direct effect of compulsory on fatalities will bias our results toward zero. Instead, in the full sample we have to
contend with the direct and indirect effects of no-fault regulation (since these cannot be distinguished from the effect
of compulsory insurance, in the full sample). In particular, though the effect of no-fault regulation through uninsured
may lead to a decrease in fatalities, the direct effect of no-fault leads to an increase in fatalities, as we show in
Section 5.4.

16

the same sign, and remains statistically significant at a 1 percent level. The magnitude of the
effect is also similar.
In columns (5) and (6) we examine the robustness of the result to additional controls.
In column (5) we control for vehicle miles traveled per person. This controls for shifts in
driving patterns that might account for changing fatalities. In principle, vehicle miles traveled
should also be seen as an outcome, since it can be influenced by insurance regulation. The
magnitude of the coefficient on uninsured motorists increases, and remains statistically
significant. In column (6) we control for an additional range of variables (automobile
registration per person, average speed, alcohol consumption per capita, and the proportion of
new cars), and again the effect of interest remains statistically significant.11
Hence the negative relationship between the proportion of uninsured motorists and
traffic fatalities confirms the moral hazard effect discussed in Section 3.1. Because
instrumental variables identify the effect experienced by those induced to switch as a result
of compulsory insurance, the instrumental variables estimate identifies the effects on
switchers, and confirms the moral hazard story.12
It is important to stress that the purchase of insurance by motorists has effects other
than on fatalities, and these effects are clearly beneficial. Such insurance reduces the riskbearing costs of drivers and leads to compensation of some victims who otherwise would
receive less or no compensation. So, although interesting and important for its own sake, the
moral hazard costs of insurance are just one element in an overall evaluation of the incidence
of uninsured motorists.

11

We use fatalities per person, rather than fatalities per vehicle mile traveled (which is more common in the
literature), as the outcome because vehicle miles traveled is potentially affected by changes in regulation, rendering
the latter more difficult to interpret. Our results are similar when using fatalities per vehicle mile traveled.
12
As noted in Imbens and Angrist (1992), even though the IV estimator identifies the effect of the endogenous
variable on the outcome for those induced to switch by the instrument, we cannot specifically identify these
individuals in our data. To the extent that we think of uninsured drivers as being inherently riskier (in terms of risk
attitude -- driving behavior, driving older vehicles, etc.) our result of increased fatalities among switchers makes
sense.

17

5.4 The Effect of No-Fault Regulation
As discussed in the introduction, the literature has established that no-fault laws increased
traffic fatalities in conjunction with compulsory insurance. The literature has been confined
to examining this joint effect because it has examined no-fault regulation in isolation from
compulsory insurance. In this section, we identify the effect of no-fault, as distinct from
compulsory insurance, by confining ourselves to the states and years that had either
compulsory insurance or no-fault. Hence, the effect of no-fault is relative to the starting point
of compulsory insurance.13
In Table 7, columns (1) to (5), we examine the effect on uninsured motorists. In
column (1), we see that no-fault increases uninsured motorists: the effect is both large (3.1
percentage points) and significant (at the one percent level). In column (2) we reestimate the
same specification in a four-year window of the passage of no-fault legislation. The effect is
somewhat larger in magnitude, and still statistically significant. In column (3), we run the log
specification and obtain similar results: the effect is significant at a 1 percent level and
corresponds to a magnitude of roughly 3 percent.14
In column (4) we examine the effect of the thresholds above which accident victims
can resort to tort claims. A no-fault system with a low threshold essentially should operate
like a tort system, since most claims exceed the threshold beyond which tort action is
permitted (a result which is established theoretically in Liao and White (1999)). A threshold
of zero corresponds to an add-on system where victims have a choice of whether to resort to
no-fault or tort. The lowest threshold among pure no-fault states is $200. As the threshold
increases, the no-fault system becomes more stringent. We incorporate this information into
the categorical variable “level” which takes the value zero for add-on states, one for no-fault
13

Note, however, that the form of compulsory insurance under tort and no-fault systems differs. Under tort,
compulsory insurance consists of third-party coverage. Under no-fault, compulsory insurance consists of first-party
coverage. We examine the sensitivity of our results to this difference as follows: we compare the effect of
compulsory insurance under a tort system with the effect of a no-fault system with a low threshold. The latter system
imposes only a negligible degree of tort limitation, and thus we estimate the effect of the move from third- to firstparty compulsory insurance. The effect is very small in magnitude, and not statistically significant. This suggests
that our results are robust to this concern.

18

states with low thresholds (less than $200), and two for states with high thresholds (greater
than $500). If the effect of no-fault on uninsured motorists is robustly positive, then we
expect this coefficient also to be positive: as the no-fault system becomes more stringent,
uninsured motorists increase. Our results confirm this: the effect of the level variable is
positive and significant.15 Of course, because the variable is categorical, the magnitude of the
effect is difficult to interpret.16 Likewise in column (5) we note that the effect of level on log
uninsured is positive and significant at a 1 percent level.
In columns (6) to (8) we examine the effect of no-fault on fatalities. In column (6) we
see that the direct effect is positive and significant. Thus, from hypothesis H2, the effect of
reduced liability dominates the effect of reduced insurance. The magnitude of the effect is on
the order of 6 percent. This corresponds to 2,400 to 3,200 lives in the United States
depending on the year.17 In column (7) we reestimate the effect in a four-year window of the
passage of no-fault legislation. Since the sample size is greatly reduced, it is not surprising
that the effect is no longer statistically significant. However, the sign of the effect remains
positive, although the magnitude is smaller. In column (8) we observe that the threshold
effect for fatalities is also positive and statistically significant. Overall, these results provide
strong evidence of the incentive effects of no-fault regulation. In Section 3.3, we observed
that, though drivers who are uninsured might in principle drive more carefully under nofault, insured drivers experience a reduction in their exposure to liability and would
accordingly drive less carefully. Given the relative proportions of these two groups, it is
natural that the latter effect dominates for fatalities.18
While the effect of no-fault on traffic fatalities is important, we wish to stress again
that it is not the sole consideration in assessing such a system. Such a system has benefits in
14

If we were to examine the effect of no-fault on uninsured in the full state-year sample the effect would be positive,
but smaller in magnitude and not significant. This is because in the full sample the effects of no-fault and
compulsory insurance are confounded (by the fact that they were typically introduced at the same time).
15
Rolph, Hammitt, and Houchens (1985) using a micro-level cross-section of insurance claims in 1977, show that
that a positive threshold leads to a reduction in bodily injury insurance claims. Our result differs because it allows
for state and year fixed effects, covers a much longer time horizon, and examines the impact of the threshold on
fatalities.
16
An additional check would be to exclude low-threshold states from the no-fault group. Our results are robust to
this specification.
17
This is on the lower end of the range of estimates produced by Cummins, Phillips, and Weiss (2000).

19

terms of reducing administrative costs, and these benefits might make it worthwhile even if it
increases traffic fatalities. Whether this would be the case, of course, would depend on the
magnitude of the effect, if any, on traffic fatalities.
6

Conclusion

This paper has investigated the effect of compulsory insurance regulation and no-fault
limitations on the incidence of uninsured motorists and on traffic fatalities. Also, using
compulsory insurance laws as an instrumental variable, we have investigated the effect of
insurance on traffic fatalities.
The evidence indicates that compulsory insurance rules do deliver their intended
effect, which is a significant reduction in the incidence of uninsured motorists. The evidence
also indicates that increasing the incidence of insurance produces an increase in fatalities.
The magnitude of this moral hazard effect is potentially large: a two percent increase in
fatalities for each percentage point decrease in uninsured motorists. While the switch by
some motorists to become insured increases fatalities, this is at least partly offset by the
effect of compulsory insurance on those drivers who chose to remain uninsured. These
individuals drive more carefully, which works to reduce fatalities. Finally, we have been able
to isolate the effect of the reductions in liability brought about by moves to a no-fault system.
Such reductions in liability produce a significant increase in fatalities. Our analysis indicates
that drivers’ behavior, like the behavior of economic agents in other contexts, is influenced
by financial incentives. Reductions in the expected financial costs of accidents, produced by
reductions in liability or by the purchase of liability insurance, lead to more traffic
fatalities.19
It is interesting to note that the presence of uninsured motorists is generally regarded
as a severe problem (see Insurance research Council (1999, 2000), National Association of
Independent Insurers (1999), and Kahzoom (2000)). Assuming that it is undesirable to have

18

In the full sample, the effect of no-fault on fatalities is smaller, though still statistically significant.
Our results in this paper contrast with those of Cohen and Einav (2001). The latter study finds that mandatory seat
belt laws are not associated with the moral hazard cost of increased fatalities. Whether this contrast in findings is
due to differences in the type of payoff affected, or other institutional features of the laws, is an open question.

19

20

uninsured motorists, researchers examining this subject have focused on ways to reduce the
incidence of such motorists. We do not doubt that a reduction in the incidence of uninsured
motorists will produce some benefits by increasing the extent to which accident victims are
compensated. Indeed work by Grabowski, Viscusi, and Evans (1989) documents an increase
in loss payments and a reduction in legal and administrative expenses under no-fault regimes.
However, our analysis indicates that such reductions are not an unmitigated good.
Automobile insurance also has a costly side, reducing precautions and increasing fatalities.20
Indeed, our work indicates that reducing the incidence of uninsured motorists might not
make potential victims better off. To be sure, when some uninsured motorists switch to
purchasing insurance, victims of accidents caused by these motorists might receive more
compensation. However, potential victims also would face a higher incidence of such
accidents. And, as long as victims cannot generally expect to be fully compensated for such
accidents (which they cannot, as insurance levels are often insufficient to cover damages
fully), increasing the number of accidents would be costly to potential victims. Whether or
not potential victims would benefit from reducing the incidence of uninsured motorists thus
would depend on which of these two effects is stronger, an issue which the present analysis
cannot resolve.
Our analysis also indicates that, whatever the benefits of moving to no-fault liability,
such benefits involve a significant moral hazard cost. In particular, the evidence suggests that
such moves increase fatalities, and that this increase is larger than has been previously
recognized.
Of course, our evidence does not enable us to reach an overall assessment of the rules
governing accident liability and accident insurance. By focusing on traffic fatalities alone, we
ignore, among other things, the effect of such rules on risk-bearing costs or on administrative
costs. However, our analysis does highlight some of the unintended consequences of the
rules governing automobile insurance and liability. By identifying and estimating the moral
hazard costs of automobile insurance and no-fault arrangements, our analysis highlights
important effects that should be taken into account in an overall assessment of these policies.
20

In a full cost-benefit analysis, the value of the additional loss of life would have to be assessed. For details, see the

21

extensive survey in Viscusi (1992), chapter 4.

22

References
American Insurance Association (1976-2000), Summary of Selected State Laws and
Regulations Relating to Automobile Insurance. New York: American Insurance
Association.
Angrist, Joshua, Guido Imbens, and Donald Rubin (1994), “Identification of Causal Effects
Using Instrumental Variables” (with discussion), Journal of the American Statistical
Association, Vol. 91, pp. 444-72.
Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav (2001), “The Effect of Mandatory Seat Belt Laws on Driving
Behavior and Traffic Fatalities,” Harvard Law School Olin Paper No. 341, forthcoming
Review of Economics and Statistics.
Cole, Cassandra R., Randy E. Dumm, and Kathleen A. McCullough (2001), “The Uninsured
Motorist Problem: An Investigation of the Impact of Enforcement and Penalty Severity
on Compliance,” Journal of Insurance Regulation, Vol. 19, pp. 613-637.
Cummins, J. David, Richard D. Phillips, and Mary A. Weiss (2001), “The Incentive Effects
of No-Fault Automobile Insurance,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 44, pp. 427464.
Derrig, A. Richard, Maria Segui-Gomez, Ali Abtahi, and Ling-Ling Liu (2002), “The Effect
of Population Safety Belt Usage Rates on Motor Vehicle-Related Fatalities,” Accidents
Analysis and Prevention, Vo. 34, pp. 101-110
Devlin, Rose Anne (1992), “Liability versus No-Fault Automobile Insurance Regimes: An
Analysis of the Experience of Quebec,” in George Dionne (ed.), Contributions to
Insurance Economics. London: Kluwer Academic, pp. 499-520.
Dewees, Don, David Duff, and Michael Trebilcock (1996), Exploring the Domain of
Accident Law. New York: Oxford University Press.
Edlin, Aaron (1999), “Per-Mile Premiums for Auto Insurance,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 6934.
Edlin, Aaron and Pinar Karaca Mandic (1999), “The Accident Externality from Driving,”
unpublished.
Gaudry, Marc, “Measuring the Effects if the No-Fault 1978 Quebec Automobile Insurance
Act with the Drag Model,” in Contributions to Insurance Economics (G. Dionne, editor).
Grabowski, Henry, W. Kip Viscusi, and William Evans (1989), “Price and Availability
Tradeoffs of Automobile Insurance Regulation,” The Journal of Risk and Insurance,
Vol. 56, pp. 275-299.

23

Huberman, Gur, David Mayers, and Clifford W. Smith (1983), “Optimal Insurance Policy
Indemnity Schedules”, The Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 14, 415-426.
Imbens, Guido, and Joshua Angrist (1992), “Identification and Estimation of Local Average
Treatment Effects,” Econometrica, Vol. 62, pp. 467-75.
Insurance Research Council (IRC) (1999-2000), Uninsured Motorists, Malvern, PA:
Insurance Research Council.
Kahzoom, J. Daniel (2000a), “What We Know about Uninsured Motorists and How Well We
Know What We Know,” Journal of Insurance Regulation, Vol. 17, pp. 59-93.
Kahzoom, J. Daniel (2000b), “Pay-at-the-Pump: Automobile Insurance are view of
Criticisms and Proposed Modifications,” Journal of Insurance Regulation, Vol. 18, pp.
448-496.
Keeton, R. William, and Evan Kwerel (1984), “Externalities in Automobile Insurance and
the Underinsured Driver Problem,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 149-179.
Kochanowski, S. Paul, and Madelyn V. Young (1985), “Deterrent Aspects of No-Fault
Automobile Insurance: Some Empirical Findings,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol.
52(2), pp. 269-288.
Landes, M. Elisabeth (1982), “Insurance Liability and Accidents: A Theoretical and
Empirical Investigation of the Effect of No-Fault Accidents,” Journal of Law and
Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 49-65.
Liao, Yu-Ping, and Michelle White (1999), “No-Fault for Motor Vehicles: An Economic
Analysis,” Department of Economics, University of Michigan, Working Paper No. 99016.
Levitt, Steven D. and Jack Porter (2001), “How Dangerous are Drinking Drivers?” Journal
of Political Economy, Vol. 109, pp. 1198-1237.
Levitt, Steven D. and Jack Porter (1999), “Sample Selection in the estimation of Air Bag and
Seat Belt Effectiveness,” NBER Working Paper No. 7210.
Ma, Yu-Luen, and Joan T. Schmidt (2000), “Factors Affecting the Relative Incidence of
Uninsured Motorists Claims,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol. 67, pp. 81-294.
McEwin, R. Ian (1989), “No-Fault and Road Accidents: Some Australasian Evidence,”
International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 9(1), pp. 13-24

24

Medoff, H. Marshall, and Joseph P. Magaddino (1982), “An Empirical Analysis of No-Fault
Insurance,” Evaluation Review, Vol. 6, pp. 373-392.
National Association of Independent Insurers (1999), The Ineffectiveness of Compulsory
Private Passenger Automobile Liability Insurance laws.
Pauly, M. (1968), “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 58, pp. 531-536.
Peltzman, Sam (1975), “The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 83, pp. 667-725.
Peltzman, Sam (1975), Regulation of Automobile Safety.
Enterprise Institute.

Washington, DC: American

Rolph, John, James Hammitt, and Robert Houchens (1985), “Automobile Accident
Compensation: How Pays How Much How Soon?” Journal of Risk and Insurance, Vol.
52, pp. 667-685.
Ruhm, Christopher J. (1996), “Alcohol Policies and Highway Vehicle Fatalities,” Journal of Health
Economics, Vol. 15, pp. 435-454.
Sherman, P.T. (1926), “Compulsory Insurance of Compensation for Injuries by Automobile
Accidents,” Pamphlets on Insurance, Vol. 4, no. 7.
Shavell, Steven (1979), “On Moral Hazard and Insurance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
pp. 541-562.
Shavell, Steven (1982), “On Liability and Insurance,” Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 13,
pp. 120-132.
Shavell, Steven (1987), Economic Analysis of Accident Law. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Shavell, Steven (2000), “On the Social Function and Regulation of Liability Insurance,”
Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance, Vol. 25, pp. 166-179.
Sloan A. Frank, Reilly B.A., and Schenzler, C.M. (1994), “Tort Liability versus Other
Approaches for Deterring Careless Driving,” International Review of Law and
Economics, Vol. 14, pp. 53-72.
Stone, Edward (1926), “Compulsory Automobile Liability Insurance,” Pamphlets on
Insurance, Vol. 4, No. 6.

25

Spence, A. Michael and Richard Zeckhauser (1971), “Insurance, Information and Individual
Action,” American Economic Review, Vol. 61, pp. 380-387.
Viscusi, W. Kip (1992). Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
White, Michelle J. (1989), “An Empirical Test of the Comparative and Contributory
Negligence Rules in Accident Law,” RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 20, pp. 308-330.
Winter, A. Ralph (2000), “Moral Hazard,“ in Handbook of Insurance (G. Dionne, editor).
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Zador Paul, and Adrian Lund (1986) “Re-Analysis of the Effects of No-Fault Auto Insurance
on Fatal Crashes,” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 53, pp. 226-241.

26

Variable
Traffic fatalities
Income per
capita
New cars
New cars per
registered
Population

Data Appendix
Description / Source
Total of people being killed in a car accident. Years available: 19701975. Source: Highway Statistics; 1975-1998. Source: the FARS.
Income per capita. Years available: 1976-1998. Source: 1976-1984,
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1983-1998, U.S. Census.
Number of new cars registered. Years available: 1975-1998. Source:
Ward’s Automotive Yearbook.
[New cars]/[registered]

Total population. Years available: 1970-1998. Source: Bureau of
Justice Statistics.
% Black
Percentage Black of population. Extrapolated between non-census
years. Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States.
% Hispanic
Percentage Hispanic of population. Extrapolated between non-census
years. Source: Statistical Abstract of the United States.
% Population
The percentage of people in the population at the age 5 to 17. Years
age 5-17
available 1970-1998. Source: the U.S. Census.
% Population
The percentage of people in the population at the age 18 to 24. Years
age 18-24
available 1970-1998. Source: the U.S. Census.
% Population
The percentage of people in the population at the age 25 to 44. Years
age 25-44
available 1970-1998. Source: the U.S. Census.
% Population
The percentage of people in the population at the age 45 to 64. Years
age 45-64
available 1970-1998. Source: the U.S. Census.
Property crimes
Number of property crimes. Years available: 1970-1998. Source:
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Property crimes
Total property crime per capita. Years available: 1970-1998. Source:
per capita
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Car registered
Number of cars registered. Years available: 1976-1998. Source:
Ward’s Automotive Yearbook.
Trucks registered Number of trucks registered. Years available: 1975-1998. Source:
Ward’s Automotive Yearbook.
Trucks, % of
[Truck]/([Truck]+[Car Registered]
total registered
Average speed
Years available: 1975-1995 Source: Highway Statistics.
Unemployment
Unemployment rate. Years available: 1970-1998. Source: Bureau of
rate
Labor Statistics.
Uninsured
Number of claims when an insured motorist is injured by a motorist
motorists
who does not have liability insurance or by hit and run motorist. Years
available: 1976-1997 (missing 1987 and 1988). Source: the Insurance
Research Council
Violent crime
Number of violent crimes. Years available: 1970-1998. Source:
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Violent crime
Total violent crime per capita. Years available: 1970-1998. Source:
per capita
Bureau of Justice Statistics.
Vehicle miles
Vehicle miles traveled for roads. Years available: 1970-1998. Source:
traveled, total
Highway Statistics.

27

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Accident Liability Regulations

Auto Insurance Regulations
Non
Compulsory
Compulsory
Insurance
Insurance
States
States
56.029
56.033
(2.732)
(1.939)
6.689
6.526
(1.923)
(2.975)
0.401
0.242
(0.244)
(0.219)
0.257
0.252
(0.081)
(0.101)
0.520
0.537
(0.076)
(0.084)
0.067
0.072
(0.020)
(0.020)
0.298
0.262
(0.121)
(0.085)
0.105
0.109
(0.116)
(0.132)
0.055
0.041
(0.072)
(0.073)
4937815
4391641
(5328238)
(4843204)
0.005
0.004
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.046
0.043
(0.012)
(0.013)
41120
36113
(42982)
(40572)
5.964
6.675
(1.976)
(2.350)
17048
12742
(6143)
(5140)
0.195
0.203
(0.021)
(0.023)
0.111
0.122
(0.017)
(0.016)
0.306
0.290
(0.025)
(0.030)
0.194
0.190
(0.017)
(0.015)
0.122
0.140
(0.062)
(0.081)
0.022
0.026
(0.007)
(0.008)

Full Sample

No-Fault
States

Non No-Fault
States

56.031
(2.462)
6.628
(2.373)
0.348
(0.247)
0.250
(0.097)
0.525
(0.079)
0.069
(0.020)
0.283
(0.112)
0.106
(0.122)
0.049
(0.072)
4732336
(5147961)
0.005
(0.003)
0.045
(0.012)
39025
(41837)
6.258
(2.152)
15617
(6170)
0.199
(0.023)
0.115
(0.017)
0.299
(0.029)
0.193
(0.017)
0.129
(0.070)
0.023
(0.007)

56.090
(2.592)
6.337
(1.422)
0.331
(0.250)
0.248
(0.082)
0.544
(0.079)
0.073
(0.019)
0.246
(0.116)
0.087
(0.086)
0.052
(0.042)
5845861
(4783559)
0.005
(0.003)
0.047
(0.013)
44648
(33047)
5.875
(1.979)
16442
(6826)
0.195
(0.025)
0.115
(0.018)
0.300
(0.027)
0.193
(0.019)
0.120
(0.069)
0.021
(0.006)

56.005
(2.407)
6.751
(2.669)
0.355
(0.246)
0.259
(0.090)
0.519
(0.078)
0.067
(0.020)
0.303
(0.106)
0.114
(0.132)
0.050
(0.082)
4315893
(5266206)
0.005
(0.004)
0.044
(0.012)
37505
(45308)
6.313
(2.170)
15285
(5856)
0.199
(0.021)
0.115
(0.017)
0.301
(0.028)
0.193
(0.016)
0.132
(0.070)
0.024
(0.008)

Minimum obs.

889

265

623

554

334

Maximum obs.

1327

364

912

874

402

Mean speed
Variance of speed
Seatbelt rate
% Drunk drivers
Cars registered per
population
% New cars
registered
% Trucks of total
registered
% Black
% Hispanic
Population
Violent crime per
capita
Property crime per
capita
Vehicle miles
traveled
Unemployment rate
Per capita income
% Population age 517
% Population age
18-24
% Population age
25-44
% Population age
45-64
Ratio uninsured
Fatalities per VMT

28

Table 2: Automobile Liability Insurance Law
State
Compulsory Insurance
No-fault Insurance
Alabama
No
Alaska
1986- (except for year 1989)
Arizona
1983- (except for years 1990-1995)
Arkansas
1988California
1975- (except for years 1990-1995)
Colorado
19741974Connecticut
19731973Delaware
1972District of Colombia 19841984-1986
Florida
1972-1977
1972Georgia
19751975-1991
Hawaii
19741974- (except for year 1998)
Idaho
1976Illinois
1989Indiana
1983Iowa
1998Kansas
19741974Kentucky
19751975Louisiana
1979Maine
1988Maryland
1973Massachusetts
Before 19691971Michigan
19731973Minnesota
19751975Mississippi
No
Missouri
1987Montana
1981Nebraska
1986Nevada
19741974-1979
New Hampshire
No
New Jersey
1973 1973New Mexico
1984 New York
Before 1969
1974North Carolina
Before 1969
North Dakota
1976 1976Ohio
1984 Oklahoma
1977Oregon
1980Pennsylvania
19751976-1983; 1990 Rhode Island
1992South Carolina
1974South Dakota
1987Tennessee
Texas
1984Utah
1974- (except for years 1990-1994) 1974 Vermont
1986; 1988-1989; 1992Virginia
1984Washington
1991West Virginia
1986Wisconsin
Wyoming
1980Number of states

46 state

17 states

29

Add-on Provision

1974-

19721987-

1973-

1971-

19721984-1989
1974- (except for year 1990)
19721973-

19721978197213 states

State
Iowa
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
North Dakota
Nebraska
Ohio
South Dakota
Wisconsin
Connecticut
District of Columbia
Massachusetts
Maine
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
Vermont
Alabama
Arkansas
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maryland
Mississippi
North Carolina
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
West Virginia
Alaska
Arizona
California
Colorado
Hawaii
Idaho
Montana
New Mexico
Nevada
Oregon
Utah
Washington
Wyoming

Table 3: Samples used for Compulsory and No-Fault
Region
Compulsory evaluation sample No-fault evaluation sample
Midwest
1970-2000
1998-2000
Midwest
1970-2000
1989-2000
Midwest
1970-2000
1983-2000
Midwest
1970-1973
1974-2000
Midwest
1970-1972
1973-2000
Midwest
1970-1974
1975-2000
Midwest
1970-2000
1987-2000
Midwest
1970-1975
1976-2000
Midwest
1970-2000
1986-2000
Midwest
1970-2000
1984-2000
Midwest
1970-1971
Midwest
1970-1971
Northeast
1970-1972, 1999-2000
1973-2000
Northeast
1970-1983
1984-1986
Northeast
1970-1971
1970-2000
Northeast
1970-2000
1988-2000
Northeast
1970
Northeast
1970-1972
1973-2000
Northeast
1970-1973
1970-2000
Northeast
1970-1975
1975-1983, 1990-200
Northeast
1970-2000
1992-2000
Northeast
1970-2000
1986, 1988-1989, 1992-2000
South
1970-2000
South
1970-1973
South
1970-1971
South
1970-1971
1972-1977
South
1970-1974, 1992-2000
1975-2000
South
1970-1974
1975-2000
South
1970-2000
1979-2000
South
1970-1972
South
1970-2000
South
1970-2000
1970-2000
South
1970-2000
1977-2000
South
1970-1973
1974-1989, 1995-2000
South
1970-2000
South
1970-1972
South
1970-1971
South
1970-2000
1986-2000
West
1970-2000
1985-2000
West
1970-2000
1983-1989, 1996-2000
West
1970-2000
1975-1989, 1996-2000
West
1970-1973
1974-2000
West
1970-1973
1974-2000
West
1970-2000
1976-2000
West
1970-2000
1981-2000
West
1970-2000
1984-2000
West
1970-1973, 1980-2000
1974-2000
West
1970-1971
West
1970-1973
West
1970-1977
West
1970-2000
1980-2000

30

Table 4: Are the Laws Predictable?
(1)
Compulsory
insurance
-0.022***
(-0.008)

(2)
Compulsory
insurance
-0.018**
(-0.009)

(3)
Compulsory
insurance
-0.017*
(-0.009)

(4)
No fault
insurance
-0.006
(-0.007)

(5)
No fault
insurance
-0.011
(-0.009)

(6)
No fault
insurance
-0.009
(-0.009)

Fraction of Blacks in
population

-0.49**
(-0.22)

-0.55**
(-0.25)

-0.50*
(-0.26)

-0.30
(-0.21)

-0.53**
(-0.26)

-0.56**
(-0.28)

Fraction of Hispanics
in population

-0.14
(-0.28)

-0.068
(-0.31)

0.031
(-0.33)

-1.51***
(-0.36)

-1.66***
(-0.41)

-1.59***
(-0.44)

-1.38e-09
(-3.35e-09)

-4.58e-09
(-3.80e-09)

-4.90e-09
(-3.99e-09)

2.01e-08***
(-3.44e-09)

2.27e-08***
(-4.02e-09)

2.17e-08***
(-4.23e-09)

Violent crimes per
thousand

24.0**
(-11.4)

29.9**
(-12.9)

28.4**
(-13.5)

-34.0***
(-10.5)

-30.6***
(-12.0)

-29.3**
(-12.7)

Property crimes per
thousand

1.94
(-1.85)

0.22
(-2.15)

0.036
(-2.25)

9.74***
(-1.76)

8.17***
(-2.05)

7.38***
(-2.16)

Real per capita income

-0.002
(-0.011)

0.013
(-0.013)

0.022
(-0.014)

0.083***
(-0.009)

0.092***
(-0.011)

0.099***
(-0.012)

% population between
ages 5 and 17

4.66***
(-1.05)

6.51***
(-1.37)

7.64***
(-1.52)

-4.15***
(-0.95)

-4.21***
(-1.22)

-3.89***
(-1.35)

% population between
ages 18 and 24

-3.85***
(-1.15)

-3.43***
(-1.27)

-2.88**
(-1.34)

1.13
(-1.07)

1.61
(-1.23)

1.88
(-1.32)

% population between
ages 25 and 44

6.30***
(-1.11)

5.61***
(-1.23)

4.90***
(-1.28)

-6.85***
(-1.00)

-7.08***
(-1.13)

-7.47***
(-1.19)

% population between
ages 45 and 64

7.24***
(-1.48)

7.62***
(-1.68)

7.87***
(-1.78)

-5.92***
(-1.35)

-6.77***
(-1.52)

-6.99***
(-1.62)

Lagged first difference
of ratio uninsured

0.088
(-0.31)

0.21
(-0.36)

-0.17
(-0.35)

-0.41
(-0.34)

Lagged fist difference
of fatalities

0.51
(-1.77)

0.96
(-2.02)

-1.18
(-1.89)

-0.87
(-2.18)

Dependent variable:
Percent unemployed

Population

Twice Lagged first
difference of ratio
uninsured

0.16
(-0.34)

-0.57
(-0.46)

Twice lagged first
difference of fatalities

0.42
(-2.03)

-0.25
(-2.17)

Observations

1221

910

808

1221

910

808

Predictive accuracy

0.68

0.70

0.72

0.77

0.78

0.78

Observations
1221
Standard errors in parentheses

910

808

1221

910

808

31

-0.20
(0.36)

Property crimes
per thousand

489

Observations

183

2.15***
(0.66)

-7.37e-10
(6.02e-10)

-8.73e-04
(0.002)

0.040
(0.74)

-9.30**
(4.21)

0.56
(0.43)

0.22
(0.14)

0.12*
(0.069)

(2)
Ratio uninsured in
4-year window of
passage of law
-0.031***
(0.006)

489

-3.82*
(1.98)

-1.11e-09
(7.06e-10)

-0.012
(0.009)

2.78
(2.75)

-14.9
(15.7)

-5.79***
(1.82)

1.17**
(0.59)

0.73***
(0.30)

-0.20***
(0.032)

(3)
log(ratio uninsured)

489

7.19e-04
(0.26)

-1.43e-10
(9.10e-11)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.35
(0.36)

2.63
(2.05)

-0.39*
(0.23)

-0.005
(0.076)

0.049
(0.039)

-0.017***
(0.004)

0.002
(0.003)

-0.025***
(0.004)

(4)
Ratio uninsured

803

0.002***
(2.86e-04)

3.93e-13***
(8.23e-14)

-3.24e-06***
(1.16e-06)

0.001***
(3.50e-04)

-0.003
(0.002)

5.14e-04***
(1.51e-04)

2.26e-04***
(5.76e-05)

2.18e-04***
(3.55e-05)

-1.34e-06
(4.75e-06)

(5)
Fatalities per
person

315

0.003***
(7.93e-04)

9.00e-13*
(4.64e-13)

-4.37e-06**
(2.14e-06)

0.002**
(8.37e-04)

-0.002
(0.005)

4.20e-04
(4.91e-04)

-1.96e-06
(1.48e-04)

3.63e-05
(7.89e-05)

(6)
Fatalities per person
in 4-year window of
passage of law
2.42e-06
(6.44e-06)

565

0.002***
(3.08e-04)

4.37e-13***
(1.05e-13)

-6.68e-06***
(1.34e-06)

0.002***
(4.29e-04)

-0.002
(0.002)

3.35e-04
(2.85e-04)

1.06e-04
(9.20e-05)

2.60e-04***
(4.70e-05)

-1.49e-05***
(4.60e-06)

-1.18e-05***
(4.01e-06)

8.65e-06*
(5.05e-06)

(7)
Fatalities per
person

32

R-squared
0.35
0.28
0.36
0.38
0.88
0.88
0.86
Notes: All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

0.30
(0.26)

% population
between 18 and 24

-1.33e-10
(9.27e-11)

1.71
(2.06)

Violent crime per
thousand

Real personal
income in 1984
dollars

-0.34
(0.24)

Fraction of blacks
in population

5.52e-04
(0.001)

-0.004
(0.077)

Proportion of
trucks

Percent
unemployed

0.057
(0.040)

-0.024***
(0.004)

(1)
Ratio uninsured

Car registration
per person

Verify insurance at
vehicle registration

Require proof of
insurance if
accident

Compulsory
insurance

Dependent
variable:

Table 5: The Effect of Compulsory Insurance

3.61e-04
(3.67e-04)
0.002
(0.003)
0.002***
(5.42e-04)
-8.04e-06***
(1.70e-06)
3.74e-13***
(1.32e-13)
0.003***
(4.16e-04)

5.41e-04*
(3.22e-04)
4.20e-04
(0.003)
0.002***
(4.85e-04)
-8.65e-06***
(1.50e-06)
3.51e-13***
(1.18e-13)
0.002***
(3.47e-04)

Fraction of blacks in
population

Violent crime per
thousand

Property crimes per
thousand

Percent unemployed

Real personal income
in 1984 dollars

% population between
ages 18 and 24

1.91e-04
(2.13e-04)

Proportion of new
cars

33

Observations
489
489
183
489
489
489
R-squared
0.76
0.69
0.80
0.71
0.70
0.75
Notes: All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

1.44e-07
(1.52e-07)

Alcohol consumption
per capita

0.003
(0.004)

0.005
(0.004)

-1.06e-06
(8.13e-07)

0.002***
(3.85e-04)

4.01e-13***
(1.25e-13)

-7.08e-06***
(1.69e-06)

0.002***
(5.54e-04)

0.002
(0.003)

1.61e-04
(3.51e-04)

6.90e-05
(1.10e-04)

(6)
IV, using
compulsory
insurance
Fatalities per
person
-4.20e-04*
(2.33e-04)

0.002***
(4.17e-04)

3.65e-13***
(1.32e-13)

-7.78e-06***
(1.70e-06)

0.001***
(5.75e-04)

0.003
(0.003)

4.20e-04
(3.67e-04)

-2.38e-04***
(1.00e-04)

(5)
IV, using
compulsory
insurance
Fatalities per
person
-6.00e-04**
(2.72e-04)

Average speed

0.002***
(3.79e-04)

3.73e-13***
(1.29e-13)

-9.29e-06***
(1.66e-06)

0.002***
(5.46e-04)

-1.25e-04
(0.003)

1.58e-04
(3.87e-04)

-7.26e-05**
(3.20e-05)
-1.74e-04*
(9.66e-05)

(4)
IV, using
compulsory
insurance
Fatalities per
person

3.10e-04***
(6.46e-05)

0.003***
(0.001)

4.98e-14
(9.15e-13)

-6.22e-06**
(2.97e-06)

0.002*
(0.001)

0.001
(0.006)

-1.99e-04
(6.38e-04)

-2.15e-04
(1.68e-04)

(3)
IV using
compulsory in 4
year window
Fatalities per
person
-1.29e-04
(2.69e-04)

Car registration per
person

Vehicle miles travel
per person

-2.42e-04***
(1.00e-04)

-1.95e-04**
(8.82e-05)

Fatalities per
person
4.51e-05
(6.27e-05)

(2)
IV, using
compulsory
insurance
Fatalities per
person
-6.05e-04**
(2.73e-04)

Proportion of trucks

log(ratio uninsured)

ratio uninsured

Dependent variable:

(1)
OLS

Table 6: The Effect of Uninsured Motorists on Fatalities

-4.48e-04
(0.001)

-1.57e-10*
(9.17e-11)

-0.38*
(0.23)

Percent unemployed

Real personal income
in 1984 dollars

% population
between ages 18 and
24
225

-0.35
(0.35)

-2.78e-10
(2.89e-10)

0.002
(0.002)

-3.07***
(0.58)

-3.78
(3.54)

528

-2.18
(1.84)

-8.29e-10
(7.43e-10)

-8.76e-04
(0.009)

-3.79
(2.59)

-22.8
(17.9)

2.25
(2.33)

528

-0.39*
(0.23)

-1.71e-10*
(9.18e-11)

-7.30e-04
(0.001)

-0.80***
(0.32)

-3.24
(2.21)

-0.34
(0.29)

528

-2.52
(1.82)

-9.37e-10
(7.33e-10)

-0.005
(0.009)

-2.78
(2.57)

-26.1
(17.7)

-0.058
(2.34)

-0.14
(0.46)

0.40
(0.32)

0.10***
(0.022)

(5)
log(ratio
uninsured)

671

5.92e-04***
(1.87e-04)

2.70e-13***
(7.15e-14)

-5.85e-06***
(9.89e-07)

7.14e-04***
(2.53e-04)

0.005***
(0.002)

2.11e-04
(1.68e-04)

9.89e-05*
(5.15e-05)

1.28e-04***
(3.19e-05)

2.58e-05***
(7.14e-06)

(6)
Fatalities per
person

291

.5.58e-04***
(2.32e-04)

5.90e-13***
(1.66e-13)

-3.28e-06***
(1.13e-06)

2.73e-04
(3.86e-04)

0.006***
(0.002)

-3.84e-04**
(1.92e-04)

5.09e-05
(6.45e-05)

-3.84e-05
(3.86e-05)

(7)
Fatalities per
person in a 4year window
7.59e-06
(8.63e-06)

671

5.77e-04***
(1.86e-04)

2.61e-13***
(7.10e-14)

-6.21e-06***
(9.86e-07)

8.23e-04***
(2.51e-04)

0.004**
(0.002)

7.81e-05
(1.71e-04)

1.27e-04***
(5.15e-05)

1.48e-04***
(3.16e-05)

1.04e-05***
(2.17e-06)

(8)
Fatalities per
person

34

R-squared
0.35
0.51
0.46
0.35
0.47
0.88
0.85
0.88
Notes: All specifications include state and year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.

528

-0.88***
(0.32)

Property crimes per
thousand

Observations

-3.04
(2.20)

Violent crime per
thousand

-0.030
(0.53)

-0.027
(0.058)

-0.16
(0.29)

-0.49
(0.47)

Fraction of blacks in
population

-0.17*
(0.087)

-0.053
(0.057)

Proportion of trucks

0.073
(0.33)

0.006
(0.040)

-0.12**
(0.060)

(4)
Ratio uninsured

-0.025
(0.040)

0.26***
(0.079)

(3)
log (ratio
uninsured)

Car registration per
person

0.040***
(0.015)

(2)
Ratio uninsured
in 4 year window

0.007***
(0.003)

0.031***
(0.010)

(1)
Ratio uninsured

level

No-fault

Dependent variable:

Table 7: The Effect of No-Fault Regulation

