                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      IN-STATE VERSUS OUT-OF-STATE STUDENTS:
                        THE DIVERGENCE OF INTEREST BETWEEN
                    PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES AND STATE GOVERNMENTS

                                            Jeffrey A. Groen
                                            Michelle J. White

                                          Working Paper 9603
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9603


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We are grateful to John Bound, Charles Brown, Paul Courant, Julie Cullen, Caroline Hoxby, Jim Poterba,
Rohini Somanathan, and the referees for very helpful comments. Previous versions of this paper were
presented at University of Michigan, the NBER Higher Education Workshop, and Cornell University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


©2003 by Jeffrey A. Groen and Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
In-State versus Out-of-State Students:
The Divergence of Interest between Public Universities and State Governments
Jeffrey A. Groen and Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 9603
April 2003
JEL No. I2, I29

                                             ABSTRACT
This paper examines the divergence of interest between universities and state governments
concerning standards for admitting in-state versus out-of-state students. States have an interest in
using universities to attract and retain high ability individuals because they pay higher taxes and
contribute more to economic development. In contrast, universities have an interest in their
graduates being successful, but little interest in where students come from or where they go after
graduation. We develop and test a model that illustrates the divergence of interest between
universities and their states. We find that public universities set lower minimum admissions
standards for in-state than out-of-state applicants, presumably following their states' preferences,
while private universities on average treat both groups equally. However we find that states in fact
gain financially when public universities admit additional out-of-state students. This is because
attending a public university in a particular state increases marginal students' probability of locating
in the state after graduation by the same amount regardless of whether students are from in-state or
out-of-state. And because marginal out-of-state students earn more, their expected future state tax
payments are higher.

We also estimate states' financial gain when public and private universities admit additional in-state
versus out-of-state students who have middle and high ability levels. Surprisingly, we find that high
ability students tend to be at least as strongly influenced in their adult location choices by where they
attend university than are middle and low ability students. Since high ability students also earn more,
this suggests that states gain financially when their universities attract high ability students,
regardless of whether the students are from in-state or out-of-state or the universities are public or
private. Our results suggest a rationale for public support of flagship public universities that can
attract high-ability students.


Jeffrey A. Groen                                Michelle J. White
Cornell University                              Department of Economics
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901                     University of California, San Diego
jg277@cornell.edu                               La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
                                                and NBER
                                                mwhite@ucsd.edu
                            In-State versus Out-of-State Students:
        The Divergence of Interest between Public Universities and State Governments1

                                   Jeffrey A. Groen and Michelle J. White

    States have an interest in using their public universities as tools to encourage economic
development. University study increases students’ human capital. Graduates with high levels of
human capital contribute to their local economies by starting their own new businesses, attracting
other businesses to the area, and raising wages generally. Attending a university in a particular
state increases graduates’ likelihood of locating in the state as adults because they develop local
connections. If attending university has a different effect on in-state versus out-of-state students’
probabilities of locating in that state, then states have an interest in favoring the particular group
whose location decisions are most sensitive at the margin.
    However universities’ interests differ from those of their states. Both public and private
universities have an interest in attracting high ability students, in maximizing revenue from tuition
and donations, and/or in having graduates who are rich and famous, but they have little interest in
where their students come from or where they go after graduation. Public universities in particular
often have a financial incentive to favor out-of-state over in-state students, because out-of-state
students pay higher tuition and universities may be able to keep the additional revenue for their
own purposes. Private universities have no particular interest in encouraging economic
development in their home regions, since economic development raises wages and land prices.
These factors suggest that there is a divergence of interest between public and private universities
and their state governments. Universities do not necessarily have an incentive to act in the best
interests of their states.
    In this paper, we explore the divergence of interest between public and private universities and
their states. We focus on standards for admission of in-state versus out-of-state students and on
whether universities act in their states’ interest in setting these standards. After a brief literature
review, section 2 develops several behavioral rules that represent states’ interest and universities’
interest in admitting in-state versus out-of-state students. These rules illustrate the divergence of
interest between universities and their state governments.            Section 3 tests the models using data

1
 We are grateful to John Bound, Charles Brown, Paul Courant, Julie Cullen, Caroline Hoxby, Jim Poterba, Rohini
Somanathan, and the referees for very helpful comments. Previous versions of this paper were presented at University
of Michigan, the NBER Higher Education Workshop, and Cornell University.


                                                         2
from College and Beyond for public and private universities. We find that public universities set
lower minimum admissions standards for in-state than out-of-state applicants, while private
universities treat both groups equally. However, correcting for selection bias, we find that the
location decisions of marginal in-state and out-of-state students are equally affected by attending a
public university. Because marginal out-of-state students have higher future earnings than
marginal in-state students, this means that states lose rather than gain financially when public
universities favor in-state applicants for admission. Finally we examine whether states would
benefit if public universities imposed maximum as well as minimum standards for admission.2


1. Literature Review
       Goldin and Katz’s (1998) study of the growth of public higher education from 1890 to 1940
supports the idea that state governments historically viewed public universities as tools for
encouraging economic development. During this period, manufacturing, mining, and agriculture
were all becoming more specialized and science-based. States that had substantial economic
activity in particular fields often established specialized public universities to train workers in these
fields and conduct research to advance the fields. Examples include tobacco farming in North
Carolina, dairy farming in Wisconsin, mining in Colorado, and oil exploration in Texas. Since
public universities provided training in fields that their states specialized in, graduates tended to
remain in the state. This allowed states to capture the benefits of their investments.
       College graduates create external benefits for other workers in the labor markets where they
locate as adults, regardless of whether they work in the specific fields that the state’s economy
specializes in. Moretti (2002) finds that wages of both high school and college graduates are
positively correlated with the share of college graduates in the local labor market. Also, college
graduates earn more than other workers and therefore pay higher state taxes. College graduates are
also more likely than other workers to start new businesses, which generate jobs for other workers
and raise demand for labor (Fan and White, 2002).
       Since the period studied by Goldin and Katz, markets for college education and college-
educated labor have become more spatially integrated. Hoxby (1997) argues that U.S. universities
have been transformed from local autarkies into competitors, since students who previously
attended universities close to home are now likely to attend universities that are further away. This

2
    For ease of exposition, we use the terms “university,” “college,” and “institution” interchangeably.


                                                              3
means that universities are increasingly forced to compete for students on regional or national
markets. As part of the same trend, demand for enrollment by out-of-state students has increased at
the top public universities (Mixon and Hsing, 1994).
    The fact that college graduates from one state may locate in other states after graduation affects
states’ incentives to invest in higher education. Strathman (1993) and Quigley and Rubinfeld
(1993) show empirically that states with more mobile populations spend less on public higher
education. Presumably these states expect to attract educated migrants from other states and/or
expect local students to move elsewhere, so that they have less incentive to provide public
universities to educate the local population. There may be a rationale for Federal intervention to
subsidize provision of public universities in states that have high migration rates.


2. Theory
    We first examine public and private universities’ interest in admitting in-state versus out-of-
state students and then turn to the state’s interest. Our model focuses on selective universities
because, among public universities, only those that are selective attract out-of-state applicants.
Because the model is intended for empirical implementation, we intentionally keep it simple.


2.1 The university’s interest
    The “equal cutoff rule.” Consider first the interest of public and private universities in
admitting in-state versus out-of-state students. Suppose the ability level of an in-state student i is
denoted si and the ability level of an out-of-state student o is denoted s o . The numbers of in-state

and out-of-state students of ability level si and s o who apply to the university and would attend if

accepted are denoted ni ( si ) and no ( s o ) for in-state and out-of-state students, respectively.

     Assume that universities select students by adopting minimum cutoff scores of si and s o for

in-state and out-of-state applicants, respectively. They reject all in-state applicants with s i < s i and

accept all in-state applicants with si ≥ si , and similarly for out-of-state applicants.3 Universities



3
  n i ( s i ) equals the number of in-state applicants of ability level s i times the proportion of in-state applicants of ability
level s i who would attend if accepted. The same applies to no ( s o ) . The functions ni ( s i ) and no ( s o ) are likely to
differ because in-state applicants are more likely to attend university near their homes. We treat these functions as
fixed because our dataset does not contain information on the full set of applicants to particular institutions.


                                                                4
have binding capacity constraints (total class size) of N . Universities’ goal is to set the cutoff
levels si and s o so as to maximize students’ average ability level:
                                            ∞                ∞
                                    1
                                   ( )[ ∫ si ni ( si )dsi + ∫ so no ( so )dso ] ,                       (1)
                                    N si                    so


subject to the capacity constraint:
                                       ∞                ∞
                               N = ∫ ni ( si )dsi + ∫ no ( so )dso .                                    (2)
                                       si               so


   The first order condition is:
                                                 si = so .                                              (3)
We refer to this result as the “equal cutoff rule” – it says that the cutoff levels for admission of in-
state and out-of-state students should be the same. It follows from the fact that universities are
assumed to care only about the average ability of their students, not about where they come from.
We test below whether public and private universities follow this rule. If private universities are
found to set equal cutoffs for both types of students while public universities are found to set lower
cutoffs for in-state students, then the result will provide support for the hypothesis that states
require or pressure public universities to favor in-state over out-of-state applicants at the margin.
   The “equal marginal revenue rule.” Another formulation of universities’ interest assumes that
they maximize a hybrid of average student ability and total revenue. Suppose universities still
admit students in declining order of ability until they reach the relevant cutoff, but they set the
cutoff levels to maximize total revenue rather average student ability. Suppose Ti and To denote
in-state and out-of-state tuition levels, respectively. Public universities always have higher tuition
levels for out-of-state than in-state students, while private universities have a single tuition level for
all students. Both types of universities may offer tuition discounts in the form of financial aid.
Universities also collect revenue in the form of donations from graduates. Suppose Di ( si ) and

Do ( so ) denote the expected present value of future donations from in-state and out-of-state

students of ability levels si and so , respectively. Future donations are assumed to depend on

student ability, because ability is positively related to earnings. Assume now that universities set
the cutoff levels s i′ and so′ so as to maximize the sum of tuition plus donations from in-state and
out-of-state students, or:



                                                             5
                                 ∞                                  ∞
                            1
                            N s∫'i
                              [ (Di ( s i ) + Ti )ni ( s i )dsi + ∫ (Do ( s o ) + To )no ( s o )ds o ] ,                  (4)
                                                                  s 'o


subject to the capacity constraint, eq. (2).
    The first order condition is:
                                                Di ( si′) + Ti = Do ( s o′ ) + To .                                       (5)
This rule – the “equal marginal revenue rule” – says that universities set the cutoff levels such that
they collect the same amount of revenue from marginal in-state and marginal out-of-state students.
    The “equal marginal revenue rule” suggests reasons why both private and public universities
might have an incentive to set different cutoff levels for in-state students (i.e., students who live
nearby) versus for out-of-state (i.e., distant) students. One reason is that in-state students are more
likely to locate close to the university as adults and this may cause them to donate more on average
than out-of-state students having the same ability levels. Another reason is that universities have
spatial monopoly power over in-state students, because some of them wish to attend college near
their homes. Private universities can take advantage of this monopoly power by giving less
financial aid to nearby students, but public universities probably cannot. (See Epple et al., 1999,
for discussion.)


2.2 The state’s interest
    The “equal additional tax payments rule.” Now consider the interests of an arbitrary state,
which we refer to as state X. In line with the view that states view universities as tools of state
economic development, we assume that state X’s goal is to maximize the present value of future
state tax revenues. Most states collect the bulk of their tax revenue from income and sales taxes.
Because these taxes are roughly proportional to income, high ability individuals pay higher taxes
because they earn more. (High income individuals tend to pay higher amounts of other state taxes,
such as property taxes and business taxes, as well.) Therefore state X has an interest both in
retaining high ability in-state students and attracting high ability out-of-state students. Both in-state
and out-of-state students are assumed to choose between attending college in state X or in some
other state. If students attend college in state X rather than another state, we assume that their
probability of locating in state X as adults rises, regardless of where they are from.4

4
  For some in-state students, the best alternative to attending the most selective public university in state X is to attend a
less selective public university in state X, rather than a university in some other state. In this case students’ probability


                                                                6
    Suppose p kj denotes students’ probabilities of locating in state X as adults. The subscript k

denotes home state and it equals y if the student’s home state is state X and n otherwise. The
subscript j denotes college state and it equals y if the student attends college in state X and n
otherwise. Thus p yy is the probability of students locating in their home states as adults if they

attend college there, p yn is the probability of students locating in their home states as adults if they

attend college out-of-state, and ∆pi = p yy − p yn denotes the increase in the probability of in-state

students locating in their home states if they attend college there rather than elsewhere. Similarly,
p ny is the probability of out-of-state students locating in the state where they attend college as

adults, p nn is the probability of students locating in a particular state as adults if they are neither

from the state nor attend college there, and ∆po = p ny − p nn denotes the increase in the probability

of out-of-state students locating in a particular state if they attend college there rather than
elsewhere. We assume that all of these terms vary with students’ ability levels. We further assume
that both ∆pi ( si ) and ∆po ( so ) are positive, but do not make any assumptions concerning their
relative magnitude. (We estimate these terms in the next section.)
    Suppose τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) denote the average present value of future state tax payments by in-

state graduates having ability level si and out-of-state graduates having ability level s o ,

respectively. The present value of future state tax revenues is assumed to increase with ability for
both types of students, but the relationship is assumed to differ for in-state versus out-of-state
students. The present value of future state tax revenues also varies across states because state tax
rates differ.5
    The state’s goal is for the public university to set cutoff levels ~
                                                                       si and ~
                                                                              so so as to maximize the
increase in expected future tax payments that results from in-state and out-of-state students,
respectively, attending public university in state X rather than elsewhere, or:

of locating in state X as adults is likely to be unaffected by which public university in state X they attend, so that –
according to our model – state X does not benefit when they are admitted to the most selective public university.
Because our dataset includes only public universities that are the most selective in their states, we ignore this
possibility.
5
  The functions τ i ( s i ) and τ o ( s o ) may differ because the relationship between ability and future earnings/future state
tax payments may differ for in-state versus out-of-state students. Note that students’ future earnings could also depend
on the type of university they attend, but we ignore this possibility. See Dale and Kreuger (2002) for discussion of
whether graduates of selective universities earn more.



                                                               7
                          ∞                                              ∞
                         [ ∫ ∆pi ( s i )τ i ( s i )ni ( s i )ds i + ∫ ∆p o ( s o )τ o ( s o )no ( s o )ds o ] ,   (6)
                          ~
                          si                                             ~
                                                                         so


subject to the same capacity constraint, eq. (2). The first order condition is:
                                ∆p (~ s )τ (~s ) = ∆p (~
                                             o       o  s )τ (~
                                                         o    s ).
                                                                 o                i   i   i   i                   (7)
Eq. (7) says that the state wants the public university to set cutoff levels such that the additional
expected future state tax revenue collected from the marginal student admitted is the same for in-
state versus out-of-state students. We call this the “equal additional tax payments rule.” If the
functions ∆po ( so ) and ∆pi ( si ) are identical in the region of the cutoff levels and the functions

τ i ( si ) and τ o ( so ) are also identical in the region of the cutoff levels, then the minimum cutoff
levels ~
       si and ~
              so for in-state and out-of-state students should be the same. But if ∆pi ( s ) > ∆p o ( s )

and/or τ i ( si ) > τ o ( so ) in the region of the cutoff levels, then the state will tend to favor a lower
cutoff level for in-state students, and vice versa.
   The “tuition offset rule.” States in fact receive revenue from students in two forms: tuition
payments from current students and future state tax payments from graduates who locate in the
state as adults. Therefore another formulation of the state’s objective is for public universities to
determine the cutoff levels for in-state versus out-of-state students by maximizing the sum of
tuition revenues plus the increase in expected future tax revenues from both types of students,
subject to the same capacity constraint. The first order condition implies that:
                              T − T = ∆p (~
                                       o    s ′)τ (~
                                                 i s ′) − ∆p (~
                                                             is ′ )τ (~
                                                                 i   is ′) .  i           o   o   o   o           (8)
This is the “tuition offset rule,” which says that the extra tuition paid by marginal out-of-state
students should just offset the extra future state tax payments paid by marginal in-state students
admitted to the public university. If this condition holds, then public universities are acting
according to the state’s interest. But if the left hand side of condition (8) is less than the right hand
side, then it would be in the state’s interest for public universities to set a lower cutoff for in-state
relative to out-of-state students, and vice versa. We test this rule below.
    Maximum cutoffs. So far we have assumed that it is in states’ interest for universities to admit
students in declining order of ability and to set only minimum cutoff levels for admission of in-state
and out-of-state students. However states may not have lexicographical preferences for higher over
lower ability students and may in fact prefer that universities set multiple cutoffs for one or both




                                                                         8
groups of students. In particular, we investigate the possibility that states might have an interest in
universities rejecting the highest ability applicants from in-state or out-of-state, because these
students’ location choices are unlikely to be affected by where they attend college. This possibility
is of interest because state legislators often seem reluctant to support public universities at the
expenditure levels required to attract high ability students.
    Suppose τ o ( so ) and τ i ( si ) increase monotonically with ability (since earnings are positively

related to ability), while ∆pi ( si ) and/or ∆po ( so ) may not be monotonically related to ability. One

possibility is that ∆pi ( si )τ i ( si ) and ∆po ( so )τ o ( so ) have the shapes shown in figure 1. Assuming
                                                                                                                             min
that the “equal additional tax payments rule” is followed, the minimum cutoff levels are set at s i
          min
and s o         , where the two curves intersect on the left hand side of the figure. As si increases,

∆pi ( si )τ i ( si ) increases monotonically, so that states do not want their universities to set maximum

cutoff levels for in-state students. But as so rises, ∆po ( so )τ o ( so ) rises to a maximum and then

falls sharply. At the point where ∆po ( so )τ o ( so ) < ∆p o ( s o          )τ o ( s o
                                                                       min                min
                                                                                                ) , states want universities to

set a maximum cutoff for out-of-state students. If the curve for in-state students also turned
downward at high ability levels, then states might want universities to set maximum cutoff levels
for in-state students as well. We test the model below.
    These arguments suggest that states may have an interest in their public universities having an
intermediate quality level: not too high because the highest ability students are unlikely to be
influenced in their location decisions by whether they attend college in the state, but not too low
because then relatively high ability in-state students would attend college elsewhere and be less
likely to settle in the state as adults.6


2.3 Summary
    The theory suggests several testable hypotheses. First, if universities’ goal is to maximize
average student ability and they are free to follow their own interests, then they are predicted to
follow the “equal cutoff rule” or the “equal marginal revenue rule.” Second, states prefer that
universities follow the “equal additional tax payments rule” or the “tuition offset rule,” under which

6
 Our model neglects various other reasons why states may favor admitting in-state students or high ability students to
public universities, including peer effects (Rothschild and White, 1995) or state legislators’ desire to appeal to voters
who want their children to be admitted to the most selective public university.


                                                            9
states gain equal additional revenue when a marginal out-of-state or in-state student is admitted to a
public university. Third, states may have an interest in public universities’ setting maximum as
well as minimum cutoffs for in-state and/or out-of-state students, depending on how the highest
ability students are influenced in their adult location decisions by attending the state university.
    In testing these hypotheses, we use data for both public and private universities. This is
because private universities are less likely to be influenced by their states’ preferences, so that their
behavior follows the model of university behavior just discussed. In contrast, public universities
are likely to follow a path that is intermediate between their states’ preferences and private
universities’ preferences.


3. Empirical Work
    Our primary data source is the Mellon Foundation’s College and Beyond (C&B). This dataset
includes information from students at 27 selective to highly selective colleges and universities who
entered college in 1976 or 1989. The 1976 cohort includes 32,000 students and the 1989 cohort
includes 36,000 students.7 For both cohorts, we have information from college records. For the
1976 cohort, we also have information from a survey of graduates conducted in 1996 that asked
questions concerning current state of residence and current income. There were 23,500 responses
to the survey.
    The C&B dataset fits our model well in that all of the institutions are selective and all enroll
substantial numbers of both in-state and out-of-state students. But two drawbacks of the dataset are
that the participating universities were not randomly selected (selection in part was based on
willingness to participate) and only four public universities – University of Michigan, Ann Arbor;
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Miami University (Ohio); and Penn State University –
are included. The C&B private institutions are generally representative of selective private colleges
and universities and the C&B public institutions are all flagship universities that compete regionally
and nationally with private universities for academically talented students and enroll substantial
numbers of out-of-state students. We address the question of whether the C&B sample is



7
  See Bowen and Bok (1998) for discussion of the C&B data. For the private institutions, all students in the entering
class were included in the dataset. For the public universities, a sample of 2,000 students from each entering class was
selected. We use institutional sample weights to account for the probability of being sampled. A list of institutions is
in Appendix Table 1.


                                                           10
representative of selective colleges/universities generally by repeating some of our calculations
using a different dataset that covers more institutions (see below).
    Table 1 shows that the average proportion of in-state students in the 1976 cohort was .83 at the
public universities and .29 at the private universities, but in the 1989 cohort, these figures dropped
to .76 and .23, respectively. The increase in out-of-state students over the period reflects the
increasing regional and national competition for students over the period.


3.1 Do universities follow the “equal cutoff rule?”
    Turn first to the question of whether universities follow the “equal cutoff rule.” We treat SAT
scores as our measure of student ability. Because it is impossible to identify a single student as the
marginal in-state or out-of-state student, we treat all in-state students in the lowest decile of the in-
state distribution at each university as marginal in-state students and we follow the same procedure
for out-of-state students. However because athletes and minority students are heavily represented
in the marginal group and they are likely to be admitted on different admissions criteria, we omit
these students before constructing the sets of marginal in-state and out-of-state students. (If
athletes and minorities were left in, we would primarily be testing institutions’ cutoffs for these
groups rather than for in-state versus out-of-state students.)8 For each institution, we construct the
average SAT score for in-state and out-of-state students in the lowest decile. We treat these values
as the cutoffs, si and s o . We then compute the value of ( s o − s i ) for each institution and we report

( s o − s i ) averaged over the groups of public and private universities.
    The results are given in the middle panel of table 1. For the 1976 cohort at public universities,
the average value of ( s o − s i ) is 51 points and the minimum and maximum values are 8 and 77,

respectively. The value of ( s o − s i ) is significantly different from zero for three of the four
institutions, using a one-tailed test. Thus our data suggest that public universities set higher
minimum cutoff levels for out-of-state students. Now turn to private universities. The average
value of ( s o − s i ) is 10 points, with a minimum of -122 and a maximum of 81. Thus, on average,
private universities treat in-state and out-of-state students equally, but there is a wide range of

8
  Since no information was available concerning athletic scholarships, we defined athletes as anyone who played an
intercollegiate sport during college. Minorities include African-Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans. For
public university students in the 1976 cohort, 40% of in-state students and 53% of out-of-state students in the lowest




                                                           11
behavior. To gauge the importance of the admissions advantage given to in-state students, we
calculate the share of the overall student distribution that is between the two cutoffs. For 1976, this
figure is 5 percent at public universities, compared to less than 1 percent at private universities.
Thus the in-state advantage at public universities is significant but not large, while in-state and out-
of-state students are treated equally at private universities.9
    We repeat the analysis using the 1989 cohort and the results are shown on the right-hand side of
table 1. The results show that public universities gave in-state students a larger advantage in 1989
than in 1976 – 84 points versus 51, while private universities’ behavior again treated both groups of
students equally, but with wide variation in their behavior. Overall the results suggest that public
universities consistently favor in-state students by a small margin, while private universities on
average treat in-state and out-of-state students the same.10
    In order to check on the representativeness of the C&B sample, we would like to replicate the
analysis of the “equal cutoff rule” with a dataset that contains more institutions. However we
found only one dataset that both contains more institutions and also has a large sample of students
at each institution. The Higher Education Research Institute (HERI) at UCLA annually surveys
college freshmen at a nationally representative sample of 4-year colleges and universities.
Unfortunately HERI only began to collect data on students’ state of residence starting in 2001, so
that our replication is for a later time period.
    We constructed two samples of institutions from the HERI data. The first includes 10 public
and 39 private institutions that are as selective as those in the C&B dataset. The second adds 5
additional public and 46 additional private institutions, all taken from the next-most-selective
category. All institutions in both samples have at least 10% out-of-state students.11 We followed
the same procedure as above to calculate average values of ( s o − s i ) . The bottom panel of table 1
gives the results. Examine the more selective sample first. For the public universities, the average

decile were athletes or minorities. For private university students in the same cohort, the figures were 55% and 47%,
respectively. For the 1989 cohort, the figures were 44%, 58%, 69%, and 57%, respectively.
9
  For the private institutions in 1976, the value of ( s o − si ) is significantly different from zero for only 6 of 22
institutions, using a two-tailed test.
10
   The value of ( s o − si ) is significantly different from zero for all of the four public institutions in 1989, using a one-
tailed test. We also repeated the analysis using the lowest 20% of SAT scores, rather than the lowest 10%, and the
results were similar.
11
   All private institutions had at least an 85% participation rate by students in the HERI survey and all public
institutions had a 75% participation rate. Institutions were also required to have data on students’ home states and
SAT/ACT scores for at least 75% of their students. There are 47,863 and 90,208 students in the two samples. See Sax
et al. (2001) for a discussion of the HERI survey.


                                                              12
value of ( s o − s i ) is 49 points and the share of the overall distribution between the two cutoffs is 4

percent. For the 39 private institutions, the average value of ( s o − s i ) is 33 points, but the range is

large. The average share of the overall distribution between the cutoffs is 2 percent. Thus the
results are similar to those using the C&B, even though the time period is later. Now examine the
results for the less selective sample. Both public and private institutions on average give a smaller
preference to in-state students. For publics, the share of the overall distribution between the two
cutoffs is only 3 percent, while for the privates, it is 1 percent. These results again suggest that
selective public universities give in-state students a small advantage in admission, while private
universities tend to treat students equally.


3.2 Do universities follow the “equal marginal revenue rule”?
  In the theoretical discussion, we argued that universities follow the “equal marginal revenue
rule,” i.e., they set minimum cutoffs such that revenue from tuition plus donations is the same for
marginal in-state versus marginal out-of-state students, or Di ( si′) + Ti = Do ( s o′ ) + To . The C&B
dataset includes information concerning donations, but only for graduates of private institutions. It
does not include information concerning individual student tuition levels (financial aid). We
therefore ignore differences in tuition levels across in-state versus out-of-state students – which in
any case are likely to be small for students at private institutions. The “equal marginal revenue
rule” then simplifies to a rule of equal donations by marginal in-state versus out-of-state students,
or Di ( si′) = Do ( s o′ ) . Although we only have data for graduates of private universities, we analyze
them on the grounds that the results are also suggestive for public universities’ behavior, assuming
that donations behavior by public versus private university graduates is similar. (Actually, most
public universities did not regularly solicit donations from graduates as of the mid-1990’s, but they
appear to be moving in that direction.)
  We have data on donations between 1991 and 1996 by graduates in the 1976 cohort. The data
cover 18 of the private institutions in our dataset and are taken from the institutions’ records. To
determine ( Do ( s o′ ) − Di ( si′)) for each institution, we constructed distributions of donations by the
marginal groups of in-state and out-of-state students at each institution (again excluding athletes
and minorities). We focus on the 75th percentile value in each distribution, because average
donations are heavily affected by large gifts and the median donation is usually zero. We found the



                                                     13
difference between the 75th percentile donation by marginal out-of-state versus marginal in-state
students at each of the 18 institutions and then calculated the average value. The results are that the
average value of ( Do ( s o′ ) − Di ( si′)) is $17 per year and the range is from -$58 to $117 per year.

Out-of-state students give more than in-state students at 14 of the 18 institutions and the average
difference in donations is $17 per year. But the difference in donations is significantly different
from zero at only one of the 14 institutions. Thus the results do not support the idea that
universities give in-state students an advantage in admissions because they donate more. On the
contrary, they suggest that private institutions, at least, have an interest in treating in-state and out-
of-state students equally.12


3.3 The effect of attending college in a state on adult location choice.
     In order to test the “equal additional tax payments rule,” we must estimate the increase in
marginal in-state versus out-of-state students’ probabilities of locating in a particular state as adults
when they attend college there. These effects are denoted ∆pi ( s i ) and ∆p o ( s o ) for marginal in-

state and out-of-state students, respectively. Our sample consists of students in the 1976 cohort
who responded to the 1996 survey, so that we observe students’ locations 16 years after graduation
from college. We drop students who are from outside the U.S. or lived outside the U.S. at the time
of the survey. Also for reasons discussed below, we drop students if they did not answer survey
questions that asked which universities they applied to.
     We use a conditional logit model. Because students can locate in any of the 50 states plus the
District of Columbia, each student enters the sample 51 times.13 The dependent variable equals one
for the state where the student lived at the time of the survey and zero for all other states. Pre-
college and college locations are represented by three dummy variables: home equals one for the
student’s home state and zero otherwise, college equals one for the state in which the student
attended college and zero otherwise, and home×college is an interaction between the home and
college variables.14 The omitted category is states that are neither the student’s home state nor
his/her college state. We represent students’ ability level with three dummy variables: low SAT

12
   The same result also emerges if we examine donation behavior only by students who donate positive amounts or if
we run a regression explaining donations as a function of in-state versus out-of-state status, SAT score, and income at
the time of the survey. The average donation in the marginal group of students is $66/year.
13
   The conditional logit model is intended for situations in which individuals choose from among more than two
mutually exclusive categories. See Greene (2000, Section 19.7).
14
   Students’ home states are the states where the high schools from which they graduated are located.


                                                           14
equals one if the student is in the lowest quintile of the SAT distribution for in-state or out-of-state
students (whichever is relevant), middle SAT equals one if the student is in any of the three middle
quintiles, and high SAT equals one if the student is in the highest quintile. Also we define a
dummy variable for whether students attended public versus private universities. In order to
estimate ∆pi ( s i ) and ∆p o ( s o ) for the marginal groups of students at public and private universities,

we interact the three location variables with three SAT variables and interact the resulting variables
with the public versus private variable. We also include state fixed effects.15
     The results of the regression are given in Appendix table 2. The results are used to predict p yy ,

 p yn , ∆p i , p ny , p nn , and ∆p o for in-state versus out-of-state students in the lowest quintile of the

SAT distribution at public and private universities. The results are shown in table 2, columns (1)
and (2). Because state fixed effects are included in the regression, the estimates differ across states
and we show the results for a representative state.16 The probability of marginal in-state students
locating in their home states as adults if they attend college there ( p yy ) is .55 for public university

students and .51 for private university students. These figures suggest that home state is an
important factor in determining graduates’ post-college location choices. If students instead attend
college outside their home states, the probability of locating in their home states after college ( p yn )

falls to .32 for both public and private university students.17 Thus the increase in the probability of
in-state students locating in their home states if they attend college there is ∆pi ( s i ) = .55 - .32 = .23
for public university students, compared to .19 for private university students. For marginal out-of-
state students, the probabilities of locating in the state where they attend college ( p ny ) are .15 and

.07 if they attend public or private universities, respectively, and the probability of locating in a
particular state if they are neither from the state nor attended college there ( p nn ) is .01 for both
types of universities. Thus the increase in the probability that marginal out-of-state students locate

15
   We use the lowest quintile rather than the lowest decile of the relevant distributions as our marginal groups, because
some of the data come from the post-college survey, which has fewer observations than the college records used in the
previous section. State fixed effects are included to capture relative sizes of states, climate, and other factors that vary
across states but not across individuals.
16
   We do not identify the representative state, because the confidentiality rules for the C&B dataset preclude reporting
results for particular institutions and most states contain only one institution.
17
   This figure is calculated assuming that students from a particular state who attend an out-of-state institution rather
than an in-state public university may attend either a public or a private institution. We make this assumption because
the number of students in our sample who attended an out-of-state public university is fairly small. As a result, the
value of p yn is the same for both public and private universities. A similar point applies to the calculations of p nn .


                                                             15
in a particular state if they attend college there ( ∆p o ( s o ) ) is .14 for public university students and
.06 for private university students.
   An implication of these results is that attending a public university has a much larger effect on
students’ post-college location choices than attending a private university. This may be because,
when students attend public universities, they meet many more in-state students than they would if
they attended a private university in the same state. But another possibility, which we now
consider, is that there may be selection bias arising from students’ choice of where to attend
college. In particular, whether students attend college in a particular state may be correlated with
whether they would like to live in that state after graduation.
  For example, students from Ohio who want to remain close to their families are likely both to
attend college in Ohio and to locate in Ohio after graduation. But students from Ohio who want to
live in warm climates are likely both to attend college in Arizona and to locate in Arizona (or
another warm state) after graduation. Ignoring this factor causes our estimates to overstate the
effect of going to college in a state on the probability of locating in that state after graduation. Our
estimate of p yy is based on natives of a representative state who attend college in their home state.

This group, on average, is predisposed to their home state as a post-college location. But our
estimate of p yn is based on natives of the same state who go to college outside their home state and

therefore tend to be predisposed against their home state as a post-college location. These effects
cause our estimates of p yy to be biased upward and p yn to be biased downward, so that our

estimate of ∆p i is biased upward. Similarly, our estimate of p ny is based on non-natives of the

representative state who attend college in the state and are predisposed to the state as a post-college
location; while our estimate of p nn is based on non-natives of the state who don’t attend college

there and are pre-disposed against locating there. These effects cause our estimate of ∆p o to be
biased upward. In both cases, the treatment group is composed of students who are predisposed to
the state and the control group is composed of students who are predisposed against the state.
    To address this problem, we use information concerning the set of institutions that students
applied to but did not attend. We have information on up to four such institutions. Since location
preferences are a factor in college choice, students reveal information about their location
preferences by the locations of the colleges they apply to. We re-estimate the model of adult
location choice but with two changes. First, we restrict the sample to students who applied to


                                                      16
colleges in more than one state, since this group of students does not have strong preferences to
locate in a particular state. Second, we define a new dummy variable apply that equals one if a
student applied to at least one institution in a state and zero otherwise. We interact apply with all of
the variables involving home and we also introduce a new set of variables that interact apply with
the dummy variables for the low, middle, and high SAT score regions and with the dummy variable
for public versus private institution. Adding the latter group of variables allows us to use the
information concerning students’ applications to colleges in states other than their home or college
states, where these states are the omitted category for the home and college variables.18
     The results of the model are given in Appendix table 3. We use them to re-do our predictions
of p yy , p yn , etc., for marginal students at public and private institutions, using the same

representative state as before. The results are shown are in columns (3) and (4) of table 2.
Comparing the adjusted and unadjusted results for public university students, we find that p yy falls

from .55 to .45 and p yn rises from .32 to .34. Both of these changes are in the predicted direction.

This causes our estimate of ∆pi ( si ) for marginal in-state public university students to fall from .23

to .11. Similarly pny falls from .15 to .14 and p nn rises from .01 to .04, so that ∆p o ( s o ) for

marginal out-of-state public university students falls from .14 to .10. For private universities, the
changes are similar: ∆pi ( si ) falls from .19 to .08 and ∆p o ( s o ) falls from .06 to .02. Thus

adjusting for bias in the estimation of ∆pi ( s i ) and ∆p o ( s o ) sharply reduces the predicted effect of

attending college in a state on the probability of graduates’ locating in that state. For in-state
students, the adjusted results show that attending a public university has only a slightly larger effect
on post-college location choice than attending a private university does, although the difference
remains large for out-of-state students. But the most surprising result of the adjustments is that
attending a public university has nearly the same effect on whether marginal in-state versus out-of-
state students locate in the state after graduation (.11 versus .10). This differs from the unadjusted
results, where the in-state student effect was considerably larger.


3.4 Do universities follow the “equal additional tax payments rule?”

18
   40% of marginal in-state students and 80% of marginal out-of-state students applied to colleges in more than one
state. There are no interactions between college and apply, since students must have applied to a college in the state




                                                           17
    Now consider the “equal additional tax payments rule,” eq. (7). This says that states would like
public and private universities within their boundaries to set cutoff levels such that the increase in
expected future state tax payments when a marginal student is admitted is the same for students
from in-state versus out-of-state. This requires that the difference between expected additional
state tax payments from marginal in-state versus out-of-state students,
∆pi ( s i )τ i ( s i ) − ∆p o ( s o )τ o ( s o ) , equals zero. We refer to this term as Difference.

   We estimated ∆pi ( s i ) and ∆p o ( s o ) in the previous section. Now turn to expected future state

tax payments by marginal students, τ i ( si ) and τ o ( so ) . Our only observation of graduates’ incomes
comes from their answers to the 1996 survey, which asked about income during the previous year.
However, graduates earn income and pay taxes to the state every year. We therefore convert
reported income in 1995 for each graduate in the sample into an estimate of lifetime income,
expressed in 1995 dollars. We use age-earnings data for college graduates from Murphy and
Welch (1990) and standard mortality tables.19 We estimate that lifetime income is 38 times the
value of income in 1995. We then convert graduates’ lifetime incomes into lifetime state tax
payments by multiplying lifetime incomes by the sum of the income and sales tax rates in 1995 in
the state where the graduate attended college. For all of the states represented in our sample, the
average combined tax rate is 9.8 percent.20
   We then compute average lifetime state tax payments for in-state and out-of-state students in the
lowest quintile of the relevant distribution for each institution in our sample. These are denoted
τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) , respectively. Because our estimates of average income are affected by students’
location preferences, we compute τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) both with and without adjustments for location

preferences. The unadjusted values of τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) are based on all students in the relevant



where they attended college. See Groen (2003) for further discussion of the specification and estimation results using
a different dataset. The results are similar to those reported here.
19
   Murphy and Welch (1990, table 9) report that earnings of college graduates increase by 74.3% during the first 10
years of labor market experience, increase by 29.3% during the next 15 years of experience, and decline by 9.8%
during the next 15 years of experience. Our figure for earned income is assumed to be for the 16th year of labor market
experience. We discount income over 10-year age ranges by the probability of death in that range, using mortality data
for 1998 from Murphy (2000), table 23, p. 80. We do not apply a discount rate, since the figures for earnings growth
are in real terms. The resulting figures underestimate true lifetime state tax payments because they neglect earnings
from wealth and pensions, but they overestimate true lifetime state tax payments by assuming that all graduates work
for 40 years and that all income is subject to taxes.
20
   See Council of State Governments (1996), tables 6.21 and 6.23. Tax rates are as of January 1, 1996. Note that most
states’ income taxes are approximately constant rather than strongly progressive.


                                                            18
marginal group, while the adjusted values of τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) are based on students in the
marginal group who applied to colleges in more than one state.21
       The middle rows of table 3 report the results for τ i ( si ) and τ o ( s o ) , averaged over the groups of

public versus private universities. The unadjusted estimates are shown in the left panel. At public
universities, lifetime state tax payments by marginal out-of-state students are 25 percent higher than
those by marginal in-state students ($225,000 versus $177,000, respectively). This difference could
be due to strong location preferences by in-state students, who may pass up lucrative opportunities
in order to remain near home. In addition, the difference could be explained by the lower average
ability of marginal in-state students at public universities, since these students were subject to a
lower minimum cutoff level for admission. Marginal private university students have higher
lifetime state tax payments than marginal public university students, regardless of whether they are
from in-state or out-of-state. This could reflect weaker preferences to remain near home or higher
minimum cutoffs at private universities, or both. When the results are adjusted, as shown on the
right side of table 3, the differential between out-of-state versus in-state students at public
universities falls ($227,000 versus $185,000, respectively). But at private universities, the ranking
is reversed and in-state students’ average tax payments are higher than those of out-of-state
students ($273,000 versus $264,000, respectively). Since we have adjusted for location
preferences, the remaining differential probably reflects differences in average ability levels
between out-of-state and in-state students.
        Now turn to the value of Difference for the marginal group of students. The average
unadjusted value for public universities is $9,400 and the range for the various institutions in our
sample is from $3,600 to $16,800. This reflects the balance of two opposing effects: in-state
students earn less and therefore pay lower state taxes than out-of-state students, but the effect of
attending university in the state on their adult location choices is higher. Since Difference is
positive, the latter effect more than offsets the former. But with adjusted figures, the picture
changes. The average adjusted value of Difference for public universities is -$2,000, because in-
state students earn less than out-of-state students and the “pull” of attending university in the state
is about the same. The implication is that, as of 1976, states would have benefited financially if
public universities had reduced the advantage they gave to marginal in-state students and accepted
more marginal out-of-state students.

21
     We again use the lowest 20% of in-state and out-of-state students (by SAT score) at each institution.


                                                             19
     For private universities, the results are different. The unadjusted average value of Difference
for private universities is $32,600 and the adjusted figure is $17,400. Therefore state governments
would collect more tax revenues if private universities had used lower minimum cutoff levels for
in-state students in 1976.


3.5 Test of the “tuition offset rule”
   Now consider the “tuition offset rule,” eq. (8). Under this rule, the present value of extra state
tax payments collected from a marginal in-state student rather than a marginal out-of-state student
(Difference) should just offset the tuition differential between out-of-state and in-state students at
public universities. To evaluate this rule, we need information for 1976 on the tuition differential
between out-of-state and in-state students ( To − Ti ) at each of the four public universities in the

C&B. We multiply the tuition differential by four years of college and then convert the result to
1995 dollars using the consumer price index. We adjust the tuition differential to take account of
the fact that it is collected 16 to 19 years earlier than the date for which we calculate Difference,
which is 1995, using a real discount rate of .02 per year. The resulting average tuition differential
is $25,600.
   Table 4 summarizes the tuition offset rule for the public universities in our sample, using both
adjusted and unadjusted figures for state tax payments. Using the unadjusted figures, a marginal
in-state student generates $9,400 more in lifetime state tax payments than a marginal out-of-state
student, but pays $25,600 less in tuition, for a net loss to the state of $16,200. Using the adjusted
figures, the state’s net loss is larger: $27,700. These results suggest that states would have gained
substantially if public universities had not favored in-state students as strongly as they did in 1976.


3.6 Do states have an interest in setting maximum as well as minimum cutoffs?
   Now turn to whether states would gain if universities set maximum as well as minimum cutoff
levels for in-state or out-of-state students. To investigate this issue, we calculate Difference
separately for all three ability regions of the SAT distribution: the lowest quintile, the three middle
quintiles, and the highest quintile. Instead of calculating Difference for each institution and then
summarizing across groups of institutions (our procedure in the previous sections), we instead pool
the individual-level data across institutions, keeping public versus private university students




                                                   20
separate. For each group, we calculate average lifetime state tax payment.22 This procedure abstracts
from the characteristics of existing institutions because we wish to address the general question of
whether states gain when high ability students attend public or private universities within their
borders. We use the same procedure to adjust for location preference as above.
      Table 5 gives the results. For in-state students at public universities, the probabilities of
locating in the home state after graduation ( p yy ) are .45, .42, and .39 for the lowest, middle, and

highest ability groups, respectively. For out-of-state students, the probabilities of locating in the
home state ( p yn ) are .34, .28, and .19 for the three groups, respectively. Thus home state becomes

a smaller influence on adult location choice as ability increases, both for in-state and out-of-state
students. This is probably because higher ability students have better opportunities generally than
lower ability students, so that their best opportunities are more likely to involve leaving their home
states. But a surprising result is that, because p yn falls faster than p yy , ∆pi ( s i ) rises as ability

increases: the figures are .11, .13, and .20 for the low, middle, and high ability groups,
respectively.23 For in-state private university students, the highest value of ∆pi ( s i ) is again the
value for high ability students: the figures are .08, .06, and .09 for the low, middle and high ability
groups, respectively. Thus high ability students are more influenced in their adult location choices
by attending college in their home states than are middle or low ability students, regardless of
whether they attend public or private universities.
     Now consider out-of-state students. For public universities, p ny and p nn are not

monotonically related to ability and therefore ∆p o ( s o ) does not have a consistent pattern: it is .10,

.09, and .11 for the low, middle, and high ability groups, respectively. At private universities,
∆p o ( s o ) is lower and again does not have a monotonic relationship with ability: it is .02, .04, and
.03 for the low, middle, and high ability groups, respectively. Thus there is little relationship
between ability and how out-of-state students’ location choices are influenced by where they attend
college. The only strong pattern for out-of-state students is that their adult location choices are
more strongly influenced by where they attend college if they attend a public rather than private
institution.

22
   In the calculations, we use only students who applied to colleges in more than one state. The SAT score ranges for
the three groups of students are: 400-1040, 1040-1330, and 1330-1600.
23
   The difference between the figures for the low versus high ability groups is statistically significant (see table 5).


                                                           21
    Now turn to the lifetime state tax payment figures in table 5. As expected, they increase
monotonically with ability for all types of students. For example, in-state public university
students have lifetime state tax payments of $205,000, $237,000, and $292,000 in the lowest,
middle, and highest SAT categories, respectively. The increases are similar for other groups of
students. Also within ability levels, out-of-state students have higher lifetime state tax payments
than in-state students at public universities, but the pattern is reversed at private universities.
(However, the differences are usually not statistically significant.)
    The figures for Difference, ∆pi ( s i )τ i ( s i ) − ∆p o ( s o )τ o ( s o ) , are given at the bottom of Table 5.

Because both the “pull” of attending college in a particular state and lifetime state tax payments
increase with ability, Difference also increases with ability. For public university students, the
figures are -$700, $5,100, and $22,900 for the lowest, middle, and highest ability groups,
respectively, and for private university students, they are $16,800, $8,000, and $20,600. Because
Difference is negative only for low ability public university students, the results suggest that states
lose financially when public universities admit additional in-state students from the lowest ability
group and gain financially when they admit additional in-state students from either the middle or
the highest ability groups.
    Putting these results together, they suggest the following: (1) States would gain financially if
public universities reduced the extent to which they favor in-state over out-of-state students at the
low ability margin. (2) States would also gain financially if public universities attracted more high
ability students, both from in-state and out-of-state. This is because high ability students tend to be
more influenced in their adult location decisions by where they attend college than are middle or
low ability in-state students and they also pay the highest state taxes. This suggests a rationale for
public support of at least one flagship public university that has high academic quality and is likely
to attract high ability students from both in-state and out-of-state. (3) States also have a large
financial gain when private universities within their boundaries attract high ability in-state students,
although the gain is lower when private universities attract high ability out-of-state students. This
suggests a rationale for states to subsidize scholarships for high-ability in-state students at private
universities within their boundaries. (4) Finally, our data do not support the idea of imposing
maximum cutoff levels at public universities for either in-state or out-of-state students. This is
because states gain more financially when an additional high ability student is admitted than when




                                                          22
an additional low ability student from in-state is admitted, regardless of whether the high ability
student is from in-state or out-of-state.


4. Conclusions
   In this paper, we examine the divergence of interest between universities and state governments
concerning standards for admitting in-state versus out-of-state students. States have an interest in
using universities to attract and retain high ability individuals because they pay higher state taxes
and contribute more to economic development. In contrast, universities have an interest in their
graduates being successful, but little interest in where their students come from or where they go
after graduation. We show that universities have an incentive to set equal admissions cutoffs for
marginal in-state versus out-of-state students. In contrast, states may gain when universities set
lower minimum admissions cutoffs for in-state than out-of-state students, if in-state students’ future
location choices are more affected by attending public university than are out-of-state students’.
   We test the predictions of the model for both public and private universities, using the Mellon
Foundation’s College & Beyond dataset. Because the C&B dataset covers only a limited number of
universities that were not randomly selected, our results are more tentative than they would be with
a larger and more representative set of institutions.
   We find that when athletes and minorities are omitted from the analysis, public universities
consistently set lower minimum admissions cutoffs for in-state than out-of-state students. The
proportion of students who are between the in-state and out-of-state minimum cutoffs is 5 to 8
percent. Private universities, in contrast, treat in-state and out-of-state applicants equally.
Surprisingly, we find that states gain more in expected future state tax revenues when marginal
out-of-state students are admitted to public universities than when marginal in-state students are
admitted. Thus when states pressure their public universities to set lower cutoffs for in-state than
out-of-state applicants, they are acting against their own financial interest.
   We also investigate whether states would gain if public universities set maximum as well as
minimum cutoffs for admission of in-state or out-of-state students, i.e., if they discouraged high
ability students from attending. We find that as ability increases, students are more rather than less
influenced in their location decisions by where they attend college, regardless of whether they are
from in-state or out-of-state. And because higher ability students pay higher state taxes, states
benefit when higher ability students from both in-state and out-of-state attend public universities.



                                                   23
Thus states would not benefit from public universities setting maximum cutoffs for admission. On
the contrary, they gain from having a flagship university that attracts high ability students from
both in-state and out-of-state.




                                                  24
                                               References

 Bowen, W.G. and D. Bok (1998), The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences of Considering Race
in College and University Admissions. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press.

 Council of State Governments (1996), The Book of the States, 1996-97 edition (vol. 31). Lexington, KY.

 Dale, S.B., and A.B. Krueger (2002), “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College: An
Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 117, pp.
1491-1528.

 Epple, D., R. Romano, and H. Sieg (1999), “Peer Effects, Financial Aid, and Selection of Students into
Colleges and Universities: An Empirical Analysis,” working paper, Carnegie Mellon Univ. Forthcoming,
Journal of Applied Econometrics.

 Fan, W., and M.J. White (2002), “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial Activity.” NBER
working paper no. 9340. Forthcoming, J. of Law & Economics.

 Goldin, C., and L. Katz (1998), “The Origins of State-Level Differences in the Public Provision of Higher
Education: 1890-1940,” American Economic Review, vol. 88, pp. 303-308.

 Greene, W.H. (2000), Econometric Analysis, 4th edition. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

 Groen, J. (2003), “The Effect of College Location on Migration of College-Educated Labor,” working
paper, Cornell University.

 Hoxby, C.M. (1997), “How the Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education Explains College
Tuition,” NBER working paper no. 6323.

 Mixon, F.G., Jr., and Y. Hsing (1994), “The Determinants of Out-of-State Enrollments in Higher
Education: A Tobit Analysis,” Economics of Education Review, vol. 13, pp. 329-35.

 Moretti, E. (2002), “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal and
Repeated Cross-Sectional Data,” NBER working paper no. 9108. Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.

 Murphy, K.M., and F. Welch (1990), “Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol.
8, pp. 202-229.

 Murphy, S.L. (2000), “Deaths: Final Data for 1998,” National Vital Statistics Reports, Vol. 48, No. 11.
Hyattsville, Md.: National Center for Health Statistics.

 Quigley, J.M., and D.L. Rubinfeld (1993), “Public Choices in Public Higher Education,” in Clotfelter, C.T.
and M. Rothschild, eds., Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press, pp. 243-278.

 Rothschild, M., and L.J. White (1995), “The Analytics of the Pricing of Higher Education and Other
Services in Which the Customers are Inputs,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 103, pp. 573-586.

 Sax, L.J., J.A. Lindholm, A.W. Astin, W.S. Korn, and K.M. Mahoney (2001), The American Freshman:
National Norms for Fall 2001. Los Angeles: Higher Education Research Institute, UCLA.



                                                     25
  Strathman, J. (1994), “Migration, Benefit Spillovers and State Support of Higher Education,” Urban
Studies, vol. 31, pp. 913-920.




                                                    26
                                    Figure 1:
                Student Ability and Future State Tax Payments by
                       In-State vs. Out-of-State Students:
                                   An Example



                                ∆ p i ( s i )τ i ( s i )




                                       ∆ p o ( s o )τ o ( s o )




s min = s min                               s omax         si , s o
 i        o




                                           27
                                        Table 1:
                            Tests of the Equal Cutoff Rule
                          Using the Lowest Decile of Students

                                        All students
                                    1976 cohort                           1989 cohort

                           Public             Private            Public                 Private
Number of institutions       4                  23                 4                      23
Proportion in-state          .83                  .29             .76                    .23


                            Non-athletes and non-minorities
( so − si ) (mean)           51                   10               84                     36
( so − si ) (min, max)      8, 77             -122, 81          33, 117             -66, 137
Share between                .05                  .00             .08                    .01
si and so (mean)

                         Results using HERI data (2001 cohort)
                            More selective sample                  Less selective sample
( so − si ) (mean)           49                   33               38                     23
( so − si ) (min, max)     12, 98             -46, 128          -15, 98             -89, 128
Share between                .04                  .02             .03                    .01
si and so (mean)




                                             28
                                            Table 2:
Effect of Attending College in a State on the Probability of Locating in the State after College
                             Students in the Lowest SAT Quintile

                     Not adjusted for selection bias:                                 Adjusted for selection bias:
                            (1)                   (2)                                      (3)                   (4)
                           Public              Private                                    Public              Private
∆pi ( s i )         0.226 (0.005)         0.189 (0.007)          ∆pi ( s i )       0.114 (0.008)         0.082 (0.011)

p yy                0.55                  0.51                   p yy              0.45                  0.42

p yn                0.32                  0.32                   p yn              0.34                  0.34

∆p o ( s o )        0.136 (0.011)         0.057 (0.003)          ∆p o ( s o )      0.102 (0.011)         0.019 (0.002)

p ny                0.15                  0.07                   p ny              0.14                  0.06

p nn                0.01                  0.01                   p nn              0.04                  0.04


Notes: p yy is the probability of students locating in their home states as adults if they attend college there, p yn is
the probability of students locating in their home states as adults if they attend college out-of-state, and
 ∆pi = p yy − p yn is the increase in the probability of in-state students locating in their home states if they attend
college there rather than elsewhere. p ny , p nn , and ∆p o are analogously defined for students who attend college out-
of-state. All values are for students in the lowest quintile of SAT scores and are for a representative state. Standard
errors are in parentheses.




                                                            29
                                             Table 3:
                        Tests of the “Equal Additional Tax Payments Rule”

                                         Unadjusted                                Adjusted
                                Public                Private            Public               Private
∆pi ( s i )                     0.226                 0.189              0.114                 0.082

∆p o ( s o )                    0.136                 0.057              0.102                 0.019


τ i ( si ) (mean)             $177,100             $254,500             $185,300              $273,300

τ o ( s o ) (mean)            $225,400             $272,300             $227,100              $264,400


Difference (mean)               $9,400              $32,600             -$2,000               $17,400
Difference (min, max)      $3,600, $16,800      $11,000, $59,000     -$8,600, $4,900    $6,100, $39,000




                                             Table 4:
                      Test of the “Tuition Offset Rule” at Public Universities

                                                      Unadjusted             Adjusted
Mean value of the difference in lifetime               $9,400                -$2,000
expected state tax payments between in-
state versus out-of-state students, in 1995
dollars (Difference):

Mean value of the four year tuition                     -$25,600             -$25,600
differential for in-state versus out-of-state
students, in 1995 dollars:

Net Amount:
  (mean)                                             -$16,200                -$27,700
  (min, max)                                     -$21,800, -$9,500      -$33,700, -$21,600




                                                   30
                                               Table 5:
                         Do States Gain When High and Middle Ability Students
                                      Attend College in the State?

                                         Public                                                 Private
SAT category              Low           Middle             High               Low               Middle       High
p yy                      .45              .42               .39              .42                 .34        .28
p yn                      .34              .28               .19              .34                 .28        .19
∆pi ( s i )            .114 (.008)    .131 (.009)       .198 (.022)       .082 (.011)      .060 (.011)    .091 (.005)


p ny                      .14              .13               .15              .06                 .07        .07
p nn                      .04              .03               .04              .04                 .03        .04
∆p o ( s o )           .102 (.011)    .094 (.006)       .114 (.023)       .019 (.002)      .037 (.003)    .034 (.001)


τ i ( si )             $205,100        $236,700          $291,900          $262,100         $309,600      $347,900
                        (9,000)         (8,000)          (22,900)          (17,800)          (8,700)      (14,000)
τ o (so )              $236,600        $275,600          $305,900          $248,800         $286,500      $326,400
                       (16,900)        (13,000)          (29,100)           (8,500)          (3,800)       (6,300)

∆pi ( si )τ i ( si )    $23,400         $31,000           $57,800          $21,500              $19,000    $31,700

∆po ( so )τ o ( so )    $24,100         $25,900           $34,900           $4,700              $10,600    $11,100


Difference               -$700           $5,100           $22,900          $16,800              $8,000     $20,600

Notes: All figures are adjusted for location preferences. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                           31
                                  Appendix Table 1:
         Institutions in the College and Beyond Dataset Used in Our Study

Public Institutions

Miami University (Ohio)
University of Michigan (Ann Arbor)
University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)
Pennsylvania State University

Private Institutions

Universities                     Colleges

Columbia University              Barnard College
Duke University                  Bryn Mawr College
Emory University                 Denison University
Georgetown University            Hamilton College
Northwestern University          Kenyon College
University of Notre Dame         Oberlin College
University of Pennsylvania       Smith College
Princeton University             Swarthmore College
Rice University                  Wellesley College
Stanford University              Wesleyan College
Tufts University                 Williams College
Tulane University
Vanderbilt University
Washington University
Yale University




                                             32
                                      Appendix Table 2:
                              Conditional Logit Model Estimates
                        Without Controls for Initial Location Preferences

                 Variable                     Coefficient       Std. Error
Home                                                2.804             0.029
home × {SAT low} × public                          -0.067             0.151
home × {SAT low} × private                          0.338             0.068
home × {SAT middle} × public                       -0.119             0.110
home × {SAT high} × public                         -0.617             0.251
home × {SAT high} × private                        -0.399             0.055

College                                                 1.630        0.044
college × {SAT low} × public                            0.701        0.191
college × {SAT low} × private                           0.024        0.116
college × {SAT middle} × public                         0.532        0.150
college × {SAT high} × public                           0.455        0.301
college × {SAT high} × private                         -0.159        0.078

home × college                                         -1.185        0.071
home × college × {SAT low} × public                     0.001        0.281
home × college × {SAT low} × private                    0.124        0.178
home × college × {SAT middle} × public                  0.010        0.214
home × college × {SAT high} × public                    0.329        0.449
home × college × {SAT high} × private                   0.244        0.136

State fixed effects                                      Yes

Log-Likelihood                                     -48,999
Pseudo R2                                           0.3480

Notes: home is an indicator for students being from the state and college is an indicator for students
attending college in the state. {SAT low}, {SAT middle}, and {SAT high} indicate SAT scores in
the lowest quintile, the middle three quintiles, and the highest quintile, respectively, of the
distribution of SAT scores. {public} and {private} indicate that the student attended a public or
private university/college. The sample size is 19,113.




                                                  33
                                      Appendix Table 3:
                              Conditional Logit Model Estimates
                         With Controls for Initial Location Preferences

                      Variable                         Coefficient    Std. Error
home                                                        2.723          0.035
home × apply × {SAT low} × public                          -1.166          0.266
home × apply × {SAT low} × private                         -0.476          0.139
home × apply × {SAT middle} × public                       -0.988          0.188
home × apply × {SAT middle} × private                      -0.671          0.072
home × apply × {SAT high} × public                         -1.857          0.478
home × apply × {SAT high} × private                        -1.149          0.103

College                                                      0.954         0.245
college × {SAT low} × private                               -0.470         0.291
college × {SAT middle} × public                              0.141         0.307
college × {SAT middle} × private                            -0.189         0.253
college × {SAT high} × public                                0.327         0.464
college × {SAT high} × private                              -0.309         0.262

home × college                                              -0.375         0.378
home × college × {SAT low} × private                         0.074         0.443
home × college × {SAT middle} × public                      -0.198         0.467
home × college × {SAT middle} × private                     -0.192         0.391
home × college × {SAT high} × public                         0.654         0.744
home × college × {SAT high} × private                        0.109         0.409

Apply                                                        1.526         0.150
apply × {SAT low} × private                                 -0.443         0.183
apply × {SAT middle} × public                               -0.276         0.189
apply × {SAT middle} × private                              -0.571         0.157
apply × {SAT high} × public                                 -0.596         0.285
apply × {SAT high} × private                                -0.550         0.165

State fixed effects                                            Yes

Log-Likelihood                                               -34,087
Pseudo R2                                                     0.3217
Notes: home is an indicator for students being from the state and college is an indicator for students
attending college in the state. apply is an indicator for students applying to a college in the state.
{SAT low}, {SAT middle}, and {SAT high} indicate SAT scores in the lowest quintile, any of the
middle three quintiles, and the highest quintile, respectively. {public} and {private} indicate that
the student attended a public or private university. The sample size, 12,781, is smaller than in
Appendix Table 2 because only students that applied to institutions in more than one state are
included.


                                                  34
                                        Appendix Table 4
                      Institutions in the HERI Dataset Used in Our Study

                                                     First Sample
Public Universities                           Private Universities                 Private Colleges

Georgia Institute of Technology               Carnegie Mellon University           Babson College
Iowa State University                         Duke University                      Bard College
Miami University (Ohio)                       Emory University                     Barnard College
University of Massachusetts (Amherst)         Johns Hopkins University             Bates College
University of Michigan (Ann Arbor)            Northwestern University              Beloit College
University of Minnesota (Twin Cities)         Rice University                      Bowdoin College
University of Pittsburgh                      Stanford University                  Bryn Mawr College
University of Vermont                         University of Rochester              Bucknell University
University of Virginia                        Vanderbilt University                Carleton College
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State U                                         Claremont McKenna College
                                                                                   Colby College
                                                                                   Connecticut College
                                                                                   Grinnell College
                                                                                   Harvey Mudd College
                                                                                   Haverford College
                                                                                   Macalester College
                                                                                   Middlebury College
                                                                                   Reed College
                                                                                   Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
                                                                                   Scripps College
                                                                                   Stevens Institute of Technology
                                                                                   Trinity College
                                                                                   University of Richmond
                                                                                   Washington and Lee University
                                                                                   Wellesley College
                                                                                   Wesleyan University
                                                                                   Wheaton College
                                                                                   Whitman College
                                                                                   Williams College
                                                                                   Worcester Polytechnic Institute


                               Additional Institutions in the Second Sample

Public Universities                          Private Universities                Private Colleges

Ohio State University                        Boston College                      Allegheny College
Purdue University (Indiana)                  Clarkson University                 Bentley College
University of Alabama                        Cornell University                  Berry College
University of Arkansas (Fayetteville)        New York University                 Bethany College
Utah State University                        Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute    Centre College
                                             Santa Clara University              Chapman University
                                             Tulane University                   Clark University
                                             University of San Diego             Coe College
                                             University of Southern California   Elizabethtown College
                                             Villanova University                Furman University
                                             Wake Forest University              Gettysburg College



                                                            35
Washington University   Goucher College
                        Hamilton College
                        Hiram College
                        Hobart and William Smith Colleges
                        Hollins University
                        Illinois Wesleyan University
                        John Brown University
                        Juniata College
                        Kettering University
                        Knox College
                        Lafayette College
                        Milwaukee School of Engineering
                        Oklahoma Christian University
                        Pacific University
                        Pepperdine University
                        Pitzer College
                        Rochester Institute of Technology
                        Rollins College
                        Saint Lawrence University
                        Siena College
                        Ursinus College
                        Wabash College
                        Willamette University




             36
