                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EXPECTED RETURNS AND EXPECTED DIVIDEND GROWTH

                                             Martin Lettau
                                          Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                          Working Paper 9605
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9605


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




Lettau acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation. Ludvigson acknowledges
financial support from the Alfred P.Sloan Foundation and from the National Science Foundation. We thank
Jushan Bai, John Y. Campbell, Kenneth French, Mark Gertler, Rick Green, Anthony Lynch, Lucrezia
Reichlin, Peter Schotman, Charles Steindel, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at Duke
University, INSEAD, London Business School, London School of Economics, Ohio State University, the
New School for Social Research, New York University, SUNY Albany, the University of Iowa, the
University of Maryland, the University of Montreal, Yale, the SITE 2001 summer conference, the CEPR
Summer 2002 Finance Symposium and the 2003 American Finance Association meetings for helpful
comments, and Nathan Barczi for excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions are the responsibility
of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Martin Lettau and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth
Martin Lettau and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 9605
April 2003
JEL No. G12, G10

                                           ABSTRACT


We investigate a consumption-based present value relation that is a function of future dividend
growth. Using data on aggregate consumption and measures of the dividend payments from

aggregate wealth, we show that changing forecasts of dividend growth make an important

contribution to fluctuations in the U.S. stock market, despite the failure of the dividend-price ratio

to uncover such variation. In addition, these dividend forecasts are found to covary with changing

forecasts of excess stock returns. The variation in expected dividend growth we uncover is positively

correlated with changing forecasts of excess returns and occurs at business cycle frequencies, those

ranging from one to six years. Because positively correlated fluctuations in expected dividend

growth and expected returns have offsetting affects on the log dividend-price ratio, the results imply

that both the market risk-premium and expected dividend growth vary considerably more than what

can be revealed using the log dividend-price ratio alone as a predictive variable.




Martin Lettau                                         Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Finance                                 Department of Economics
Stern School of Business                              New York University
New York University                                   269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
44 West Fourth Street                                 New York, NY 10001
New York, NY 10012-1126                               and NBER
and NBER                                              sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
mlettau@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction
One does not have to delve far into recent surveys of the asset pricing literature to uncover
a few key empirical results that have come to represent stylized facts, part of the “standard
viewÔ of U.S. aggregate stock market behavior.

    1. Large predictable movements in dividends are not apparent in U.S. stock market data.
       In particular, the log dividend-price ratio does not have important long horizon fore-
       casting power for the growth in dividend payments.1

    2. Returns on aggregate stock market indexes in excess of a short term interest rate
       are highly forecastable over long horizons. The log dividend-price ratio is extremely
       persistent and forecasts excess returns over horizons of many years.2

    3. Variance decompositions of dividend-price ratios show that changing forecasts of future
       excess returns comprise almost all of the variation in dividend-price ratios. These find-
       ings form the basis for the conclusion that expected dividend growth is approximately
       constant.3

    Empirical evidence on the behavior of the dividend-price ratio has transformed the way
financial economists perceive asset markets. It has replaced the age-old view that expected
returns are approximately constant, with the modern-day view that time-variation in ex-
pected returns constitutes an important part of aggregate stock market variability. Even the
extraordinary behavior of stock prices during the late 1990s has not unraveled this trans-
formation. Academic researchers have responded to this episode by emphasizing that—in
contrast to stock market dividends—movements in aggregate stock prices have always played
an important role historically in restoring the dividend-price ratio to its mean, even though
the persistence of the dividend-price ratio implies that such restorations can sometimes
take many years to materialize (Heaton and Lucas (1999); Campbell and Shiller (2001);
Cochrane (2001), Ch. 20; Lewellen (2001); Campbell (2002); Fama and French (2002)).
These researchers maintain that, despite the market’s unusual behavior recently, changing
forecasts of excess returns make important contributions to fluctuations in the aggregate
stock market.
    1
     A large literature documents the poor predictability of dividend growth by the dividend-price ratio over
long horizons, for example, Campbell (1991); Cochrane (1991); Cochrane (1994); Cochrane (1997); Cochrane
(2001); Campbell (2002). Ang and Bekaert (2001) find somewhat stronger predictability; we discuss their
results further below.
   2
     See Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988); Hodrick (1992); Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay
(1997); Cochrane (1997); Cochrane (2001), Ch. 20; Campbell (2002).
   3
     See Campbell (1991); Cochrane (1991); Hodrick (1992); Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997), Ch. 7;
Cochrane (2001), Ch. 20; Campbell (2002).



                                                     3
     Yet there are noticeable cracks in the standard academic paradigm of predictability based
on the dividend-price ratio. On the one hand, several researchers, focusing primarily on fore-
casting horizons less than a few years, have argued that careful statistical analysis provides
little evidence that the log dividend-price ratio forecasts returns (for example, Nelson and
Kim (1993); Stambaugh (1999); Ang and Bekaert (2001); Valkanov (2001)). These find-
ings have led some to conclude that changing forecasts of excess returns make a negligible
contribution to fluctuations in the aggregate stock market.
     On the other hand, other researchers have found that excess returns on the aggregate
stock market are strongly forecastable at horizons far shorter than those over which the
persistent dividend-price ratio predominantly varies. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) find
that excess stock returns are forecastable at horizons over which the dividend-price ratio has
comparably weak forecasting power, namely at “business cycleÔ frequencies, those ranging
from a few quarters to several years. Such predictable variation in returns is revealed not
by the slow moving dividend-price ratio, but instead by an empirical proxy for the log
consumption-wealth ratio, denoted cayt , a variable that captures deviations from the common
trend in consumption, asset (nonhuman) wealth and labor income. The consumption-wealth
variable cayt is less persistent than the dividend-price ratio, consistent with the finding that
the former forecasts returns over shorter horizons than latter.
     Taken together, these empirical findings raise a series of puzzling questions. Do the
intermediate horizon statistical analyses using the dividend-price ratio imply that expected
excess returns are approximately constant? If so, then why does cayt have predictive power
for excess returns at horizons ranging from a few quarters to several years? Moreover, if
business cycle variation in expected returns is present, why does the dividend-price ratio
have difficulty capturing this variation?
     This paper argues that it is possible to make sense of these seemingly contradictory
findings and in the process provide empirical answers to the questions posed above. We study
a consumption-based present value relation that is a function of future dividend growth. The
evidence we present has two key elements. First, using data on aggregate consumption and
dividend payments from aggregate (human and nonhuman) wealth, we show that changing
forecasts of stock market dividend growth do make an important contribution to fluctuations
in the U.S. stock market, despite the failure of the dividend-price ratio to uncover such
variation. Although U.S. dividend growth is known to have some short-run forecastability
arising from the seasonality of dividend payments, to our knowledge this study is one of the
few to find important predictability in direct long-horizon regressions, and in particular at
horizons over which excess stock returns have been found to be forecastable. Second, these
dividend forecasts are found to positively covary with changing forecasts of excess stock
returns.
     These findings help resolve the puzzles discussed above, for two reasons. First, the results
help explain why the log dividend-price ratio has been found to be a relatively weak predictor

                                               4
of US dividend growth, despite the evidence presented here that dividend growth is highly
forecastable. Movements in expected dividend growth that are positively correlated with
movements in expected returns have offsetting effects on the log dividend-price ratio. Second,
they can explain why business cycle variation in expected excess returns is captured by cayt ,
but not well captured by the dividend-price ratio. Movements in expected returns that are
positively correlated with movements in expected dividend growth will have offsetting affects
on the log dividend-price ratio, but not necessarily on the log consumption-wealth ratio.
    We emphasize two implications of our findings. First, expected dividend growth is not
constant, but instead varies over horizons ranging from one to six years. Thus, the variation
in expected dividend growth that we uncover occurs at business cycle frequencies, not the
ultra low frequencies that dominate the sampling variability of the log dividend-price ratio.
Second, common variation in expected returns and expected dividend growth will make it
more difficult for the log dividend-price ratio to display significant predictive power for future
returns as well as future dividend growth, consistent with evidence reported in Nelson and
Kim (1993), Stambaugh (1999), Ang and Bekaert (2001) and Valkanov (2001)). Such a
failure is not an indication that expected returns are constant, however. On the contrary,
the log dividend-price ratio will have difficulty revealing business cycle variation in the equity
risk-premium precisely because expected returns fluctuate at those frequencies, and covary
with changing forecasts of dividend growth. These findings therefore suggest not only that
expected returns vary, but that they vary by far more (over shorter horizons) than what can
be revealed using the log dividend-price ratio alone as a predictive variable.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present an expres-
sion linking aggregate consumption and dividend payments from aggregate wealth, to the
expected future growth rates of income flows from aggregate wealth. This delivers a present
value relation for future dividend growth in terms of observable variables. We then move
on in Section 3 to discuss the data, and present results from estimating the common trend
in log consumption and measures of the dividend payments from aggregate wealth. For the
main part of our analysis, we focus on findings using the growth in dividends paid from the
CRSP value-weighted stock market index, in order to make our results directly comparable
with those from the existing asset pricing literature. Nevertheless, in Section 5.3 we show
that our main conclusions are not altered by including aggregate share repurchases in the
measure of dividends. In section 4 we present the outcome of long-horizon forecasting re-
gressions for dividend growth and excess returns on the US stock market. Section 5 discusses
one possible explanation for why expected dividend growth might vary over time, and be
positively correlated with expected returns, despite the fact that firms may have an incentive
to smooth dividend payments if shareholders desire smooth consumption paths. Section 6
concludes.




                                                5
2       A Consumption-Based Present Value Relation for
        Dividend Growth
This section presents a consumption-based present value relation for future dividend growth.
We consider a representative agent economy in which all wealth, including human capital,
is tradable. Let Wt be beginning of period aggregate wealth (defined as the sum of human
capital, Ht , and nonhuman, or asset wealth, At ) in period t; Rw,t+1 is the net return on
aggregate wealth. For expositional convenience, we consider a simple accumulation equation
for aggregate wealth, written

                                  Wt+1 = (1 + Rw,t+1 )(Wt − Ct ).                                   (1)

Labor income Yt does not appear explicitly in this equation because of the assumption that
the market value of tradable human capital is included in aggregate wealth.4 Throughout
this paper we use lower case letters to denote log variables, e.g., ct ≡ log(Ct ).
    Defining r ≡ log(1 + R), Campbell and Mankiw (1989) derive an expression for the log
consumption-aggregate wealth ratio by taking a first-order Taylor expansion of (1), solv-
ing the resulting difference equation for log wealth forward, and imposing a transversality
condition.5 The resulting expression holds to a first-order approximation:6
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                ct − wt = Et         ρiw (rw,t+i − ∆ct+i ),                         (2)
                                               i=1

where ρw ≡ 1 − exp(c − w). This expression says that the log consumption-wealth ratio
embodies rational forecasts of returns and consumption growth.
    Equation(2) is of little use in empirical work because aggregate wealth includes human
capital, which is not observable. Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) address this problem by
reformulating the bivariate cointegrating relation between ct and wt as a trivariate cointe-
grating relation involving three observable variables, namely ct , at , and yt ,where at is the log
of nonhuman, or asset, wealth, and yt is log labor income. The resulting empirical “proxyÔ
for the log consumption-aggregate wealth ratio is a consumption-based present value relation
    4
     None of the derivations below are dependent on this assumption. In particular, equation (3), below,
can be derived from the analogous budget constraint in which human capital is nontradeable: At+1 =
                                              P∞ Q j
(1 + Ra,t+1 )(At + Yt − Ct ), where, Ht = Et j=0 i=0 (1 + Ra,t+i )−i Yt+j .
   5
     This transversality condition rules out rational bubbles.
   6
     We omit unimportant linearization constants in the equations throughout the paper.




                                                     6
involving future returns to asset wealth7
                                                  ∞
                                                  X
         cayt ≡ ct − ωat − (1 − ω) yt = Et               ρiw (ωra,t+i − ∆ct+i + (1 − ω) ∆yt+1+i ) ,          (3)
                                                   i=1

where ω is the average share of asset wealth, At , in aggregate wealth, Wt , ra,t is the log return
to asset wealth, At . Under the maintained hypothesis that asset returns, consumption growth
and labor income growth are covariance stationary, (3) says that consumption, asset wealth
and labor income are cointegrated, and that deviations from the common trend in ct , at , and
yt summarize expectations of returns to asset wealth, consumption growth, labor income
growth, or some combination of all three. The wealth shares ω and (1 − ω) are cointegrating
coefficients. We discuss their estimation further below. The cointegrating residual on the
left-hand-side of (3) is denoted cayt for short. The cointegration framework says that, if risk
premia vary over time (for any reason), cayt is a likely candidate for predicting future excess
returns. Both (2) and (3) are consumption-based present-value relations involving future
returns to wealth.
    In this paper we employ the same accounting framework to construct a consumption-
based present value relation involving future dividend growth from aggregate wealth. We
can move from the consumption-based present value relation involving future returns, (3),
to one involving future dividend growth by expressing the market value of assets in terms of
expected future returns and expected future income flows. The general derivation is given
in Campbell and Mankiw (1989), and the application to our setting is given in Appendix A.
This derivation delivers a present-value relation involving the log of consumption and the
logs of dividends from asset wealth, dt , and human wealth, yt , which takes the form
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
           cdyt ≡ ct − νdt − (1 − ν) yt = Et              ρiw (ν∆dt+i + (1 − ν)∆yt+i − ∆ct+i ).              (4)
                                                    i=1

    Equation (4) is a consumption-based present value relation involving future dividend
growth. Under the maintained hypothesis that ∆dt , ∆yt , and ∆ct are covariance stationary,
equation (4) says that consumption, dividends from asset wealth, and dividends from hu-
man capital (labor income) are cointegrated, and that deviations from their common trend
(given by the left-hand-side of (4)) provide a rational forecast of dividend growth, labor
income growth, consumption growth, or some combination of all three. The income shares
ν and (1 − ν) are cointegrating coefficients. We discuss their estimation further below. The
cointegrating residual on the left-hand-side of (4) is denoted cdyt , for short.
   7
     We will often refer loosely to cayt as a proxy for the log consumption-aggregate wealth ratio, ct −wt . More
precisely, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) find that cayt is a proxy for the important predictive components
of ct − wt for future returns to asset wealth. Nevertheless, the left-hand-side of (3) will be proportional to
ct − wt under the following conditions: first, expected labor income growth and consumption growth are
constant and, second, the conditional expected return to human capital is proportional to the return to
nonhuman capital.


                                                         7
    It is instructive to compare equation (4) with the proxy for the consumption-aggregate
wealth ratio, (3), studied in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a). Equation (3) says that if investors
want to maintain flat consumption paths (i.e., expected consumption growth is approxi-
mately constant), fluctuations in cayt reveal expectations of future returns to asset wealth,
provided that expected labor income growth is not too volatile. This implication was studied
in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a). Analogously, equation (4) says that if investors want to
maintain flat consumption paths, fluctuations in cdyt summarize expectations of the growth
in future dividends to aggregate wealth. This implication of the framework is studied here.
Investors with flat consumption paths will appear to smooth out transitory fluctuations in
dividend income stemming from time-variation in expected dividend growth. Consumption
should be high relative to its long-run trend relation with dt and yt when dividend growth is
expected to be higher in the future, and low relative to its long-run trend with dt and yt when
dividend growth is expected to fall. Moreover, if expected consumption growth and expected
labor income growth do not vary much, cdyt should display relatively little predictive power
for future consumption and labor income growth, but may forecast stock market dividend
growth, if in fact expected dividend growth varies over time. In this case, (4) says that cdyt
is a state variable that summarizes changing forecasts of dividend growth to asset wealth.
    It is also instructive to compare (4) and (3) with the linearized expression for the log
dividend-price ratio. Following Campbell and Shiller (1988) the log dividend-price ratio may
be written (up to a first-order approximation) as
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                                  dt − pt = Et          ρi (rt+1+i − ∆dt+1+i ),                               (5)
                                                  i=0
                                                                                           1
where pt be the log price of stock market wealth, which pays the dividend, dt , ρ ≡ 1+exp(d−p) ,
and rt is the log return to stock market wealth.8 This equation says that if the log dividend-
price ratio is high, agents must be expecting high future returns on stock market wealth, or
low dividend growth rates. Many studies, cited in the introduction, have documented that
dt − pt explains little of the variability in future dividend growth; as a consequence, expected
dividend growth is often modelled as constant.
    Equation (5) can be simplified if we assume that expected stock returns follow a first-
order autoregressive process, Et rt+1 ≡ xt = φxt−1 + ξ t . With this specification for expected
stock returns, and if expected dividend growth is constant, the log dividend-price ratio takes
the form                                 ∞
                                       X                               xt
                         dt − pt = Et       ρi (rt+1+i − ∆dt+1+i ) =        .                (6)
                                        i=0
                                                                     1 − ρφ
When expected dividend growth is constant, the log dividend-price ratio does not forecast
dividend growth at any horizon but instead forecasts long-horizon stock returns, because it
  8
      Like those above for cayt and cdyt , this expression ignores inconsequential linearization constants.



                                                         8
captures time-varying expected returns, xt . Equation (6) shows that, under the standard
view that expected dividend growth is approximately constant, any and all variation in
expected returns must be revealed by variation in the dividend-price ratio.
    It is useful to consider the behavior of the log dividend-price ratio in a simple example
for which expected dividend growth is not constant. Suppose that expected dividend growth
varies according to a first-order autoregressive process,

                                      Et ∆dt+1 ≡ gt = ψgt−1 + ζ t .                                      (7)

As is evident from (5), the effect of such variation on the log dividend-price ratio depends on
the correlation between expected dividend growth and expected returns. For example, if the
two are positively correlated, expected returns may be modeled as having two components,
one component common to expected dividend growth, and another component independent
of expected dividend growth. In this case we may write Et rt+1 = βgt + xt , where β > 0 is the
loading on expected dividend growth that generates a positive correlation between Et rt+1
and Et ∆dt+1 , and xt is a component of expected returns that is independent of expected
dividend growth.9 Note that when β = 1, all of the variation in expected dividend growth
is common to variation in expected returns.
    Combining Et rt+1 = βgt + xt with (5), the log dividend-price ratio becomes
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                               dt − pt = Et             ρ(rt+1+i − ∆dt+1+i )                             (8)
                                                  j=0
                                                 1         1−β
                                          =          xt −        gt .                                    (9)
                                              1 − ρφ      1 − ρψ
    Equation 9 shows that, when β is greater than zero, the relationship between dt − pt and
both expected dividend growth and expected returns will be obfuscated. When all of the
variation in expected dividend growth is common to variation in expected returns, β = 1
and the expression is precisely the same as (6) for the case in which expected dividend
growth is constant. In this instance, the log dividend-price ratio will have no forecasting
power for future dividend growth even though, by construction, expected dividend growth
varies over time. This is because positively correlated fluctuations in expected dividend
growth and expected returns have offsetting affects on the log dividend-price ratio. The
log dividend-price ratio will also have no forecasting power for one component of expected
returns, namely gt , because that component is completely offset by variation in expected
dividend growth. When 0 < β < 1, dt − pt will still have difficulty revealing changing
forecasts of stock market dividend growth, because it only captures a portion, (1 − β), of
time-variation n expected dividend growth; the remaining portion is not revealed because
it is common to time-varying expected returns. It will also only capture a portion, xt , of
   9
    The loading on xt is normalized to unity. This normalization is without loss of generality, since the
specification above can always be redefined as Et rt+1 = βgt + γ x̃t as Et rt+1 = βgt + xt where xt = γ x̃t .


                                                        9
time-varying expected returns, because the remaining portion, βgt , is more than offset by
variation in expected dividend growth, −gt . Notice that these problems do not affect the
two consumption-based ratios discussed above, because they are not simultaneous functions
of expected returns and expected dividend growth. These considerations motivate the use of
the consumption-based ratios developed above to uncover possible time-variation in expected
returns and expected dividend growth.
    The framework developed above, with its approximate consumption identities, serves
merely to motivate and interpret an investigation of whether consumption-based present
value relations might be informative about the future path of dividend growth, asset returns,
labor income growth or consumption growth. The empirical investigation itself, discussed
in the next section, is not dependent on these approximations. Nevertheless, we may assess
the implications of framework presented above by investigating whether such present-value
relations are informative about the future path of consumption growth, labor income growth
or dividend growth from the aggregate stock market. We do so next.


3      The Common Trend in Consumption, Dividends and
       Labor Income
3.1     Data and Preliminary Analysis
Before we can estimate a common trend between consumption and measures of aggregate
dividends, we need to address two data issues that arise from the use of aggregate consump-
tion and dividend/income data. First, we use nondurables and services expenditure as a
measure of aggregate consumption. This measure is a subset of total consumption, which is
unobservable because we don’t have a measure of the service flow from the stock of durable
goods. Note that it would be inappropriate to use total personal consumption expenditures
as a measure of consumption in this framework. This series includes expenditures on durable
goods, which represent replacements and additions to the capital stock (investment), rather
than the service flow from the existing stock. Durables expenditures are properly accounted
for as part of nonhuman wealth, At , a component of aggregate wealth, Wt .10
  10
     Treating durables purchases purely as an expenditure removing them from At and including them in Ct
is also improper because doing so ignores the evolution of the asset over time, which must be accounted for
by multiplying the stock by a gross return. (In the case of many durable goods, this gross return would be
less than one and consist primarily of depreciation.) What should be used in this budget constraint for Ct is
not total expenditures but total consumption, of which the service flow from the durables stock is one part.
But the service flow is unobservable, and is not the same as the investment expenditures on consumption
goods. An assumption of some sort is necessary, and we follow Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) by assuming
that the log of unobservable real total consumption, cTt , is a multiple, λ > 1 of the log of real nondurables
and services expenditure, ct , plus a stationary random component, ¯t . Under this assumption, the observable



                                                     10
    Second, we have experimented with constructing various empirical measures of nonstock
dividends by adding forms of non-equity income from private capital, the largest component
of which is interest income, to stock market dividends. In our sample, however, we find the
strongest evidence of a common trend between log consumption, log stock market dividends,
and log labor income. A likely explanation is that the inflationary component of nominal
interest income, along with the explicit inflation tax on interest income inherent in the
U.S. tax code, makes real interest income difficult to measure, and creates peculiar trends
in interest income that have nothing in particular to do with the evolution of permanent
real interest income. These problems are especially evident in our sample during the 1970s
and 1980s when nominal interest income grew rapidly because of inflation.11,12 In addition,
we do not directly observe dividend payments from some forms of nonhuman, nonfinancial
household net worth, primarily physical capital.13
    Fortunately, it is not necessary to include every dividend component from aggregate
wealth in the expression (4) to obtain a consumption-based present value relation that is a
function of future stock market dividend growth, the object of interest in this study. As long
as the excluded forms of dividend payments are cointegrated with the included forms (as
models with balanced growth would suggest), the framework above implies that the included
dividend measures may be combined with consumption to obtain a valid cointegrating re-
lation. In this study, we use stock market dividends as a measure of dividend payments
from nonhuman (asset) wealth, and use dt to denote stock market dividends from now on. If
nonstock/nonlabor forms of dividend income are cointegrated with the dividend payments
log of real nondurables and services expenditures, ct , appears in the cointegrating relation (3).
   11
      The real component of nominal interest income is not directly observable. Nominal interest income can
be put in real terms by deflating by a price level to get the component which should be associated with
real consumption, but one would still need to subtract the product of some inflation rate and the stock of
financial assets from this amount. Measurement is complicated because the stock data are in the flow of
funds while the nominal interest data are in the National Income and Product Accounts, and the components
do not match precisely.
   12
      Some researchers have documented a significant decline in the percentage of firms paying tax-inefficient
dividends in data since 1978 (e.g., Fama and French (2001)). It might seem that such a phenomenon
would create problem with trends in stock market dividend income similar to those for interest income.
An inspection of the dividend data from the CRSP value-weighted index, however, reveals that—with the
exception of the unusually large one-year decline in dividends in 2000, discussed below—the total dollar
value of CRSP value-weighted dividends (in real, per capita terms) has not declined precipitously over the
period since 1978, or over the full sample. The average annual growth rate of real, per capita dividends is
5.6% from 1978 through 1999, greater than the growth rate for the period 1948 to 1978. The annual growth
rate for the whole sample (1948-2001) is 4.2%.
   13
      One response to this point is to use the product side of the national income accounts to estimate income
flows of such components of wealth as the residual from GDP less reported dividend and labor income. This
approach creates its own problems, however, because it requires the income and product sides of the national
accounts to be combined, and there is no way to know how much of the statistical discrepancy between the
two is attributable to underestimates of income versus overestimates of output.


                                                     11
from stock market wealth, dt , and/or human capital, yt , the framework above implies a
cointegrating relation among ct , stock market dividends, dt , and labor income yt , and the
resulting cointegrating residual should reveal expectations over long-horizons of either future
∆dt , ∆yt or ∆ct , or some combination of all three.
    These data considerations have two implications. First, imply that the cointegrating
coefficients in (3) and (4) should not sum to one. As discussed in Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001a), the cointegrating parameters in (3) and (4) are likely to sum to a number less than
one because only a fraction of total consumption based on nondurables and services expen-
diture is observable (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)). Second, they have implications for
the sums of the cointegrating coefficients in (3) and (4). Denote the shares wealth shares
ω and (1 − ω) generically as cointegrating coefficients αa and αy , respectively. Likewise,
denote the shares ν and (1 − ν) generically as cointegrating coefficients β d and β y , respec-
tively. Since some components of aggregate dividends are omitted in (4), the sums α           ba + α
                                                                                                   by
and βbd + βby , (where “hatsÔ denote estimated values), are unlikely to be identical in finite
         14
samples. The parameters α      ba, αby , β  bd , and β
                                                     by may be estimated using either single equation
or system methods. The estimated values of the cointegrating residuals cayt and cdyt are
denoted cd ay t and cdy
                     c t , respectively.
    The data used in this study are annual, per capita variables, measured in 1996 dollars,
and span the period 1948 to 2001. We use annual data in order to insure that any fore-
castability of dividend growth we uncover is not attributable to the seasonality of dividend
payments. Annual data is also used because the outcome of both tests for, and estimation of,
cointegrating relations can be highly sensitive to seasonal adjustments. Stock market divi-
dends are measured as dividends on the CRSP value-weighted index and are scaled to match
the units of consumption and labor income. Appendix B provides a detailed description of
the sources and definitions of all the data used in this study.
    Table 1 first presents summary statistics for log of real, per capita consumption growth,
labor income growth, dividend growth, the change in the log of the CRSP price index, ∆pt ,
and the change in the log of household net worth, ∆at , all in annual data. Real dividend
growth is considerably more volatile than consumption and labor income, having a standard
deviation of 12 percent compared to 1.1 and 1.8 for consumption and labor income growth,
respectively. It is somewhat less volatile than the log difference in the CRSP value weighted
price index, which has a standard deviation of 16 percent, but still more volatile than the log
difference in networth, which has a standard deviation of 4 percent. Consumption growth
and labor income growth are strongly positively correlated, as are ∆pt and ∆at . Annual real
consumption growth and real dividend growth have a weak correlation of -0.16.
    We begin by testing for both the presence and number of cointegrating relations in the
system of variables x0t ≡ [ct , dt , yt ]0 . Such tests have already been performed for the system
  14
       These conclusions are based on our own Monte Carlo analysis.



                                                     12
v0t = [ct , at , yt ]0 in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) and Lettau and Ludvigson (2002). The
results are contained in Appendix C of this paper. We assume all of the variables contained
in xt and vt are first order integrated, or I(1), an assumption verified by unit root tests. Test
results presented in the Appendix C suggest the presence of a single cointegrating relation
for both vector time series. We denote the single cointegrating relation for v0t = [ct , at , yt ]0
as α0 = (1, −αd , −αy )0 , and for x0t = [ct , dt , yt ]0 as β 0 = (1, −β d , −β y )0 .
    The cointegrating parameters αd , αy and β d , β y must be estimated. We use a dynamic
least squares procedure which generates asymptotically optimal estimates (Stock and Watson
(1993)).15 This procedure estimates β       b 0 = (1, −0.13, −0.68)0 . The Newey-West corrected t-
statistics (Newey and West (1987)) for these estimates are -10.49 and -34.82, respectively.
We denote the estimated cointegrating residual β            b 0 xt as cdy
                                                                       c t . The estimated cointegrating
                                0    0
                                    b = (1, −0.29, −0.60)0 , very similar to that obtained in Lettau
vector for v0t = [ct , at , yt ] is α
and Ludvigson (2001a) using quarterly data. The Newey-West corrected t-statistics for these
estimates are -14.32 and -30.48, respectively.
    Table 2 displays autocorrelation coefficients for dt − pt , cd         ay t and cdy c t . It is well-known
that the dividend-price ratio is very persistent. In annual data from 1948 to 2000 it has
a first order autocorrelation 0.88, a second order autocorrelation of 0.72 and a third order
autocorrelation of 0.60. The autocorrelations of cdy         c t and cd   ay t are much lower and die out
more quickly. Their first order autocorrelation coefficients are 0.48 and 0.55, respectively;
their second order autocorrelation coefficients are 0.13 and 0.22 respectively.
    In Figure 1 we plot the demeaned values of cdy               c t and cd  ay t over the period 1948 to
2001. The sample correlation between cdy        c t and cd      ay t is 0.41. The figure shows that the
two consumption-based present-value relations tend to move together over time, although
there are some notable episodes in which they diverge. One such episode is the year 2000,
when an extraordinary 30% decline in recorded dividends (an extreme outlier in our sample)
pushed cdyc t well above its historical mean.
    To better understand the time-series properties of dt − pt , cd            ay t , and cdy
                                                                                           c t , it is useful to
examine estimates of error-correction representations for (dt , pt )0 , (ct , at , yt )0 and (ct , dt , yt )0 .
Table 3 presents the results of estimating first-order cointegrated vector autoregressions
(VARs) for dt and pt , for ct , at and yt , and for ct , dt , and yt .16 For dividends and prices,
the theoretical cointegrating vector (1, −1)0 is imposed; for the other two systems, the coin-
tegrating vectors are estimated as discussed above. The table reveals several noteworthy
properties of the data on consumption, household wealth, stock market dividends, and labor
income.
    First, Panel A shows that the log dividend-price ratio has little ability to forecast future
dividend growth or price growth in the cointegrated VAR. Variation in the log dividend-price
  15
    Two leads and lags of the first differences of ∆yt and ∆dt are used in the dynamic least squares regression.
  16
    The VAR lag lengths were chosen in accordance with findings from Akaike and Schwartz tests. The
second system is also studied in Ludvigson and Steindel (1999).


                                                      13
ratio is too persistent to display statistical evidence of cointegration in this sample, a result
made apparent by the absence of a statistically significant error-correction representation in
Panel A (although see the discussion below of the findings in Lewellen (2001) and Campbell
and Yogo (2002)). Second, Panel B shows that estimation of the cointegrating residual cd    ay t−1
is a strong predictor of wealth growth. Both consumption and labor income growth are
somewhat predictable by lags of either consumption growth and/or wealth growth, as noted
elsewhere (Flavin (1981); Campbell and Mankiw (1989)), but the adjusted R2 statistics
(especially for the labor income equation) are lower than those for the asset regression. More
importantly, the cointegrating residual cd ay t−1 is an economically and statistically significant
determinant of next period’s asset growth, but not next period’s consumption or labor income
growth. This finding implies that asset wealth is mean-reverting, and adjusts over long-
horizons to match the smoothness of consumption and labor income. These results are
consistent with those in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) using quarterly data.
    Panel C displays estimates from a cointegrated VAR for ct , dt , and yt . The results are
analogous to those for the cointegrated VAR involving ct , at , and yt . Consumption and
labor income are predictable by lagged consumption and wealth growth, but not by the
cointegrating residual cdy
                         c t−1 . What is strongly predictable by the cointegrating residual is
stock market dividend growth: cdy   c t−1 is both a statistically significant and economically
important predictor of next year’s dividend growth, ∆dt . These findings imply that when
log dividends deviate from their habitual ratio with log labor income and log consumption, it
is dividends, rather than consumption or labor income, that is forecast to slowly adjust until
the cointegrating equilibrium is restored. As for asset wealth, dividends are mean reverting
and adapt over long-horizons to match the smoothness in consumption and labor income.


4     Long-Horizon Forecasting Regressions
A more direct way to understand mean reversion is to investigate regressions of long-horizon
returns and dividend growth onto the consumption ratios cdy      c t−1 and cd ay t−1 . The theory
behind (3) and (4) makes clear that both ratios should track longer-term tendencies in
asset markets, rather than provide accurate short-term forecasts of booms or crashes. We
focus in this paper on explaining the historical behavior of forecastable components of stock
market dividend growth, and their relation to forecastable components of excess stock market
returns. Table 4 presents the results of univariate regressions of the return on the CRSP
value-weighted stock market index in excess of the three-month Treasury bill rate, at horizons
ranging from one to 6 years. In each regression, the dependent variable is the H-period log
excess return, rt+1 − rf,t+1 + ... + rt+H − rf,t+H , where rf,t is used to denote the Treasury
bill rate, or “risk-freeÔ rate. The independent variable is either dt − pt , cday t , or cdy
                                                                                          c t . The
table reports the estimated regression coefficient, the adjusted R2 statistic in square brackets,


                                                14
and a heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation-consistent t-statistic for the hypothesis that the
regression coefficient is zero in parentheses. The table also reports, in curly brackets, the
rescaled t-statistic recommended by Valkanov (2001) for the hypothesis that the regression
coefficient is zero. We discuss this rescaled t-statistic below. Table 5 presents the same
output for predicting long-horizon CRSP dividend growth, ∆dt+1 + ... + ∆dt+H . As hinted
at by the results reported in Table 3, neither cd    ay t , or cdy
                                                                c t has any important long-horizon
forecasting power for consumption or labor income growth; to conserve space, we do not
report those results here.
    The first row of Table 4 shows that the log dividend-price ratio has little power for
forecast aggregate stock market returns from one to 6 years in this sample. Again, these
results differ from those reported elsewhere, primarily because we have included the last few
years of stock market data in the sample. The extraordinary increase in stock prices in the
late 1990s substantially weakens the statistical evidence for predictability by dt − pt that had
been a feature of previous samples. If we end the sample in 1998, the log dividend price ratio
displays forecasting power for excess returns, but its strongest forecasting power is exhibited
over horizons that are far longer than that exhibited by the consumption-wealth ratio proxy,
 ay t (see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)).17 By contrast, the second row of Table 4 shows
cd
that cday t has statistically significant forecasting power for future excess returns at horizons
ranging from one to six years. This evidence is consistent with that reported in Lettau and
                                                                                                     2
Ludvigson (2001a) using quarterly data. Using this single variable alone achieves an R of
0.27 for excess returns at a one-year horizon, 0.49 for excess returns over a two year horizon,
and 0.52 for excess returns over a six year horizon.
    The remaining row of Table 4 gives an indication of the forecasting power of cdy              c t for
long-horizon excess returns. At a one year horizon, cdy     c t , displays little statistical forecasting
power for future returns in this sample. For returns over all longer horizons, however, this
present-value relation for dividend growth displays forecasting power for future returns. In
addition, the coefficients from these predictive regressions are positive, indicating that a
high cdy
       c t forecasts high excess returns just as a high cd    ay t forecasts high excess returns. The
                                                                                         2
t-statistics are above four for all horizons in excess of one year, and the R statistic rises
from .20 at a three year horizon to .32 at a six year horizon. Because both cd             ay t and cdy
                                                                                                     ct
are positively related to future excess returns, the results imply that both capture some
component of time-varying expected returns.
   We now turn to forecasts of long-horizon dividend growth. Table 5 displays results from
  17
     Other statistical approaches find that the dividend-price ratio remains a strong predictor of excess stock
returns even in samples that include recent data. Lewellen (2001) notes that when the dividend-price ratio
is very persistent but nonetheless stationary, episodes in which the dividend yield remains deviated from its
long-run mean for an extended period of time will not necessarily constitute evidence against predictability.
Similar results are reported in recent work by Campbell and Yogo (2002), who find evidence of return
predictability by financial ratios if one is willing to rule out an explosive root in the ratios.



                                                      15
the same forecasting exercise for long horizon dividend growth as presented above for long-
horizon excess returns. In this sample, which includes data in the last half of the 1990s, the
log dividend-price ratio displays some forecasting power for future dividend growth (row 1),
but has the wrong sign (positive), consistent with evidence in Campbell (2002) who also uses
data that include the second half of the 1990s. Rows 2 and 3 present the results of predictive
regressions using cd ay t and cdy c t . The consumption-based present value relation for future
dividend growth, cdy c t , has strong forecasting power for future dividend growth at horizons
ranging from one to six years. The individual coefficients are highly statistically significant,
and the regression results suggest that the variable explains between 20 and 40 percent of
future dividend growth, depending on the horizon.
    Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a) found that cd       ay t had predictive power for future returns;
Row 2 shows that it also has statistically significant predictive power for dividend growth
rates in our sample, with high values of cd     ay t predicting high dividend growth rates. The
forecasting power of cd   ay t is, however, weaker than that displayed by cdy     c t at every horizon
in excess of one year (row 3). For example, at a four year horizon, cdy             c t explains about
20 percent of the variation in dividend growth, while cd         ay t explains 9 percent. At a five
year horizon, cdy t explains about 28 percent of the variation in dividend growth, while cd
                c                                                                                       ay t
explains 10 percent. Still, just as for excess returns, the results suggest that both cd          ay t and
cdy
 c t capture some component of time-varying expected dividend growth.
    The results in Tables 5 and 6 suggest that there is common variation in expected returns
and expected dividend growth. The consumption-wealth ratio proxy, cd             ay t , which is a strong
predictor of excess stock market returns, is also a predictor of stock market dividend growth.
Conversely, cdy
              c t , a strong predictor of stock market dividend growth, is also a predictor of
excess stock market returns. A natural question is whether either variable has independent
predictive power for excess returns and dividend growth. To address this question, Table 6
presents the results of multivariate regressions of long-horizon excess returns (upper panel)
and dividend growth (lower panel) using cd       ay t and cdy c t as regressors. The table shows
that, in forecasting long horizon excess returns, cdy  c t contains no information about future
returns that is independent of that contained in cd    ay t : at all forecasting horizons, cd   ay t drives
out cdy
      c t . Even though both variables convey information about future returns and future
dividend growth, cd  ay t contains some information about future returns that is independent of
that contained in cdy t . This suggests the presence of an independent component in expected
                    c
excess returns, corresponding to the component xt in the discussion above.
    The second panel of Table 6 shows that much the opposite pattern is borne out in long-
horizon forecasting regressions for dividend growth: cdy   c t drives out cd  ay t in forecasting future
dividend growth at all forecasting horizons greater than three years. But for forecasting
horizons between 2 and 3 years, the information contained in cd           ay t and cdy c t is apparently
sufficiently similar that the regression has difficulty distinguishing their independent effects
(although cdy
            c t is statistically significant at the 6 percent level). Accordingly, cd       ay t and cdy
                                                                                                       ct

                                                    16
are not marginally significant predictors of dividend growth over 2 and 3 year horizons, but
they are strongly jointly significant (the p-value for the F -test is less than 0.000001).
    This latter finding suggests that much of the variation in expected dividend growth
may be common to variation in expected returns, at least for two and three year horizons.
The findings also suggest that there may be a component of expected returns that moves
independently of expected dividend growth. Note that if much of the variation in expected
dividend growth is common to variation in expected returns, we would not expect innovations
in expected dividend growth to have an important effect on the log dividend-price ratio, for
the reasons discussed in Section 2. By contrast, if there were a component of expected
returns that is independent of expected dividend growth, we would expect innovations in
expected returns to have a positive effect on the log dividend-price ratio.
    One way to evaluate these possibilities is to estimate elasticities of the dividend-price
ratio with respect to innovations in expected dividend growth and expected returns. Such
estimates can be accomplished by running regressions of dt − pt on innovations in cdy   dt and
 ay t . The output below is generated by regressing dt − pt on the residuals, εcdy,t and εcay,t ,
cd
from first-order autoregressions for cdy
                                       dt and cd  ay t , respectively. The lagged log dividend-
ratio is also included as a regressor to control for the substantial persistence in dt − pt . The
estimation output from these regressions using data from 1948 to 2001, with t-statistics in
parentheses, is
                     dt − pt = −0.06 + 0.96 (dt−1 − pt−1 ) − 1.31 εcdy,t
                                  (−1.45)   (18.89)              (−1.0)

                     dt − pt = −0.05 + 0.97 (dt−1 − pt−1 ) + 4.24 εcay,t .
                                  (−1.41)   (22.02)              (2.73)

These results confirm the intuition suggested by the long-horizon forecasting regressions
presented above. Innovations in expected dividend growth, as proxied by εcdy,t , have no sta-
tistically significant effect on dt − pt , consistent with the finding that much of the variation
in expected dividend growth is common to variation in expected returns. By contrast, inno-
vations in expected returns, as proxied by εcay,t , are statistically significant at conventional
significance levels. These findings reinforce the conclusion that persistent variation in the
log dividend-price ratio is better described as capturing some low frequency component of
expected excess returns than variation in expected dividend growth, consistent with the ar-
guments in Heaton and Lucas (1999), Campbell and Shiller (2001), Cochrane (2001), Fama
and French (2002), and Lewellen (2001); Campbell (2002).


4.1    Related Empirical Findings
In summary, the evidence presented above suggests that there is important predictability
of dividend growth over long horizons, and that predictable variation in dividend growth is
correlated with that in excess returns. To our knowledge, such evidence of important pre-
dictability in dividend growth, correlated with important forecastable movements in excess

                                                17
returns, is largely new. Other researchers, cited in the introduction, have found that divi-
dend growth predictability–if evident at all in long-horizon regressions–occurs at relatively
short horizons and is not highly correlated with predictable variation in excess returns. More
recently, Ang (2002) investigates the forecastability of long-horizon dividend growth for the
aggregate stock market using annual data from 1927-2000. Although Ang concludes that
there may be some long-horizon forecastability of dividend growth based on results from
rolling forward a first-order vector autoregression for dividend yields, dividend growth rates
and returns, he finds little evidence of predictability in long-horizon dividend growth from
direct long-horizon regressions. These findings are consistent with those of the earlier papers
cited in the introduction which use the log dividend-price ratio as a predictive variable, and
our own results using dt − pt , reported above.
    One recent study that does find predictability of dividend growth in direct long-horizon
regressions is Ang and Bekaert (2001), who report results based on observations from 1952:Q4
to 1999:Q4 on the S&P 500 stock market index. Like Ang (2002), they also confirm the
earlier findings of Campbell (1991) and Cochrane (1991), that dividend growth is largely
unpredictable by the dividend-price ratio in univariate long-horizon forecasting regressions.
As Campbell (1991) and Cochrane (1991) emphasize, such findings imply that changing
forecasts of future dividend growth must comprise little of the variation in the dividend-
price ratio. But, Ang and Bekaert (2001) do find that the dividend-price ratio has marginal
predictive power for future dividend growth in a multivariate regression once the earnings
yield is also included as a regressor. (The earnings yield also has marginal predictive power.)
There are two main differences between our predictability results and those in Ang and
Bekaert (2001). First, the joint forecasting power of the dividend yield and the earnings yield
for dividend growth is concentrated at shorter horizons than in regressions using cdy  c t and
cd
 ay t . Second, the R-squares for the regressions using the former variables are substantially
lower than those using the latter. For example, in the sample used in Ang and Bekaert (2001),
the dividend yield and the earnings yield jointly explain about 21 percent of dividend growth
one year ahead, and about 13 percent a five year horizon. The comparable numbers using
 c t alone as a predictive variable are 31 percent and 34 percent.18
cdy


4.2     Additional Statistical Tests
4.2.1    Multivariate Long-Horizon Forecasting Regressions19

The cointegrating coefficients in cd
                                   ay t and cdy
                                             c t are estimated using the full sample. This
estimation strategy is appropriate for testing the theoretical framework above, because suf-
  18
     These numbers are higher than those reported in Table 4 because we use the slightly shorter sample
employed by Ang and Bekaert (2001) in order to make the results directly comparable.
  19
     We are grateful to Jushan Bai for pointing out the possibility of using the methodology used in this
subsection.


                                                   18
ficiently large samples of data are necessary to recover the true cointegrating coefficients,
and there is no implication (either from the theoretical framework or from statistical theory)
that cday t and cdy
                 c t should forecast the right-hand-side variables in (3) and (4) unless the
cointegrating coefficients have converged to their true values. Fortunately, cointegrating co-
efficients are “superconsistent,Ô converging to their true values at a rate proportional to the
sample size T , and can therefore be treated as known in subsequent estimation. It follows
that a valid test of the theoretical cointegration framework in (3) and (4) requires the use of
the full sample to estimate the cointegrating coefficients.20
     A separate issue concerns not whether the theoretical framework is correct, but whether
a practitioner, operating in early part of our sample and without access to the whole sample
to estimate cointegrating coefficients, could have exploited the forecasting power of cd    ay t
and cdy t . Out-of-sample or subsample analysis is often used to assess questions of this
       c
nature. A difficulty with these procedures, however, is that the subsample analysis inherent
in out-of-sample forecasting tests entails a loss of information, and can lead such tests to be
substantially less powerful than in-sample forecasting tests (Inoue and Kilian (2002)). This
means that out-of-sample (and subsample) tests can fail to reveal true forecasting power that
even a practitioner could have had in real time. This pattern that would be exacerbated in
any investigation of long-horizon forecasting power.
     With these considerations in mind, we now provide an alternative approach to assessing
the forecasting power of cd ay t and cdy
                                      c t . The approach we propose eliminates the need to
estimate cointegrating parameters using the full sample in a first stage regression, but at the
same time avoids the power problems inherent in out-of-sample and subsample analyses. To
do so, we consider single equation, multivariate regressions taking the form

                                    zt+h = a + b1 ct + b2 at + b3 yt + ut ,                   (10)

where the dependent variable zt+h is either the h period excess return on the CRSP value-
weighted index, or the h period dividend growth rate on the CRSP value-weighted index.
Rather than estimating the cointegrating relation among ct , at , and yt in a first stage re-
gression and then using the cointegrating residual as the single right-hand-side variable, the
regression (10) uses the multiple variables involved in the cointegrating relation as regressors
directly. If there is a relation between the left-hand-side variable to be forecast, and some
stationary linear combination of the regressors ct , at , and yt , the regression can freely esti-
mate the non-zero coefficients b1 , b2 , and b3 which generate such a relation. For this excercise,
we maintain the hypothesis that the left-side-variable is stationary, while the right-hand-side
variables are I (1). Then, under the null hypothesis that (ct , at , yt )0 has a single cointegrat-
ing relation, it is straightforward to show that the limiting distributions for b1 , b2 , and b3
will be standard, implying that the forecasting regression (10) will produce valid adjusted
  20
       This issue is discussed in more detail in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001b).


                                                      19
R2 and t-statistics. Because this procedure does not require any first-stage estimation of
cointegrating parameters, it is clear that the forecasting regression (10), its coefficients and
R2 statistics, cannot be influenced by such a prior analysis.
     Table 6 reports long-horizon regression results for excess returns and dividend growth,
from an estimation of (10) and a directly analogous multivariate regression in which ct , dt ,
and yt are the regressors. The table reports the coefficient estimates at the top of each cell,
heteroskedasticity and serial correlation robust t-statistics in parentheses, and adjusted R2
statistics in square brackets.21 The results are broadly consistent with those obtained using
cday t and cdy
            c t as forecasting variables. In almost every case, the individual coefficients on each
regressor are strongly statistically significant as predictive variables for excess returns and
dividend growth, and the R2 statistics indicate that the regressors jointly explain about the
same fraction of variation in future returns and future dividend growth as do the individual
regressors cd ay t and cdy
                        c t . For example, the multivariate regression with ct , at , and yt as
 regressors explains about 26 percent of one year ahead excess returns, whereas cd     ay t explains
 27 percent. Similarly, the multivariate regression with ct , dt , and yt explains about 24 percent
 of the variation in one-year-ahead dividend growth, whereas cdy    c t explains 20 percent. These
 results do not support the conclusion that cd    ay t and cdy
                                                             c t have forecasting power merely
 because they are estimated in a first stage, using data from the whole sample period.

4.2.2    Small Sample Robustness

There are at least two potential econometric hazards with interpreting the long-horizon
regression results using cdy
                          c t and cd  ay, presented above. One is that the use of overlapping
data in long-horizon regressions can skew statistical inference in finite samples. Valkanov
(2001) shows that, in finite samples where the forecasting horizon is a nontrivial fraction of
the sample size, (i) the t-statistics of long-horizon regression coefficients do not converge to
  21
    Inference on b1 , b2 , and b3 can be accomplished by re-writing (10) so that the hypotheses to be tested are
written as a restrictions on I (0) variables (Sims, Stock, and Watson (1990)). For example, the hypothesis
b1 = 0 can be tested by rewriting (10) as

              zt+h   =   a + b1 [ct − ωat − (1 − ω) yt ] + [b2 + b1 ω] at + [b3 + b1 (1 − ω)] yt + ut
                     =   a + b1 [cayt ] + [b2 + b1 ω] at + [b3 + b1 (1 − ω)] yt + ut .

It follows that the ordinary least squares estimate of b1 has a limiting distribution given by
                                                   À                           !
                              √ °          ±                      σ 2
                                                                    u
                                T bb1 − b1 −→ N 0, PT                        2
                                                                                 ,
                                                        T t=1 (cayt − cay)

where σ 2u denotes the variance of ut , and cay is the sample mean of cayt . These may be evaluated by using
the full sample estimates, cday t . A similar rearrangement can be used to test hypotheses about b2 and b3 .
Note that the full sample estimates of the cointegrating coefficients are only required to do inference about
the forecasting excercise–they do not affect the forecasting excercise itself.



                                                        20
a well defined distribution, and (ii) the finite-sample distributions of R2 statistics in long-
horizon regressions do not converge to their population values. A second possible econometric
hazard with interpreting the long-horizon regression results presented in the previous section
occurs because (like most long-horizon forecasting variables) cdy       c t and cd ay are persistent
variables, which, although predetermined, are not exogenous. This lack of exogeneity can
create a small sample bias in the regression coefficient that works in the direction of indicating
predictability even where none is present (Nelson and Kim (1993) and Stambaugh (1999)).
    To address these potential inference problems, we perform three robustness checks. The
                                     √
first is to compute the rescaled t/ T statistic (where T is the sample size), recommended by
Valkanov (2001). Second, we use vector autoregessions to impute long-horizon R2 statistics,
rather than estimating them directly from long-horizon regressions. Third, we perform
both bootstrapped and Monte Carlo estimates of the empirical distribution of the predictive
regression coefficients and adjusted R2 statistics under the null of no predictability.
                                                 √
    We begin by discussing the rescaled t/ T statistic. Valkanov (2001) shows that, when
there is nontrivial overlap in the residuals of long-horizon regressions, the t-statistic for
whether the predictive variable is statistically different from zero diverges at rate T 1/2 . Thus,
                                                                                       √
Valkanov proposes testing for statistical significance by using a rescaled t/ T statistic,
which has a well defined limiting distribution. The distribution of this rescaled statistic is
nonstandard, however, and depends on two nuisance parameters, δ and c. The parameter δ
measures the covariance between innovations in the variable to be forecast, and innovations
some forecasting variable, call it Xt . The parameter c measures deviations from unity in the
highest autoregressive root for Xt , in a decreasing (at rate T ) neighborhood of 1. Both of
these parameters may be consistently estimated using the methodology described in Valkanov
                                                                            √
(2001). With these estimates in hand, the rescaled t-statistic, t/ T , may be compared
against critical values provided in Valkanov (2001).
    The rescaled t-statistics for our application are reported in curly brackets in Table 4,
for univariate predictive regressions of excess returns on cd     ay t and cdy
                                                                            c t , and in Table 5, for
univariate predictive regressions of dividend growth on cd        ay t and cdy
                                                                            c t . The table reports
both the statistic itself, and whether its value implies that the predictive coefficient in each
regression is statistically significant at the 5, 2.5 and 1 percent levels. According to this
rescaled t-statistic, cd
                       ay t is a powerful forecaster of excess returns (statistically significant at
the 1% level) at every horizon ranging from one to six years, as is cdy  c t at all but the one-year
horizon (Table 4). For future dividend growth (Table 5), the rescaled t-statistic implies that
cdy
 c t is a statistically significant predictor at the 1% percent level at every horizon from one
to six years, whereas cd  ay t is a statistically significant predictor of dividend growth at the
1% level at every horizon ranging from one to four years. These results do not support the
conclusion that the forecasting power of cd     ay t and cdy
                                                          c t for long-horizon excess stock market
returns and stock market dividend growth can be attributed to biases arising from the use
of overlapping data in finite samples.

                                                 21
    Finite sample problems with overlapping data in long-horizon regressions may also be
avoided by using vector autoregression to impute implied long-horizon R2 statistics for uni-
variate forecasting regressions, rather than estimating them directly from long-horizon re-
turns. The methodology for measuring long-horizon statistics by estimating a VAR has been
covered by Campbell (1991), Hodrick (1992), and Kandel and Stambaugh (1989), and we
refer the reader to those articles for further details. We present the results from using this
methodology in Table 8, which investigates the long-horizon predictive power of cd             ay t and
cdy
 c t for future returns and future dividend growth using bivariate, first-order VARs. For
each forecasting horizon we consider, we calculate an implied R2 statistic using the coefficient
estimates of the VAR and the estimated covariance matrix of the VAR residuals.
    Table 8 shows that the pattern of the implied R2 statistics from the vector autoregressions
is very similar to those from the produced from the single equation long-horizon regressions.
The implied adjusted R2 statistics for forecasting dividend growth with cdy       c t (row 3) peaks
at 0.2 for a three year horizon. This forecasting power is consistently greater than that
obtained from a simple autoregression for dividend growth (row 1). A similar pattern holds
for the implied R2 statistics for forecasting with cd  ay t : the implied R2 statistic for forecasting
excess returns with cd   ay t is as high as 49% at a three year horizon; for forecasting dividend
growth with cd  ay t , it reaches 24% at a three year horizon. Thus, the evidence favoring
predictability of dividend growth and excess stock returns using cdy      c t and cd ay t is robust to
                                                                              2
the VAR methodology, implying that the size of the long-horizon R statistics cannot be
readily attributed to inference problems with the use of overlapping data in finite samples.
    An alternate method for addressing potential finite sample biases is to estimate the
empirical distribution of regression coefficients and adjusted R2 statistics from predictive
regressions in which cd  ay t and cdy
                                    c t are used as forecasting variables. Table 9 presents results
based on two methodologies which yield very similar results: a bootstrap and a Monte Carlo
simulation, both conducted under the null hypothesis of no predictability (i.e., residuals for
the dependent variable are generated by regressions on a constant). For both simulations,
we use first-order autoregressive specifications our reduced form models for cd                  c t .22
                                                                                      ay t and cdy
For the bootstrap, artificial sequences of excess returns and dividend growth are generated
by drawing randomly (with replacement) from the sample residuals, under the null of no pre-
dictability.23 The simulations were repeated 10,000 times. For the Monte Carlo simulation,
10,000 artificial time-series equal to the size of our data set were generated under the null
of no predictability by taking random draws from a normal distribution; the notes to Table
  22
     It is known that the standard bootstrap is not consistent if the data series have a near-unit root.
However, cd ay t and cdy
                     d do not appear well-characterized as near-unit root processes, since—unlike the log
                         t
dividend-price ratio—standard cointegration tests strongly reject the hypothesis that they are I (1) random
variables.
  23
     Nelson and Kim (1993) also perform randomization, which differs from bootstrapping only in that
sampling is without replacement. We also performed the simulations using randomization and found that
the results were not affected by this change.


                                                    22
9 provides details. To avoid difficulties caused by the use of overlapping data, we focus here
on the one-year ahead regressions presented in Tables 5 and 6.
    Table 9 summarizes the estimated sampling distribution for the slope coefficient and the
R2 statistic in univariate forecasting regressions of annual excess returns and annual dividend
growth. Panel A presents the bootstrap results; Panel B, the Monte Carlo results. The results
of each simulation are nearly identical. In almost every case, the estimated predictability
coefficient and R2 statistic lies outside of the 95 percent confidence interval based on the
empirical distribution under the null of no predictability. In most cases they lie outside of the
99 percent confidence interval. The one exception is for the case in which excess returns are
regressed on the one-year lagged value of cdy;c in this case, we cannot reject the hypothesis
that one-step ahead forecasting power of cdy c t is not statistically indistinguishable from zero.
This is not surprising, since even the standard asymptotic statistics suggest that cdy
                                                                                     c t only has
significant predictive power for returns at horizons longer than one year. For all of the other
regressions and forecasting horizons, we find that our estimated slope coefficients and R2
statistics are large relative to their sampling distributions under the null of no predictability.
In summary, these results, like those discussed above using the rescaled t-statistic and VAR-
imputed R2 statistics, do not support the conclusion that the predictability of excess returns
and dividend growth documented here is can be attributed to small sample biases in the
regression coefficients or R2 statistics.


4.3    Including Share Repurchases
So far we have focused on measuring dividends as the actual cash paid to shareholders of the
CRSP value-weighted index. We do this in order to make our results directly comparable
with the existing literature which has focused on forecasting the growth rate in this particular
measure of dividends. This measure is of interest because it represents the predominant form
of payout to shareholders over much of the post-war period. Moreover, as noted by Campbell
and Shiller (2001), traditional dividends are an appealing indicator of fundamental value for
long-term shareholders, because the end-of-period share price becomes trivially small when
discounted from the end to the beginning of a long holding period.
    Nonetheless, there is a growing view that changing corporate finance policy has led
many firms, in recent years, to compensate shareholders through repurchase programs rather
than through dividends (Fama and French (2001); Grullon and Michaely (2002)), even if
large firms with high earnings have continued to increase traditional dividend payouts over
time (DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2002)). In this section we show that our main
conclusions are not altered by adjusting dividends to account for share repurchase activity.
    One way to adjust dividends for such shifts in corporate financial policy is to add dollars
spent on repurchases to dividends. We do so here by adding aggregate share repurchase
expenditures for the Industrial Compustat firms reported in Grullon and Michaely (2002)


                                               23
to our measure of dividends.24 These data cover the period 1972 to 2000 and are added to
the CRSP dividends after being scaled to match the units of our original dividend series.
As Grullon and Michaely (2002) note, repurchases activity prior to 1972 represented a tiny
fraction of shareholder compensation for U.S. corporations; thus the traditional dividend
series should provide an accurate measure of actual payouts in data prior to 1972.
    Table 10 presents the results of univariate long horizon forecasting regressions for the
growth in dividends plus repurchase activity, using cd
                                                     ay t and cdy
                                                               c t as forecasting variables in
separate regressions. The results should be compared with those in Table 5, which presents
the analogous findings using CRSP value-weighted dividends. Comparing the output from
the two tables, it is immediately evident that the inclusion of share repurchases does not
alter the main conclusions obtained from using traditional dividends: cd ay t and cdy
                                                                                   c are both
strong predictors of the long-horizon growth rates in this series, with t-statistics that begin
above 4 for horizons at one year and increase, and R-squared statistics that are in line
with those in Table 4. We conclude that adjusting dividends for repurchases does not alter
the main finding in this paper, namely that the growth in compensation to shareholders
is forecastable in post-war data, and over horizons previously associated exclusively with
return forecastability.


5      Why Might Expected Dividend Growth Covary with
       Expected Returns?
If investors themselves desire smooth consumption paths, why don’t managers perfectly
smooth dividend payments? Some authors have noted that dividends are smoother than
earnings, consistent with the hypothesis that managers do some dividend smoothing (Cochrane
(1994); Lamont (1998)). One possibility is that although dividend-smoothing may be possi-
ble over long horizons (as revealed by the dividend-price ratio), it may be more difficult over
horizons corresponding more closely to the business cycle. Several researchers have presented
evidence that is suggestive of this hypothesis. Gertler and Hubbard (1993) study firm-level
data from Compustat and find that firm dividend payouts are lower during a slow-down in
economic growth and higher during periods of economic expansion. Bernanke and Gertler
(1989) and Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) present theoretical and empirical evidence
of countercyclical variation in the external finance premium, suggesting that managers who
need to finance long-term projects have a greater need to retain earnings in recessions than
in expansions.. The equity risk-premium also appears counter-cyclical: it rises during an
  24
    We add gross repurchases to our measure of dividends, since those data are readily available from the
published work of Grullon and Michaely (2002). This procedure is conservative for our purpose, since the
sum of share repurchases and traditional dividend payments would only be closer to our original series if we
instead added net repurchases (net of new issues).



                                                    24
economic slow-down and falls during periods of economic growth (Fama and French (1989);
Ferson and Harvey (1991); Lettau and Ludvigson (2001a)). Taken together, these findings
suggest that high risk-premia occur in periods of economic recession and coincide with a
temporarily low stock price, temporarily low earnings, and temporarily low dividends. This
suggests that consumers may be better able to smooth transitory fluctuations in their div-
idend income than managers are able to smooth fluctuations in earnings. If this is true,
earnings growth should be predictably higher when, according to cdy   c t , dividend growth and
excess stock returns are predictably higher.
    Table 11 presents some evidence that is supportive of this hypothesis using earnings data
for NYSE firms. The earnings data are from Lewellen (2001) and are operating earnings
before depreciation to market value. Unfortunately, only a short sample is available that is
limited by when Compustat data are available: 1964-2000.25 Table 11 reports that earnings
growth is predictably higher when predictable dividend growth, as captured by cdy        c t , is
higher. The regressor cdyc t , is strongly statistically significant as a predictor of earnings
growth at business cycle frequencies, with t-statistics in excess of four for one to three year
forecasting horizons, and in excess of three for a four year horizon. The univariate forecasting
regression explains about 14 percent of the variation in earnings growth 4 years hence. Thus,
when consumption is high relative to its common trend with dt and yt , both dividends and
earnings are temporarily low, and forecast to grow more quickly in the future. These results
are consistent with the hypothesis manager’s dividend smoothing ability is imperfect over
business cycles.


6      Conclusion
This paper presents evidence that changing forecasts of dividend growth make an important
contribution to fluctuations in the U.S. stock market, despite the failure of the dividend-price
ratio to uncover such variation. Although these findings contradict the common conclusion
that expected dividend growth is roughly constant, they reinforce the textbook conclusion
that expected returns are time-varying and make an important contribution to aggregate
stock market fluctuations. Dividend forecasts covary with changing forecasts of excess stock
returns, and are positively correlated with business cycle variation in expected returns. Such
fluctuations in expected returns and expected dividend growth have offsetting affects on
the dividend-price ratio. The findings provide at least a partial explanation for why the
consumption-wealth ratio has been found superior to the log dividend-price ratio as a pre-
dictor of excess stock market returns over medium-term horizons.
    The findings suggest that an important component of time-varying expected returns and
  25
    We use Lewellen’s data and not earnings per share since that measure is contaminated by variability in
share issuance.



                                                   25
time-varying expected dividend growth is not captured by the log dividend-price ratio, or
likely by other aggregate financial ratios. This stacks the deck against such financial ratios in
statistical tests of return or dividend growth predictability. The results also imply that time-
varying investment opportunities will be poorly captured by variation in the log dividend-
price ratio, because it fails to reveal significant movements in the investment opportunity set
that occur over business cycle horizons. This implication should be of special relevance to
the growing body of literature on strategic asset allocation, in which the log dividend-price
ratio is often used a proxy for time-variation in the investment opportunity set, and as an
input into the optimal asset allocation decision of a long-horizon investor.26
    We caution that the findings presented here provide but one piece of a larger puzzle
concerning the behavior of the dividend-price ratio, especially that more recently. There is
a growing view that shifts in corporate financial policy may have created persistent changes
in dividend growth rates. For example, firms have been distributing an increasing frac-
tion of total cash paid to shareholders in the form of stock repurchases (e.g., Fama and
French (2001)). It is too soon to tell whether such shifts in corporate financial policy will
be sustained. At the same time, stock prices relative to earnings and other measures of
economic fundamentals have followed patterns similar to that of the dividend-price ratio
(Campbell and Shiller (2001)), while the consumption-based valuation ratio for dividend
growth studied here has been less affected. These observations suggest that factors other
than changes in corporate payout policy may be partly responsible for the behavior of ag-
gregate financial ratios in recent data. Whatever the reason for these changes, the results
presented here suggest that some of the differences between the log dividend-price ratio and
the log consumption-wealth ratio have been attributable historically to changing forecasts
of long-horizon dividend growth.




 26
      For a lucid summary of this literature, see Campbell and Viceira (2001).


                                                     26
                           Appendix A: Derivation of cdyt
   Equation (4) is based on the derivation in Campbell and Mankiw (1989) for the relation between
log consumption and the log of total income flows from aggregate wealth. Campbell and Mankiw
move from the consumption-based present value relation involving future returns, (the consumption-
wealth ratio), to one involving future income flows. A derivation is given in Campbell and Mankiw
(1989) and here.
    Wt is total wealth, which consists of Nt shares at time t, each of which have an ex-dividend
price, Pt , and dividend payment, It :

                                           Wt = Nt (Pt + It ).                                    (11)

   The return on aggregate wealth is defined
                                                    Pt+1 + It+1
                                        Rt+1 =                  .                                 (12)
                                                        Pt
Combining (11) and (12),
                                      Wt+1          Wt
                                           = Rt+1 (    − It ).                                    (13)
                                      Nt+1          Nt
Equation (13) can be written
                                                           ²             ³
                                                               Wt
                          Wt+1 = Rt+1 (Nt + ∆Nt+1 )               − It       ==>
                                                               Nt
                                     ²                                 ³
                                                                 ∆Nt+1
                        Wt+1   = Rt+1 Wt − It Nt + (Wt − It Nt )
                                                                  Nt
Note that from (11), (Wt − It Nt ) = Nt Pt . Thus,

                               Wt+1 = Rt+1 (Wt − It Nt + Pt ∆Nt+1 ).

The term Pt ∆Nt+1 is net-new investment, i.e. the net issuance of new shares, ∆Nt+1 , valued at
the ex-dividend price Pt . Investors save by reinvesting a portion of their dividend income in the
asset markets.
   Equation (13) is of the same form as the accumulation equation for total wealth, Wt+1 =
Rt+1 (Wt − Ct ), and can be linearized in the same way. Campbell and Mankiw do so and derive
                                              ∞
                                              X
                       it − wt = −nt + Et           ρi (rt+i − ∆it+i ) + constant,                (14)
                                              i=1

where lower case letters denote log variables. Note that it in (14) is the log per share dividend. To
obtain total dividends, It must be multiplied by the number of shares Nt ; or in logs we need it + nt .
Adding nt on both sides of (14) delivers a present value relation relating log total dividends to log
total wealth:
                                     ∞
                                     X
                    iTt − wt = +Et         ρi (rt+i − ∆iTt+i + ∆nt+i ) + constant,
                                     i=1
where iTt denotes total (rather than per share) income from aggregate wealth, iTt ≡ it + nt .
   Combining (14) with the log-linearized expression for the log consumption wealth ratio
                                                          ∞
                                                          X
                                         ct − wt = Et           ρi (rt+i − ∆ct+i ),                     (15)
                                                          i=1

yields
                                          ∞
                                          X
                     ct −   iTt   = Et           ρi (∆iTt+i − ∆nt+i − ∆ct+i ) + constant.               (16)
                                           i=1

This equation is a more general version of (3.7) in Campbell and Mankiw:
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                            ct −   iTt   = Et          ρi (∆iTt+i − ∆ct+i ) + constant.                 (17)
                                                 i=1

Campbell and Mankiw arrive at (17) by normalizing (in the last step), Nt , the number of shares
in each period, to equal one. Although equation (16) implies that ct − iTt may related to future
changes in the log of the number of shares of asset wealth, this implication is not interesting because
the pure number of shares is continuously renormalized by stock splits and reverse splits. Note also
that the notation in Campbell and Mankiw (1989) is unfortunate, because in their text (and in
their equation (3.7)), yt is used to denote log total income (what we denote iT here), whereas in
their appendix (where they derive equation (17)), yt denotes the log of income per share, it .
   Equation (4) is based Campbell and Mankiw’s (16), but differs in two respects. First, Camp-
bell and Mankiw assume a particular functional form for investor preferences, and therefore set
Et ∆ct+i = µ + σEt rt+i . Second, equation (16) is expressed in terms of the total income flow from
aggregate wealth, iTt , whereas as in (4), this total is decomposed into its asset wealth and human
wealth components using the relation iTt ≈ νdt + (1 − ν) yt , where ν is the steady state share of
income from asset wealth in total income. Together these assumptions yield the expression
                                                 ∞
                                                 X
   cdyt ≡ ct − νdt − (1 − ν) yt = Et                   ρiw (ν∆dt+i + (1 − ν)∆yt+i − ∆ct+i − ν∆nt+i ).   (18)
                                                 i=1

For this simple framework, we have assumed that the number of “shares” of human capital are
constant, since human wealth is not traded on a stock market. This assumption is inconsequential
for the substance of the derivation, since it merely determines whether ∆nt+i in (18) is multiplied
by the constant ν . Finally, we follow Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and avoid carrying the term
ν∆nt+i around by making an arbitrary normalization that the number shares is always unity. This
delivers equation (4) in the text.
   The steady state income shares ν and (1 − ν) can be related to the steady state wealth shares ω
and (1 − ω). To see this, assume that the steady state of the economy is characterized by balanced
growth at some gross rate 1 + g, and a constant return on aggregate wealth, Rw,t ≡ R. These
assumptions are standard features of equilibrium growth models. Equation (15) implies the steady
state value of beginning-of-period aggregate wealth is given by
                                ∞
                                X
                       Wt =           (1 + R)−i Ct+i
                                i=0
                                ∞
                                X
                            =         (1 + R)−i (It+i Nt+i + Pt ∆Nt+1+i )
                                i=0
                                ∞
                                X
                                      (1 + R)−i Dt+i + Pt ∆Nt+1+i
                                                            A
                                                                        ¡
                            =                                     + Yt+i ,
                                i=0

       A
where Nt+1 denotes the change in the number of shares of asset wealth at time t + 1. Using the
expression above, and noting that the steady state ratio of aggregate wealth to consumption is
given by (1 + R) / (R − g), it is straightforward to show that the steady share of asset wealth in
aggregate wealth, ω , is given by

                                           Dt + (π − 1) Pt NtA
                                    ω=                            ,
                                         Dt + (π − 1) Pt NtA + Yt

where, Dt , Pt NtA , and Yt all grow deterministically at rate 1+g , π ≡ (1 + g) / (1 + r − kr + kg),
and where k ≡ ItT /Ct ≥ 1, is the steady state ratio of total income to total consumption. Notice
that when k = 1 (there is no saving in steady state), we have π = 1 and

                                                 Dt
                                          ω=           = ν,
                                               Dt + Yt
and income shares equal wealth shares.
                              Appendix B: Data Description
    The sources and description of each data series we use are listed below.
    CONSUMPTION
    Consumption is measured as either total personal consumption expenditure or expenditure on
nondurables and services, excluding shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are seasonally adjusted
at annual rates, in billions of chain- weighted 1996 dollars. The components are chain-weighted
together, and this series is scaled up so that the sample mean matches the sample mean of total
personal consumption expenditures. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Economic Analysis.
    AFTER-TAX LABOR INCOME
    Labor income is defined as wages and salaries + transfer payments + other labor income -
personal contributions for social insurance - taxes. Taxes are defined as [wages and salaries/(wages
and salaries + proprietors’ income with IVA and Ccadj + rental income + personal dividends
+ personal interest income)] times personal tax and nontax payments, where IVA is inventory
valuation and Ccadj is capital consumption adjustments. The annual data are in current dollars.
Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    WEALTH
    Total wealth is household net wealth in billions of current dollars, measured at the end of the
period. Stock market wealth includes direct household holdings, mutual fund holdings, holdings
of private and public pension plans, personal trusts, and insurance companies. Nonstock wealth is
the residual of total wealth minus stock market wealth, and includes ownership of privately traded
companies in noncorporate equity. Our source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.
    DIVIDENDS
    Dividends are constructed from the CRSP index returns. The CRSP dividends, Dc,t , are scaled
by the average ratio of stock market wealth, St to the price of the value-weighted CRSP index, Pc,t
to reflect dollar values, i.e., Dt ≡ E(St /Pc,t )Dc,t .
    POPULATION
    A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per capita
disposable income. Consumption, wealth, labor income, and dividends are in per capita terms.
Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    PRICE DEFLATOR
    The nominal after-tax labor income, stock market dividend and wealth data are deflated by the
personal consumption expenditure chain-type deflator (1996=100), seasonally adjusted. (Source:
Bureau of Economic Analysis.)
                          Appendix C: Cointegration Tests
    This appendix presents the results of cointegration tests. Dickey-Fuller tests for the presence
of a unit root in c, y, a, d, and p (not reported) are consistent with the hypothesis of a unit root
in those series.
    Table C-I reports test statistics corresponding to two cointegration tests. Reported in the far
right column are Phillips and Ouliaris (1990) residual based cointegration test statistics. The table
shows both the Dickey-Fuller t-statistic and the relevant five and 10 percent critical values. The test
is carried out without a deterministic trend in the static regression. We applied the data dependent
procedure suggested in Campbell and Perron (1991) for choosing the appropriate lag length in an
augmented Dickey-Fuller test. This procedure suggested that the appropriate lag length was one
for both the (c, a, y)0 system and the (c, d, y)0 system. The tests reject the null of no cointegration
both systems at the five percent level. The persistent dividend-price ratio displays no evidence
favoring cointegration in this sample.
    Table C-I also reports the outcome of testing procedures suggested by Johansen (1988) and Jo-
hansen (1991) that allow the researcher to estimate the number of cointegrating relationships. This
procedure presumes a p-dimensional vector autoregressive model with k lags, where p corresponds
to the number of stochastic variables among which the investigator wishes to test for cointegration.
For our application, p = 3. The Johansen procedure provides two tests for cointegration: under the
null hypothesis, H0 , that there are exactly r cointegrating relations, the ‘Trace’ statistic supplies
a likelihood ratio test of H0 against the alternative, HA , that there are p cointegrating relations,
where p is the total number of variables in the model. A second approach uses the ‘L-max’ statistic
to test the null hypothesis of r cointegrating relations against the alternative of r + 1 cointegrating
relations.
    The critical values obtained using the Johansen approach also depend on the trend character-
istics of the data. We present results allowing for linear trends in data, but assuming that the
cointegrating relation has only a constant. See the articles by Johansen for a more detailed dis-
cussion of these trend assumptions. In choosing the appropriate trend model for our data, we are
guided by both theoretical considerations and statistical criteria. Theoretical considerations imply
that the long-run equilibrium relationship between consumption, labor income and wealth do not
have deterministic trends, although each individual data series may have deterministic trends. The
Table also reports the 90 percent critical values for these statistics.
    Both the L-max and Trace test results establish evidence of a cointegrating relation among
log consumption, log labor income, and the log of household wealth, and among log consumption,
log dividends and the log of labor income. Table C-I shows that we may reject the null of no
cointegration against the alternative of one cointegrating vector. In addition, we cannot reject the
null hypothesis of one cointegrating relationship against the alternative of two or three.
References
Ang, A. (2002): “Characterizing the Ability of Dividend Yields to Predict Future Dividends in
 Log-Linear Present Value Models,” Unpublished paper, Graduate School of Business, Columbia
 University.

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2001): “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” NBER Working
 Paper No. 8207.

Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, Net Worth and Business Cycle
  Flutuations,” American Economic Review, 79, 14–31.

Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1996): “The Financial Accelerator and the
  Flight to Quality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1), 1–15.

Campbell, J. Y. (1991): “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal,
 101, 157–179.

        (2002): “Consumption-Based Asset Pricing,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance
  forthcoming, ed. by G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and C. MacKinlay (1997): The Econometrics of Financial
 Markets. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Campbell, J. Y., and G. Mankiw (1989): “Consumption, Income, and Interest Rates: Reinter-
 preting the Time Series Evidence,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, ed. by O. Blan-
  chard, and S. Fischer, pp. 185–216. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Campbell, J. Y., and P. Perron (1991): “Pitfalls and Opportunities: What Macroeconomists
 Should Know About Unit Roots,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual: 1991, ed. by O. J.
 Blanchard, and S. Fischer. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
  Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195–227.

        (2001): “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock Market Outlook: An Update,” NBER
  working paper No. 8221.

Campbell, J. Y., and L. Viceira (2001): Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for
 Long-Term Investors. Oxford Univeristy Press, London, UK.

Campbell, J. Y., and M. Yogo (2002): “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,” Un-
 published paper, Harvard University.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991): “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of Finan-
 cial Studies, 5(2), 243–280.

       (1994): “Permanent and Transitory Components of GDP and Stock Prices,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109, 241–265.
        (1997): “Where is the Market Going? Uncertain Facts and Novel Theories,” Economic
  Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 11, 1–37.

        (2001): Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

DeAngelo, H., L. DeAngelo, and D. J. Skinner (2002): “Are Dividends Disappearing?
 Dividend Concentration and the Consolidation of Earnings,” Unpublished paper, University of
 Michigan.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.

       (1989): “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 25, 23–49.

        (2001): “Disappearing Dividends: Changing Firm Characteristics or Lower Propensity to
  Pay,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60(1), 3–43.

        (2002): “The Equity Premium,” Journal of Finance, 57(2), 637–659.

Ferson, W. E., and C. R. Harvey (1991): “The Variation of Economic Risk Premiums,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 99, 385–415.

Flavin, M. (1981): “The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About Future
  Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), 974–1009.

Gertler, M., and R. G. Hubbard (1993): “Corporate Financial Policy, Taxation, and Macroe-
 conomic Risk,” Rand Journal of Economics, 24(2), 286–303.

Grullon, G., and R. Michaely (2002): “Dividends, Share Repurchases, and the Substitution
 Hypothesis,” Journal of Finance, 57(4), 1649–1684.

Heaton, J., and D. Lucas (1999): “Stock Prices and Fundamentals,” in NBER Macroeco-
 nomics Annual: 1999, ed. by O. J. Blanchard, and S. Fischer. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hodrick, R. (1992): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures for
 Inference and Measurement,” Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357–386.

Inoue, A., and L. Kilian (2002): “In-Sample or Out-of-Sample Tests of Predictability: Which
  One Should We Use?,” Unpublished paper, Department of Economics, University of Michigan.

Johansen, S. (1988): “Statistical Analysis of Cointegrating Vectors,” Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control, 12, 231–254.

        (1991): “Estimation and Hypothesis Testing of Cointegration Vectors in Gaussian Vector
  Autoregressive Models,” Econometrica, 56, 1551–1580.
Kandel, S., and R. Stambaugh (1989): “Modeling Expected Stock Returns for Long and
 Short Horizons,” Unpublished Paper , Rodney L. White Center, Wharton School, University of
 Pennsylvania.

Lamont, O. (1998): “Earnings and Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance, 53, 1563–87.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001a): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected
  Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.

         (2001b): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return Tradeoff,” Unpublished
  paper, New York University.

        (2002): “Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values,” Unpublished Paper, New York
  University.

Lewellen, J. W. (2001): “Predicting Returns With Financial Ratios,” Unpublished paper, MIT
  Sloan School of Management.

Nelson, C. C., and M. J. Kim (1993): “Predictable Stock Returns: The Role of Small Sample
 Bias,” Journal of Finance, 43, 641–661.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semidefinite, Heteroskedasticity
 and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703–708.

Phillips, P., and S. Ouliaris (1990): “Asymptotic Properties of Residual Based Tests for
  Cointegration,” Econometrica, 58, 165–193.

Sims, C. A., J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (1990): “Inference in Linear Time-Series Models
  with Some Unit Roots,” Econometrica, 58(1), 113–144.

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999): “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54,
  375–421.

Stock, J. H., and M. Watson (1993): “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in Higher
  Order Integrated Systems,” Econometrica, 61, 783–820.

Valkanov, R. (2001): “Long-Horizon Regressions: Theoretical Results and Applications,” Jour-
  nal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                            ∆ct    ∆yt     ∆dt      ∆pt     ∆at
                                Univariate Summary Statistics
                    Mean (in %)             2.01   2.30    4.01    6.88     2.45
             Standard Deviation (in %)      1.14   1.83   12.24    16.13    4.05
                                     Correlation Matrix
                        ∆ct                 1.00   0.78   -0.13    -0.00    0.32
                        ∆yt                        1.00   -0.10    -0.10    0.18
                        ∆dt                                1.00    0.64     0.52
                        ∆pt                                        1.00     0.83
                        ∆at                                                 1.00

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for annual growth of real per capita consumption
∆ct , labor income ∆yt , CRSP-VW dividends ∆dt , CRSP-VW price ∆pt and asset wealth ∆at .
The sample spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                             Table 2: Autocorrelations of Ratios
                       Ratio               ρ1         ρ2          ρ3          ρ4
                       d−p               0.875       0.724      0.596       0.473
                 c − 0.29 a − 0.60 y     0.551       0.130      0.085       0.051
                 c − 0.13 d − 0.68 y     0.475       0.217      0.258       0.171

Notes: This table reports autocorrelations of ratios involving consumption ct , labor income yt ,
CRSP-VW dividends dt , CRSP-VW price pt and asset wealth at . ρi denotes the autocorrelation of
order i (in years). The cointegrating coefficients in the last two rows are estimates using dynamic
least squares with 2 leads and lags. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                        Table 3: Estimates From Cointegrated VARs
                                           Panel A: (d, p)
                                                                  Equation
                    Dependent Variable                  ∆dt                   ∆pt
                           ∆dt−1                       -0.194                  0.364
                          (t-stat)                    (-1.059)               (1.352)
                           ∆pt−1                       -0.192                 -0.210
                          (t-stat)                    (-1.441)               (-1.079)
                        dt−1 − pt−1                     0.103                  0.070
                          (t-stat)                    (2.205)                (1.021)
                                R̄2                     0.183                 0.046

                                      Panel B: (c, a, y)
                                                                Equation
                 Dependent variable            ∆ct                ∆yt            ∆at
                        ∆ct−1                  0.267              0.449         -0.523
                       (t-stat)              (1.279)            (1.220)        (-0.696)
                        ∆yt−1                 -0.039             -0.148          0.433
                       (t-stat)              (-0.294)           (-0.641)        (0.916)
                        ∆at−1                 0.112               0.128         0.392
                       (t-stat)              (2.777)            (1.794)         (2.702)
                       cday t−1               -0.007              0.102          1.726
                       (t-stat)              (-0.053)           (0.457)         (3.803)
                          R̄2                 0.199              0.050          0.207


                                      Panel C: (c, d, y)
                                                                Equation
                 Dependent variable            ∆ct                ∆yt            ∆dt
                        ∆ct−1                 0.469               0.652         -0.136
                       (t-stat)              (2.284)            (1.869)        (-0.060)
                        ∆yt−1                 -0.074             -0.156          -0.252
                       (t-stat)              (-0.572)           (-0.709)       (-0.176)
                        ∆dt−1                 0.029              0.052           -0.129
                       (t-stat)              (2.311)            (2.389)        (-0.917)
                       cdy
                       d
                           t−1                -0.038              0.219          2.400
                       (t-stat)              (-0.408)           (1.377)         (2.314)
                          R̄2                 0.179              0.098          0.104



   Notes: The table reports estimated coefficients from cointegrated first-order vector autoregres-
sions of the column variable on the row variable; ct is log consumption, yt is log labor income, at is
log asset wealth (net worth), dt is log stock market dividends, and pt is the log CRSP value-weighted
price index. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Estimated coefficients that are significant at
the 5% level are highlighted in bold face. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
            Table 4: Univariate Long-horizon Regressions – Excess Stock Returns
                     h-period regression: hi=1 (rt+i − rf,t+i ) = k + γ zt + ¯t,t+h
                                         P

                                                     Horizon h (in years)
   zt =                  1              2               3               4              5               6

  d t − pt             0.14            0.24           0.27            0.34            0.52           0.73
                      (1.90)          (1.40)         (1.21)          (0.73)          (0.84)         (1.12)
                      [0.08]          [0.10]          [0.10]         [0.10]          [0.16]          [0.23]

    cd
     ay t              6.48           11.78          13.23           13.62           16.81          21.94
                      (4.19)          (5.42)         (5.42)          (5.27)          (7.07)         (5.46)
                    {0.57∗∗∗ }      {0.74∗∗∗ }     {0.74∗∗∗ }      {0.72∗∗∗ }      {0.96∗∗∗ }     {0.74∗∗∗ }
                      [0.27]          [0.49]          [0.46]         [0.37]          [0.39]          [0.52]

    cdy
    d
        t              1.32            5.21           6.11            6.77           18.09          11.40
                      (1.47)          (7.38)         (4.13)          (4.28)          (4.92)         (4.45)
                      {0.20}        {1.00∗∗∗ }     {0.56∗∗∗ }      {0.58∗∗∗ }      {0.67∗∗∗ }     {0.61∗∗∗ }
                      [0.01]          [0.16]          [0.20]         [0.20]          [0.20]          [0.32]

Notes: This tables reports the results of h-period regressions of CRSP-VW returns in excess of a
3-month Treasury-bill rate, rr,t , on the variable listed in the first column: hi=1 (rt+i − rf,t+i ) = k +
                                                                              P

γ zt +¯t,t+h , where zt are the cointegration residuals listed in the first column. ct is log consumption,
yt is log labor income, at is log asset wealth (net worth), dt is log stock market dividends, and pt
is the log CRSP value-weighted price index. cd
                                             ay t and cdy
                                                      d are estimated cointegrating residuals
                                                          t

for the systems (ct , at , yt )0 and (ct , dt , yt )0 , respectively. For each regression, the table reports OLS
estimates of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses), the
  √
t/ T test suggested in Valkanov (2001) in curly brackets and adjusted R2 statistics in square
brackets. Significant coefficients using the standard t-test at the 5% level are highlighted in bold
                                                           √
face. Significance at the 5%, 2.5% and 1% level of the t/ T test using Valkanov’s (2001) critical
values is indicated by ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ ∗ ∗, respectively. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948
to 2001.
             Table 5: Univariate Long-horizon Regressions – Dividend Growth
                             h-period regression: dt+h − dt = k + γ zt + ¯t,t+h

                                                      Horizon h (in years)
    zt =                 1               2               3               4               5               6

  d t − pt             0.09            0.18            0.19            0.23            0.29            0.34
                      (2.94)          (2.11)          (2.70)          (2.27)          (2.70)          (2.41)
                       [0.07]          [0.15]          [0.13]          [0.14]         [0.15]          [0.19]

    cd
     ay t              4.74            5.89            4.90            4.30            5.13            5.72
                      (6.26)          (4.86)          (3.33)          (2.80)          (2.17)          (1.50)
                     {0.85∗∗∗ }     {0.66∗∗∗ }      {0.45∗∗∗ }      {0.38∗∗∗ }       {0.30∗ }         {0.20}
                       [0.29]          [0.30]          [0.16]          [0.09]         [0.10]          [0.12]

    cdy
    d
        t              2.74            3.95            3.65            3.99            5.24            6.13
                      (4.06)          (5.84)          (4.13)          (3.60)          (5.38)          (3.65)
                     {0.55∗∗∗ }     {0.79∗∗∗ }      {0.56∗∗∗ }      {0.49∗∗∗ }      {0.73∗∗∗ }      {0.50∗∗∗ }
                       [0.20]          [0.24]          [0.20]          [0.20]         [0.28]          [0.37]

Notes: This tables reports results from h-period regression of CRSP-VW dividend growth: dt+h −
dt = k + γ zt + ¯t,t+h , where zt are the cointegration residuals listed in the first column. ct
is log consumption, yt is log labor income, at is log asset wealth (net worth), dt is log stock
market dividends, and pt is the log CRSP value-weighted price index. cd
                                                                      ay t and cdy
                                                                               d are estimated
                                                                                   t

cointegrating residuals for the systems (ct , at , yt )0 and (ct , dt , yt )0 , respectively. For each regression,
the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics
                        √
(in parentheses), the t/ T test suggested in Valkanov (2001) in curly brackets and adjusted R2
statistics in square brackets. Significant coefficients using the standard t-test at the 5% level are
                                                                             √
highlighted in bold face. Significance at the 5%, 2.5% and 1% level of the t/ T test using Valkanov’s
(2001) critical values is indicated by ∗, ∗∗ and ∗ ∗ ∗, respectively. The sample is annual and spans
the period 1948 to 2001.
                        Table 6: Multivariate Long-horizon Regressions
                                                       Horizon h (in years)
       Variables                 1            2           3           4               5             6
                         h-period regression: excess stock returns
          cd
           ay t                 6.94        11.15        12.22        11.95        15.33         18.47
                              (3.27)        (3.73)       (3.82)       (3.43)       (3.86)        (4.12)
          cdy
          d
              t                -0.74         0.89         1.14         1.70         1.46          3.44
                              (-0.81)       (0.69)       (0.80)       (1.02)       (0.76)        (1.81)
                               [0.27]       [0.48]       [0.45]       [0.36]       [0.38]        [0.53]
                            h-period regression: dividend growth
          cd
           ay t                3.71          4.27         2.62         0.62         -0.30        -0.82
                              (3.08)        (1.95)       (1.09)       (0.31)       (-0.14)      (-0.24)
          cdy
          d
              t                1.64          2.29         2.58         3.72          5.37        6.48
                              (2.57)        (1.86)       (1.87)       (2.74)       (4.78)       (3.32)
                              [0.34]        [0.35]       [0.21]       [0.18]        [0.26]       [0.36]

Notes: This tables reports results from h-period regression of CRSP-VW returns in excess of a 3-
month Treasury-bill rate (top panel), and dividend growth (bottom panel). ct is log consumption,
yt is log labor income, at is log asset wealth (net worth), dt is log stock market dividends, and pt
is the log CRSP value-weighted price index. cd
                                             ay t and cdy
                                                      d are estimated cointegrating residuals
                                                          t

for the systems (ct , at , yt )0 and (ct , dt , yt )0 , respectively. For each regression, the table reports OLS
estimates of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and
adjusted R2 statistics in square brackets. Significant coefficients at the 5% level are highlighted in
bold face. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                      Table 7: Multivariate Long-horizon Regressions
                                                  Horizon h (in years)
     Variables               1           2          3            4           5         6
                 h-period regression: excess stock returns on c, a and y
        ct                  6.50      11.96        13.48       13.92        17.34     22.53
                          (4.76)      (6.18)       (6.37)      (6.48)       (6.91)    (6.92)
        at                 -1.83       -3.29        -3.60       -3.67       -5.06     -6.76
                          (-4.57)     (-5.82)      (-5.83)     (-5.85)     (-6.90)   (-7.11)
        yt                 -4.01       -7.43        -8.50       -8.85      -10.56    -13.52
                          (-4.91)     (-6.43)      (-6.73)     (-6.89)     (-7.05)   (-6.96)
                           [0.26]      [0.49]       [0.48]      [0.40]      [0.41]    [0.55]
                 h-period regression: excess stock returns on c, d and y
        ct                  1.53        5.44         7.12        8.38      10.36     14.70
                          (1.59)      (6.56)       (4.97)      (5.52)      (5.69)     (5.62)
        dt                 -0.07       -0.54        -0.55       -0.58       -0.74     -1.16
                          (-0.60)     (-5.10)      (-3.00)     (-3.03)     (-3.20)   (-3.49)
        yt                 -1.30       -4.03        -5.48       -6.50       -7.96    -11.05
                          (-1.98)     (-7.09)      (-5.58)     (-6.26)     (-6.39)   (-6.18)
                           [0.00]      [0.15]       [0.23]      [0.25]      [0.24]    [0.37]
                  h-period regression: dividend growth on c, a and y
        ct                  4.31        5.04         4.52        4.70        6.18      6.61
                          (6.26)      (6.60)       (4.64)      (4.16)       (4.16)    (3.34)
        at                 -1.44       -1.91        -2.05       -2.49       -3.46     -3.70
                          (-7.16)     (-8.56)      (-7.22)     (-7.56)     (-7.99)   (-6.41)
        yt                 -2.44       -2.67        -2.10       -1.88      -12.31    -22.50
                          (-5.93)     (-5.86)      (-3.60)     (-2.78)     (-2.61)   (-2.12)
                           [0.29]      [0.37]       [0.29]      [0.29]      [0.38]    [0.40]
                  h-period regression: dividend growth on c, d and y
        ct                  2.14        2.88         2.41        2.39        3.28      4.08
                          (3.92)      (4.77)       (3.59)      (2.74)      (3.86)    (2.99)
        dt                 -0.45       -0.64        -0.62       -0.69       -0.88     -0.98
                          (-6.49)     (-8.28)      (-7.23)     (-6.20)     (-8.15)   (-5.66)
        yt                 -1.22       -1.60        -1.21       -1.09       -1.57     -2.13
                          (-3.28)     (-3.86)      (-2.64)     (-1.82)     (-2.70)   (-2.28)
                           [0.24]      [0.33]       [0.29]      [0.31]      [0.40]    [0.48]

Notes: See next page.
   Notes: This tables reports results from h-period regression of CRSP-VW returns in excess of
a 3-month Treasury-bill rate, and dividend growth. ct is log consumption, yt is log labor income,
at is log asset wealth (net worth), and dt is log stock market dividends. For each regression,
the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in
parentheses), and adjusted R2 statistics (in square brackets). Significant coefficients at the 5% level
are highlighted in bold face. The distribution of the coefficient estimates is as follows. Consider
a regression zt = µ + β 1 x1t + β 2 x2t + β 3 x3t + ¯t , where x1 , x2 and x3 are cointegrated and the
cointegrating vector is (1, −θ2 , −θ3 ). Let η t = x1t − θ2 x2t − θ3 x3t . Then the OLS estimate of β 1
                              √
has a limiting distribution of T (β b − β ) → N (0, σ 2 (1/T PT (η − η̄ )2 )−1 ) where η̄ is the mean
                                     1     1                     t=1 t      t             t

of η t and σ 2 is the variance of ¯. Note that η t depends on the cointegrating vector. The standard
error is Newey-West corrected. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                Table 8: Implied Long-Horizon R2 from VARs
      row      Variables             Implied R2 for Forecast Horizon H

                                1        2        3         4        5        6

       1          ∆dt         0.12     0.09      0.05     0.05     0.04      0.03

       2       ∆dt , cd
                      ay t    0.34     0.31      0.24     0.20     0.17      0.14

       3       ∆dt , cdy
                     d
                         t    0.17     0.19      0.20     0.19     0.19      0.19

       4           rt         0.08     0.09      0.05     0.03     0.03      0.03

       5        rt , cd
                      ay t    0.36     0.52      0.49     0.42     0.39      0.36

       6        rt , cdy
                     d
                         t    0.20     0.26      0.26     0.28     0.31      0.32

Note: The table reports implied R2 statistics for H-year dividend growth and excess
returns obtained from second-order vector autoregressions. The column denoted “Vari-
ables” lists the variables included in the VAR. The implied (unadjusted) R2 statistics
for dividend growth in rows 1, 2 and 3 and excess returns in rows 4, 5 and 6 for horizon
H are calculated from the estimated parameters of the VAR and the estimated co-
variance matrix of VAR residuals. Row 1 gives the implied R2 statistic for forecasting
dividend growth with lagged dividend growth, row 2 with lagged cd
                                                                ay t and row 3 with
       d . Row 4 gives the implied R2 statistic for forecasting excess stock market
lagged cdy t

returns with lagged returns, row 5 with lagged cd
                                                ay t , and row 6 with lagged cdy
                                                                             d . The
                                                                                 t

sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                        Table 9: Small Sample Inference of Slope and R2

      xt          β
                  b         95% CI          99% CI            R2        95% CI          99% CI
                                           Panel A: Bootstrap

                                             excess returns
     cd
      ay t       6.48     (-2.78, 3.86)   (-4.13, 5.44)       0.27   (-0.01, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)
     cdy
      d
           t     1.32     (-2.09, 2.96)   (-3.10, 4.15)       0.01   (-0.01, 0.07)    (-0.02, 0.10)

                                            dividend growth
     cd
      ay t       4.74     (-2.12, 2.61)   (-3.10, 3.78)       0.29   (-0.02, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)
     cdy
      d
           t     2.74     (-1.32, 2.19)   (-1.94, 3.09)       0.20   (-0.02, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)

                                          Panel B: Monte Carlo

                                             excess returns
     cd
      ay t       6.48     (-3.31, 3.17)   (-4.73, 4.60)       0.27   (-0.02, 0.05)    (-0.02, 0.10)
     cdy
      d
           t     1.32     (-2.45, 2.44)   (-3.54, 3.52)       0.01   (-0.02, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)

                                            dividend growth
     cd
      ay t       4.74     (-1.96, 1.98)   (-2.97, 2.96)       0.29   (-0.02, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)
     cdy
      d
           t     2.74     (-1.58, 1.57)   (-2.13, 2.29)       0.20   (-0.02, 0.06)    (-0.02, 0.11)

Notes: This tables reports confidence intervals from a bootstrap procedure (Panel A) and a Monte
Carlo simulation (Panel B). 10,000 artificial time series of the size of our data set are generated under
the null hypothesis of no predictability. The data generating process is zt+1 = α + et+1 , xt+1 =
µ+φxt−1 +vt+1 where zt is either excess returns or dividends growth and xt is either cay or cdy. The
parameters in the data generating process are set to sample estimates for both the bootstrap and
the Monte Carlo. We then run OLS regressions zt+1 = α + βxt + ut+1 and study the distributions
   b and the R2 . In the bootstrap we draw (with replacement) from the residuals of the system
of β
estimated under the null hypothesis. For the Monte Carlo analysis the residuals e and v are drawn
                                                b and R2 report our empirical estimates using
from a normal distribution. The columns denoted β
annual data from 1948 to 2001.
   Table 10: Univariate Long-horizon Regressions – Including Share Repurchases
                         h-period regression: dt+h − dt = k + γ zt + ¯t,t+h

                                                Horizon h (in years)
             zt =              1         2          3          4          5         6

            d t − pt         0.09       0.10       0.10       0.11      0.15       0.19
                            (1.76)     (1.12)     (0.81)     (0.70)    (0.81)     (0.88)
                             [0.01]    [0.01]     [0.00]     [0.00]     [0.01]    [0.02]

             cd
              ay t           4.66       6.36       6.52       6.51      7.97       9.24
                            (4.58)     (4.52)     (3.44)     (2.97)    (4.15)     (3.95)
                             [0.24]    [0.25]     [0.19]     [0.15]     [0.18]    [0.22]

             cdy
             d
                 t           4.28       5.10       4.59       4.77      6.47       8.29
                            (5.67)     (5.05)     (2.91)     (2.32)    (3.23)     (3.98)
                             [0.20]    [0.19]     [0.12]     [0.10]     [0.16]    [0.24]

Notes: This tables reports results from h-period regression of CRSP-VW dividend growth: dt+h −
dt = k + γ zt + ¯t,t+h , where dividends d are adjusted to include share repurchases using the
estimates in Grullon and Michaely (2002). For each regression, the table reports OLS estimates
of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and adjusted R2
statistics in square brackets. Significant coefficients using the standard t-test at the 5% level are
highlighted in bold face. The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2000, since the
repurchases data from Grullon and Michaely are only available through 2000.
                    Table 11: Long-horizon Regression – Earnings Growth
                                                  Horizon h (in years)
        Variables              1           2         3           4            5           6
          cdy
          d
              t               2.16       3.46        4.73        6.68       6.75        7.05
                             (4.88)     (6.50)      (4.51)      (3.56)     (2.20)      (2.01)
                             [0.07]     [0.06]      [0.07]      [0.14]     [0.13]      [0.13]

Notes: This tables reports results from h-period regression of earnings growth: et+h − et = k +
β cdy
  d + ¯t,t+h . The earnings data are from Lewellen (2001). For each regression, the table reports
      t

OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey and West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses) and
adjusted R2 statistics in square brackets. Significant coefficients at the 5% level are highlighted in
bold face. The sample is annual and spans the period 1964 to 2000.
                                 Table C-I: Cointegration Tests
                                  L-max Test                        Trace Test                   t-Test
       Variables          H0 : r =     0      1     2    H0 : r =      0     1      2    H0 : no cointegration
10% Critical Values                  12.10 2.82                      13.31 2.71                   -2.60
 5% Critical Values                  14.04 3.96                      15.41 3.76                   -2.93

          d, p                       6.06   4.56                     10.62 4.56                   -0.47
10% Critical Values                  18.70 12.10 2.82                26.70 13.31 2.71             -3.52
 5% Critical Values                  20.78 14.04 3.96                29.68 15.41 3.76             -3.80

         c, a, y                     25.34 6.57 0.07                 31.98 6.64 0.07             -4.13
         c, d, y                     27.58 5.36 1.08                 34.01 6.43 1.08             -3.77

Notes: The first two columns report the L-max and Trace test statistics described in Johansen
(1988) and Johansen (1991). The former tests the null hypothesis that there are r cointegrating
relations against the alternative of r+1; the latter tests the null of r cointegrating relations against
the alternative of p, where p is the number of variables in the cointegrated system. The last
column reports the Dickey-Fuller test for dt − pt and the Phillips-Ouliaris (1990) cointegration test
for (c, a, y) and (c, d, y). The critical values for the Phillips-Ouliaris tests allow for trends in the
data while the Dickey-Fuller regression does not include a trend, since according to the theory,
there should be no trend in d-p. One lag was used for all tests. The variables are consumption
ct , labor income yt , CRSP-VW dividends dt , CRSP-VW price pt and asset wealth at . The null
hypothesis is no cointegration; significant statistics at the 10% level are highlighted in bold face.
The sample is annual and spans the period 1948 to 2001.
                             Figure 1: CDY and CAY

.08                                                                            .08


.06                                                                            .06


.04                                                                            .04


.02                                                                            .02


.00                                                                            .00


-.02                                                                           -.02


-.04                                                                           -.04
              CAY           CDY

       1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000
